with the sharing of the starting point of adaptation to different
tasks. Recently, there has been a few works [ 17,21,33] that
try to achieve task-wise model or initialization through their
proposed task embeddings. The metric-based system has a
similar issue with MAML, and thus TADAM [ 17] proposes
to learn task embeddings, which are then used to generate
afﬁne transformation parameters that transform the features.
In this work, we focus on analyzing the problems of
MAML and improving its performance, while maintaining
its generalizability. LEO [ 21] tries to solve the issue with the
shared initialization by learning task embeddings through
relation network, which are then used to generate input-
dependent initializations in low-dimensional latent space.
Another work that tries to relax the constraint on sharing
the initialization is Multimodal MAML [ 33], where they
propose to learn task embeddings and transform the MAML
initialization with afﬁne parameters.
In contrast to [ 33,21] that only focus on making the
initialization task-dependent, we approach the problem from
the perspective of optimization and provide a new insight
that the quality of MAML initialization is compromised due
toconﬂicts among tasks on the location of the initialization
in optimization landscape. Such compromised initialization
will hinder fast adaptation and is illustrated by sharp loss
landscape in Figure 2. Motivated by the phenomenon of
conﬂicts , we argue that we only need to attenuate ( forget )
the compromised part of the initialization. In fact, a large
portion of the performance boost comes from the attenuation,
not from the task-conditioned transformation (see Table 4).
From the perspective of optimization, we also provide
more effective and efﬁcient task embedding. Previous
works [ 21,33] try to achieve task-wise initializations through
learning task embeddings directly from the input. However,
learning such task embeddings without any task label is dif-
ﬁcult and require specialized techniques, such as relation
network [ 21] and metric learning [ 17] that may not be appli-
cable in other complex problems such as in reinforcement
learning. We argue and observe that the amount of conﬂicts
varies among tasks, hinting that conﬂicts can be used to iden-
tify tasks. Since conﬂicts between the desired initialization
by task and the learned initialization can be described with
gradients (see Section 3.3), we demonstrate that gradients
itself give task-speciﬁc optimization information and thus
can be used to represent tasks. Because gradients are easily
obtainable and model-agnostic, not only do we achieve ef-
fective task-wise initialization but also manage to maintain
the simplicity and generalizability of MAML.
Overall, our proposed method greatly improves the perfor-
mance of MAML while managing to maintain the simplicity
and generalizability of MAML. Owing to its generalizability,
we further show that not only does our method demonstrate a
consistent improvement across domains, including reinforce-
ment learning; but also our method can be easily applied toother MAML-based methods.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Problem Formulation
Before introducing the proposed method, we start with
the formulation of a generic meta-learning algorithm. We
assume there is a distribution of tasks p(T), from which
meta-learning algorithm aims to learn the prior knowledge,
represented by a model with parameters θ. Tasks, each of
which is sampled from p(T), are split into three disjoint
sets: meta-training set, meta-validation set, and meta-test
set. Ink-shot learning, a task Tiis ﬁrst sampled from the
meta-training set, followed by sampling knumber of ex-
amplesDTifromTi. Thesekexamples are then used to
quickly adapt a model with parameters, θ. Then, new ex-
amplesD′
Tiare sampled from the same task Tito evaluate
the generalization performance on unseen examples with the
corresponding loss function, LTi. The feedback from the
loss is then used to adjust the model parameters θto achieve
better generalization. Finally, the meta-validation set is used
for model selection, while the meta-test set is used for the
ﬁnal evaluation on the selected model.
3.2. Model­Agnostic Meta­Learning
To tackle the problem of fast adaptation to unseen tasks
with few examples, we borrow the philosophy and the
methodology from MAML [ 5]. MAML encodes prior knowl-
edge in an initialization and seeks for a “good” common ini-
tial set of values for weights of a neural network across tasks.
Formally, given a network fθwith weights θ, MAML learns
a set of initial weight values, θ, which will serve as a good
starting point for fast adaptation to a new task Ti, sampled
from a task distribution p(T). Given few examples DTiand
a loss functionLTifrom the taskTi, the network weights
are adapted toTiduring inner-loop update as follows:
θ′
i=θ−α∇θLDTi
Ti(fθ). (1)
To give feedback on the generalization performance of the
model with adapted weights θ′
ito each task, the model is
evaluated on new examples, D′
Tisampled from the same task
Ti. The feedback, manifested in the form of loss gradients, is
used to update the initialization θso that better generalization
is achieved:
θ←θ−η∇θ/summationdisplay
TiLD′
Ti
Ti(fθ′
i). (2)
3.3. Deﬁnition of Conﬂict
While MAML is elegantly simple, its limitation comes
from the very fact that the initialization is shared across a
distribution of tasks. Despite the goal of MAML, which
2381