Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 125:1–17, 2020
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning with a Generative Model
is Minimax Optimal
Alekh Agarwal ALEKHA @MICROSOFT .COM
Microsoft Research
Sham Kakade SHAM @CS.WASHINGTON .EDU
University of Washington
Lin F. Yang LINYANG @EE.UCLA .EDU
University of California, Los Angeles
Abstract
This work considers the sample and computational complexity of obtaining an "-optimal policy in a discounted
Markov Decision Process (MDP), given only access to a generative model. In this model, the learner accesses
the underlying transition model via a sampling oracle that provides a sample of the next state, when given any
state-action pair as input. We are interested in a basic and unresolved question in model based planning: is
this naïve “plug-in” approach — where we build the maximum likelihood estimate of the transition model in
the MDP from observations and then ﬁnd an optimal policy in this empirical MDP — non-asymptotically,
minimax optimal? Our main result answers this question positively. With regards to computation, our result
provides a simpler approach towards minimax optimal planning: in comparison to prior model-free results,
we show that using anyhigh accuracy, black-box planning oracle in the empirical model sufﬁces to obtain
the minimax error rate. The key proof technique uses a leave-one-out analysis, in a novel “absorbing MDP”
construction, to decouple the statistical dependency issues that arise in the analysis of model-based planning;
this construction may be helpful more generally.
1. Introduction
How best to plan across a long-horizon with access to an approximate model of a Markov Decision Process?
This is a fundamental question at the heart of reinforcement learning, and understanding it is essential to
tackling even more complex challenges such as sample-efﬁcient exploration (see e.g. (Kakade et al., 2003;
Strehl et al., 2006; Strehl, 2007; Jaksch et al., 2010; Osband and Van Roy, 2014; Azar et al., 2017; Sidford
et al., 2018b,a)). When the approximate model is arbitrary, these questions are studied, for example, in the
approximate dynamic programming literature (Bertsekas, 1976). Before moving to approximation questions,
a more basic question is an information theoretic one: how many samples from the Markov Decision Process
are required to yield a near optimal policy? Our work studies this question in the generative model framework
introduced in the work of Kearns and Singh (1999).
In the generative model setting, the learning agent has sampling access to a generative model of the Markov
Decision Process (henceforth MDP), and it can query the next state s0sampled from the transition process,
c
2020 A. Agarwal, S. Kakade & L.F. Yang.