PREPRINT 15
Fig. 8. Visualizations of explanations on the BBBP and Graph-SST2 datasets.
classiﬁcation datasets, and choose GNN-GI and GNN-LRP
only for real-world datasets.
8.2 Study of Fidelity
We further study our proposed evaluation metric Fi-
delity with a random designation of feature importance [86].
Speciﬁcally, we assign the random importance scores to
different edges and compare the performance of different
methods to this random baseline. It helps answer two ques-
tions; these are, is a particular GNN explanation method
better than a random guess? and can the evaluation metrics
successfully capture the difference between them? Intu-
itively, good evaluation metrics should demonstrate the per-
formance difference between well-performed models and
the random baseline. The results are reported in Table 3
and 4.
We show the Fidelity scores of different techniques with
Sparsity levels equal to 0.6 and 0.7. Note that the results
that are inferior to the random baseline are denoted with
. We can observe that the Fidelity metrics show that dif-
ferent GNN explanation techniques generally obtain better
results than the random guess. Such results indicate the
correctness of our proposed Fidelity metrics. Meanwhile,
we notice that the results of DeepLift are worse than the
random baseline on BA-Shapes and BA-Motifs datasets.
We believe the reason is that DeepLift does not consider
graph information and hence is not stable across datasets,
which is consistent with our ﬁndings from Figure 6 and 7.
In addition, GNN-GI is also not performing well on these
two datasets. One possible reason is GNN-GI is developed
based on the gradient input rule so its results are highly
depending on the properties of input graphs. Furthermore,
all methods are performing better than the random baseline
for both Fidelity+ and Fidelity- metrics on our proposed
sentiment graph datasets. It indicates that our proposed
datasets are suitable and stable to evaluate different GNN
explanation techniques.
8.3 Method Comparisons with Accuracy
In this section, we further compare different techniques
using the Accuracy metric. Since the Accuracy metric re-
quires the ground truths for GNN explanations, we apply
extensive experiments on synthetic datasets. We evaluate
different methods using the BA-shapes and BA-Community
datasets, which are taken from GNNExplainer [46]. Speciﬁ-
cally, the ground-truth motifs are converted to ground-truth
edge masks and we compute the AUC-ROC score between
the edge importance scores provided by different explana-
tion techniques and the ground-truth edge masks. Note thatSubgraphX provides subgraph-level explanations, which
cannot be converted to soft edge masks. Hence, SubgraphX
is not directly comparable in terms of AUC-ROC score and
is ignored. In addition, since these two datasets are node
classiﬁcation tasks, Grad-CAM is also ignored. The results
are reported in Table 5. We observe that GNN-LRP obtains
the highest Accuracy on the BA-shapes dataset and GNNEx-
plainer performs the best on the BA-Community dataset.
Overall, we believe GNN-LRP , GNNExplainer, and GNN-
GI have competitive performance while PGExplainer is not
performing as promising as its original reported results.
Our ﬁnding regarding PGExplainer is similar to a recent
reproducibility work [88]. In addition, DeepLift performs
the worst on both datasets, which is reasonable because
DeepLift does not consider any graph-speciﬁc information
when providing explanations. Finally, it is noteworthy that
the ground truths in synthetic datasets are only reasonable
approximations of the ground truths instead of real ground
truths.
8.4 Method Comparisons with Stability
We also compare different methods using the Stability
metric. The key idea of Stability is to apply small changes
to the input graph without affecting the predictions and
measure the difference between explanations. We follow an
existing work [87] to set up the experiments on BA-shapes
and BA-Community datasets. Speciﬁcally, for each node,
we randomly attach two noise nodes to its L-hop neighbor
graph while keeping the ground-truth motifs unchanged.
Then we generate 10 input perturbations for each node
and obtain the corresponding explanations. For each pair
of perturbation and explanation, we evaluate it using the
Accuracy metric above. Finally, the Stability score is the
absolute value of the averaged Accuracy score change for
these 10 input perturbations compared to the original graph.
The results are reported in Table 5. Note that since Stability
is developed based on Accuracy and these two datasets are
node classiﬁcation datasets, SubgraphX and Grad-CAM are
not included. We notice that DeepLift has the best Stability
score but its corresponding Accuracy scores are signiﬁcantly
worse. Such results indicate that DeepLift performs not well
consistently and stably. We also observe that the method
with higher Accuracy tends to have a higher Stability score
(note that a lower Stability score means more stable). Then it
is important to analyze the results considering both of them
and a possible way to understand the Stability score is to
consider it as the error bar of the Accuracy score. Hence,
for those three methods with competitive Accuracy scores,
we believe GNN-LRP and GNNExplainer have better per-