PREPRINT 7
original model for the input graph. While these methods
share a similar high-level idea, the key difference lies in
two aspects: how to obtain the local dataset and what
interpretable surrogate model to use.
4.3.2 Methods
GraphLime [61] extends the LIME algorithm [71], [72] to
deep graph models and studies the importance of different
node features for node classiﬁcation tasks. Given a target
node in the input graph, GraphLime considers its N-hop
neighboring nodes and their predictions as its local dataset
where a reasonable choice of Nis the number of layers
in the trained GNNs. Then a nonlinear surrogate model,
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) Lasso [73],
is employed to ﬁt the local dataset. Note that HSIC Lasso is
a kernel-based feature selection algorithm. Finally, based on
the weights of different features in HSIC Lasso, it can select
important features to explain the HSIC Lasso predictions.
Those selected features are regarded as the explanations of
the original GNN prediction. However, GraphLime can only
provide explanations for node features but ignore graph
structures, such as nodes and edges, which are more impor-
tant for graph data. In addition, GraphLime is proposed to
explain node classiﬁcation predictions but cannot be directly
applied to graph classiﬁcation models.
RelEx [62] also studies the explainability of node classiﬁ-
cation models by combining the ideas of surrogate methods
and perturbation-based methods. Given a target node and
its computational graph ( N-hop neighbors), it ﬁrst obtains
a local dataset by randomly sampling connected subgraphs
from the computational graph and feeding these subgraphs
to the trained GNNs to obtain their predictions. Speciﬁcally,
starting from the target node, it randomly selects neigh-
boring nodes in a BFS manner. Next, it employs a GCN
model as the surrogate model to ﬁt the local datasets. Note
that different from LIME and GraphLime, the surrogate
model in RelEx is not interpretable. After training, it further
applies the aforementioned perturbation-based methods,
such as generating soft masks or Gumbel-Softmax masks, to
explain the predictions. Compared with GraphLime, it can
provide explanations regarding important nodes. However,
it contains multiple steps of approximations, such as using
the surrogate model to approximate local relationships and
using masks to approximate the edge importance, thus
making the explanations less convincing and trustable. Fur-
thermore, as perturbation-based methods can be directly
employed to explain original deep graph models, then it
is not necessary to build another non-interpretable deep
model as the surrogate model to explain. It is also unknown
how it can be applied for graph classiﬁcation tasks.
PGM-Explainer [63] builds a probabilistic graphical
model to provide instance-level explanations for GNNs.
The local dataset is obtained by random node feature
perturbation. Speciﬁcally, given an input graph, each time
PGM-Explainer randomly perturbs the node features of sev-
eral random nodes within the computational graph. Then
for any node in the computational graph, PGM-Explainer
records a random variable indicating whether its features
are perturbed and its inﬂuence on the GNN predictions. By
repeating such procedures multiple times, a local dataset
is obtained. Note that the local dataset of PGM-Explainercontains node variables instead of different neighboring
graph samples. Then it selects top dependent variables to
reduce the size of the local dataset via the Grow-Shrink (GS)
algorithm [74]. Finally, an interpretable Bayesian network
is employed to ﬁt the local dataset and to explain the
predictions of the original GNN model. PGM-Explainer
can provide explanations regarding graph nodes but ig-
nore graph edges, which contain important graph topology
information. In addition, different from GraphLime and
RelEx, the PGM-Explainer can be used to explain both node
classiﬁcation and graph classiﬁcation tasks.
4.4 Decomposition Methods
Finally, we introduce the decomposition methods for ex-
plaining deep graph models.
4.4.1 A uniﬁed view
Another popular way to explain deep image classiﬁers is
decomposition methods, which measure the importance of
input features by decomposing the original model predic-
tions into several terms. Then those terms are regarded as
the importance scores of the corresponding input features.
These methods directly study the model parameters to
reveal the relationships between the features in the input
space and the output predictions. Note that the conservative
property of these methods requires that the sum of the
decomposed terms is equal to the original prediction score.
However, it is challenging to directly apply such methods
to the graph domain since graphs contain nodes, edges, and
node features. It is non-trivial to distribute scores to differ-
ent edges while graph edges contain important structural
information that cannot be ignored.
Recently, several decomposition methods are proposed
to explain the deep graph neural networks, including Layer-
wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [54], [59], Excitation
BP [55] and GNN-LRP [60]. The intuition of these algo-
rithms is to build score decomposition rules to distribute the
prediction scores to the input space. The general pipeline
of these methods is shown in Figure 4. These methods
distribute the prediction score layer by layer in a back-
propagation manner until the input layer. Starting from the
output layer, the model’s prediction is treated as the initial
target score. Then the score is decomposed and distributed
to the neurons in the previous layer following the decom-
position rules. By repeating such procedures until input
space, they can obtain importance scores for node features,
which can be combined to represent edge importance, node
importance, and walk importance. It is noteworthy that all
of these algorithms ignore the activation functions in deep
graph models. The main difference among these methods is
the score decomposition rules, the view of decomposition,
and the targets of explanations.
4.4.2 Methods
LRP [54], [59] extends the original LRP algorithm [75] to
deep graph models. It decomposes the output prediction
score to different node importance scores. The score decom-
position rule is developed based on the hidden features and
weights. For a target neuron, its score is represented as a
linear approximation of neuron scores from the previous