PREPRINT 5
1Input graph234  Mask generation algorithm0.90.70.3Feature maskEdge maskNode mask11100.90.90.10.0GNNsPredictionObjective function
Fig. 2. The general pipeline of the perturbation-based methods. They employ different mask generation algorithms to obtain different types of masks.
Note that the mask can correspond to nodes, edges, or node features. In this example, we show a soft mask for node features, a discrete mask
for edges, and an approximated discrete mask for nodes. Then the mask is combined with the input graph to capture important input information.
Finally, the trained GNNs evaluate whether the new prediction is similar to the original prediction and can provide guidance for improving the mask
generation algorithms.
masks for nodes. The soft masks contain continuous values
between [0;1]and the mask generation algorithm can be
directly updated by back-propagation. However, soft masks
are suffered from the “introduced evidence” problem [14]
that any non-zero or non-one value in the mask may in-
troduce new semantic meaning or new noise to the input
graph, thus affecting the explanation results. Meanwhile,
the discrete masks only contain discrete values 0and1,
which can avoid the “introduced evidence” problem since
no new numerical value is introduced. However, discrete
masks always involve non-differentiable operations, such
as sampling. One popular way to solve it is the policy
gradient technique [66]. Furthermore, recent studies [50],
[67], [68] propose to employ reparameterization tricks, such
as Gumbel-Softmax estimation and sparse relaxations, to
approximate the discrete masks. Note that the output mask
is not strictly discrete but provides a good approxima-
tion, which not only enables the back-propagation but also
largely alleviates the “introduced evidence” problem.
4.2.2 Methods
GNNExplainer [46] learns soft masks for edges and node
features to explain the predictions via mask optimization. To
obtain masks, it randomly initializes soft masks and treats
them as trainable variables. Then GNNExplainer combines
the masks with the original graph via element-wise multi-
plications. Next, the masks are optimized by maximizing the
mutual information between the predictions of the original
graph and the predictions of the newly obtained graph.
Even though different regularization terms, such as element-
wise entropy, are employed to encourage optimized masks
to be discrete, the obtained masks are still soft masks so
that GNNExplainer cannot avoid the “introduced evidence”
problem. In addition, the masks are optimized for each
input graph individually and hence the explanations may
lack a global view.
PGExplainer [47] learns approximated discrete masks
for edges to explain the predictions. To obtain edge masks,it trains a parameterized mask predictor to predict edge
masks. Given an input graph, it ﬁrst obtains the embeddings
for each edge by concatenating the corresponding node
embeddings. Then the predictor uses the edge embeddings
to predict the probability of each edge being selected,
which can be treated as the importance score. Next, the
approximated discrete masks are sampled via the reparam-
eterization trick. Finally, the mask predictor is trained by
maximizing the mutual information between the original
predictions and new predictions. Note that even though the
reparameterization trick is employed, the obtained masks
are not strictly discrete but can largely alleviate the “intro-
duced evidence” problem. In addition, since all edges in
the dataset share the same predictor, the explanations can
provide a global understanding of the trained GNNs.
GraphMask [57] is a post-hoc method for explaining
the edge importance in each GNN layer. Similar to the
PGExplainer, it trains a classiﬁer to predict whether an edge
can be dropped without affecting the original predictions.
However, GraphMask obtains an edge mask for each GNN
layer while PGExplainer only focuses the input space. In ad-
dition, to avoiding changing graph structures, the dropped
edges are replaced by learnable baseline connections, which
are vectors with the same dimensions as node embeddings.
Note that binary Concrete distribution [68] and reparame-
terization trick are employed to approximate discrete masks.
In addition, the classiﬁer is trained using the whole dataset
by minimizing a divergence term, which measures the
difference between network predictions. Similar to PGEx-
plainer, it can largely alleviate the “introduced evidence”
problem and provide a global understanding of the trained
GNNs.
ZORRO [56] employs discrete masks to identify impor-
tant input nodes and node features. Given an input graph,
a greedy algorithm is used to select nodes or node features
step by step to obtain discrete masks for nodes and features.
For each step, ZORRO selects one node or one node feature
with the highest ﬁdelity score. Note that the objective func-