PREPRINT 16
Evaluation MetricsDatasetsAlgorithmsBA-shapesTree-Grids BA-2MotifsBA-CommunityTree-CycleGraph-SST2 Graph-TwitterGraph-SST5MUTAGTox21BBBPGNNExplainer PGExplainerSubgraphX GNN-LRPDeepLIFTGrad-CAMXGNNFidelity+Fidelity-Sparsity
Fig. 9. A overview of our open-source library, which includes uniﬁed implementations of multiple common baseline methods, commonly used
datasets, and three evaluation metrics.
formance than GNN-GI in terms of Accuracy and Stability.
8.5 Dataset Visualizations
In this section, we present the visualized results from
molecular datasets and our proposed graph sentiment
datasets. The results are reported in Figure 8. The left two
examples are the visualized explanations from the BBBP [82]
dataset and both examples are labeled and predicted as
positive. Note that a positive label means the molecule has
the Blood-Brain-Barrier Penetration property. While the CN
chain is identiﬁed in the ﬁrst example and the CN ring
is captured in the second example, it is challenging for
the users to understand the explanations without chemical
domain knowledge. It’s not clear what is the chemical
meaning of these patterns. Hence, we believe such results
are less intuitive and human-intelligible for non-experts.
The third and fourth examples are from the Graph-SST2
dataset and both are correctly predicted. The third one is
negative and the last one is positive. Since each node is
associated with a word or a symbol, users can understand
the sentiment meaning of each node. Then it is easier to
understand the identiﬁed explanations. For example, in the
third example, the phrase “has nothing fresh” has a clearly
negative sentiment. Hence, we believe our proposed graph
sentiment datasets are more suitable for evaluating GNN
explanation techniques.
9 A NOPEN-SOURCE LIBRARY
To facilitate research into graph neural networks, we de-
velop an open-source library to study the explainability
in GNNs. It is developed as a part of our DIG (Dive
into Graphs) library [89], which is a turnkey library for
graph deep learning research and now publicly available3.
3. https://github.com/divelab/DIG/Our library can be directly used to reproduce results of
existing GNN explanation methods, develop new algo-
rithms, and conduct evaluations for explanation results.
First, in this library, we include the implementations of sev-
eral existing methods, such as GNNExplainer [46], PGEx-
plainer [47], DeepLIFT [64], GNN-LRP [60], Grad-CAM [55],
SubgraphX [48], and XGNN [45]. While several methods
provide ofﬁcial implementations, their development envi-
ronments may vary, thus making fair comparisons difﬁcult.
To this end, we implement these methods in the same
development environment that the key dependencies of
our library are PyTorch 1.6.0 [90] and PyTorch Geometric
1.6.1 [91]. With such a uniﬁed environment, new techniques
can be easily and fairly compared with existing methods.
Second, we include several datasets for GNN explanation
tasks in our library. Note that we not only provide the
aforementioned sentiment graph datasets, but also include
several commonly used datasets, such as MUTAG, BBBP ,
BA-shapes, and BA-2Motifs, etc. These datasets include
synthetic data, text data, and molecular data, and cover
both graph classiﬁcation tasks and node classiﬁcation tasks.
Hence, we believe that using such datasets can provide a
comprehensive study of different GNN explanation meth-
ods. In addition, our library provides implementations of
different evaluation metrics, including Fidelity+, Fidelity-,
and Sparsity. These metrics can be directly applied to eval-
uate the explanation results obtained from our framework
and provide comprehensive evaluations from the model’s
perspective.
10 C ONCLUSION
Graph Neural Networks are widely studied recently but
the explainability of graph models is still less explored. To
investigate the underlying mechanisms of these black-boxes,
several explanation methods are proposed to explain graph