PREPRINT 2
different GNN explanation techniques. We aim at providing
intuitive understanding and high-level insights of different
methods so that researchers can choose proper directions to
explore. The contributions of this work are summarized as
below:
This survey provides a systematic and comprehen-
sive review of existing explanation techniques for
deep graph models. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst and only survey work on such a topic.
We propose a novel taxonomy of existing GNN ex-
planation techniques. We conclude the key idea of
each category and provide insightful analysis.
We introduce each GNN explanation method in de-
tail, including its methodology, advantages, draw-
backs, and difference compared with other methods.
We summarize the commonly employed datasets
and evaluation metrics for GNN explanation tasks.
We discuss their limitations and recommend several
convincing metrics.
We build three human-understandable datasets from
the text domain by converting sentences to graphs.
These datasets are now publicly available and can be
directly used for GNN explanation tasks.
We develop an open-source library for the GNN
explanation research. In this library, we include the
implementations of several existing techniques, com-
monly used datasets, and different evaluation met-
rics. It can be used to reproduce existing methods
and develop new GNN explanation techniques.
We conduct experiments to study and compare sev-
eral explanation techniques. Our analysis can pro-
vide insights for new researchers about the develop-
ment of the research ﬁeld and baseline selections.
Explainability versus Interpretability: Explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence is an emerging area of research, and the use of
terminology is not completely standardized. In particular,
the differences of the terms “explainability” and “inter-
pretability” are not completely deﬁned. In some studies,
these two terms are used interchangeably [26], while in
other studies some subtle differences have been made. In
this work, we argue that these two terms should be dif-
ferentiated. In particular, we follow the existing work [49]
to distinguish these two terms. We consider a model to
be “interpretable” if the model itself can provide humanly
understandable interpretations of its predictions. Note that
such a model is no longer a black box to some extent. For
example, a decision tree model is an “interpretable” one.
Meanwhile, an “explainable” model implies that the model
is still a black box whose predictions could potentially be
understood by post hoc explanation techniques. We articulate
such a difference with the hope that the community could
eventually develop a standardized use of terminology as
this ﬁeld matures.
2 T HECHALLENGES
Explaining deep graph models is an important but challeng-
ing task. In this section, we discuss the common challenges
for explaining GNNs.First, unlike images and texts, graphs are not grid-like
data, which means there is no locality information and each
node has different numbers of neighbors. Instead, graphs
contain important topology information and are represented
as feature matrices and adjacency matrices. To explain fea-
ture importance, we may directly extend the explanation
methods for image data to graph data. However, the ad-
jacency matrices represent the topology information and
only contain discrete values. Then existing methods may
not be suitable for obtaining high-quality explanations for
GNNs. For example, input optimization methods [10], [16]
are popular to explain the general behaviors of image classi-
ﬁers. It treats the input as trainable variables and optimizes
the input via back-propagation to obtain abstract images to
explain the model. However, the discrete adjacency matri-
ces cannot be optimized in the same manner. In addition,
several methods [14], [50] learn soft masks to capture im-
portant image regions. However, applying soft masks to the
adjacency matrices will destroy the discreteness property.
Furthermore, graph nodes and edges contribute together to
the ﬁnal predictions of GNNs and the interactions between
them are also important, which cannot be captured existing
methods from image domain.
In addition, for images and texts, we study the impor-
tance of each pixel or word. However, it is more important
to study the structural information for graph data. First,
the nodes in graphs may be unlabeled and the labels of
the whole graphs are determined by graph structures. Then
studying each node may be meaningless since those un-
labeled nodes contain no semantic meaning. In addition,
for graphs in biochemistry, neurobiology, ecology, and en-
gineering, graph substructures are highly related to their
functionalities [51]. An example is network motifs, which
can be considered as the building blocks of many complex
networks [52], [53]. Then such structural information should
not be ignored in the explanation tasks. However, existing
methods from image domains cannot provide explanations
regarding the structures. Next, for node classiﬁcation tasks,
the prediction of each node is determined by different mes-
sage walks from its neighbors. Investigating such message
walks is meaningful but challenging. None of the existing
methods in the image domain can consider such walk
information, which needs further explorations.
Furthermore, graph data are less intuitive than images
and texts. To understand deep models, domain knowledge
for the datasets is necessary. For images and texts, under-
standing the semantic meaning of input data is simple and
straightforward. For their explanations, humans can easily
understand them even though the explanations are highly
abstract. However, since graphs can represent complex data,
such as molecules, social networks, and citation networks,
it is challenging for humans to understand the meaning
of graphs. In addition, in interdisciplinary areas such as
chemistry and biology, there are many unsolved mysteries
and the domain knowledge is still lacking. Hence, it is
non-trivial to obtain human-understandable explanations
for graph models, thus raising the need of standard datasets
and evaluation metrics for explanation tasks.