PREPRINT 8
Prediction scoreDesigned BPTarget score explanation
0.50.3+···0.1+···0.07+···0.03+···Node explanation
Node explanation
Walk explanation·········0.250.50.150.10.60.30.0750.0250.30.70.30.150.051.0DistributeExplainDistributeLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRP
LRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRP
LRPEBGNN-LRP
Fig. 4. The general pipeline of the decomposition methods. These methods distribute the prediction score to input space to indicate the input
importance. The target score is decomposed layer by layer in a back-propagation manner. Note that the main difference among these methods is
the employed score decomposition rule.
layer. Intuitively, the neuron with a higher contribution of
the target neuron activation receives a larger fraction of
the target neuron score. Speciﬁcally, Baldassarre et al. [54]
applies the -stabilized rule from the original LRP , while
Schwarzenberg et al. [59] employs the z+-rule to perform
decomposition. To satisfy the conservative property, the
adjacency matrix is treated as a part of GNN model in the
post-hoc explanation phase so that it can be ignored during
score distribution; otherwise, the adjacent matrix will also
receive decomposed scores, thus making the conservative
property invalid. Since LRP is directly developed based
on the model parameters, its explanation results are more
trustable. However, it can only study the importance of
different nodes and cannot be applied to graph structures,
such as subgraphs and graph walks, which are more im-
portant for understanding GNNs. In addition, such a algo-
rithm requires a comprehensive understanding of the model
structures, which limits its applications for non-expert users,
such as interdisciplinary researchers.
Excitation BP [55] shares a similar idea as the LRP
algorithm but is developed from the view of the law of total
probability. It deﬁnes that the probability of a neuron in the
current layer is equal to the total probabilities it outputs
to all connected neurons in the next layer. Then the score
decomposition rule can be regarded as decomposing the
target probability into several conditional probability terms.
Note that the computation of Excitation BP is highly similar
to thez+-rule in LRP . Hence, it shares the same advantages
and limitations as the LRP algorithm.
GNN-LRP [60] studies the importance of different graph
walks. It is more coherent to the deep graph neural net-
works since graph walks correspond to message ﬂowswhen performing neighborhood information aggregation. It
treats the GNN model as a function and provides a view
of high-order Taylor decomposition to develop the score
decomposition rule. It is theoretically proven that the Taylor
decomposition (at root zero) only contains T-order terms
whereTis the number of layers in the trained GNNs and
each term corresponds to a T-step graph walk. Then such
terms can be regarded as the importance scores of graph
walks. Since it is not possible to directly compute the high-
order derivatives given by Taylor expansion, GNN-LRP also
follows a back propagation procedure to approximate the T-
order terms. Note that the back propagation computation
in GNN-LRP is similar to the LRP algorithm. However,
instead of distributing scores to nodes or edges, GNN-
LRP distributes scores to different graph walks. It records
the paths of the distribution processes from layer to layer.
Those paths are considered as different walks and the scores
are obtained from their corresponding nodes. While GNN-
LRP has a solid theoretical background, the approximations
in its computations may not be accurate. In addition, the
computational complexity is high since each walk is con-
sidered separately. Furthermore, it is also challenging for
non-experts to use, especially for interdisciplinary domains,
because the back propagation rules need to be derived for
different models and GNN variants.
5 M ODEL -LEVEL EXPLANATIONS
Different from instance-level methods, model-level methods
aim at providing the general insights and high-level under-
standing to explain deep graph models. Speciﬁcally, they
study what input graph patterns can lead to a certain GNN