PREPRINT 4
4.1 Gradients/Features-Based Methods
First, we introduce the gradients/features-based methods
for explaining deep graph models.
4.1.1 A uniﬁed view
Employing gradients or features to explain the deep models
is the most straightforward solution, which is widely used
in image and text tasks. The key idea is to use the gradients
or hidden feature map values as the approximations of input
importance. Speciﬁcally, gradients-based methods [10], [11]
compute the gradients of target prediction with respect to
input features by back-propagation. Meanwhile, features-
based methods [12], [13] map the hidden features to the
input space via interpolation to measure importance scores.
Generally, in such methods, larger gradients or feature val-
ues indicate higher importance. Note that both gradients
and hidden features are highly related to the model pa-
rameters, then such explanations can reﬂect the information
contained in the model. Since these methods are simple
and general, they can be easily extended to the graph
domain. Recently, several methods have been applied to
explain graph neural networks, including SA [54], Guided
BP [54], CAM [55], and Grad-CAM [55]. The key difference
among these methods lies in the procedure of gradient back-
propagation and how different hidden feature maps are
combined.
4.1.2 Methods
SA[54] directly employs the squared values of gradients as
the importance scores of different input features. It can be
directly computed by back-propagation, which is the same
as network training but the target is input features instead
of model parameters. Note that the input features can be
graph nodes, edges, or node features. It assumes that higher
absolute gradient values indicate the corresponding input
features are more important. While it is simple and efﬁcient,
it has several additional limitations. First, SA can only reﬂect
the sensitivity between input and output, which cannot
accurately show the importance. In addition, it also suffers
from saturation problems [64]. In the saturation regions of
the model, where the model output changes minimally with
respect to any input change, the gradients can hardly reﬂect
the contributions of inputs.
Guided BP [54] shares a similar idea with SA but
modiﬁes the procedure of backs propagating gradients.
Since negative gradients are challenging to explain, Guided
BP only back propagates positive gradients while clipping
negative gradients to zeros. Then only positive gradients are
used to measure the importance of different input features.
Note that Guided BP shares the same limitations as SA.
CAM [55] maps the node features in the ﬁnal layer to
the input space to identify important nodes. It requires the
GNN model to employ a global average pooling (GAP)
layer and a fully-connected (FC) layer as the ﬁnal classiﬁer.
Speciﬁcally, CAM takes the ﬁnal node embeddings and
combines different feature maps by weighted summations
to obtain importance scores for input nodes. Note that the
weights are obtained from the ﬁnal fully-connected (FC)
layer connected with the target prediction. This approach
is also very simple but still has several major limitations.First, CAM has special requirements for the GNN structure,
which limits its application and generalization. Second, it
assumes that the ﬁnal node embeddings can reﬂect the
input importance, which is heuristic and may not be true.
Furthermore, it can only explain graph classiﬁcation models
and cannot be directly applied to node classiﬁcation tasks,
since it needs the ﬁnal FC layer to map predictions to
different nodes.
Grad-CAM [55] extends the CAM to general graph
classiﬁcation models by removing the constraint of the GAP
layer. Instead of using the weights between the GAP output
and FC output, it employs gradients as the weights to com-
bine different feature maps. Speciﬁcally, it ﬁrst computes
the gradients of the target prediction with respect to the
ﬁnal node embeddings. Then it averages such gradients to
obtain the weight for each feature map. However, it is also
based on heuristic assumptions and cannot explain node
classiﬁcation models.
4.2 Perturbation-Based Methods
Next, we introduce the perturbation-based methods for
explaining deep graph models.
4.2.1 A uniﬁed view
The perturbation-based methods are widely employed to
explain deep image models [14], [15], [65]. The underlying
motivation is to study the output variations with respect
to different input perturbations. Intuitively, when important
input information is retained, the predictions should be sim-
ilar to the original predictions. Existing methods [14], [15],
[65] learn a generator to generate a mask to select important
input pixels to explain deep image models. However, such
methods cannot be directly applied to graph models. Unlike
images, graphs are represented as nodes and edges, and
they cannot be resized to share the same node and edge
numbers. In addition, different from images, the structural
information is critical for graphs and can determine the
functionalities.
To explain deep graph models, several perturbation-
based methods are proposed, including GNNExplainer [46],
PGExplainer [47], ZORRO [56], GraphMask [57], Causal
Screening [58], and SubgraphX [48]. They share a similar
high-level pipeline as shown in Figure 2. First, given the
input graph, masks are obtained in different ways to indi-
cate important input features. Note that depending on the
explanation tasks, different masks are generated, such as
node masks, edge masks, and node feature masks. Next,
the generated masks are combined with the input graph to
obtain a new graph containing important input information.
Finally, the new graph is fed into the trained GNNs to eval-
uate the masks and update the mask generation algorithms.
Intuitively, the important input features captured by masks
should convey the key semantic meaning and hence lead
to a similar prediction to the original one. The difference
between these methods mainly lies in three aspects: the
mask generation algorithm, the type of masks, and the
objective function.
It is noteworthy that there are three different types of
masks: soft masks, discrete masks, and approximated dis-
crete masks. In Figure 2, we show soft masks for node fea-
tures, discrete masks for edges, and approximated discrete