PREPRINT 6
GNNsNew  datasetFit surrogate modelsExplanationsInput dataGNNsSampled dataNode/edge droppingLocal neighbor samplingNode feature perturbationHSIC LassoGCNsBayesian PGMPredictionNew predictions
Fig. 3. The general pipeline of the surrogate methods. Given an input graph and its prediction, they ﬁrst sample a local dataset to represent
the relationships around the target data. Then different surrogate methods are applied to ﬁt the local dataset. Note that surrogate models are
generally simple and interpretable ML models. Finally, the explanations from the surrogate model can be regarded as the explanations of the
original prediction.
tion, ﬁdelity score, measure how the new predictions match
the original predictions of the model by ﬁxing the selected
nodes/features and replacing the others with random noise
values. Since there is no training procedure involved, the
non-differentiable limitation of discrete masks is avoided.
In addition, by using hard masks, ZORRO is not suffered
from the “introduced evidence” problem. However, the
greedy mask selection algorithm may lead to local optimal
explanations. In addition, the explanations may lack a global
understanding since masks are generated for each graph
individually.
Causal Screening [58] studies the causal attribution
of different edges in the input graph as explanations. It
identiﬁes an edge mask for the explanatory subgraph. The
key idea of causal attribution is to study the change of
predictions when adding an edge into the current explana-
tory subgraph, known as the causal effect. To obtain edge
masks for each step, it studies the causal effects of different
edges and selects the edge with the highest causal effect to
add to the explanatory subgraph. Speciﬁcally, it employs
the individual causal effect (ICE) to select edges, which
measures mutual information (between the predictions of
original graphs and the explanatory subgraphs) difference
after adding different edges to the subgraph. Similar to
ZORRO, Causal Screening is a greedy algorithm generating
discrete masks without any training procedure. Hence, it is
not suffered from the “introduced evidence” problem but
may lack a global understanding and stuck in local optimal
explanations.
SubgraphX [48] explores subgraph-level explanations
for deep graph models. It employs the Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) algorithm [69] to efﬁciently explore different
subgraphs via node pruning and select the most important
subgraph from the leaves of the search tree as the expla-
nation of the prediction. In addition, it employs Shapley
value [70] as the reward of MCTS to measure the importance
of subgraphs and proposes an efﬁcient approximation of
Shapley value by only considering the interactions within
message passing range. While SubgraphX is not directly
studying masks, the MCTS algorithm can be understood as
the mask generation algorithm and its node pruning actionscan be regarded as different masks to obtain subgraphs.
In addition, the Shapley values can be treated as the ob-
jective function to update the mask generation algorithm.
Compared with other perturbation-based methods, its ob-
tained subgraphs are more human-intelligible and suitable
for graph data. However, the computational cost is more
expensive since it needs to explore different subgraphs with
the MCTS algorithm.
4.3 Surrogate Methods
In this section, we introduce the surrogate methods for
explaining deep graph models.
4.3.1 A uniﬁed view
Deep models are challenging to explain because of the
complex and non-linear relationships between the input
space and output predictions. A popular way to provide
instance-level explanations for image models is known as
surrogate method. The underlying idea is to employ a sim-
ple and interpretable surrogate model to approximate the
predictions of the complex deep model for the neighboring
areas of the input example. Note that these methods assume
that the relationships in the neighboring areas of the input
example is less complex and can be well captured by a
simpler surrogate model. Then the explanations from the
interpretable surrogate model are used to explain the orig-
inal prediction. Applying surrogate methods to the graph
domain is challenging since graph data are discrete and
contain topology information. Then it is not clear how to
deﬁne the neighboring regions of the input graph and what
interpretable surrogate models are suitable.
Recently, several surrogate methods are proposed to
explain deep graph models, including GraphLime [61],
RelEx [62], and PGM-Explainer [63]. The general pipeline
of these methods is shown in Figure 3. To explain the
prediction of a given input graph, they ﬁrst obtain a local
dataset containing multiple neighboring data objects and
their predictions. Then they ﬁt a interpretable model to
learn the local dataset. Finally, the explanations from the
interpretable model are regarded as the explanations of the