PREPRINT 11
Fig. 5. A data example of our graph sentiment datasets. Each node represents a word while edges indicates the relationship between the words.
Note that edges are directed but their labels are ignored.
7.1.2 Sentiment graph data
Traditional graph datasets are challenging to understand
since humans only have limited domain knowledge. It raises
the need of building human-understandable graph datasets.
Text data can be a proper choice for graph explanation tasks
since they consist of words and phrases with understand-
able semantic meanings. Then the explanation results can
be easily evaluated by humans. Hence, we build three senti-
ment graph datasets based on text sentiment analysis data,
including SST2 [77], SST5 [77], and Twitter [78] datasets.
First, for each text sequence, we convert it to a graph
that each node represents a word while the edges reﬂect
the relationships between different words. Speciﬁcally, we
employ the Biafﬁne parser [79] to extract word dependen-
cies. We show an example of our generated sentiment graph
in Figure 5. Note that the generated graphs are directed
but the edge labels are ignored since most GNNs cannot
capture edge label information. Next, we employ BERT [80]
to obtain the word embeddings and such embeddings are
used as initial embeddings of graph nodes. Speciﬁcally, we
use a pre-trained twelve-layer base BERT model to extract a
768-dimension feature vector for each word.
We build three sentiment graph datasets, known as
Graph-SST2, Graph-SST5, and Graph-Twitter. They are now
publicly available and can be directly used to study dif-
ferent explanation techniques1. The statistics and properties
of these datasets are reported in Table 2. We report the
prediction accuracies of two-layer GNNs on these datasets,
including GCNs, GATs, and GINs. In addition, we also show
the ﬁne-tuned accuracies of a pre-trained twelve-layer base
BERT [80] using the original sentence datasets. Since the
results of BERT are obtained by ﬁnetuning the model and
word embeddings, it is expected to perform better than the
GNN models without ﬁnetuned node embeddings. Notably,
we choose to use the word embeddings as the node embed-
dings without ﬁnetuning because ﬁnetuning may encode
the label information into the word embeddings, which
affect the structural information captured by GNNs and
the ﬁnal explanations. Hence, we believe these datasets are
reasonable choices for building graph models to explain.
Based on the semantic meaning of different words and the
sentiment labels, we can study whether the explanations can
identify the words with key meanings and the relationships
among different words.
7.1.3 Molecule data
Molecular datasets are also widely used in explanation
tasks, such as MUTAG [81], BBBP [82], and Tox21 [83].
1. https://github.com/divelab/DIG/tree/main/dig/xgraph/
datasetsEach graph in such datasets corresponds to a molecule
where nodes represent atoms and edges are the chemical
bonds. The labels of molecular graphs are generally deter-
mined by the chemical functionalities or properties of the
molecules. Employing such datasets for explanation tasks
requires domain knowledge, such as what chemical groups
are discriminative for their functionalities. For example, in
the dataset MUTAG, different graphs are labeled based on
their mutagenic effects on a bacterium. In addition, it is
known that carbon rings and NO 2chemical groups may
lead to mutagenic effects [81]. Then we can study whether
the explanations can identify such patterns for the corre-
sponding class.
7.2 Evaluation Metrics
Even though visualization results can provide an insightful
understanding regarding whether the explanations are rea-
sonable to humans, such evaluations are not fully trustable
due to the lack of ground truths. In addition, to compare
different explanation methods, humans need to study the
results for each input example, which is time-consuming.
Furthermore, human evaluations are highly dependent on
their subjective understanding, which is not fair enough.
Hence, evaluation metrics are crucial for studying explana-
tion methods. Good metrics should evaluate the results from
the model’s perspective, such as whether the explanations
are faithful to the model [84], [85]. In this section, we
introduce several recently proposed evaluation metrics for
explanation tasks.
7.2.1 Fidelity
First, the explanations should be faithful to the model. They
should identify input features that are important for the
model, not our humans. To evaluate this, the Fidelity+ [55]
metric is recently proposed. Intuitively, if important input
features (nodes/edges/node features) identiﬁed by expla-
nation techniques are discriminative to the model, the pre-
dictions should change signiﬁcantly when these features
are removed. Hence, Fidelity+ is deﬁned as the difference
of accuracy (or predicted probability) between the original
predictions and the new predictions after masking out im-
portant input features [55], [86].
Formally, letGidenote the i-th input graph and f()
denote the GNN classiﬁer to be explained. The prediction
result of this graph is represented as ^yi=argmaxf(Gi).
Then its explanations can be considered as a hard impor-
tance mapmiwhere each element is 0 or 1 to indicate if the
corresponding feature is important. Note that for methods
like ZORRO [56] and Causal Screening [58], the generated