PREPRINT 3
Graph Neural NetwokExplanations
Instance-levelExplanations
Model-levelExplanations
Gradients/Features
Perturbations
Decomposition
Surrogate
Generation
SAGuided BPCAMGrad-CAM
GNNExplainerPGExplainerZORROGraphMaskCausal ScreeningSubgraphX
LRP Excitation BPGNN-LRP
GraphLimeRelExPGM-Explainer
XGNN
Fig. 1. An overview of our proposed taxonomy. We categorize existing GNN explanation approaches into two branches: instance-level methods
and model-level methods. For the instance-level methods, the gradients/features-based methods include SA [54], Guided BP [54], CAM [55], and
Grad-CAM [55]; the perturbation-based methods are GNNExplainer [46], PGExplainer [47], ZORRO [56], GraphMask [57], Causal Screening [58],
and SubgraphX [48]; the decomposition methods contains LRP [54], [59], Excitation BP [55] and GNN-LRP [60]; the surrogate methods include
GraphLime [61], RelEx [62], and PGM-Explainer [63]. For the model-level methods, the only existing approach is XGNN [45].
3 A NOVERVIEW OF THE TAXONOMY
Recently, several approaches are proposed to explain the
predictions of deep graph models. These methods focus on
different aspects of the graph models and provide different
views to understand these models. They generally answer
a few questions; some of those are, which input edges are
more important? which input nodes are more important?
which node features are more important? what graph pat-
terns will maximize the prediction of a certain class? To
better understand these methods, we provide a taxonomy
of different explanation techniques for GNNs. The structure
of our taxonomy is shown in Figure 1. Based on what
types of explanations are provided, different techniques are
categorized into two main classes: instance-level methods
and model-level methods.
First, instance-level methods provide input-dependent
explanations for each input graph. Given an input graph,
these methods explain deep models by identifying impor-
tant input features for its prediction. Based on how the
importance scores are obtained, we categorize the methods
into four different branches: gradients/features-based meth-
ods, perturbation-based methods, decomposition methods,
and surrogate methods. Speciﬁcally, the gradients/features-
based methods employ the gradients or the feature values
to indicate the importance of different input features. In
addition, perturbation-based methods monitor the change
of prediction with respect to different input perturbations to
study input importance scores. The decomposition methods
ﬁrst decompose the prediction scores, such as predicted
probabilities, to the neurons in the last hidden layer. Then
they back propagate such scores layer by layer until the
input space and use such decomposed scores as the im-
portance scores. Meanwhile, for a given input example,
surrogate based methods ﬁrst sample a dataset from the
neighbors of the given example. Next, these methods ﬁt a
simple and interpretable model, such as the decision tree,to the sampled dataset. Then the explanations from the
surrogate model are used to explain the original predic-
tions. Second, model-level methods explain graph neural
networks without respect to any speciﬁc input example. The
input-independent explanations are high-level and explain
general behaviors. Compared with instance-level methods,
this direction is still less explored. The only existing model-
level method is XGNN [45], which is based on graph gener-
ation.
Overall, these two categories of methods explain deep
graph models from different views. Instance-level meth-
ods provide example-speciﬁc explanations while model-
level methods provide high-level insights and a generic
understanding. To verify and trust deep graph models,
it requires human supervision to check the explanations.
For instance-level methods, more human supervisions are
needed since experts need to explore the explanations for
different input graphs. For model-level methods, since the
explanations are high-level, less human supervisions are
involved. Furthermore, the explanations of instance-level
methods are based on real input instances so that they
are easier to understand. However, the explanations for
model-level methods may not be human-intelligible since
the obtained graph patterns may not even exist in the real-
world. Overall, these two types of methods can be combined
together to better understand deep graph models, and hence
it is necessary to investigate both of them.
4 I NSTANCE -LEVEL EXPLANATIONS
We start our explorations by introducing the instance-level
methods for GNN explanations. In this section, we will
discuss the motivations, methodologies, advantages, limi-
tations of each category.