𝑁2× 4 𝑁1× 4Deep Feature 
Extraction LayerSource & Target 
Point CloudsSource Target
𝑁2×32 𝑁1×32Point-wise Feature
𝑁 × 4𝑁 × 𝐾 × 3 6Sample
Candidates
𝑁 × 𝐶 × 4𝑁 × 𝐶 × 𝐾 × 3 6
Weighting Layer
GT Target  
Keypoints𝑁 ×32 𝑁 × 𝐶 × 32
𝑁 × 3 𝑁 × 3Corresponding Point 
Generation LayerSource & Target 
KeypointsConcat
Concat
𝑁 × 3
SameDeep Feature 
Embedding Layer
𝑁 × 3Weighted 
Loss
Refined Target  
KeypointsPredicted Relative PoseGenerated
Relative Pose
GT Relative Pose
MaxPool
MLP( 32×32×32)
SharedDFE Layer
SoftPlusTop K
MLP( 16× 8 × 1)
SharedWeighting Layer
(16, 3, 1)SoftMax
Weights 
Matrix(4, 3, 1)(1, 3, 1)
Weighted 
SumTarget Candidates
3D CNNsCPG LayerFigure 2. The architecture of the proposed end-to-end learning network for 3D point cloud registration, DeepVCP. The source and target
point clouds are fed into the deep feature extraction layer, then Nkeypoints are extracted from the source point cloud by the weighting
layer.N×Ccandidate corresponding points are selected from the target point cloud, followed by a deep feature embedding operation.
The corresponding keypoints in the target point cloud are generated by the corresponding points generation layer. Finally, we propose to
use the combination of two losses those encode both the global geometric constraints and local similarities.
feature descriptors as we did in Section 3.3. The output is
anN×C×32tensor. Similar to [ 25], those tensors rep-
resenting the extracted DFE features descriptors from the
source and target are fed into a three-layer 3D CNNs, fol-
lowed by a softmax operation, as shown in Figure 2. The
3D CNNs can learn a similarity distance metric between
the source and target features, and more importantly, it can
smooth (regularize) the matching volume and suppress the
matching noise. The softmax operation is applied to convert
the matching costs into probabilities.
Finally, the target corresponding point yiis calculated
through a weighted-sum operation as:
yi=1/summationtextC
j=1wjC/summationdisplay
j=1wj·y′
j, (1)
wherewjis the similarity probability of each candidate
corresponding point y′
j. The computed target corresponding
points are represented by a N×3tensor.
Compared to the traditional ICP algorithm that relied on
the iterative optimization or the methods [ 33,7,49] which
search the corresponding points among existing points from
the target point cloud and use RANSAC to reject outliers,
our approach utilizes the powerful generalization capability
of CNNs in similarity learning, to directly “guess” where
the corresponding points are in the target point cloud. This
eliminates the use of RANSAC, reduces the iteration times
to 1, signiﬁcantly reduces the running time, and achieves
ﬁne registration with high precision.Another implementation detail worth mentioning is that
we conduct a bidirectional matching strategy during infer-
ence to improve the registration accuracy. That is, the input
point cloud pair is considered as the source and target simul-
taneously. While we do not do this during training, because
this does not improve the overall performance of the model.
3.5. Loss
For each keypoint xifrom the source point cloud, we can
calculate its corresponding ground truth ¯yiwith the given
ground truth transformation (¯R,¯T). Using the estimated
target corresponding point yiin Section 3.4, we can directly
compute the L1distance in the Euclidean space as a loss:
Loss1=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1|¯yi−yi|. (2)
If only the Loss1in Equation 2is used, the keypoint
matching procedure during the registration is independent
for each one. Consequently, only the local neighboring con-
text is considered during the matching procedure, while the
registration task is obviously constrained with a global ge-
ometric transform. Therefore, it is essential to introduce
another loss including global geometric constraints.
Inspired by the iterative optimization in the ICP algo-
rithm, we perform a single optimization iteration. That is,
we perform a singular value decomposition (SVD) step to
estimate the relative transformation given the correspond-
ing keypoint pairs {xi,yi},i= 1,···,N, and the learned
15