weights from the weighting layer. Following an outlier re-
jection step, where 20% point pairs are rejected given the
estimated transformation, another SVD step is executed to
further reﬁne the estimation (R,T). Then the second loss
in our network is deﬁned as:
Loss2=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1|¯yi−(Rxi+T)|. (3)
Thanks to [ 18], the latest Tensorﬂow has supported the
SVD operator and its backpropagation. This ensures that
the proposed network can be trained in an end-to-end pat-
tern. As a result, the combined loss is deﬁned as:
Loss=αLoss 1+(1−α)Loss2, (4)
whereαis the balancing factor. In Section 4.3, we demon-
strate the effectiveness of our loss design. It has been tested
that the convergence rate is faster and the accuracy is higher
when the L1loss is applied.
It is worth to note that the estimated corresponding key-
pointsyiare actually constantly being updated together
as the estimated transformation (R,T)during the training.
When the network converges, the estimated corresponding
keypoints become unlimitedly close to the ground truth. It is
interesting that this training procedure is actually quite sim-
ilar to the classic ICP algorithm. While the network only
needs a single iteration to ﬁnd the optimal corresponding
keypoint and then estimate the transformation during infer-
ence, which is very valuable.
3.6. Dataset Speciﬁc Reﬁnement
Moreover, we ﬁnd that there are some characteristics in
KITTI and Apollo-SouthBay datasets that can be utilized
to further improve the registration accuracy. Experimental
results using many different datasets are introduced in the
supplemental material. This speciﬁc network duplication
method is not applied in these datasets.
Because the point clouds from Velodyne HDL64 are dis-
tributed within a relatively narrow region in the z-direction,
the keypoints constraining the z-direction are usually quite
different from the other two, such as the points on the
ground plane. This causes the registration precision at the z,
rollandpitch directions to decline. To tackle this problem,
we actually duplicate the whole network structure as shown
in Figure 2, and use two copies of the network in a cascade
pattern. The back network uses the estimated transforma-
tion from the front network as the input, but replaces the 3D
CNNs in the CPG step of the latter with a 1D one sampling
in thezdirection only. Both the networks share the same FE
layer, becasue we do not want to extract FE features twice.
This increases the z,rollandpitch ’s estimation precision.4. Experiments
4.1. Benchmark Datasets
We evaluate the performance of the proposed network
using 11 training sequences of the KITTI odometry dataset
[13]. The KITTI dataset contains point clouds captured
with a Velodyne HDL64 LiDAR in Karlsruhe, Germany to-
gether with the “ground truth” poses provided by a high-
end GNSS/INS integrated navigation system. We split the
dataset into two groups, the training, and the testing. The
training group includes 00-07 sequences, and the testing in-
cludes 08 - 10 sequences.
Another dataset that is used for evaluation is the Apollo-
SouthBay dataset [ 25]. It collected point clouds using the
same model of LiDAR as the KITTI dataset, but, in the
San Francisco Bay area, United States. Similar to KITTI,
it covers various scenarios including residential areas, ur-
ban downtown areas, and highways. We also ﬁnd that the
“ground truth” poses in Apollo-SouthBay is more accurate
than KITTI odometry dataset. Some ground truth poses
in KITTI involve larger errors, for example, the ﬁrst 500
frames in Sequence 08. Moreover, the mounting height
of the LiDAR in Apollo-SouthBay is slightly higher than
KITTI. This allows the LiDAR to see larger areas in the z
direction. We ﬁnd that the keypoints picked up in these high
regions sometimes are very helpful for registration. The
setup of the training and test sets is similar to [ 25] with the
mapping portion discarded. There is no overlap between the
training and testing data. Refer to the supplemental material
for additional experimental results using more challenging
datasets.
The initial poses are generated by adding random noises
to the ground truth. In KITTI and Apollo-SouthBay, we
added a uniformly distributed random error of [0 ∼1.0]min
x-y-zdimension, and a random error of [0 ∼1.0]◦inroll-
pitch -yaw dimension. The models in different datasets
are trained separately. Refer to the supplemental material
where we evaluate robustness given inaccurate initial poses
using other datasets.
4.2. Performance
Baseline Algorithms We present extensive performance
evaluation by comparing with a few point cloud registra-
tion algorithms based on geometry. They are: (i) The ICP
family, such as ICP [ 3], G-ICP [ 37], and AA-ICP [ 28]; (ii)
NDT-P2D [ 39]; (iii) GMM family, such as CPD [ 26]; (iv)
The learning-based method, 3DFeat-Net [ 46]. The imple-
mentations of ICP, G-ICP, AA-ICP, and NDT-P2D are from
the Point Cloud Library (PCL) [ 34]. Gadomski‘s imple-
mentation [ 12] of the CPD method is used and the original
3DFeat-Net implementation with RANSAC for the registra-
tion task is used.
Evaluation Criteria The evaluation is performed by
16