Figure 5. Visualization of the detected keypoints by the point weighting layer. The pink and grey keypoints are detected by the front and
back network, respectively. The pink ones appear on stationary objects, such as tree trunks and poles. The grey ones are mostly on the
ground, as expected.
a
bc
dea
b
c
d
eAfter Registration
a’
b’c’
d’e’a’
b’
c’
d’
e’Before Registration
Figure 6. Illustrate the matching similarity probabilities of each keypoint to its matching candidates by visualizing them in xandy
dimensions with 9ﬁxedzvalues. The black and pink points are the detected keypoints in the source point cloud and the generated ones in
the target, respectively. The effectiveness of the registration process is shown on the left (before) and right (after).
source point cloud and the generated ones in the target, re-
spectively. It is seen that the keypoints detected are sufﬁ-
ciently salient that the matching probabilities are concen-
tratedly distributed.
5. Conclusion
We have presented an end-to-end framework for the
point cloud registration task. The novel designs in our net-
work make our learning-based system achieve the compa-
rable registration accuracy to the state-of-the-art geomet-
ric methods. It has been shown that our network can
learn which features are good for the registration task au-
tomatically, yielding an outlier rejection capability. Com-
paring to ICP and its variants, it beneﬁts from deep fea-
tures and is more robust to inaccurate initial poses. Basedon the GPU acceleration in the state-of-the-art deep learn-
ing frameworks, it has good runtime efﬁciency that is no
worse than common geometric methods. We believe that
our method is attractive and has considerable potential for
many applications. In a further extension of this work, we
will explore ways to improve the generalization capability
of the trained model with more LiDAR models in broader
application scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Baidu ADT in conjunc-
tion with the Apollo Project ( http://apollo.auto/ ). Natasha
Dsouza helped with the text editing and proof reading.
Runxin He and Yijun Yuan helped with the DeepVCP‘s de-
ployment on clusters.
19