signed as a general point cloud registration solution.
3. Method
This section describes the architecture of the proposed
network designed in detail as shown in Figure 2.
3.1. Deep Feature Extraction
The input of our network consists of the source and tar-
get point cloud, the predicted (prior) transformation, and the
ground truth pose required only during the training stage.
The ﬁrst step is extracting feature descriptors from the point
cloud. In the proposed method, we extract feature descrip-
tors by applying a deep neural network layer, denoted as
the Feature Extraction (FE) Layer. As shown in Figure 2,
we feed the source point cloud, represented as an N1×4
tensor, into the FE layer. The output is an N1×32tensor
representing the extracted local feature. The FE layer we
used here is PointNet++ [ 31] which is a poineer work ad-
dressing the issue of consuming unordered points in a net-
work architecture. We are also considering to try rotation
invariant 3D descriptors [ 6,16,23] in the future.
These local features are expected to have certain seman-
tic meanings. Working together with the weighting layer
to be introduced next, we expect our end-to-end network to
be capable to avoid the interference from dynamic objects
and deliver precise registration estimation. In Section 4.4,
we visualize the selected keypoints and demonstrate that the
dynamic objects are successfully avoided.
3.2. Point Weighting
Inspired by the attention layer in 3DFeatNet [ 46], we de-
sign a point weighting layer to learn the saliency of each
point in an end-to-end framework. Ideally, points with in-
variant and distinct features on static objects should be as-
signed higher weights.
As shown in Figure 2,N1×32local features from the
source point cloud are fed into the point weighting layer.
The weighting layer consists of a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) of 3 stacking fully connected layers and a top k op-
eration. The ﬁrst two fully connected layers use the batch
normalization and the ReLU activation function, and the
last layer omits the normalization and applies the softplus
activation function. The most signiﬁcant Npoints are se-
lected as the keypoints through the top k operator and their
learned weights are used in the subsequent processes.
Our approach is different from 3DFeatNet [ 46] in a few
ways. First, the features used in the attention layer are ex-
tracted from local patches, while ours are semantic features
extracted directly from the point cloud. We have greater
receptive ﬁelds learned from an encoder-decoder style net-
work (PointNet++ [ 31]). Moreover, our weighting layer
does not output a 1D rotation angle to determine the fea-
ture direction, because our design of the feature embeddinglayer in the next section uses a symmetric and isotropic net-
work architecture.
3.3. Deep Feature Embedding
After extracting Nkeypoints from the source point
cloud, we seek to ﬁnd the corresponding points in the tar-
get point cloud for the ﬁnal registration. In order to achieve
this, we need a more detailed feature descriptor that can bet-
ter represent their geometric characteristics. Therefore, we
apply a deep feature embedding (DFE) layer on their neigh-
borhood points to extract these local features. The DFE
layer we used is a mini-PointNet [ 30,7,25] structure.
Speciﬁcally, we collect Kneighboring points within a
certain radius dof each keypoint. In case that there are less
thanKneighboring points, we simply duplicate them. For
all the neighboring points, we use their local coordinates
and normalize them by the searching radius d. Then, we
concatenate the FE feature extracted in Section 3.1with the
local coordinates and the LiDAR reﬂectance intensities of
the neighboring points as the input to the DFE layer.
The mini-PointNet consists of a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) of 3 stacking fully connected layers and a max-
pooling layer to aggregate and obtain the feature descrip-
tor. As shown in Figure 2, the input of the DFE layer is an
N×K×36vector, which refers to the local coordinate,
the intensity, and the 32-dimensional FE feature descriptor
of each point in the neighborhood. The output of the DFE
layer is again a 32-dimensional vector. In Section 4.3, we
show the effectiveness of the DFE layer and how it help im-
prove the registration precision signiﬁcantly.
3.4. Corresponding Point Generation
Similar to ICP, our approach also seeks to ﬁnd corre-
sponding points in the target point cloud and estimate the
transformation. The ICP algorithm chooses the closest
point as the corresponding point. This prohibits backprop-
agation as it is not differentiable. Furthermore, there are
actually no exact corresponding points in the target point
cloud to the source due to its sparsity nature. To tackle
the above problems, we propose a novel network structure,
the corresponding point generation (CPG) layer, to gener-
ate corresponding points from the extracted features and the
similarity represented by them.
We ﬁrst transform the keypoints from the source point
cloud using the input predicted transformation. Let
{xi,x′
i},i= 1,···,Ndenote the 3D coordinate of the key-
point from the source point cloud and its transformation in
the target point cloud, respectively. In the neighborhood
ofx′
i, we divide its neighboring space into (2r
s+ 1,2r
s+
1,2r
s+ 1) 3D grid voxels, where ris the searching radius
andsis the voxel size. Let us denote the centers of the 3D
voxels as {y′
j},j= 1,···,C, which are considered as the
candidate corresponding points. We also extract their DFE
14