DeepVCP: An End-to-End Deep Neural Network for Point Cloud Registration
Weixin Lu Guowei Wan Yao Zhou Xiangyu Fu Pengfei Yuan Shiyu Song∗
Baidu Autonomous Driving Technology Department (ADT)
{luweixin, wanguowei, zhouyao, fuxiangyu, yuanpengfei, songshiyu }@baidu.com
Abstract
We present DeepVCP - a novel end-to-end learning-
based 3D point cloud registration framework that achieves
comparable registration accuracy to prior state-of-the-art
geometric methods. Different from other keypoint based
methods where a RANSAC procedure is usually needed, we
implement the use of various deep neural network struc-
tures to establish an end-to-end trainable network. Our
keypoint detector is trained through this end-to-end struc-
ture and enables the system to avoid the interference of dy-
namic objects, leverages the help of sufﬁciently salient fea-
tures on stationary objects, and as a result, achieves high
robustness. Rather than searching the corresponding points
among existing points, the key contribution is that we inno-
vatively generate them based on learned matching proba-
bilities among a group of candidates, which can boost the
registration accuracy. We comprehensively validate the ef-
fectiveness of our approach using both the KITTI dataset
and the Apollo-SouthBay dataset. Results demonstrate that
our method achieves comparable registration accuracy and
runtime efﬁciency to the state-of-the-art geometry-based
methods, but with higher robustness to inaccurate initial
poses. Detailed ablation and visualization analysis are in-
cluded to further illustrate the behavior and insights of our
network. The low registration error and high robustness of
our method make it attractive to the substantial applications
relying on the point cloud registration task.
1. Introduction
Recent years has seen a breakthrough in deep learning
that has led to compelling advancements in most seman-
tic computer vision tasks, such as classiﬁcation [ 22], de-
tection [ 15,32] and segmentation [ 24,2]. A number of
works have highlighted that these empirically deﬁned prob-
lems can be solved by using DNNs, yielding remarkable
results and good generalization behavior. The geometric
problems that are deﬁned theoretically, which is another
∗Author to whom correspondence should be addressed
(a) Source and target PCs and source keypoints
(d) Final registration result
(b) Search region of keypoints
(c) Generated target matched points 
Figure 1. The illustration of the major steps of our proposed end-
to-end point cloud registration method: (a) The source (red) and
target (blue) point clouds and the keypoints (black) detected by
the point weighting layer. (b) A search region is generated for
each keypoint and represented by grid voxels. (c) The matched
points (magenta) generated by the corresponding point generation
layer. (d) The ﬁnal registration result computed by performing
SVD given the matched keypoint pairs.
important category of the problem, has seen many recent
developments with emerging results in solving vision prob-
lems, including stereo matching [ 47,5], depth estimation
[36] and SFM [ 40,51]. But it has been observed, for tasks
using 3D point clouds as input, for example, the 3D point
cloud registration task, experiential solutions of most recent
attempts [ 49,11,7] have not been adequate, especially in
terms of local registration accuracy.
Point cloud registration is a task that aligns two or more
different point clouds collected by LiDAR (Light Detec-
tion and Ranging) scanners by estimating the relative trans-
formation between them. It is a well-known problem and
plays an essential role in many applications, such as Li-
DAR SLAM [ 50,8,19,27], 3D reconstruction and mapping
[38,10,45,9], positioning and localization [ 48,20,42,25],
object pose estimation [ 43] and so on.
LiDAR point clouds have innumerable unique aspects
that can enhance the complexity of this particular problem,
including the local sparsity, large amount of data generated
and the noise caused by dynamic objects. Compared to the
image matching problem, the sparsity of the point cloud
12