makes ﬁnding two exact matching points from the source
and target point clouds usually infeasible. It also increases
the difﬁculty of feature extraction due to the large appear-
ance difference of the same object viewed by a laser scan-
ner from different perspectives. The millions of points pro-
duced every second requires highly efﬁcient algorithms and
powerful computational units. ICP and its variants have rel-
atively good computational efﬁciency, but are known to be
susceptible to local minima, therefore, rely on the quality of
the initialization. Finally, appropriate handling of the inter-
ference caused by the noisy points of dynamic objects typi-
cally is crucial for delivering an ideal estimation, especially
when using real LiDAR data.
In this work, titled “DeepVCP” (Virtual Corresponding
Points), we propose an end-to-end learning-based method
to accurately align two different point clouds. The name
DeepVCP accurately captures the importance of the virtual
corresponding point generation step which is one of the key
innovative designs proposed in our approach. An overview
of our framework is shown in Figure 1.
We ﬁrst extract semantic features of each point both from
the source and target point clouds using the latest point
cloud feature extraction network, PointNet++ [ 31]. They
are expected to have certain semantic meanings to empower
our network to avoid dynamic objects and focus on those
stable and unique features that are good for registration.
To further achieve this goal, we select the keypoints in the
source point cloud that are most signiﬁcant for the registra-
tion task by making use of a point weighting layer to assign
matching weights to the extracted features through a learn-
ing procedure. To tackle the problem of local sparsity of the
point cloud, we propose a novel corresponding point gener-
ation method based on a feature descriptor extraction proce-
dure using a mini-PointNet [ 30] structure. We believe that it
is the key contribution to enhance registration accuracy. Fi-
nally, besides only using the L1 distance between the source
keypoint and the generated corresponding point as the loss,
we propose to construct another corresponding point by in-
corporating the keypoint weights adaptively and executing
a single optimization iteration using the newly introduced
SVD operator in TensorFlow. The L1 distance between the
keypoint and this newly generated corresponding point is
again used as another loss. Unlike the ﬁrst loss using only
local similarity, this newly introduced loss builds the uni-
ﬁed geometric constraints among local keypoints. The end-
to-end closed-loop training allows the DNNs to generalize
well and select the best keypoints for registration.
To summarize, our main contributions are:
•To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst end-
to-end learning-based point cloud registration frame-
work yielding comparable results to prior state-of-the-
art geometric ones.
•Our learning-based keypoint detection, novel corre-sponding point generation method and the loss func-
tion that incorporates both the local similarity and the
global geometric constraints to achieve high accuracy
in the learning-based registration task.
•Rigorous tests and detailed ablation analysis using the
KITTI [ 13] and Apollo-SouthBay [ 25] datasets to fully
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
2. Related Work
The survey work from F. Pomerleau et al. [ 29] provides a
good overview of the development of traditional point cloud
registration algorithms. [ 3,37,26,39,44] are some repre-
sentative works among them. A discussion of the full liter-
ature of the these methods is beyond the scope of this work.
The attempt of using learning based methods starts by
replacing each individual component in the classic point
cloud registration pipeline. S. Salti et al. [ 35] proposes to
formulate the problem of 3D keypoint detection as a binary
classiﬁcation problem using a pre-deﬁned descriptor, and
attempts to learn a Random Forest [ 4] classiﬁer that can ﬁnd
the appropriate keypoints that are good for matching. M.
Khoury et al. [ 21] proposes to ﬁrst parameterize the input
unstructured point clouds into spherical histograms, then
a deep network is trained to map these high-dimensional
spherical histograms to low-dimensional descriptors in Eu-
clidean space. In terms of the method of keypoint detection
and descriptor learning, the closest work to our proposal
is [46]. Instead of constructing an End-to-End registration
framework, it focuses on joint learning of keypoints and de-
scriptors that can maximize local distinctiveness and simi-
larity between point cloud pairs. G. Georgakis et al. [ 14]
solves a similar problem for RGB-D data. Depth images
are processed by a modiﬁed Faster R-CNN architecture for
joint keypiont detection and descriptor estimation. Despite
the different approaches, they all focus on the representation
of the local distinctiveness and similarity of the keypoints.
During keypoint selection, content awareness in real scenes
is ignored due to the absence of the global geometric con-
straints introduced in our end-to-end framework. As a re-
sult, keypoints on dynamic objects in the scene cannot be
rejected in these approaches.
Some recent works [ 49,11,7,1] propose to learn 3D
descriptors leveraging the DNNs, and attempt to solve the
3D scene recognition and re-localization problem, in which
obtaining accurate local matching results is not the goal. In
order to achieve that, methods, as ICP, are still necessary for
the registration reﬁnement.
M. Velas et al. [ 41] encodes the 3D LiDAR data into
a speciﬁc 2D representation designed for multi-beam me-
chanical LiDARs. CNNs is used to infer the 6 DOF poses
as a classiﬁcation or regression problem. An IMU assisted
LiDAR odometry system is built upon it. Our approach pro-
cesses the original unordered point cloud directly and is de-
13