Spiking Deep Residual Network
Yangfan Hu
Zhejiang University
huyangfan@zju.edu.cnHuajin Tang
Zhejiang University
htang@zju.edu.cnGang Pan
Zhejiang University
gpan@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have received signiﬁcant attention for their biolog-
ical plausibility. SNNs theoretically have at least the same computational power as
traditional artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). They possess potential of achieving
energy-efﬁciency while keeping comparable performance to deep neural networks
(DNNs). However, it is still a big challenge to train a very deep SNN. In this paper,
we propose an efﬁcient approach to build a spiking version of deep residual net-
work (ResNet). ResNet is considered as a kind of the state-of-the-art convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). We employ the idea of converting a trained ResNet to
a network of spiking neurons, named Spiking ResNet (S-ResNet). We propose
a shortcut conversion model to appropriately scale continuous-valued activations
to match ﬁring rates in SNN, and a compensation mechanism to reduce the error
caused by discretisation. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared with the
state-of-the-art SNN approaches, the proposed Spiking ResNet achieves the best
performance on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet 2012. Our work is the ﬁrst
time to build a SNN deeper than 40, with comparable performance to ANNs on a
large-scale dataset.
1 Introduction
SPIKING neural network (SNN) is considered as a promising approach to build an intelligent
machine as efﬁcient as the human brain. Compared with conventional ANN, SNN is more
biologically realistic and its neurons communicate with each other via discrete events (spikes) instead
of continuous-valued activations. Theoretically, SNN can approximate any function as ANN [ 1].
Such system is updated asynchronously as event arrives, thus reduces number of operations required
at each time step. Recent developments show that SNNs can be emulated by neuromorphic hardware
such as TrueNorth [ 2], SpiNNaker [ 3] and ROLLS [ 4] with several orders of magnitude less energy
consumption than that by contemporary computing hardware. Furthermore, SNNs are inherently
suitable for processing data from emerging AER-based (address-event-representation) sensors that
have low redundancy, low latency and high dynamic range, such as dynamic vision sensor (DVS) [ 5].
Visual systems [ 6,7] constructed with SNN, DVS and neuromorphic processors have demonstrated
their capacity in solving visual tasks as well as prominent energy-efﬁciency.
At current stage, how to train a SNN remains an open challenge due to the discontinuity of its spiking
mechanism. Many efforts have been made to solve this problem. These methods can be categorised
into four classes. The ﬁrst class seeks to make SNN differentiable with some approximations and apply
gradient descent. The second class takes inspiration from biological neurons and utilises synaptic
plasticity rules. The third class views SNN as a stochastic process and learns with probabilistic
inference. However, the three kinds of approaches are not yet well-developed and cannot deal with
deep architectures. The last kind of approaches employ the idea of conversion to narrow the gap of
performance between SNN and ANN. It trains a conventional ANN and builds a conversion algorithm
to map the weights to an equivalent SNN. Although this approach can build deeper SNNs than the
ﬁrst three approaches, it is still a big challenge to build a large-scale SNN, for the performance after
conversion will drop rapidly when the network architecture goes deeper, e.g. more than 30 layers.
In this paper, we investigate the learning of deep SNN by converting residual network [ 8], a cutting-
edge CNN architecture that allows a network to go extremely deep and has achieved great successarXiv:1805.01352v2  [cs.NE]  3 Jun 2020