Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 47 formats of data - apart from numerical data, artificial intelligence processes texts, images, 
and sounds, providing them with significance and relevance for further analyses (Dhar, 
2016).  
AI has been so far dr awing the attention of engineers, IT experts, and analysts, but is now 
moving outside its traditional areas of occurrence, making an increasingly stronger mark in 
the field of management and marketing. The ever -increasing amount of consumer data 
available online, in big data systems or mobile devices, makes AI become an important ally 
of marketing, as it is based on data analysis in almost every area of its application. 
Marketing takes advantage of data to a large extent - from consumer needs research, 
mark et analyses, customer insights, and competition intelligence through pursuing activities 
in various communication or distribution channels to measuring the results and effects of 
the adopted strategies. Marketing becomes a natural beneficiary of developing  information 
technology (Mazurek, 2011a, 2011b, 2014). The proximity of both domains makes it 
possible to achieve a synergy effect. Therefore, it seems important to emphasise the 
potential of artificial intelligence and of the available AI -based tools and to discuss the 
commercial applications of AI in the area of marketing.  
The article is divided into four parts. The first part includes the key definitions of the ideas 
related to AI. The second discusses examples of AI solutions implemented in the area of  
marketing. The third part, being an effect of an analysis of the collected examples, provides 
a description of areas of AI’s impact on marketing. The final part of the article covers the 
opportunities and risks underlying the application of AI in marketin g activity.  
1 Theoretical background  
1.1 Artificial Intelligence overview  
Artificial intelligence derives from information technology. It is often used interchangeably 
with notions like automation or robotization. It also tends to be confused with machine 
learning or algorithm application. According to Oxford Dictionary, AI is “the theory and 
development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human 
intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision -making, an d 
translation between languages” ("artificial intelligence | Definition of artificial intelligence in 
English by Oxford Dictionaries", 2019) . The technology based on artificial intelligence is 
able to imitate the cognitive functions that we attribute to th e human mind, including the 
ability to solve problems and learn (Syam, Sharma, 2018). The role and of AI is to process 
and identify the acquired data and then to perform certain tasks. This is the definition of the 
so-called Artificial Narrow Intelligence , which functions and carries out tasks in a defined 
area (Shanahan, 2015). The second type of AI is Artificial General Intelligence , whose 
scope of intellectual capacity is comparable to that of the human brain (Sterne, 2017). The 
current potential of AI w orks in a narrow area, and tasks are performed thanks to the 
advancement of three technologies: machine learning, deep learning, and natural language 
processing.  
Machine learning (ML) has taken AI to a higher level, one above the level of following a set 
of predefined rules. Therefore, ML has changed the role of algorithms that have been used 
so far with AI. ML has enabled computers to learn by themselves based on the available