Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 49 4Ps: product, price, promotion, and place. There were further advancements made within 
the marketing mix concept, such as adding another Ps - people, processes, phy sical 
evidence (Booms, Bittner, 1980), though the idea of 4Ps is still widely used and accepted.  
2 Methodology  
Due to the emerging trends of AI application in the business area, the aim of this paper is to 
review the AI implementation in the field of marketing. The goal of the research is to assess 
the scope of AI application within marketing mix and find answers to the research 
questions: (1) do all areas of AI (voice, text, image recognition, decision -making, 
autonomous vehicles and robots) find appl ication in marketing; (2) what kind of implications 
does AI make in marketing practice. To answer these questions , the authors decided to 
conduct secondary data research to gather examples of AI application. The procedure of 
collecting AI application w as made in two steps. The f irst step was a focus on review the 
marketing portals (www.marketingweek.com, www.adweek.com, www.warc.com) to gather 
AI application in marketing. The second step was the validation of selected examples by 
confirming  gathered examples with the information on the company site or in the press 
release of each example. There was no limitation connected with the sample location ; the 
goal of the secondary research was to collect any example of AI application. The presented 
conclusions are based on the results of the authors ' analysis of gathered examples.  
3 Results   
To answer the first research question ( Do all areas of AI find application in marketing?) , 
authors compiled all validated examples grouped according to the five AI areas which are 
presented in Table 1. For each mentioned AI area (text, voice, image recognition, decision 
making, autonomous vehicles and robots) authors have found AI application in marketing. 
While text recognition, image recognition, decision -making  technologies are widely used, 
the voice technology , as well as autonomous vehicles and robots,  are not so popular. This 
can be caused by the greater complexity of both technologies. Moreover, autonomous 
vehicles and robots are more often perceived as a pa rt of Industry 4.0 domain than 
marketing . Thus it is seldom perceived as a way of creating and developing innovations in 
sales channel management, merchandising optimization or delivering customer service 
which are placed in a marketing mix program within the ‘place’ domain.  
Table 1  | Examples of application of AI in marketing  
AI areas  Examples of application in marketing  
Voice processing 
technologies  • Voice purchase requests made through a device or the Amazon Alexa 
app.  
• Virtual assistants  are supporting task execution (Siri, Google Home, 
Cortana) .  
Text processing 
technologies  • Use of a virtual assistant as a guide to walk you through a shopping 
centr e (Alpine.AI) . 
• A virtual assistant embedded in a mobile bank  app, taking advantage 
of NLP, handles client requests alone by responding to their inquiries. 
A virtual assistant  is presenting application features, options to make a 
purchase of bank products by oneself, and providing information about 
the location of b ank branches and cash machines (ING Bank Śląski) . 
• A GPS navigation system that apart from showing the route to the