Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 51 • A chatbot  is preparing a cocktail recipe using the ingredients the 
consumer has at home and based on the consumer’s preferences. 
The chatbot analyses 300 recipes and offers the best -matched 
solution (Diageo Simi Bartender) . 
• Based on the user’s mobile phone data (locat ion, sun exposure time), 
the app indicates the right level of UV protection filter (Monteloeder) . 
• Dynamic matching of prices to the user based on their shopping 
record visited websites, or the owned mobile phone (iperfumy.pl, 
kontigo.pl) . 
• Matching adverts to user characteristics based on one’s online history 
(ING Bank Śląski) . 
• New product recommendations (Amazon, Netflix) . 
• GO-I-PACE, an application  is analysing one’s driving style, route 
choices, and frequency of charging the car (electric car). Based on th e 
results, the app offers suggestions on how to drive the care in a more 
efficient and effective manner (Jaguar I -PACE) . 
• ZozoSuit helps customers order clothes fitted perfectly to their figure. 
Thanks to in -built 150 sensors, ZozoSuit makes it possible to take 
150,000 measurements (Start Today, StretchSense) . 
• A platform to manage marketing campaigns online. In the first weeks, 
AI learns the specificity of a given company, then, based on data 
analysis, comes up with recommendations concerning the campaign 
strategy (Albert AI, Harley Davidson) . 
• Detecting faults and errors in product functioning and forecasting 
malfunction occurrences. The s ynchronisation of the work performed 
by the technical team responsible for device (lift) monitoring and repair 
works (if n ecessary) (KONE, IBM Watson IoT, Salesforce Einstein) . 
• Creation of a consolidated customer record regardless of the products 
purchased and used, linking customer data from every company area 
(Sales Cloud Einstein, U.S. Bank) . 
• Synchronisation of customer da ta from all possible points of contact 
with the brand (social media, website, e -mail, phone conversation). All 
interactions are aggregated and presented in one place in order to 
offer improved customer service (Salesforce, Adidas) . 
Autonomous 
robots and 
vehicles  • Service -free shops (Ford & Alibaba, Amazon Go, Zaitt Brasil) . 
• A robot used to check the stock on shop shelves and the arrangement 
of the products displayed. Information of shortages or incorrect 
arrangement is sent to the service staff, who take their time to look 
into the reported issues (Schnuck) . 
• An autonomous sho p is offering basic and fresh products and 
magazines, able to travel independently to the warehouse in order to 
replenish the stock. The shop was tested in Shanghai (Moby Mart) . 
Source : author s 
 
4 Findings and Discussion  
4.1  Implications for marketing  
To answer the second research question ( what kind of implications does AI make in 
marketing practice ?) authors conducted an analysis of gathered examples and made a 
synthesis  of how the examples reflect the marketing mix. Conclusions are presented in 
Table 2. Each validated examples shows that AI impact each area of marketing mix 
program. This fining is especially important for practitioners who are responsible for 
developing innovations as AI influence the whole spectrum of marketing activity. It is worth 
mentioning that the area of ‘place’ requires cooperation with Industry 4.0 specialist, as