Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 53 4.3  The impact of AI on marketing management  
When it comes to marketing management, AI has a significant impact on contemporary 
practices, and will surely require a new approach to tasks fulfilled in marketing teams:  
• Elimination of laborious and time -consuming activities . AI automates routine 
and repeatable tasks (e.g. data collection and analysis, image search and 
adaptation/processing).  
• Bigger significance of creative and strategic activities . Precise analyses 
performed by AI increases the role of creative and strategi c activities to build 
competitive advantage.  
• Design innovations . AI redefine the way the value is delivered to the customer 
and increase the role of finding new solutions through design.  
• Developing new competences in the marketing team . AI requires incor porating 
data scientist skills as well as an understanding of the new technology possibilities 
in the marketing team.  
• A new marketing ecosystem . The complexity of AI increases the role of 
companies producing AI solutions. Due to the current level of AI adv ancement (the 
level of Artificial Narrow Intelligence), there is a need to develop a new model of 
cooperation with AI entities offering data engineering or ML tools.  
Conclusion  
The analysis confirmed that AI is applied in many areas of marketing. The commercial 
solutions based on it take advantage of all five AI areas: image recognition, text recognition, 
decision -making, voice recognition and autonomous robots and vehicles. Whil e the first 
three are applied quite extensively in marketing, the instances practical application of voice 
recognition are rare and developed by the biggest tech companies such as Amazon, 
Google, Apple, or Microsoft on a large scale. Similarly, the autonom ous vehicles and robots 
are not so frequent solution, as this area is much more connected with Industry 4.0, than 
innovation design within the marketing mix.  
AI in marketing tends to be currently implemented at the operational level, usually as one -
off ini tiatives or activities. This may result from the fact that we are dealing with the first 
instances of the practical application of AI, and companies are careful with implementing 
this new technology, experimenting with it. The costs related to the developm ent of new 
concepts and the uncertainty of the outcome of their implementation may affect the caution 
in putting these innovations into practice as well.  
When analysing product popularity, i.e. of Salesforce Einstein and Albert AI, it seems that 
the first implementations inspire trust to AI solutions and companies are more willing to take 
advantage of them if they see positive results of their application.  
The analysis of the collected examples shows that AI offers a new quality to a consumer’s 
life. 24/7 c ustomer service, hyper -personalised solutions, more convenient shopping, or the 
possibility to avoid making the wrong choice all contribute to a new dimension in the area of 
the marketing organisation.