Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  48 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 data by establishing links between individual pieces of data. Thanks to these ca pabilities, 
ML makes it possible to draw conclusions and form generalisations on the basis of 
performed analyses (McIlwraith, Marmanis, & Babenko, 2017). ML comes in many forms 
and may be presented as pattern recognition, statistical modelling, data explor ation, 
knowledge discovery, predictive analytics, data analytics, adaptive systems, self -organising 
systems, and many more (Domingos, 2016).  
Deep learning (DL) is a higher level of ML because it is based on learning algorithms that 
do not need to be manage d manually. DL, taking advantage of big data and computing 
power (of , e.g. server farms, CPU power, cloud computing), makes it possible to decipher 
and provide the result for a new piece of information instantly (Alpaydin, 2016).  
Natural language processin g (NLP) is one of the applications of ML and DL, aiming at 
speech recognition. Many years of research in this area have made it possible to work on 
large amounts of data (text samples) that act as sources of the context, the vocabulary, the 
syntax, and the  semantic meaning (Alpaydin, 2016).  
Advancements conducted in those technologies have enabled the development of AI in the 
areas of voice, text, and image recognition, decision -making, and autonomous robots and 
vehicles. Practical applications can be met for each of these areas. Voice recognition is 
available , for example , in smartphones (e .g. Siri, Google Assistant). Text recognition 
solutions are used as virtual assistants wh o deliver rapid answers (e .g. Deakin Univ ersity 
and IBM Watson). Image recog nition is used for payment approval, thanks to comparison 
face image the system can make payments (e .g. food chain KFC). Decision -making system 
is available for educational purpose – IBM Elements is dedicated for teachers to support 
them in student assessm ent and to deliver creates recommended individual development 
path for each student. Finally, autonomous robots and vehicles are used in the warehouses 
to manage the stock (e .g. in Amazon Kiva system).  
1.2 Marketing mix  
In 2013 by the American Marketing As sociation approved a new version of marketing 
definition. According to the association “marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and 
processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have 
value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large”  ("What is Marketing? — The 
Definition of Marketing — AMA", 2019) .  
The critical aspect of marketing is the value delivery to customers (Grönroos, 2006), while 
the value may represent different product aspects such as goods, ideas, services, 
information, or any type of solution that fulfil customer needs.  
McCarthy propose d the idea of “marketing mix” as a conceptual framework translating 
marketing planning into practice (Bennett, 1997). Though the marketing mix is not a 
scientific theory, its tools can develop both long -term strategies and short -term tactical 
marketing pro grammes (Palmer, 2004). McCarthy refined previous Borden's conception of 
satisfying the target market. He regrouped Borden's 12 elements (product planning, pricing, 
branding, channels of distribution, personal selling, advertising, promotions, packaging, 
display, servicing, physical handling, fact -finding and analysis) into four elements, called