Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  46 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
  
MARKETING AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE   
 
———————————————————————————————————————  
Jarek , K., Mazurek, G. 
———————————————————————————————————————  
Krystyna Jarek , Grzegorz Mazurek  / Kozminski University , Poland .  
Email: krystyna.jarek@kozminski.edu.pl , gmazurek@kozminski.edu.pl  
 
Abstract  
In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has become an emerging trend in different fields: 
science, business, medicine, automotive and education. AI has also reached marketing. 
The aim of the paper is to research how deeply AI is applied in marketing and what 
implications there are for marketing practitioners. Authors stated two research questions - 
which areas of AI are used in marketing and what implications AI deliv ers for marketing 
managers. To answer those questions , the authors conducted research o n secondary data 
with AI examples used for marketing purpose. The analysis of gathered examples show s 
that AI is widely introduced into the marketing field, though the applications are at the 
operational level. This may be the effect of careful implementati on of the new technology, 
still at the level of experimenting with it. The uncertainty of the outcome of AI 
implementation may affect the caution in putting these innovations into practice as well. 
Gathered examples proved that AI influences all aspects of  marketing mix impacting both 
consumer value delivery as well as the marketing organization and management. The 
paper delivers implications for business , especially ideas about implementing AI into 
marketing, designing innovations and the ideas  on how to incorporate new skills into 
marketing team required by the new technology.  
 
Keywords : artificial intelligence, AI, marketing, AI application, AI implications, AI in 
Marketing  
JEL Classification : M31, M15 
 
Introduction  
Artificial intelligence (AI) has lately become a very popular subject in the area of 
management and marketing sciences, although, quite paradoxically, the works on its 
development in other fields of science have been proceeding continuously for over half a  
century. Over the years, AI has been appearing in and disappearing from the spotlight 
depending on the level of its advancement and the increase in its potential applicability. The 
interest in and the extensive discussion on AI are caused by the first wid e-scale commercial 
applications of AI, which have shown the potential and the capabilities of this technology 
also in the area of marketing. The rapid development of AI in recent years has been 
possible thanks to the advancement of the cognitive mechanisms  of AI and of capabilities of 
machines to learn based on the obtained data (Lieto, Bhatt, Oltramari, & Vernon, 2017), as 
well as thanks to the possibility to create previously non -existing information (Grawal, Gans, 
& Goldfarb, 2017). The power of AI also lies in the spectrum of processing of various