Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  50 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 selected destination suggests attractions found nearby or on the way 
to the destination, and shows similar objects to those related to the se t 
destination (Naver) . 
• An analysis of statements made by clients of banks, insurance 
companies, and telecoms performed in order to diagnose irritating 
situations, which led to the elimination of negative events that might 
occur in the customer journey, and  to modification of the customer 
service process (Touchpoint) . 
• Development and launch of new beer recipes, and modification of the 
existing products thanks to information gathered by a chatbot 
(Intelligentx Brew) . 
• Development of a marketing campaign to lau nch a new car model - 
the Toyota Mirai. Using data provided by a selected target group, 
computers performed an analysis of texts and videos on YouTube in 
order to teach the machines the preferred style of the said target 
group. Next, through multiple itera tions, they developed the first 
creative advertising campaign, and the final texts for the adverts were 
approved by the supervising team. The result was almost a thousand 
of advertising spots tailored to the profiles of the ad recipients on 
Facebook (Toyot a, Saatchi&Saatchi) . 
• Promotion of the Milonerzy  TV show, the Polish edition of Who Wants 
to Be a Millionaire? , on Facebook taking advantage of a 
conversational chatbot. Maintaining the format and the style typical of 
the show made it possible to offer new and unique experience (TVN) . 
Image 
recognition and 
processing 
technology  • Face recognition as a way to make payments (KFC) . 
• Recognising the condition of face skin, followed by an individual 
selection of the type of face cream based on an analysis of one’s 
photo and data , including information about the current weather 
(Shiseido) . 
• A photo as a medium to search  for items online. Apart from search 
results in the form of identical items, the search engine offers similar 
or complementary items (eBay) . 
• Using the client’s face image to select colour cosmetics individually 
during online shopping (Estée Lauder) . 
• Service -free bricks and mortar shop where video cameras analyse the 
selected products and payments are made automatically (Amazon) . 
• Electronic mirrors in a clothing shop that match the collection to the 
client’s appearance, style, and taste (FashionAI) . 
• Selection of  the best Christmas gift by going through twelve best 
suggestions. Based on the recognition of the buyer’s face and emotion 
analysis, the programme suggested the best option to go for (eBay) . 
• Identification of clients before the start of a video consultati on by 
comparing the video image with a photo provided earlier by the client 
(BBVA) . 
• Embedded ML mechanisms make it possible to automatically frame 
images according to the requirements of the brand and 
communication channels (Adobe Sensei) . 
• An image finder that makes it possible to select the best photos and 
reject the less appealing ones (Everypixel) . 
Decision -making  • Development of individual savings plan thanks  to an analysis of the 
funds available on one’s account, receipts, amount of expenses and  
the way one spends their money. By comparing the financial 
behaviour of a user and a given community, the application develops 
a tailor -made savings plan to match the financial capabilities of a 
given person (Plum) . 
• Travel destinations matched individuall y based on the traveller’s 
musical preferences. Apart from the city, the app chooses specific 
districts and attractions to match the user’s profile (Spotify, Emirates) .