Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 6 of 17
users [ 43]. Thus, this study aims to improve many aspects related to recommendation systems and the
way in which they affect human life.
At this stage of the project it is also important to analyze the main concerns and challenges
regarding the understanding of the application domain. Ethical aspects are one of the main concerns
surrounding recommendation systems. Research concerning the ethical issues related to these
systems is divided into different scientiﬁc areas, since it usually focuses on particular aspects of
the recommendation systems in a wide range of scenarios. At the same time, consumers are becoming
increasingly aware of their rights and privacy concerns are beginning to emerge. In this way,
most organizations exhibit some secrecy in disclosing the operational details of their recommendation
systems due to the concerns about violating the rights of their costumers. This makes it difﬁcult
for researchers to acquire and discover more knowledge related to the functioning of these systems,
thus hindering the progress of recommendation systems.
Having a clear understanding of the business objectives is an important effort in order to ensure
that the DM process is carried out rigorously and that an efﬁcient recommendation system is therefore
achieved. Hence, the objectives that guided this study, are the following:
 Increase the number of sales;
 Improve company’s revenue;
 Encourage engagement and activity on products and services;
 Gain competitive advantage;
 Calibrate user preferences;
 Make personalized recommendations;
 Find the recommendation algorithm and parameterization that leads to the highest overall
performance of the product recommendation system.
The ﬁrst ﬁve objectives are related to the recommendation business goals. The improvement
of the quality of product recommendation systems is one of the most crucial aspects in the industry.
This translates into an increment of customer’s satisfaction as well as in the improvement of the
company’s proﬁtability. The rest of the objectives set out are related to the objectives inherent to
the DM process. These objectives will provide substantial insight into the product recommendation
systems through the application and reﬁnement of the DM techniques.
Hence, a project plan was designed to make an initial assessment of the techniques to be used in
the further stages of the project. Figure 3 details the steps to be executed in order to achieve the DM
and business goals.
Figure 3. Project plan of the study.