Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 2 of 17
to predict a new set of related products. Recommendation systems have appeared as a solution to this
problem and have been receiving a great deal of attention and use from the scientiﬁc community in
recent years.
Recommender systems are information search and ﬁltering tools that help users to discover
relevant items and to make better choices while searching for products or services such as movies,
books, vacations, or electronic products. The fundamental goal of a recommender system is to reduce
the information overload and to provide personalized suggestions that can assist the users in the
decision-making process [ 4,5]. Figure 1 shows the generic operation behind the recommendation
systems in a simpliﬁed way. However, these systems usually face certain limitations and challenges
due to the increasing demand of high-quality personalization and recommendation [4,6].
Figure 1. Illustration of the logical process of a recommendation system.
Recommendation systems have become a valuable asset regardless of the application domain.
Nowadays, Internet users turn to the WorldWideWeb for help in the planning and selection of many
everyday tasks, whether it is what music to listen to (Spotify), what consumer products to purchase
(Amazon, AliExpress), what movies to watch (Netﬂix) and so on. Furthermore, social networks such as
LinkedIn, YouTube and Facebook have also included recommendation technologies to suggest groups
to join, people to follow, videos to watch or posts to like [7].
Although the origins of recommender systems can be traced back to the extensive work in
cognitive science [ 8], approximation theory [ 9], information retrieval [ 10], forecasting theories [ 11],
and also have bonds to management science [ 12] and to consumer choice modeling in marketing [ 13],
recommender systems emerged as an independent research area in the mid-1990s when investigators
started focusing on recommendation problems that explicitly rely on the rating structure. In its most
basic formulation, the recommendation problem is reduced to the difﬁculty of determining ratings for
items that have not been seen by the user. Generally, this estimation is based on the ratings given by
the user to other items and on some other knowledge. Once it becomes possible to estimate the ratings
for the items that have not yet been rated, it will be feasible to recommend the items with the highest
estimated ratings to the user [4].
Being part of intelligent systems, recommender systems use several kinds of knowledge.
The knowledge needed to produce recommendations have four sources: from the user itself, from other
peer users of the system, from data regarding the items being recommended, and lastly from the
recommendation ﬁeld itself, knowledge about how recommended items are applied and what needs
they satisfy [14].
Recommendation systems can be divided into three main categories [ 4]—Content-based
Recommendations, Collaborative Recommendations, and Hybrid Recommendations. In the ﬁrst
approach, the user will be recommended items similar to those he/she enjoyed in the past. In turn,
in the collaborative approach, recommendations are made based on items consumed by users whose