Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 5 of 17
and subgroups [ 37], and predictive algorithms, that perform induction to make predictions of a
speciﬁc attribute, which results in models that can be used for regression and classiﬁcation [36,38].
There are three main categories of DM strategies reported in the literature: supervised,
unsupervised, and semi-supervised learning. In supervised learning, a set of input variables named
training set is used to learn model parameters and predict a target or dependent variable. In
unsupervised learning, the target variable does not exist and no training set is used. In turn, DM
techniques are used to discover patterns, clusters, or relationships in the dataset. In semi-supervised
learning, the target variable exists but the value is only provided for a small amount of examples and
DM techniques are used to predict the values of missing target values or extract patterns, clusters,
or relationships in the dataset [ 39,40]. In this study we will use a neural network named autoencoder,
an unsupervised learning technique, based on a collaborative ﬁltering method to create a product
recommendation system.
TensorFlow 2.0.0 [ 41] was used for the creation and training of the model. TensorFlow supports
both large-scale training and inference. In addition, it is ﬂexible enough to support experimentation
and research into new Machine Learning models and system-level optimizations [42].
The DM process will follow the CRISP-DM Methodology (Cross Industry Standard Process for
Data Mining), one of the most popular methodologies used in DM projects worldwide. CRISP-DM is a
cyclic process, which is divided into six phases, namely, Business Understanding ,Data Understanding ,
Data Preparation ,Modeling ,Evaluation and Deployment . Figure 2 depicts the main stages of the
CRISP-DM lifecycle.
Figure 2. Stages of the CRISP-DM methodology for Data Mining (DM) processes.
The following subsections contain a detailed description of each stage of the CRISP-DM lifecycle.
3.1. Business Understanding
In recent years, consumers have begun to demand differentiated content from brands,
and today they are thrilled by technology, looking for high standards of innovation, sophistication,
and customisation. One of the strategies that companies can adopt to face this reality is the
implementation of recommendation systems. By combining user proﬁle information with information
ﬁltering and Machine Learning algorithms, recommendation systems have proven to be effective in
providing users with a more intelligent and proactive information service.
In online shopping, a better recommendation system can have a direct effect on the revenue of
the company, since the recommendations can have a signiﬁcant impact on the purchase decisions of