Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 3 of 17
tastes and preferences are similar to that of the referred user. Finally, combining content-based and
collaborative recommendations leads to hybrid approaches, which are regularly applied, since both
types of recommendations can be complemented by one another [15].
Human beings have always sought opinions or advice on items through conversations with
friends, store staff, and even through the reading of comments on products, to help them in the
decision-making process. This is the basis of Collaborative Filtering, which uses other people’s
opinions to make a recommendation. Collaborative ﬁltering techniques can be divided into two
categories: memory-based (user/item-based) and model-based [ 16]. Memory-based algorithms act
on the entire user/item matrix. They assume that users/items can be grouped together by similarity.
On the other hand, model-based techniques use a set of user assessments to generate an estimated
model, saving the parameters learned during training. Instead of using similarity measurements,
these algorithms are characterized by the creation of models [17].
Matrix Factorization [ 18], one of the techniques used in collaborative model-based ﬁltering, is a
well-established algorithm in the recommendation system’s literature. It is a model that achieves a
decent performance in the task of predicting ratings, standing out the Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) models. But it turns out to be essentially a linear
model, making it impossible to capture complex nonlinear and intricate relationships that can be
predictive of users’ preferences [19].
Today, with the concept of deep learning becoming more important, several researchers have
begun to test its usability in a collaborative ﬁltering approach in order to achieve better results [ 20].
For example, Van den Oord et al. made use of deep convolutional neural network to give music
recommendations [ 21]. Deep models can learn high-order features of input data which may be useful
for recommendation as indicated in Reference [ 22]. Autoencoders are a common building block of
Deep Learning architectures [20,23].
In this article, an autoencoder is used for collaborative ﬁltering tasks with the aim of giving
product recommendations. An autoencoder is a neural network that learns to copy its input to its
output in order to encode the inputs into a hidden (and usually low-dimensional) representation [ 19].
Neural networks have proven to be capable of approximating any continuous function, making it
suitable for addressing the limitation of matrix factorization and enhancing the expressiveness of
matrix factorization [ 19]. A comparison of the results will also be made between the SVD and the
autoencoder using the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) metric.
The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows—Section 2 will present the related
work on collaborative ﬁltering, autoencoders, and SVD. The methodology used in this study will
be presented in Section 3, where a small overview of the datasets used, the data preparation,
the architecture of the autoencoder as well as some evaluation metrics will be discussed. Section 4 will
present the main ﬁndings and their discussion. Finally, Section 5 concludes this article and points out
possible future work.
2. Related Work
In the context of recommendation systems, several solutions have emerged using collaborative
ﬁltering to help users ﬁnd items that meet their interests and also beneﬁt different organizations and
sectors in order to captivate their customers.
In the literature several approaches can be found to achieve goals similar to this article. As an
example, R. YiBo and G. SongJie have implemented a recommendation system using an algorithm
based on SVD smoothing that predicts item ratings that users have not yet rated by employing SVD
technology, and then uses Pearson’s similarity correlation measurement to ﬁnd neighbors for the target
users, and ﬁnally makes recommendations [ 24]. S. Badrul et al. propose and experimentally validate
a technique that has the potential to incrementally build SVD-based models and promises to make
the recommender systems highly scalable [ 25]. B. Qilong et al. propose a new approach combining a
clustering algorithm with an SVD algorithm that is widely used in the domain of image-processing into