Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 9 of 17
where Sfis an activation function, nis the number of neurons in the input layer, and mis the number
of neurons in the hidden layer. The encoder is parameterized by a mnweight matrix Wand a bias
vector b2Rm[27,44].
Then, the decoder maps the hidden representation hback to a reconstruction x0=fx0
1,x0
2, ...,x0
ng
by a function g:
x0=g(h) =Sg(W0
h+b0), (2)
where Sgrepresents the decoder’s activation function. The decoder’s parameters are comprised of a
bias vector b02Rnand a nmweight matrix W0[27,44].
The purpose of an autoencoder is to obtain ddimensional representation of data such that an
error measure between xandu(x) =decode (encode (x))is minimized [45].
Autoencoders have been widely used for its outstanding performance in data dimensionality
reduction, noise cleaning, feature extraction, and data reconstruction [46].
Over the years, recommendation systems have been extensively used to deliver personalized
suggestions on products and/or services to users. Nonetheless, most recommendation systems still
face challenges in dealing with the enormous volume and complexity of the data. In order to address
this challenge, as discussed in Section 2, several researchers have dedicated their investigation to
improving recommendation systems by integrating deep learning techniques. The scientiﬁc literature
contains recent studies that demonstrate a high efﬁciency of autoencoders in information retrieval
and recommendation tasks. Hence, constructing a recommendation system based on an autoencoder
would improve the accuracy of the recommendations due to a clearer understanding of the needs and
characteristics of the users given its ability to learn the non-linear user-item relationship efﬁciently and
to encode complex abstractions into data representations [27].
3.4.2. Initialization of Parameters
By analyzing several articles related to autoencoders in the literature, it was possible to identify
that each one uses a different set of parameters. Almost every author claims that, in a certain respect,
a particular algorithm or parameterisation is better than another, which makes it difﬁcult to choose
between them. At the moment, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a detailed and objective comparison of the different
approaches and the available results are sometimes paradoxical. Hence, the choice was made by “trial
and error,” that is, by making an exhaustive experimenting with different criteria until the solution
that best suits each person’s scenario was found. Table 2 depicts the parameters chosen for the model.
The considerations and decisions that led to the parameters selected were the following:
 For the loss function, because we are not dealing with a classiﬁcation problem where binary
cross-entropy can be used, the loss function used had to be the Mean Square Error (MSE);
 The selection of the optimizer had to do with the fact that ADAM presents itself as one of the best,
as it is very fast, requires little memory and is ideal for handling large amounts of data;
 The dropout is only used during training, and is then automatically disabled during execution;
 Finally, the choice of the activation function was based on the range to which the network values
went, as well as the results of the experiments performed while running the autoencoder with
other functions that were tested, but the loss and RMSE results were worse than the ones obtained
with Tanh for the encoder layer, latent space and Linear for the output layer.
Table 2. Parameters of the autoencoder model.
Activation Function Tanh for encoder layer, latent space and Linear for output layer
Optimizer Adam with a learning rate of 0.0001
Loss Function Mean Square Error (MSE)
Dropout 0.1