Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 4 of 17
a collaborative ﬁltering algorithm. Then they decompose the rating matrix with the SVD algorithm
and merge them into a new rating matrix to calculate the similarity between each pair of users.
At last, they take advantage of the similarity to ﬁnd the nearest neighbors in the collaborative ﬁltering
recommendation and predict the ratings of the items to make the recommendation [26].
However, most recommendation systems still face challenges in dealing with the enormous
volume, complexity and dynamics of data [ 27]. In order to address these issues, a number of researchers
have dedicated themselves to improving recommendation systems by integrating deep learning
techniques. The ﬁrst attempts to use deep learning for recommendation systems began with the
use of restricted Boltzman machines (RBMs) [ 22]. However, several recent approaches have been
using autoencoders. For example, H. T. Dai et al. built a ﬂexible Deep Autoencoder (DAE) model,
named FlexEncoder, that uses conﬁgurable parameters and unique features to analyze the parameter
inﬂuence on the prediction accuracy of recommender systems [ 28]. S. Suvash et al. propose AutoRec,
a novel autoencoder framework for collaborative ﬁltering (CF). Empirically, AutoRec’s compact and
efﬁciently trainable model outperforms state-of-the-art CF techniques (biased matrix factorization,
RBM-CF and LLORMA) on the Movielens and Netﬂix datasets [ 29]. C. Sanxing et al. propose a
novel CF method that uses a stacked auto-encoder with denoising, an unsupervised deep learning
method, to extract the useful low-dimensional features from the original sparse user-item matrices [ 30].
O. Yuanxin et al. proposed an autoencoder based on collaborative ﬁltering method, which provides
pre-training and stacking mechanisms. The experimental study on commonly used MovieLens datasets
have shown its potential and efﬁcacy in achieving higher recall [ 31]. Another work developed, where
autoencoders were used, was that of Li, X., & She, J [ 32] who proposed a Bayesian generative model
called collaborative variational autoencoder (CVAE) that considers both rating and content for making
recommendations in multimedia scenarios. The model learns deep latent representations from content
data in an unsupervised manner and also learns implicit relationships between items and users from
both content and ratings. These experiments show that CVAE is able to signiﬁcantly outperform the
state-of-the-art recommendation methods with more robust performance. Other work more similar
to this paper is that of Oleksii Kuchaiev & Boris Ginsburg [ 33] that proposes a model for the rating
prediction task in recommender systems, which signiﬁcantly outperforms previous state-of-the art
models in the time-split Netﬂix dataset. Their model is based on a deep autoencoder with 6 layers and
is trained end-to-end without any layer-wise pre-training. They also propose a new training algorithm
based on iterative output re-feeding to overcome the natural sparseness of collaborate ﬁltering.
Earlier this year, Zhang et al. performed a comparative analysis of the different autoencoder-based
recommender systems and came to the conclusion that the application of autoencoders to
recommendation systems is still at a preliminary stage, encouraging other researchers to pursue
this branch of research [ 27]. In this paper, we will develop a recommendation system based on an
autoencoder with a drop-out layer.
Studies using matrix factorization technique, such as SVD, present problems when dealing with
very sparse data or in large quantities. In an attempt to tackle these issues, as well as to produce a
system that can deliver better results, from those presented in the works related to autoencoders, this
paper proposes the use of an autoencoder with a drop-out layer.
3. Methodology
Machine learning and Data Mining (DM) are becoming increasingly important areas of
engineering and computer science and have been successfully applied to a wide range of problems in
science and engineering [ 34,35]. Machine Learning is the scientiﬁc ﬁeld dealing with the construction of
computer systems that have the ability to adapt, learn and improve their performance in a given domain
through experience. On the other hand, DM is a multidisciplinary area that incorporates mathematical
functions, Machine Learning techniques, and statistical analysis to uncover hidden patterns or
rules and extract previously unknown and potentially meaningful knowledge [ 36]. DM techniques
include descriptive algorithms, for ﬁnding interesting patterns in the data, like associations, clusters,