Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 8 of 17
Table 1. Final number of items and users of datasets MovieLens.
ML-1M ML-10M
Items 3043 8940
Users 6022 69,838
3.4. Modelling
Ultimately, it is imperative to apply modeling techniques and provide their parameters to the
learning dataset in order to determine which model performs best in the evaluation stage.
As mentioned earlier, this study will make use of an autoencoder. In this section, the autoencoder
architecture used for the product recommendation system will be introduced. In addition, a brief
explanation of autocoders and how they work will be presented as well as the parameters used to
achieve the results featured in Section 4.
3.4.1. Autoencoder Overview
An autoencoder is an unsupervised deep learning method that learns how to effectively compress
and encode data, and then reconstructs data from a reduced encoded representation to a representation
that is identical to the original input. In another words, an autoencoder is a neural network that applies
back-propagation, setting the target values (outputs) to be equal to the inputs [30,44].
Hence, an autoencoder is typically a neural network of three layers, as demonstrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Typical structure of an autoencoder.
The layers that constitute a basic autoencoder are: input layer, hidden layer, and output layer.
The input layer and the hidden layer construct an encoder . The hidden layer and the output layer
construct a decoder . Between these two, there is a code. Their description is the following the following:
 Encoder has the function of compressing input information into a different latent space;
 Code is a part of the network that represents the compressed input which is fed to the decoder;
 Decoder does the reverse work and reconstructs the original information, moving from the latent
space to the original information space.
The encoder encodes the high-dimensional input data x=fx1,x2, ...,xnginto a low dimensional
hidden representation h=fh1,h2, ...,hmgby a function f:
h=f(x) =Sf(Wx+b), (1)