Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5510 14 of 17
Figure 13. Ten suggestions for products provided by the model.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
Retail organisations are under constant pressure to ﬁnd new ways to respond to the progressive
changes in the marketplace while at the same time meeting the increasingly challenging needs of
their customers. Over the years, consumers have become more and more demanding, and today they
are fascinated by all kinds of technology, seeking new ways of innovation, sophistication and a high
degree of personalisation. Faced with this reality, organizations need to be prompt and effective in
pursuing and creating new ways of attracting consumers through innovation in the way that they meet
consumers’ needs and act before the market in order to increase sales and loyalty of their customers,
thereby achieving competitive advantages.
One of the strategies that companies can adopt is the implementation of recommendation systems.
The suggestion of products that meet the tastes and preferences of users makes recommendation
systems an effective means of increasing revenues, offering companies a higher source of income and
competitive advantage over their competitors.
Although recommendation systems have been around for quite some time and several companies
and researchers have been working on the subject, as the vast majority of today ’s customers belong to
a young group known as Generation Y or Millennials, which is characterized by an increased use of
internet and technology, recommendation systems require constant innovation and improvement.
Hence, this study focus on ﬁnding effective ways to develop successful product recommendations.
We found that the use of autoencoders for recommendation systems has shown great potential.
In this paper, we present and implement an autoencoder model in order to obtain efﬁcient product
recommendations. In addition, we made a comparison of this approach with one of the techniques
widely used for the purposes of recommendation systems, the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).
Although the SVD was faster in execution time, it was found that the autoencoder presented lower
RMSE values. It was also possible to identify that the autoencoder performed better with a larger
dataset, proving, once again, that collaborative ﬁltering is more effective when faced with more data.
The importance of using a dropout on the neural network was also presented, thus avoiding overﬁtting.
Collaborative ﬁltering presents its limitations and ends up not working well if it is not faced
with a reasonable amount of data, or if there are users with very different preferences from the others
because this ﬁltering is based on the similarity of users. In addition to these problems, this type of
ﬁltering is very closely linked to an external factor, the interaction of users with the platform that
makes use of the product recommendation system, because it depends on the explicit feedback, that is,
the user’s reviews of the products. As the method presented in this paper is based on this type of
ﬁltering, it also presents the same problems. In order to solve some of these vulnerabilities, in future
work, it would be a good idea to use hybrid ﬁltering to make greater use of different algorithms
and to inspect if the results of the autoencoder would be better. Another idea would be to check
how the model behaves in the face of new datasets. Finally, it would be interesting not only to make
recommendations about products or services, but also to make recommendations for discount coupons,
taking into account the products to which the users have expressed interest, thereby increasing the
number of sales, the customer’s satisfaction, and the conﬁdence bond with the company, while also
offering competitive advantage.