Pushing the Limits of Capsule Networks
Prem Nair, Rohan Doshi, Stefan Keselj
Princeton University
{pnair, rkdoshi, skeselj}@princeton.edu
December 2017
1 Motivation and Goal
Convolutional neural networks use pooling and other downscaling operations to maintain translational
invariance for detection of features, but in their architecture they do not explicitly maintain a
representation of the locations of the features relative to each other. This means they do not represent
two instances of the same object in different orientations the same way, like humans do, and so
training them often requires extensive data augmentation and exceedingly deep networks.
A team at Google Brain recently made news with an attempt to ﬁx this problem: Capsule Networks
(Sabour et al. [2017]), hereon referred to as CapsNets. While a normal CNN works with scalar outputs
representing feature presence, a CapsNet works with vector outputs representing entity presence.
There is much discussion about whether these new models could actually work as intended because
Sabour et al. [2017] mainly applied them to the MNIST dataset under favorable hyperparameter
conditions.
We want to stress test CapsNet in various incremental ways to better understand their performance
and expressiveness. In broad terms, the goals of our investigation are to:
1. Test CapsNets on datasets that are like MNIST but harder in a speciﬁc way.
2. Explore the internal embedding space and sources of error for CapsNets.
2 Background and Related Work
The original idea driving this work is the capsule, ﬁrst discussed in Hinton et al. [2011]. The capsule
was pitched as a convenient way to represent an entity: it is a vector whose norm indicates the
probability that entity is present and whose direction indicates the conﬁguration that entity is in.
Capsules could theoretically be combined to form hierarchical tree structures representing entities. It
was a nice idea, but it did not get much traction until a few months ago when Sabour, Frosst, and
Hinton ﬁnally ﬁgured out how to train a network to recognize and work in this space (Sabour et al.
[2017]). In this section we will attempt to convey our understanding of their model, but the best
resource is their actual paper.
2.1 Fundamentals of Capsules and the Dynamic Routing Algorithm
CapsNets are comprised of layers of capsules, each of which are composed of neurons. But unlike
neurons, capsules deal with inputs and an output that are vectors. Each vector is meant to encode a
rich representation of some entity: the vector’s direction indicates what form the entity seems to be in
(e.g. the pose of an object) and the vector’s norm indicates the conﬁdence of the representation. These
vectors can be combined by afﬁnely transforming and then adding them (analogous to multiplying
scalars by weights and then adding them). The method for the forward pass of information from
capsule layer to capsule layer is called dynamic routing.arXiv:2103.08074v1  [cs.CV]  15 Mar 2021