Figure 20a shows near perfect clustering into 10 groups for MNIST. However, each of the other
datasets is not nearly so neat. Fashion-MNIST is next in complexity, and the worst is CIFAR10. The
disorder of embedding appears correlated to the test accuracy and quality of reconstruction. This
means that the t-SNE visualization is a potentially informative complement to accuracy for assessing
strategies for improving network performance on more complex datasets.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we pushed the limits of CapsNets by exploring their performance and expressiveness
when controlled, incremental changes were made to them. Our experiments yielded ﬁndings that are
pertinent to the goals we outlined at the beginning:
1.CapsNets were able perform better than AlexNet on datasets marginally harder than MNIST,
but they were not as good at coping with deformations as one might expect. Increasing the
number of routing iterations from the recommended 3 did not help, and in fact, decreasing it
to 2 did not harm performance. This suggests that although CapsNets are probably learning
some useful information about spatial relationships between entities, they are not making
full use of routing to encode them robustly.
2.CapsNets could convincingly reconstruct MNIST and Fashion-MNIST samples, whose
embeddings seemed to measure meaningful qualities like thickness or skew. However,
they could not do so for SVHN or CIFAR10, whose embeddings mainly encoded intensity
and color. Across all datasets, most of the errors made by CapsNets corresponded to
noisy or ambiguous reconstructions. The t-SNE visualizations of the embeddings further
corroborated this, by showing that only MNIST had a cleanly separable label space.
Together, our ﬁndings indicate that the current CapsNet design is unlikely to work on other classiﬁca-
tion tasks, let alone machine learning tasks in general. This being said, we are not recommending that
the idea be discarded; the concept of a capsule is intuitively appealing and they have demonstrated
reasonable performance in our experiments. We believe that there is signiﬁcant potential for CapsNets
to be improved and made useful. The three paths we are most excited about are:
1.Routing The current routing algorithm is perhaps the most simple and intuitive way of
deciding which high level capsules get assigned to which low level capsules. Fleshing it
out to be more informed and less brittle could enable CapsNets to learn more complicated
structure in the data. For example, a neural network could act as the mechanism that
reweighs coefﬁcients.
2.Architecture The current architecture is also relatively austere. There is only one layer
of convolution for feature generation and only one layer of capsules before the end object
capsules are built. Although this shallow structure might work on MNIST, it seems unrea-
sonable to expect that all the nuances of a vehicle or animal in CIFAR could be represented
with one level of entities. A deeper network, perhaps with some domain speciﬁc structure,
might overcome this. Sabour et al. [2017] has some other experiments in this direction.
3.Task Finally, it could be the case that CapsNets would be good at other more complicated
tasks, even though they are not the best at the “simple” task of classiﬁcation. The task we
are most curious about is segmentation, because perhaps the cosine similarities between
embeddings computed by the CapsNet could be used as indicators of how likely it is that
two pixels are in the same object.
6 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Russakovsky and Dr. Ferencz for their tireless patience in teaching us
the fundamentals of computer vision. This work would not be possible without the computational
resources of the Visual AI Lab and Seung Lab and our starter code from Kenta Iwasaki of Gram.AI.
15