Figure 7
The hyperparameter which most interests us is the number of routing iterations (from the dynamic
routing algorithm). This parameter is unique to CapsNets and has important implications on their
performance and runtime: every time inference is run, this many routing operations are run to
determine which DigitCapsules the PrimaryCapsules send their information to. Sabour et al. [2017]
recommends 3 routing iterations, but we are curious about what the best number would be with
respect to all four of our datasets.
We ran a set of experiments where we set the number of routing operations to one of (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
for each dataset. Although 3 iterations yielded good test accuracies, overall 2 performed about as
well, even performing better in some instances. This is interesting for two reasons. First, it seems to
go against the original paper’s claim. Perhaps it could be the case that 3 iterations converges more
stably than 2, but we reran our experiments multiple times and got similar graphs each time. Second,
it could be indicative that the proposed dynamic routing algorithm is too “abrupt”. The process of
deciding which PrimaryCapsules feed into which DigitCapsules is a complex one, and would be
surprising if an algorithm would only ever need two iterations to do this well.
4.2 Embedding Spaces
4.2.1 Reconstructions
Now that we have an idea of the performance of CapsNet on various tasks, we want to understand
why they are behaving the way they are so we can improve them. We can get a direct look into
one component of the network’s loss function by visualizing the reconstructions it generates. In
Figures 8, 9, 10, and 11 we have shown the network’s reconstruction after epoch 2, its reconstruction
after epoch 50, and the ground truth images for each dataset.
MNIST’s reconstruction improved substantially from epoch 2 to 50, mostly matching ground truth.
However, the classiﬁcation accuracy began to plateau earlier than the reconstruction accuracy, which
suggests that the reconstruction does not necessarily help much with classiﬁcation. Fashion-MNIST
also had good reconstruction improvement, but the ﬁner clothing details were not captured, which
could be an effect of an embedding that is too small, or a decoder that is too shallow. SVHN went
from failing to reconstruct anything substantial to a mostly gray rendering of the numbers. The
network still failed to replicate colors. The reconstructions of CIFAR10, were always unrecognizable,
apart from horses, which we assume is due to the consistency of point of view for most horse photos.
4.2.2 Understanding Errors
For the datasets with the best reconstructions, MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, we can make use of their
reconstructions when understanding error sources, since we can decode the embeddings and recover
9