methods integrate attention-based techniques with deep neu-
ral architectures, aiming to learn higher quality token repre-
sentation that incorporates syntactic and semantic informa-
tion from the surrounding contexts. and then the model is
ﬁne-tuned to adapt to a downstream supervised task. BERT
(Devlin et al. 2018) is a bi-directional pre-training model
backboned by the Transformer Encoder (Vaswani et al.
2017), a deep hybrid neural network with feed forward lay-
ers and self-attention layers which we have brieﬂy discussed
in section 3.3. During pre-training, one task is to learn a bi-
directional masked language model, meaning that a small
percent of tokens in a sentence are masked and the goal is to
predict these tokens based on their context. The other task is
binary next sentence prediction, where two spans of texts are
sampled from the corpora and the model is trained to pre-
dict whether they are contiguous. As discussed in Section
3.3, each token redistributes attention across the sequence
and reconstruct its interaction with other tokens in a self-
adaptive manner as the training proceeds, aiming to learn
its contextual representation based on the entire sequence.
When the pre-trained model is integrated with a supervised
task, an additional layer is added on top of the model and
ﬁne-tuned to adapt to its supervised downstream task. The
new model has achieved ground-breaking results on various
NLP tasks, by focusing on pre-training the deep hybrid ar-
chitecture on large text corpora and then sparing minimal ef-
forts on ﬁne-tuning. Other attention-based pre-training mod-
els include OpenAI GPT, which instead uses a Transformer
Decoder (with backward disabling mask) to pre-train a deep
left-to-right language model based on a different set of tasks.
5 Evaluation
Compared to the universal usage of attention, only a few at-
tempts are made either to give a rigorous mathematical jus-
tiﬁcation of why it works in various scenarios. Nevertheless,
there are several works that have attempted to set up stan-
dards on evaluating its performance, either qualitatively or
quantitatively, task-speciﬁc or general, and here we give a
short summarization of these approaches.
5.1 Quantitative
Quantitative evaluation on attention can be further divided
into intrinsic or extrinsic based on whether the contribution
of attention is assessed on itself or along within a down-
stream supervised task.
Intrinsic evaluation methods are typically proposed in ma-
chine translation (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), where
attention is analogous to word alignment, performance of at-
tention could be directly measured by comparing the atten-
tion distribution with the gold alignment data, and quantiﬁed
using alignment error rate (AER). Similarly, Liu et al. pro-
posed a method to manually construct ”gold attention vec-
tors” (Liu et al. 2017) by ﬁrst identifying labelled key words
within a sentence and then conducting post-processing pro-
cedures such as smoothing and normalization, given abun-
dant well-annotated data. For example, for the sentence Mo-
hamad ﬁred Anwar , his former protege , in1998 , the four
tokens in boldface are labelled as argument words and re-
ceive an attention score of 0:25each ( 0:254 = 1 ), and
Figure 4: An illustration of extrinsic evaluation of different
attention mechanisms under a downstream machine transla-
tion task. The image is modiﬁed from (Luong, Pham, and
Manning 2015)
.
Figure 5: An illustration of qualitative methods based on
heatmaps. Higher color intensity indicates higher attention
score. The image is modiﬁed from (Lin et al. 2017)
.
then smoothing is optionally applied around each attended
token. Though intrinsic evaluation methods produce precise
measurements on performance, they tend to be restricted to
their speciﬁc tasks and rely heavily on plentitude of labelled
data.
On the other hand, extrinsic evaluation methods (Figure 4)
are more general and widely used. This can be easily formu-
lated by comparing the overall performance across differ-
ent models under the downstream task. However, the result
could be misleading since whether or not the improvements
should be attributed to the attention component can not be
determined.
5.2 Qualitative
Qualitative evaluation for attention is currently the most
widely used evaluation technique, due to its simplicity and
convenience for visualization (Figure 5). To be speciﬁc, a
heat-map is constructed across the entire sentence where the
intensity is proportional to the normalized attention score
each element receives. Intuitively, attention is expected to
be focused on key words for the corresponding task. How-
ever, such an approach turns out to be better for visualization
than for analysis.
6 Conclusion and Prospects
In this paper, we have surveyed through recent works on the
attention mechanism and conducted an introductory sum-
mary based on its formulation, variation, application and
evaluation. Compared to its wide usage in various NLP
tasks, attempts to explore its mathematical justiﬁcation still