2.i=exp(ei)P
iexp(ei)(normalize)
3.c=P
iivi(read contents)
Here we re-interpret computing attention score as soft mem-
ory addressing using query q, and encoding as reading con-
tents from memory based on attention scores fig, which
constitutes the very basic form of memory-based attention.
In fact, in quite a few literatures, ”memory” is simply a syn-
onym for the input sequence. Also note that if every pair
ofkiandviare equal, this reduces to the basic attention
mechanism. However, the alternative (memory-based) atten-
tion mechanism can become much more powerful as we in-
corporate additional functionalities to enable reusability and
increase ﬂexibility, both of which we will later discuss in
detail.
Reusability A fundamental difﬁculty in some question an-
swering tasks is that the answer is indirectly related to the
question and therefore can not be easily solved via basic
attention techniques (demonstrated at the beginning of this
section). However, this can be achieved if we can simulate
a temporal reasoning procedure by making iterative mem-
ory updates (also called multi-hop) to navigate attention to
the correct location of the answer step-by-step (Sukhbaatar
et al. 2015), an outline of which is illustrated in Figure 2.
Intuitively, in each iteration, the query is updated with new
contents, and updated query is used for retrieving relevant
contents. A pseudo run on an early example is given in Fig-
ure 3, where the query is initialized as the original question
and is later updated by simply summing up the current query
and content (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015):
q(t+1)=q(t)+c(t)(29)
More sophisticated update methods include constructing a
recurrent network across query and content of multiple time
steps (Kumar et al. 2016), or inducing the output based on
both content and location information (Graves, Wayne, and
Danihelka 2014). Results show that when complex temporal
reasoning tasks are given (similar to Figure 3), the memory-
based attention model can successfully locate the answer af-
ter several hops.
Flexibility Since keys and values are distinctly repre-
sented, we have freedom to incorporate prior knowledge
in designing separate key and value embeddings to allow
them to better capture relevant information respectively. To
be speciﬁc, key embeddings can be manually designed to
match the question and value embeddings to match the re-
sponse. In key-value memory network (Miller et al. 2016), a
window level representation is proposed such that keys are
constructed as windows centered around entity tokens and
values are those corresponding entities, aiming for more efﬁ-
cient and accurate matching. Then for the example in Figure
3, entities such as apple andbedroom are value embeddings,
and their surrounding tokens are key embeddings.
More sophisticated architectures include the Dynamic Mem-
ory Network (Kumar et al. 2016) where the overall archi-
tecture is ﬁne-split into four parts: question module, in-
put module, episodic memory module and answer module,1.initializeq=question
2.ei=a(q;k(ki))(address the memory)
3.i=exp(ei)P
iexp(ei)(normalize)
4.c=P
iiv(vi)(retrieve contents)
5.q=updatequery (q;c)(update query)
6.goto 2 (multi-hop)
Figure 2: An enhanced version of memory-based attention
with multi-hop and alternative key value embeddings
Figure 3: A pseudo illustration of memory-based attention
updates on an early question answering example.
each of which is a complex neural micro-architecture it-
self. Such modularized design enables piecewise domain
knowledge injection, efﬁcient communication among mod-
ules, and generalization to a wider range of tasks beyond
traditional question answering. A similar architecture is pro-
posed to handle both textual and visual question answering
tasks (Xiong, Merity, and Socher 2016), where visual in-
puts are fed into a deep convolutional network and high-level
features are extracted and processed into an input sequence
for the attention network. If we further extend memory and
query representation to ﬁelds beyond question answering,
memory-based attention techniques are also used in aspect
and opinion term mining (Wang et al. 2017) where query is
represented as aspect prototypes, in recommender systems
(Zheng et al. 2018) where users become the memory com-
ponent and items become queries, in topic modelings (Zeng
et al. 2018) where latent topic representation extracted from
a deep network constitutes the memory, etc.
3.5 Task-speciﬁc Attention
In this section we include alternative usage of attention that
are intricately designed for a speciﬁc task. Although not as
generalizable as methods introduced earlier, they are well-
motivated and ﬁt properly into their own task, therefore
worth mentioning. Tan et al. proposed an alternative for
computing attention scores for the task of abstractive docu-
ment summarization (Tan, Wan, and Xiao 2017). The formu-
lation of new graph-based attention is similar to PageRank
algorithm (Page et al. 1999). Given a document V=fvig
where eachvirepresents a sentence, the stationary attention