Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 1: Illustrated probability simplex with Gaussian-Softmax, GEM, and Dirichlet distributions.
Unlike the Gaussian-Softmax or the GEM distribution, the Dirichlet distribution is able to capture
the multi-modality that illustrates multiple peaks at the vertices of the probability simplex.
Utilizing a Dirichlet distribution as a conjugate prior to a multinomial distribution has an advantage
compared to the usage of a softmax function on a Gaussian distribution. For instance, Figure 1
illustrates the potential difﬁculties in utilizing the softmax function with the Gaussian distribution.
Given the three-dimensional probability simplex, the Gaussian-Softmax distribution cannot generate
the illustrated case of the Dirichlet distribution with a high probability measure at the vertices of the
simplex, i.e. the multi-modality where the necessity was emphasized in Hoffman & Johnson (2016).
Additionally, the Grifﬁths-Engen-McCloskey (GEM) distribution (Pitman, 2002), which is the prior
distribution of the SBV AE, is difﬁcult to model the multi-modality because the sampling procedure
of the GEM distribution is affected by the rich-get-richer phenomenon, so a few components tend
to dominate the weight of the samples. This is different from the Dirichlet distribution that does not
exhibit such phenomenon, and the Dirichlet distribution can fairly distribute the weights to the com-
ponents, and the Dirichlet distribution is more likely to capture the multi-modality by controlling the
prior hyper-parameter (Blei et al., 2003). Then, we conjecture that enhanced modeling on Dirichlet
prior is still needed 1) because there are cases that the Gaussian-Softmax approaches, or the softmax
Laplace approximation, cannot imitate the Dirichlet distribution; and 2) because the nonparametric
approaches could be inﬂuenced by the biases that the Dirichlet distribution does not suffer from.
Given these motivations for modeling the Dirichlet distribution with the SGVB estimator, this pa-
per introduces the Dirichlet Variational Autoencoder (DirV AE) that shows the same characteristics
of the Dirichlet distribution. The DirV AE is able to model the multi-modal distribution that was
not possible with the Gaussian-Softmax and the GEM approaches. These characteristics allow the
DirV AE to be the prior of the discrete latent distribution, as the original Dirichlet distribution is.
Introducing the DirV AE requires the conﬁguration of the SGVB estimator on the Dirichlet distri-
bution. Speciﬁcally, the Dirichlet distribution is a composition of the Gamma random variables,
so we approximate the inverse Gamma cumulative distribution function (CDF) with the asymptotic
approximation. This approximation on the inverse Gamma CDF becomes the component of approx-
imating the Dirichlet distribution. We compared this approach to the previously suggested approx-
imations, i.e. approaches with the Weibull distribution and with the softmax Gaussian distribution,
and our approximation shows the best log-likelihood among the compared approximations.
Moreover, we report that we had to investigate the component collapsing along with the research on
DirV AE. It has been known that the component collapsing issue is resolved by the SBV AE because
of the meaningful decoder weights from the latent layer to the next layer. However, we found that
SBV AE has latent value collapsing issue resulting in many near-zero values on the latent dimensions
that leads to the incomplete utilization of the latent dimension. Hence, we argue that Gaussian V AE
(GV AE) suffers from the decoder weight collapsing , previously limitedly deﬁned as component
collapsing ; and SBV AE has a problem of the latent value collapsing . Finally, we suggest that the
deﬁnition of component collapsing should be expanded to represent both cases of decoder weight
andlatent value collapsings . The proposed DirV AE shows neither the near-zero decoder weights nor
the near-zero latent values, so the reconstruction uses the full latent dimension information in most
cases. We investigated this issue because our performance gain comes from resolving the expanded
version of the component collapsing . Due to the component collapsing issues, the existing V AEs
have less meaningful latent values or could not effectively use its latent representation. Meanwhile,
DirV AE does not have component collapsing due to the multi-modal prior which possibly leads
to superior qualitative and quantitative performances. We experimentally showed that the DirV AE
2