Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
DIRICHLET VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
Weonyoung Joo, Wonsung Lee, Sungrae Park & Il-Chul Moon
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, South Korea
fes345,aporia,sungraepark,icmoon g@kaist.ac.kr
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes Dirichlet Variational Autoencoder (DirV AE) using a Dirichlet
prior for a continuous latent variable that exhibits the characteristic of the categor-
ical probabilities. To infer the parameters of DirV AE, we utilize the stochastic
gradient method by approximating the Gamma distribution, which is a component
of the Dirichlet distribution, with the inverse Gamma CDF approximation. Addi-
tionally, we reshape the component collapsing issue by investigating two problem
sources, which are decoder weight collapsing and latent value collapsing, and
we show that DirV AE has no component collapsing; while Gaussian V AE ex-
hibits the decoder weight collapsing and Stick-Breaking V AE shows the latent
value collapsing. The experimental results show that 1) DirV AE models the la-
tent representation result with the best log-likelihood compared to the baselines;
and 2) DirV AE produces more interpretable latent values with no collapsing is-
sues which the baseline models suffer from. Also, we show that the learned latent
representation from the DirV AE achieves the best classiﬁcation accuracy in the
semi-supervised and the supervised classiﬁcation tasks on MNIST, OMNIGLOT,
and SVHN compared to the baseline V AEs. Finally, we demonstrated that the
DirV AE augmented topic models show better performances in most cases.
1 I NTRODUCTION
AVariational Autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014c) brought success in deep generative
models (DGMs) with a Gaussian distribution as a prior distribution (Jiang et al., 2017; Miao et al.,
2016; 2017; Srivastava & Sutton, 2017). If we focus on the V AE, the V AE assumes the prior dis-
tribution to beN(0;I)with the learning on the approximated ^and^. Also, Stick-Breaking VAE
(SBV AE) (Nalisnick & Smyth, 2017) is a nonparametric version of the V AE, which modeled the
latent dimension to be inﬁnite using a stick-breaking process (Ishwaran & James, 2001).
While these V AEs assume that the prior distribution of the latent variables to be continuous random
variables, recent studies introduce the approximations on discrete priors with continuous random
variables (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017; Rolfe, 2017). The key of these approximations
is enabling the backpropagation with the reparametrization technique, or the stochastic gradient
variational Bayes (SGVB) estimator, while the modeled prior follows a discrete distribution. The
applications of these approximations on discrete priors include the prior modeling of a multinomial
distribution which is frequently used in the probabilistic graphical models (PGMs). Inherently, the
multinomial distributions can take a Dirichlet distribution as a conjugate prior, and the demands on
such prior have motivated the works like Jang et al. (2017); Maddison et al. (2017); Rolfe (2017)
that support the multinomial distribution posterior without explicit modeling on a Dirichlet prior.
When we survey the work with explicit modeling on the Dirichlet prior, we found a frequent ap-
proach such as utilizing a softmax Laplace approximation (Srivastava & Sutton, 2017). We argue
that this approach has a limitation from the multi-modality perspective. The Dirichlet distribution
can exhibit a multi-modal distribution with parameter settings, see Figure 1, which is infeasible to
generate with the Gaussian distribution with a softmax function. Therefore, the previous continuous
domain V AEs cannot be a perfect substitute for the direct approximation on the Dirichlet distribu-
tion.
1arXiv:1901.02739v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2019