this application. This will allow these variational quantum simulation
methods to use fewer training resources (either input-output pairs, orentangling auxiliary systems), yet still achieve good generalization andscalability.
Discovering quantum error correcting codes can be viewed as an
optimization problem
44,45,74–78. Furthermore, it can be thought of as a
machine learning problem, since computing the average ﬁdelity of the
code involves training data (e.g., chosen from a 2-design44). Signi ﬁcant
effort has been made to solve this problem on classical computers74–78.
Such approaches can bene ﬁt from our generalization bounds, poten-
tially leading to faster classical discovery of quantum codes. Morerecently, it was proposed to use near-term quantum computers to ﬁndsuch codes
44,45. Again our bounds imply good generalization perfor-
mance with small training data for this application, especially for
QCNNs45, due to their logarithmic number of parameters.
Finally, autoencoders and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
have recently been generalized to the quantum setting13,43,79,80.B o t h
employ training data, and hence our generalization bounds providequantitative guidance for how much training data to employ in theseapplications. Moreover, our results can provide guidance for ansatzdesign. While there is no standard ansatz yet for quantum auto-encoders or quantum GANs, ansätze with a minimal number of para-meters will likely lead to the best generalization performance.
Next, we give a comparison to previously known results. Some
prior works have studied the generalization capabilities of quantum
models, among them the classical learning-theoretic approachesof
81–89; the more geometric perspective of17,18; and the information-
theoretic technique of20,37. Independently of this work, Ref. 38also
investigated covering numbers in QMLMs. However our bounds arestronger, signi ﬁcantly more general, and broader in scope. We give a
detailed comparison of our results to related work in Supplemen-tary Note 1.
To view our results in the context of the quest for quantum
advantage, it is important to note that we do not prove a quantumadvantage of quantum over classical machine learning. However,
generalization bounds for QMLMs are necessary to understand their
potential for quantum advantage. Namely, QMLMs can outperformclassical methods, assuming both achieve small training error, only inscenarios in which QMLMs generalize well, but classical ML methodsdo not. We therefore consider our results a guide in the search forquantum advantage of QML: We need to identify a task in whichQMLMs with few trainable gates achieve small training error, butclassical models need substantially higher model complexity toachieve the same goal. Then, our bounds guarantee that the QMLMperforms well also on unseen data, but we expect the classical modelto generalize poorly due to the high model complexity.
We conclude with some open questions. For QMLMs with expo-
nentially many independently trainable gates, our generalization error
bounds scale exponentially with n, and hence we do not make non-
trivial claims about this regime. H owever, this does not yet imply that
exponential-size QMLMs have bad generalization behavior. Whetherand under which circumstances this is indeed the case is an interestingFig. 3 | Generalization performance of variational unitary compiling. We
employed a variable structure QMLM (as discussed near Theorem 4). Panel ( a)
shows the dependence of Nmin, the minimum training data size for accurate com-
pilation, on n, the number of qubits. Accurate compilation is de ﬁned as achieving
kU/C0VðαÞk2
F<1 0/C05on 1 out of 8 (blue) or on 7 out of 8 (red) runs. For training data
with random computational basis inputs (solid lines), Nminscales linearly in n.W h e n
training on examples with Haar random inputs (dashed lines), Nminis constant up to
system size n= 9. In Panel ( b), for n= 9 qubits, we plot the prediction error ofsuccessfully trained (training cost < 10−8) runs for 8 training data sets with N=1 6t o
N= 30 random computational basis inputs. Panel ( c) shows the dependence of the
testing error on the reciprocal of the training error for different training data sizes,in the case of 9 qubits. Here, the data consisted of random computational basis
states and the corresponding outputs. As Nincreases, small training error becomes
a more reliable predictor for small testing error. Each subplot shows 8 differenttraining runs, trained on different training data sets.
Fig. 4 | Performance of variational unitary compiling when initializing near thesolution. Each panel shows the results of a single randomly initialized training run,
where we used randomly drawn low-entangled states for training. The testing erroron 20 test states, which we allow to be more strongly entangled than the states used
during training, is plotted versus the reciprocal of the training error for training
data sizes N=1 ,2 ,f o rd i f f e r e n ts y s t e ms i z e s n. A training data set of size N= 1 is not
sufﬁcient to guarantee good generalization: Even with decreasing training error,
the testing error remains large. In contrast, assuming favorably initialized training,
N= 2 training data points suf ﬁce for good generalization, even for up to n=4 0
qubits.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 6