nature communications
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Generalization in quantum machine learning
from few training data
Matthias C. Caro1,2, Hsin-Yuan Huang3,4,M .C e r e z o5,6, Kunal Sharma7,
Andrew Sornborger5,8,L u k a s zC i n c i o9&P a t r i c kJ .C o l e s9
Modern quantum machine learning (QML) methods involve variationally
optimizing a parameterized quantum c ircuit on a training data set, and sub-
sequently making predictions on a testing data set (i.e., generalizing). In this
work, we provide a comprehensive study of generalization performance inQML after training on a limited number Nof training data points. We show that
the generalization error of a qua ntum machine learning model with Ttrainable
gates scales at worst asﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=Np
. When only K≪Tgates have undergone sub-
stantial change in the optimization proc ess, we prove that the generalization
error improves toﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K=Np
. Our results imply that the compiling of unitaries into
a polynomial number of native gates, a crucial application for the quantum
computing industry that typically uses exponential-size training data, can besped up signi ﬁcantly. We also show that classi ﬁcation of quantum states across
a phase transition with a quantum convolutional neural network requires onlya very small training data set. Other pot ential applications include learning
quantum error correcting codes or qua ntum dynamical simulation. Our work
injects new hope into the ﬁe l do fQ M L ,a sg o o dg e n e r a l i z a t i o ni sg u a r a n t e e d
from few training data.
The ultimate goal of machine learning (ML) is to make accurate pre-
dictions on unseen data. This is known as generalization, and sig-niﬁcant effort has been expended to understand the generalization
capabilities of classical ML models. For example, theoretical results
have been formulated as upper bounds on the generalization error as a
function of the training data size and the model complexity
1–5.S u c h
bounds provide guidance as to how much training data is requiredand/or suf ﬁcient to achieve accurate generalization.
Quantum machine learning (QML) is an emerging ﬁeld that has
generated great excitement
6–9. Modern QML typically involves training
a parameterized quantum circuit in order to analyze either classical orquantum data sets
10–16. Early results indicate that, for classical data
analysis, QML models may offer some advantage over classical modelsunder certain circumstances17–19. It has also been proven that QML
models can provide an exponential advantage in sample complexityfor analyzing quantum data
20,21.
However, little is known about the conditions needed for accurate
generalization in QML. Signi ﬁcant progress has been made in under-
standing the trainability of QML models18,22–36, but trainability is a
separate question from generalization18,37,38.O v e r ﬁtting of training
data could be an issue for QML, just as it is for classical machinelearning. Moreover, the training data size required for QML general-ization has yet to be fully studied. Naïvely, one could expect that anexponential number of training points are needed when training afunction acting on an exponentially large Hilbert space. For instance,some studies have found that, exponentially in n, the number ofReceived: 12 April 2022
Accepted: 4 August 2022
Check for updates
1Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany.2Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology (MCQST),
Munich, Germany.3Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA.4Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences,
Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA.5Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.6Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.7Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742, USA.8Quantum Science Center, Oak Ridge, TN 37931, USA.9Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.
e-mail: caro@ma.tum.de
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;