leads to an empirical risk given by
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1hyi∣EQCNN
α ð∣ψiihψi∣Þ∣yii: ð10Þ
In Fig. 2, we visualize the phase classi ﬁcation performance
achieved by our QCNN, trained according to this loss function, while
additionally taking the number of misclassi ﬁed points into account.
Moreover, we show how the true risk, or rather the test accuracy asproxy for it, correlates well with the achieved training accuracy,already for small training data sizes. This is in agreement with ourtheoretical predictions, discussed in more detail in SupplementaryNote 4, which for QCNNs gives a generalization error bound poly-logarithmic in the number of qubits. We note that refs. 65,66observed
similarly favorable training data requirements for a related task oflearning phase diagrams.
Next, we turn our attention to the unitary compiling application.
Compiling is the task of transforming a high-level algorithm into a low-
level code that can be implemented on a device. Unitary compiling is aparadigmatic task in the NISQ era where a target unitary is compiledinto a gate sequence that complies with NISQ device limitations, e.g.,hardware-imposed connectivity and shallow depth to mitigate errors.Unitary compiling is crucial to the quantum computing industry, as it isessentially always performed prior to running an algorithm on a NISQdevice, and various companies have their own commercialcompilers
67,68. Hence, any ability to accelerate unitary compiling could
have industrial impact.
Here we consider the task of compiling the unitary Uof the n-
qubit Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT)69into a short-depth para-
meterized quantum circuit V(α). For V(α) we employ the VAns (Vari-
able Ansatz) algorithm62,70, which uses a machine learning protocol to
iteratively grow a parameterized quantum circuit by placing andremoving gates in a way that empirically leads to lower loss functionvalues. Unlike traditional approaches that train just continuous para-meters in a ﬁxed structure circuit, VAns also trains discrete para-
meters, e.g., gate placement or type of gate, to explore the architecturehyperspace. In Supplementary Note 5, we apply our theoretical resultsin this compiling scenario.
The training set for compilation is of the form f∣ψ
i/C11
,U∣ψi/C11
gN
i=1,
consisting of input states ∣ψi/C11
and output states obtained through the
action of U.T h e ∣ψi/C11
are drawn independently from an underlying data-
generating distribution. In our numerics, we consider three such dis-tributions: (1) random computational basis states, (2) random (non-orthogonal) low-entangled states, and (3) Haar random n-qubit states.
Note that states in the ﬁrst two distributions are easy to prepare on a
quantum computer, whereas states f rom the last distribution become
costly to prepare as ngrows. As the goal is to train V(α) to match the
action of Uon the training set, we de ﬁne the loss function as the
squared trace distance between U∣ψ
i/C11
and VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
, i.e.,
‘ðα;∣ψi/C11
,U∣ψi/C11
Þ:=∣∣U∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Uy/C0VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣VðαÞy∣∣2
1.T h i sl e a d st o
the empirical risk
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1∣∣U∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Uy/C0VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣VðαÞy∣∣2
1, ð11Þ
where ∣∣⋅∣∣1indicates the trace norm.
Figure 3shows our numerical results. As predicted by our analy-
tical results, we can, with high success probability, accurately compilethe QFT when training on a data set of size polynomial in the number ofqubits. Our numerical investigation shows a linear scaling of thetraining requirements when training on random computational basisstates. This better than the quadratic scaling implied by a directapplication of our theory, which holds for any arbitrary data-
generating distribution. Approximate implementations of QFT with a
reduced number of gates
71, combined with our results, could help tofurther study this apparent gap theoretically. When training on Haar
random states, our numerics suggest that an even smaller number oftraining data points is suf ﬁcient for good generalization: Up to n=9
qubits, we generalize well from a constant number of training data
points, independent of the system size.
Even more striking are our results when initializing close to the
solution. In this case, as shown in Fig. 4,w eﬁnd that two training data
points suf ﬁce to obtain accurate generalization, which holds even up
to a problem size of 40 qubits. Our th eoretical results in Theorem 3 do
predict reduced training requirements when initializing near thesolution. Hence, the numerics are in agreement with the theory,although they paint an even more optimistic picture and suggest thatfurther investigation is needed to understand why the training datarequirements are so low. While the assumption of initialization nearthe solution is only viable assuming additional prior knowledge, it
could be justi ﬁed in certain scenarios. For example, if the unitaries to
be compiled depend on a parameter, e.g., time, and if we have alreadycompiled the unitary for one parameter setting, we might use this asinitialization for unitaries with a similar parameter.
Discussion
We conclude by discussing the impact of our work on speci ﬁc appli-
cations, a comparison to prior work, the interpretation of our resultsfrom the perspective of quantum advantage, and some openquestions.
W eb e g i nw i t had i s c u s s i o no ft h ei m p a c to ns p e c i ﬁc applications.
Quantum phase classi ﬁcation is an exciting application of QML, to
which Ref. 45has successfully applied QCNNs. However, Ref. 45only
provided a heuristic explanation for the good generalization perfor-mance of QCNNs. Here, we have presented a rigorous theory thatencompasses QCNNs and explains their performance, and we haveconﬁrmed it numerically for a fairly complicated phase diagram and a
wide range of system sizes. In particular, our analysis allows us to gobeyond the speci ﬁc model of QCNNs and extract general principles for
how to ensure good generalization. As generating training data for thisproblem asks an experimenter to prepare a variety of states fromdifferent phases of matter, which will require careful tuning of differ-
ent parameters in the underlying Hamiltonian, good generalization
guarantees for small training data sizes are crucial to allow for theimplementation of phase classi ﬁcation through QML in actual physical
experiments.
Several successful protocols for unitary compiling make use of
training data
52–54. However, prior work has relied on training data sets
whose size scaled exponentially with the number of qubits. This scalingis problematic, both because it suggests a similarly bad scaling of thecomputational complexity of processing the data and because gen-erating training data can be expensive in actual physical implementa-tions. Our generalization bounds provide theoretical guarantees on
the performance that unitary compiling with only polynomial-size
training data can achieve, for the relevant case of ef ﬁciently imple-
mentable target unitaries. As we have numerically demonstrated in thecase of the Quantum Fourier Transform, this signi ﬁcant reduction in
training data size makes unitary compiling scalable beyond what pre-vious approaches could achieve. Moreover, our results provide newinsight into why the VAns algorithm
62is successful for unitary com-
piling. We believe that the QML perspective on unitary compilingadvocated for in this work will lead to new and improved ansätze,which could scale to even larger systems.
Recent methods for variational dynamical simulation rely on
quantum compiling to compile a Tro tterized unitary into a structured
ansatz with the form of a diagonalization
48,49,72,73. This technique allows
for quantum simulations of times longer than an iterated Trotteriza-tion because parameters in the diagonalization may be changed byhand to provide longer-time simulations with a ﬁxed depth circuit. We
expect the quantum compiling results presented here to carry over toArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 5