open question (e.g., see17,37for some initial results). More generally,
one can ask: Under what circumstances will a QMLM, even one ofpolynomial size, outperform our general bound. For example, if wehave further prior knowledge about the loss, arising from speci ﬁc
target applications, it might be possible to use this information to
tighten our generalization bounds. Moreover, as our generalization
bounds are valid for arbitrary data-generating distributions, they maybe overly pessimistic for favorable distributions. Concretely, in ournumerical experiments for unitary compiling, highly entangled stateswere more favorable than especially ef ﬁciently preparable states from
the perspective of generalization. It may thus be interesting to inves-tigate distribution-speci ﬁc tightenings of our results. Finally, it may be
fruitful to combine the generalization bounds for QMLMs studied inthis work and the effect of data encodings in
86to yield a better picture
on generalization in quantum machine learning.
Methods
This section gives an overview over our techniques. First, we outlinethe proof strategy that leads to the different generalization boundsstated above. Second, we present more details about our numericalinvestigations.
Analytical methods
An established approach to generalization bounds in classical statis-tical learning theory is to bound a complexity measure for the classunder consideration. Metric entropies, i.e., logarithms of covering
numbers, quantify complexity in exactly the way needed for general-
ization bounds, as one can show using the chaining technique from thetheory of random processes
90,91. Therefore, a high level view of our
proof strategy is: We establish novel metric entropy bounds forQMLMs and then combine these with known generalization resultsfrom classical learning theory. The strongest form of our general-ization bounds is the following.
Theorem 5 .(Mother theorem ). Consider a QMLM with an arbitrary
number of parameterized local quantum channels, where for eachT> 0, we have G
Tdifferent QMLM architectures with Ttrainable local
gates. Suppose that after optimizing on the training data, the QMLM
hasTindependently parameterized local quantum channels, where the
tthchannel is reused at most Mtimes and is changed by Δtduring the
optimization. Without loss of generality, assume Δ1≥…≥ΔT.T h e nw i t h
high probability over input training data of size N, we have
gen ðα*Þ2O min
K=0 , ...,TfðKÞ+ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
logðGTÞ
Nr  !
, ð12Þ
where fðKÞ:=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ
Nq
+∑T
k=K+1MΔk.
We give a detailed proof in Supplementary Note 3. There, we also
describe a variant in case the loss function cannot be evaluated exactly,but only estimated statistically. Here, we present only a sketch of howto prove Theorem 5.
Before the proof sketch, however, we discuss how Theorem 5
relates to the generalization bounds stated above. In particular, wedemonstrate how to obtain Theorems 1, 2, 3, and 4 as special cases ofTheorem 5.
In the scenario of Theorem 1, the QMLM architecture is ﬁxed in
advance, each trainable map is only used once, and we do not takeproperties of the optimization procedure into account. In the languageof Theorem 5, this means: There exists a single T>0w i t h G
T= 1 and we
have G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T.A l s o , M= 1. And instead of taking the minimum
over K=1 ,…,T, we consider the bound for K=T. Plugging this into the
generalization bound of Theorem 5, we recover Theorem 1.
Similarly, Theorem 5 implies Theorems 2, 3, and 4. Namely, if we
take GT=1a n d G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T, and evaluate the bound for K=T,w erecover Theorem 2. Choosing GT= 1 and G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T,t h eb o u n d
of Theorem 5 becomes that of Theorem 3. Finally, we can obtainTheorem 4 by bounding the minimu m in Theorem 5 in terms of the
expression evaluated at K=T.
Now that we have established that Theorem 5 indeed implies
generalization bounds for all the different scenarios depicted in Fig. 1,
we outline its proof. The ﬁrst central ingredient to our reasoning are
metric entropy bounds for the class of all n-qubit CPTP maps that a
QMLM as described in Theorem 5 can implement, where the distancebetween such maps is measured in terms of the diamond norm. Note:The trivial metric entropy bound obtained by considering this class ofmaps as compact subset of an Euclidean space of dimension expo-nential in nis not suf ﬁcient for our purposes since it scales exponen-
tially in n. Instead, we exploit the layer structure of QMLMs to obtain a
better bound. More precisely, we show: If we ﬁx a QMLM architecture
with Ttrainable 2-qubit maps and a number of maps 0 ⩽K⩽T,a n dw e
assume (data-dependent) optimization distances Δ
1⩾…⩾ΔT,t h e ni t
sufﬁces to take ( ε/KM)-covering nets for each of the sets of admissible
2-qubit CPTP maps for the ﬁrstKtrainable maps to obtain a
ðε+∑T
k=K+1MΔkÞ-covering net for the whole QMLM. The cardinality of
a covering net built in this way, crucially, is independent of n,b u t
depends instead on K,M,a n d T. In detail, its logarithm can effectively
be bounded as 2OKlogMT =ε/C0/C1/C0/C1
. This argument directly extends
from the 2-local to the κ-local case, as we describe in Supplemen-
tary Note 3.
Now we employ the second core ingredient of our proof strat-
egy. Namely, we combine a known upper bound on the generalization
error in terms of the expected supremum of a certain random pro-cess with the so-called chaining technique. This leads to a general-ization error bound in terms of a metric entropy integral. As we needa non-standard version of this bound, we provide a complete deri-vation for this strengthened form. This then tells us that, for eachﬁxed T,M,K,a n d Δ
1⩾…⩾ΔT, using the covering net constructed
above, we can bound the generalization error asgen ðα*Þ2Oðﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ=Np
+∑
T
k=K+1MΔkÞ, with high probability.
The last step of the proof consists of two applications of the union
bound. The ﬁrst instance is a union bound over the possible values of
K. This leads to a generalization error bound in which we minimize
over K=0 ,…,T. So far, however, the bound still applies only to any
QMLM with ﬁxed architecture. We extend it to variable QMLM archi-
tectures by taking a second union bound over all admissible numbersof trainable gates Tand the corresponding G
Tarchitectures. As this is,
in general, a union bound over countably many events, we have toensure that the corresponding failure probabilities are summable.Thus, we invoke our ﬁxed-architecture generalization error bound for
a success probability that is proportional to ðG
TT2Þ/C01. In that way, the
union bound over all possible architectures yields the logarithmicdependence on G
Tin the ﬁnal bound and completes the proof of
Theorem 5.
Numerical methods
This section discusses numerical methods used throughout the paper.
The subsections give details on computational techniques applied tophase classi ﬁcation of the cluster Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 9) and Quantum
Fourier Transform compilation.
Phase classi ﬁcation . The training and testing sets consist of ground
states ∣ψ
i/C11
of the cluster Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 9), computed for different
coupling strengths ( J1,J2). The states ∣ψi/C11
were obtained with the
translation invariant Density Matrix Renormalization Group92.T h e
states in the training set (represented by blue crosses in Fig. 2a) are
chosen to be away from phase transition lines, so accurate descriptionof the ground states is already achieved at small bond dimension χ.
That value determines the cost of further computation involving thestates ∣ψ
i/C11
a n dw ek e e pi ts m a l lf o re f ﬁcient simulation.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 7