Figure 1gives an overview of the different scenarios considered in
this work. We begin with the basic form of our result. We consider aQMLM that has arbitrarily many non-trainable global quantum gatesandTtrainable local quantum gates. Here, by local we mean κ-local for
some n-independent locality parameter κ, and a local quantum gate
can be a unitary or a quantum channel acting on κqubits. Then we have
the following bound on the generalization error for the QMLM withﬁnal parameter setting α* after training:
Theorem 1 .(Basic QMLM ). For a QMLM with Tparameterized local
quantum channels, with high probability over training data of size N,
we have that
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogT
Nr !
: ð5Þ
Remark 1 . Theorem 1 directly implies sample complexity bounds: For
any ε> 0, we can, with high success probability, guarantee that
gen(α*)⩽ε, already with training data of size N~TlogT=ε2,w h i c h
scales effectively linearly with T, the number of parameterized gates.
For ef ﬁciently implementable QMLMs with T2OðpolynÞ,as a m -
p l es i z eo f N2Opolyn=ε2/C0/C1
is already suf ﬁcient. More concretely, if
T2OnD/C0/C1
for some degree D, then the corresponding suf ﬁcient
sample complexity obtained from Theorem 1 satis ﬁesN2~OnD=ε2/C0/C1
,
where the ~Ohides factors logarithmic in n.I nt h eN I S Qe r a56,w ee x p e c t
the number Tof trainable maps to only grow mildly with the number of
qubits, e.g., as in the architectures discussed in refs. 18,45,57.I nt h i s
case, Theorem 1 gives an especially strong guarantee.
In various QMLMs, such as QCNNs, the same parameterized local
gates are applied repeatedly. One could also consider running thesame QMLM multiple times to gather measurement data and thenpost-processing that data. In both cases, one should consider theQMLM as using the same parameterized local gates repeatedly. Weassume each gate to be repeated at most Mtimes. A direct application
of Theorem 1 would suggest that we need a training data size Nof
roughly MT, the total number of parameterized gates. However, the
required number of training data actually is much smaller:
Theorem 2 .(Gate-sharing QMLM ). Consider a QMLM with Tindepen-
dently parameterized local quantum channels, where each channelis reused at most Mtimes. With high probability over training data of
sizeN,w eh a v e
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogðMTÞ
Nr !
: ð6Þ
Thus, good generalization, as in Remark 1, can already be guar-
anteed, with high probability, when the data size effectively scaleslinearly in T(the number of independently parameterized gates) and
only logarithmically in M(the number of uses). In particular, applying
multiple copies of the QMLM in parallel does not signi ﬁcantly worsen
the generalization performance compared to a single copy. Thus, as wediscuss in Supplementary Note 3, Theorem 2 ensures that we can
increase the number of shots used to estimate expectation values at
the QMLM output without substantially harming the generalizationbehavior.
The optimization process of the QMLM also plays an important
role in the generalization performance. Suppose that during theoptimization process, the t
thlocal gate changed by a distance Δt.W e
can bound the generalization error by a function of the changes fΔtgt.
Theorem 3 .(Gate-sharing QMLM under optimization ). Consider a
QMLM with Tindependently parameterized local quantum channels,
where the tthchannel is reused at most Mtimes and is changed by Δt
during the optimization. Assume Δ1≥…≥ΔT. With high probability over
training data of size N,w eh a v e
gen ðα*Þ2O min
K=0 , ...,Tﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ
Nr
+∑T
k=K+1MΔk() !
: ð7Þ
When only K≪Tlocal quantum gates have undergone a sig-
niﬁcant change, then the generalization error will scale at worst line-
arly with Kand logarithmically in the total number of parameterized
gates MT. Given that recent numerical results suggest that the para-
meters in a deep parameterized quantum circuit only change by asmall amount during training
58,59,T h e o r e m3m a y ﬁnd application in
studying the generalization behavior of deep QMLMs.
Finally, we consider a more advanced type of variable ansatz
optimization strategy that is also adopted in practice60–63. Instead of
Fig. 1 | Various types of Quantum Machine Learning Models (QMLMs). Panel ( a)
depicts a basic QMLM with T= 6 independently parameterized gates. The gray
boxes illustrate some global evolutions that are not trainable. Panel ( b) shows a
gate-sharing QMLM with T= 2 independently parameterized gates, each gate is
repeatedly used for M= 3 times. In panel ( c), we depict a multi-copy QMLM. We take
measurement data from Mrounds of a basic QMLM with T= 6 parameterized gates
and post-process the measurement outcomes to produce an output. Running M
copies of a basic QMLM with Tgates is equivalent to running a gate-sharing QMLMwith T= 6 parameterized gates, in which each gate is repeated Mtimes. Panel ( d)
describes a gate-sharing QMLM under optimization. The parameterized gate to theleft undergoes a small change, while the one to the right undergoes a large change.
If we sort the changes Δ
1,Δ2from large to small, then Δ1≫Δ2≈0. Finally, panel ( e)
illustrates gate-sharing QMLM with variable structure. The number Tof para-
meterized gates changes throughout the optimization. The ﬁgure begins with T=1
and ends with T=2 .Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 3