ﬁxing the structure of the QMLM, such as the number of para-
meterized gates and how the parameterized gates are interleaved with
theﬁxed gates, the optimization algorithm could vary the structure,
e.g., by adding or deleting parameterized gates. We assume that foreach number Tof parameterized gates, there are G
Tdifferent QMLM
architectures.
Theorem 4 .(Gate-sharing QMLM with variable structure ). Consider a
QMLM with an arbitrary number of parameterized local quantumchannels, where for each T>0 , w e h a v e G
Tdifferent QMLM archi-
tectures with Tparameterized gates. Suppose that after optimizing on
the data, the QMLM has Tindependently parameterized local quantum
channels, each repeated at most Mtimes. Then, with high probability
over input training data of size N,
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogðMTÞ
Nr
+ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
logðGTÞ
Nr  !
: ð8Þ
Thus, even if the QMLM can in principle use exponentially many
parameterized gates, we can control the generalization error in termsof the number of parameterized gates used in the QMLM after opti-m i z a t i o n ,a n dt h ed e p e n d e n c eo nt h en u m b e ro fd i f f e r e n ta r c h i -tectures is only logarithmic. This logarithmic dependence is crucial aseven in the cases when G
Tgrows exponentially with T,w e
have log ðGTÞ=N2OðT=NÞ.
Numerical results
In this section we present generalization error results obtained by
simulating the following two QML implementations: (1) using a QCNNto classify states belonging to different quantum phases, and (2)training a parameterized quantum circuit to compile a quantumFourier transform matrix.
We begin with the quantum phase classi ﬁcation application. The
QCNN architecture introduced in
45generalizes the model of (classical)
convolutional neural networks with the goal of performing patternrecognition on quantum data. It is composed of so-called convolu-
tional andpooling layers, which alternate. In a convolutional layer, a
sequence of translationally invariant parameterized unitaries on
neighbouring qubits is applied in parallel, which works as a ﬁlter
between feature maps in different layers of the QCNN. Then, in thepooling layers, a subset of the qubits are measured to reduce the
dimensionality of the state while preserving the relevant features of
the data. Conditioned on the corresponding measurement outcomes,translationally invariant parameterized 1-qubit unitaries are applied.The QCNN architecture has been employed for supervised QML tasksof classi ﬁcation of phases of matter and to devise quantum error
correction schemes
45. Moreover, QCNNs have been shown not to
exhibit barren plateaus, making them a generically trainable QMLarchitecture
27.
The action of a QCNN can be considered as mapping an input
state ρinto an output state ρoutgiven as ρout=EQCNN
α ðρinÞ.T h e n ,g i v e n
ρout, one measures the expectation value of a task-speci ﬁc Hermitian
operator.
In our implementation, we employ a QCNN to classify states
belonging to different symmetry protected topological phases. Spe-ciﬁcally, we consider the generalized cluster Hamiltonian
H=∑n
j=1Zj/C0J1XjXj+1/C0J2Xj/C01ZjXj+1/C16/C17
, ð9Þ
where Zi(Xi)d e n o t et h eP a u l i z(x) operator acting on qubit i,a n dw h e r e
J1and J2are tunable coupling coef ﬁcients. As proved in64,a n da s
schematically shown in Fig. 2, the ground-state phase diagram of the
Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 9) has four different phases: symmetry-protected
topological (I), ferromagnetic (II), anti-ferromagnetic (III), and trivial(IV). In the Methods section, we provide additional details regardingthe classical simulation of the ground states of H.
By sampling parameters in the ( J
1,J2) plane, we create a training set
fð∣ψi/C11
,yiÞgN
i=1composed of ground states ∣ψi/C11
ofHand their associated
labels yi. Here, the labels are in the form of length-two bit strings, i.e.,
yi∈{0, 1}2, where each possible bit string corresponds to a phase that
∣ψi/C11
can belong to. The QCNN maps the n-qubit input state ∣ψi/C11
to a
2-qubit output state. We think of the information about the phase asbeing encoded into the output state by which of the 4 computational
basis effect operators is assigned the smallest probability. Namely, we
deﬁne the loss function as ‘ðα;∣ψ
i/C11
,yiÞ:=yi/C10
∣EQCNN
α ð∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Þ∣yi/C11
.T h i sFig. 2 | Generalization performance of quantum phase recognition. We
employed the QCNN architecture for quantum phase recognition on ground states
of the generalized cluster Hamiltonian Hof Eq. ( 9). We evaluated the phase
assigned by the QCNN to a point in the J1-J2-plane by sampling 8192 computational
basis measurement outcomes and taking the least frequent outcome as the pre-
dicted phase. Panel ( a) visualizes the performance of the QCNN for 16-qubits,
trained with 30 data points, which were labelled according to the analyticallydetermined phase diagram. Blue crosses denote training data points (not all 30 areshown). Blue (red) circles represent correctly (incorrectly) classi ﬁed points. Panel(b) shows that, as the training data size increases, the training accuracy quickly
becomes a good predictor for the testing accuracy on 10,000 randomly sampled
points, i.e., the dependence of testing accuracy on training accuracy is approxi-
mately linear with slope increasing with N. The different points in the plot corre-
spond to different parameter settings in the QCNN throughout the optimization.
The dotted gray line shows the baseline accuracy of 25% achieved by random
guessing. Panel ( c) shows that the improvement in the slope with growing training
data size is similar for different numbers of qubits, re ﬂecting the at-worst poly-
logarithmic dependence of Nonnpredicted by our bounds.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 4