qubits, large amounts of training data would be needed, assuming that
one is trying to train an arbitrary unitary39,40. This is a concerning result,
since it would imply exponential scaling of the resources required forQML, which is precisely what the ﬁeld of quantum computation would
like to avoid.
In practice, a more relevant scenario to consider instead of arbi-
trary unitaries is learning a unitary that can be represented by apolynomial-depth quantum circuit. This class of unitaries correspondsto those that can be ef ﬁciently implemented on a quantum computer,
and it is exponentially smaller than that of arbitrary unitaries. Moregenerally, one could consider a QML model with Tparameterized
gates and relate the training data size Nneeded for generalization to T.
Even more general would be to consider generalization error adynamic quantity that varies during the optimization.
In this work, we prove highly general theoretical bounds on the
generalization error in variational QML: The generalization error is
approximately upper bounded byﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=Np
. In our proofs, we ﬁrst
establish covering number bounds for the class of quantum operationsthat a variational QML model can implement. From these, we thenderive generalization error bounds using the chaining technique forrandom processes. A key implication of our results is that an ef ﬁciently
implementable QML model, one such that T2OðpolynÞ, only requires
an ef ﬁcient amount of training data, N2OðpolynÞ, to obtain good
generalization. This implication, by itself, will improve the ef ﬁciency
guarantees of variational quantum algorithms
10,41,42that employ train-
ing data, such as quantum autoencoders13, quantum generative
adversarial networks43, variational quantum error correction44,45, var-
iational quantum compiling46,47, and variational dynamical
simulation48–51. It also yields improved ef ﬁciency guarantees for clas-
sical algorithms that simulate QML models.
We furthermore re ﬁne our bounds to account for the optimiza-
tion process. We show that generalization improves if only someparameters have undergone substantial change during the optimiza-tion. Hence, even if we used a number of parameters Tlarger than the
training data size N, the QML model could still generalize well if only
some of the parameters have changed signi ﬁcantly. This suggests that
QML researchers should be careful not to overtrain their models
especially when the decrease in training error is insuf ﬁcient.
To showcase our results, we consider quantum convolutional
neural networks (QCNNs)
27,45,aQ M Lm o d e lt h a th a sr e c e i v e ds i g -
niﬁcant attention. QCNNs have only T=OðlognÞparameters and yet
they are capable of classifying quantum states into distinct phases. Ourtheory guarantees that QCNNs have good generalization error forquantum phase recognition with only polylogarithmic trainingresources, N2Oðlog
2nÞ. We support this guarantee with a numerical
demonstration, which suggests that even constant-size training datacan suf ﬁce.
Finally, we highlight the task of quantum compiling, a crucial
application for the quantum computing industry. State-of-the-art
classical methods for approximate optimal compiling of unitariesoften employ exponentially large training data sets
52–54. However,
our work indicates that only polynomial-sized data sets areneeded, suggesting that state-of-the-art compilers could be furtherimproved. Indeed, we numerically demonstrate the surprisingly lowdata cost of compiling the quantum Fourier transform at relativelylarge scales.
Results
Framework
Let us ﬁrst outline our theoretical framework. We consider a quantum
machine learning model (QMLM) as being a parameterized quantum
channel, i.e., a completely positive trace preserving (CPTP) map that isparameterized. We denote a QMLM as E
QMLM
α ð/C1Þwhere α=(θ,k)
denotes the set of parameters, including continuous parameters θ
inside gates, as well as discrete parameters kthat allow the gatestructure to vary. We make no further assumptions on the form of the
dependence of the CPTP map EQMLM
α ð/C1Þon the parameters α. During the
training process, one would optimize the continuous parameters θand
potentially also the structure kof the QMLM.
A QMLM takes input data in the form of quantum states. For
classical data x,t h ei n p u ti s ﬁrst encoded in a quantum state via a map
x↦ρ(x). This allows the data to be either classical or quantum in
nature, since regardless it is eventu ally encoded in a quantum state. We
assume that the data encoding is ﬁxed in advance and not optimized
over. We remark here that our results also apply for more generalencoding strategies involving data re-uploading
55, as we explain in
Supplementary Note 3.
For the sake of generality, we allow the QMLM to act on a sub-
system of the state ρ(x). Hence, the output state can be written as
ðEQMLM
α /C10idÞðρðxÞÞ. For a given data point ( xi,yi), we can write the loss
function as
‘ðα;xi,yiÞ=T r Oloss
xi,yiEQMLM
α /C10id/C16/C17
ðρðxiÞÞhi
, ð1Þ
for some Hermitian observable Oloss
xi,yi. As is common in classical learn-
ing theory, the prediction error bounds will depend on the largest(absolute) value that the loss function can attain. In our case, we
therefore assume C
loss :=s u px,y∣∣Oloss
x,y∣∣<1, i.e., the spectral norm can
be bounded uniformly over all possible loss observables.
In Eq. ( 1), we take the measurement to act on a single copy of the
output of the QMLM EQMLM
α ð/C1Þupon input of (a subsystem of) the data
encoding state ρ(xi). Atﬁrst this looks like a restriction. However, note
that one can choose EQMLM
α ð/C1Þto be a tensor product of multiple copies
of a QMLM, each with the same parameter setting, applied to multiple
copies of the input state. Hence our framework is general enough to
allow for global measurements on multiple copies. In this addition tothe aforementioned situation, we further study the case in whichtrainable gates are more generally reused.
For a training dataset S=fðx
i,yiÞgN
i=1of size N, the average loss for
parameters αon the training data is
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1‘ðα;xi,yiÞ, ð2Þ
which is often referred to as the training error .W h e nw eo b t a i nan e w
input x,t h e prediction error of a parameter setting αis taken to be the
expected loss
RðαÞ=E
ðx,yÞ~P‘ðα;x,yÞ ½/C138 , ð3Þ
where the expectation is with respect to the distribution Pfrom which
the training examples are generated.
Achieving small prediction error R(α) is the ultimate goal of
(quantum) machine learning. As Pis generally not known, the training
error ^RSðαÞis often taken as a proxy for R(α). This strategy can be
justiﬁed via bounds on the generalization error
gen ðαÞ=RðαÞ/C0 ^RSðαÞ, ð4Þ
which is the key quantity that we bound in our theorems.
Analytical results
We prove probabilistic bounds on the generalization error of a QMLM.
Our bounds guarantee that a good performance on a suf ﬁciently large
training data set implies, with high probability, a good performance onpreviously unseen data points. In particular, we provide a precise
meaning of "suf ﬁciently large ”in terms of properties of the QMLM and
the employed training procedure.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 2