directly affects future strategies and match result. Given a large hero pool, e.g., 40 heroes (more than
1011combinations), a complete tree search method like the Minimax algorithm used in OpenAI Five
[2] will be computationally intractable [5].
To manage this, we develop a drafting agent leveraging Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) [ 7] and
neural networks. MCTS estimates the long-term value of each pick, and the hero with the maximum
value will be picked. The particular MCTS version we use is Upper Conﬁdence bounds applied to
Trees (UCT) [ 19]. When drafting, a search tree is built iteratively, with each node representing the
state (which heroes have been picked by both teams) and each edge representing the action (pick a
hero that has not been picked) resulting to a next state.
The search tree is updated based on the four steps of MCTS for each iteration, i.e., selection, expansion,
simulation, and backpropagation, during which the simulation step is the most time-consuming. To
speed up simulation, different from [ 5], we build a value network to predict the value of the current
state directly instead of the inefﬁcient random roll-out to get the reward for backpropagation, which
is similar to AlphaGo Zero [ 31]. The training data of the value network is collected via a simulated
drafting process played by two drafting strategies based on MCTS. When training the value network,
Monte-Carlo roll-out is still performed until reaching the terminal state, i.e., the end of the simulated
drafting process. Note that, for board games like Chess and Go, the terminal state determines the
winner of the match. However, the end of the drafting process is not the end of a MOBA match, so we
cannot get match results directly. To deal with this, we ﬁrst build a match dataset via self-play using
the RL model trained in Section 3.3, and then we train a neural predictor for predicting the win-rate
of a particular lineup. The predicted win-rate of the terminal state is used as the supervision signal
for training the value network. The architectures of the value network and the win-rate predictor are
two separate 3-layer MLPs. For the win-rate predictor, the input feature is the one-hot representation
of the 10 heroes in a lineup, and the output is the win-rate ranged from 0 to 1. For the value network,
the input representation is the game state of the current lineup, containing one-hot indexes of picked
heroes in the two teams, default indexes of unpicked heroes, and the index of the team which is
currently picking, while the output is the value of the state. On the other hand, the selection, expansion
and backpropagation steps in our implementation are the same as the normal MCTS [19, 5].
3.5 Infrastructure
To manage the variance of stochastic gradients introduced by MOBA agents, we develop a scalable
and loosely-coupled infrastructure to construct the utility of data parallelism. Speciﬁcally, our
infrastructure follows the classic Actor-Learner design pattern [ 12]. Our policy is trained on the
Learner using GPUs while the self-play happens on the Actor using CPUs. The experiences,
containing sequences of observations, actions, rewards, etc., are passed asynchronously from the
Actor to a local replay buffer on the Learner. Signiﬁcant efforts are dedicated to improving the
system throughput, e.g., the design of transmission mediators between CPUs and GPUs, the IO cost
reduction on GPUs, which are similar to [ 38]. Different from [ 38], we further develop a centralized
inference module on the GPU side to optimize resource utilization, similar to the Learner design in a
recent infrastructure called Seed RL [11].
4 Evaluation
4.1 Experimental Setup
We test on Honor of Kings , which is the most popular MOBA game worldwide and has been actively
used as the testbed for recent AI advances [10, 35, 16, 36, 38, 37].
Our RL infrastructure runs over a physical computing cluster. To train our AI model, we use 320
GPUs and 35,000 CPUs, referred to as one resource unit . For each of the experiments conducted
below, including ablation study, time and performance comparisons, we use the same quantity of
resources to train, i.e., one resource unit, unless otherwise stated. Our cluster can support 6 to 7 such
experiments in parallel. The mini-batch size per GPU card is 8192. We develop 9,227 scalar features
containing observable unit attributions and in-game stats, and 6 channels of spatial features read from
the game engine with resolution 6*17*17. Each of the teacher models has 9 million parameters,
while the ﬁnal model has 17 million parameters. LSTM unit sizes for teacher and ﬁnal models are
512 and 1024, respectively. LSTM time step is 16 for all models. For teacher models, we train using
6