6 Broader Impact
To the research community . MOBA (Multiplayer Online Battle Arena) poses a grand challenge
to the AI community. We would believe that mastering a typical MOBA game without restrictions
will become the next AI milestone like AlphaGo orAlphaStar . To this end, this paper is introducing
a MOBA AI learning paradigm towards this goal. Moreover, the proposed methodology is based
on general-purpose machine learning components that are applicable to other similar multiplayer
domains. Our results suggest that curriculum-guided reinforcement learning can help handle very
complex tasks involving multi-agent competition and cooperation, real-time decision-making, im-
perfect observation, complex strategy space, and combinatorial action space. We herewith expect
this work to provide inspirations to other complex real-world problems, e.g., real-time decisions of
robotics.
To the game industry .Honor of Kings , published by Tencent, has a tremendously large user group.
It was reported to be the world’s most popular and highest-grossing game of all time, as well as the
most downloaded App worldwide6. Our AI has found several real-world applications in the game,
and is changing the way that MOBA game designers work, particularly game balance designers,
elaborated as follows: 1) Game balance testing. In MOBA and many other game types, balancing
the ability of each character is essential. The numerical values and skill-sets design of a MOBA
hero, e.g., the physical/magical attack value, blood, and skill types, are traditionally set based on the
experience of game balance designers. Value adjustments to a hero must be tested in the Beta game
servers for months, to see its win-rate in the hero pool through a signiﬁcantly large number of human
matches. In self-play reinforcement learning, the agents are very sensitive to feature changes and
hero adjustments affect the win-rate of the team. Using similar techniques presented in this paper, we
have constructed a balance testing tool for Honor of Kings . 2) PVE (player vs environment) game
mode. We had deployed earlier checkpoints trained by our method (with a much weaker ability than
the AI in this paper, mainly for entertainment) into Honor of Kings . These checkpoints are for players
at all levels. 3) AFK hosting. It happens that players in casual matches drop ofﬂine or AFK (away
from the keyboard) during a game due to an unstable network, temporary emergencies, etc. We have
developed a preliminary learning-based AI to host the dropped players.
To the esports community . The playing style of our AI is different from normal playing of human
esports players7. For example, in MOBA, a commonly seen opening-strategy for human teams is the
three-lane-strategy, i.e., marksman and warrior heroes go to bottom and top lanes, respectively, while
the mage hero plays the middle. However, such a strategy has seldom been adopted by the AI team.
Our AI has its way of fast upgrading and team cooperation, which has inspired new strategies to
professional players. As commented by a professional coach, “AI’s resource allocation is a bit weird
but effective. After trying out some of AI’s playing style, we observe a slight increase of gold and
experience gained during certain game phases. Another ﬁnding given by AI is that some marksman
heroes are suitable to play middle, apart from playing bottom. These are interesting and helpful to us.”
In the future, we would believe that with larger hero pool support, the strategies explored by self-play
reinforcement learning will have an even broader impact on how esports players play the game.
7 Funding Disclosure
This work is supported by the Tencent AI Department and the Tencent TiMi Studio.
References
[1]Y . Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of
the 26th annual international conference on machine learning , pages 41–48, 2009.
[2]C. Berner, G. Brockman, B. Chan, V . Cheung, P. D˛ ebiak, C. Dennison, D. Farhi, Q. Fischer,
S. Hashme, C. Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.06680 , 2019.
[3]N. Brown and T. Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats top
professionals. Science , 359(6374):418–424, 2018.
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honor_of_Kings
7Matches played by AI can be found from the Google Drive link: https://sourl.cn/NVwV6L
10