designed to have diverse playing mechanics), particularly in the 5 versus 5 (5v5) mode where two
teams (each with 5 heroes selected from the hero pool) compete against each other1.
In spite of its suitability for AI research, mastering the playing of MOBA remains to be a grand
challenge for current AI systems. State-of-the-art work for MOBA 5v5 game is OpenAI Five for
playing Dota 2 [2]. It trains with self-play reinforcement learning (RL). However, OpenAI Five plays
with one major limitation2, i.e., only 17 heroes were supported, despite the fact that the hero-varying
and team-varying playing mechanism is the soul of MOBA [38, 29].
As the most fundamental step towards playing full MOBA games, scaling up the hero pool is
challenging for self-play reinforcement learning, because the number of agent combinations, i.e.,
lineups, grows polynomially with the hero pool size. The agent combinations are 4,900,896 ( C10
17
C5
10) for 17 heroes, while exploding to 213,610,453,056 ( C10
40C5
10) for 40 heroes. Considering the
fact that each MOBA hero is unique and has a learning curve even for experienced human players,
existing methods by randomly presenting these disordered hero combinations to a learning system
can lead to “learning collapse” [ 1], which has been observed from both OpenAI Five [2] and our
experiments. For instance, OpenAI attempted to expand the hero pool up to 25 heroes, resulting in
unacceptably slow training and degraded AI performance, even with thousands of GPUs (see Section
“More heroes” in [ 24] for more details). Therefore, we need MOBA AI learning methods that deal
with scalability-related issues caused by expanding the hero pool.
In this paper, we propose a learning paradigm for supporting full MOBA game-playing with deep
reinforcement learning. Under the actor-learner pattern [ 12], we ﬁrst build a distributed RL infrastruc-
ture that generates training data in an off-policy manner. We then develop a uniﬁed actor-critic [ 20]
network architecture to capture the playing mechanics and actions of different heroes. To deal with
policy deviations caused by the diversity of game episodes, we apply off-policy adaption, following
that of [ 38]. To manage the uncertain value of state-action in game, we introduce multi-head value
estimation into MOBA by grouping reward items. Inspired by the idea of curriculum learning [ 1] for
neural network, we design a curriculum for the multi-agent training in MOBA, in which we “start
small” and gradually increase the difﬁculty of learning. Particularly, we start with ﬁxed lineups to
obtain teacher models, from which we distill policies [ 26], and ﬁnally we perform merged training.
We leverage student-driven policy distillation [ 9] to transfer the knowledge from easy tasks to difﬁcult
ones. Lastly, an emerging problem with expanding the hero pool is drafting, a.k.a. hero selection,
at the beginning of a MOBA game. The Minimax algorithm [ 18] for drafting used in existing work
with a small-sized hero pool [ 2] is no longer computationally feasible. To handle this, we develop an
efﬁcient and effective drafting agent based on Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) [7].
Note that there still lacks a large-scale performance test of Game AI in the literature, due to the
expensive nature of evaluating AI agents in real games, particularly for sophisticated video games.
For example, AlphaStar Final [33] and OpenAI Five [2] were tested: 1) against professionals for 11
matches and 8 matches, respectively; 2) against the public for 90 matches and for 7,257 matches,
respectively (all levels of players can participate without an entry condition). To provide more
statistically signiﬁcant evaluations, we conduct a large-scale MOBA AI test. Speciﬁcally, we test
using Honor of Kings , a popular and typical MOBA game, which has been widely used as a testbed for
recent AI advances [ 36,38,37]. AI achieved a 95.2% win-rate over 42 matches against professionals,
and a 97.7% win-rate against players of High King level3over 642,047 matches.
To sum up, our contributions are:
We propose a novel MOBA AI learning paradigm towards playing full MOBA games with
deep reinforcement learning.
We conduct the ﬁrst large-scale performance test of MOBA AI agents. Extensive experiments
show that our AI can defeat top esports players.
1In this paper, MOBA refers to the standard MOBA 5v5 game, unless otherwise stated.
2OpenAI Five has two limitations from the regular game: 1) the major one is the limit of hero pool, i.e., only
a subset of 17 heroes supported; 2) some game rules were simpliﬁed, e.g., certain items were not allowed to buy.
3InHonor of Kings , a player’s game level can be: No-rank, Bronze, Silver, Gold, Platinum, Diamond,
Heavenly, King (a.k.a, Champion) and High King (the highest), in ascending order.
2