Towards Playing Full MOBA Games with
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Deheng Ye1Guibin Chen1Wen Zhang1Sheng Chen1Bo Yuan1Bo Liu1Jia Chen1
Zhao Liu1Fuhao Qiu1Hongsheng Yu1Yinyuting Yin1Bei Shi1Liang Wang1
Tengfei Shi1Qiang Fu1Wei Yang1Lanxiao Huang2Wei Liu1
1Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
2Tencent TiMi L1 Studio, Chengdu, China
{dericye,beanchen,zivenwzhang,victchen,jerryyuan,leobliu,jaylahchen,ricardoliu,
frankfhqiu,yannickyu,mailyyin,beishi,enginewang,francisshi,leonfu,
willyang,jackiehuang}@tencent.com; wl2223@columbia.edu
Abstract
MOBA games, e.g., Honor of Kings, League of Legends, and Dota 2, pose grand
challenges to AI systems such as multi-agent, enormous state-action space, complex
action control, etc. Developing AI for playing MOBA games has raised much
attention accordingly. However, existing work falls short in handling the raw game
complexity caused by the explosion of agent combinations, i.e., lineups, when
expanding the hero pool in case that OpenAI’s Dota AI limits the play to a pool of
only 17 heroes. As a result, full MOBA games without restrictions are far from
being mastered by any existing AI system. In this paper, we propose a MOBA
AI learning paradigm that methodologically enables playing full MOBA games
with deep reinforcement learning. Speciﬁcally, we develop a combination of novel
and existing learning techniques, including curriculum self-play learning, policy
distillation, off-policy adaption, multi-head value estimation, and Monte-Carlo
tree-search, in training and playing a large pool of heroes, meanwhile addressing
the scalability issue skillfully. Tested on Honor of Kings, a popular MOBA game,
we show how to build superhuman AI agents that can defeat top esports players.
The superiority of our AI is demonstrated by the ﬁrst large-scale performance test
of MOBA AI agent in the literature.
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for games, a.k.a. Game AI, has been actively studied for decades. We have
witnessed the success of AI agents in many game types, including board games like Go [ 30], Atari
series [ 21], ﬁrst-person shooting (FPS) games like Capture the Flag [ 15], video games like Super
Smash Bros [ 6], card games like Poker [ 3], etc. Nowadays, sophisticated strategy video games
attract attention as they capture the nature of the real world [ 2], e.g., in 2019, AlphaStar achieved the
grandmaster level in playing the general real-time strategy (RTS) game - StarCraft 2 [33].
As a sub-genre of RTS games, Multi-player Online Battle Arena (MOBA) has also attracted much
attention recently [ 38,36,2]. Due to its playing mechanics which involve multi-agent competition
and cooperation, imperfect information, complex action control, and enormous state-action space,
MOBA is considered as a preferable testbed for AI research [ 29,25]. Typical MOBA games include
Honor of Kings ,Dota , and League of Legends . In terms of complexity, a MOBA game, such as
Honor of Kings , even with signiﬁcant discretization, could have a state and action space of magnitude
1020000[36], while that of a conventional Game AI testbed, such as Go, is at most 10360[30]. MOBA
games are further complicated by the real-time strategies of multiple heroes (each hero is uniquely
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.