14 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
with shared weights are then fully characterized from a mathematical point of
view.
The dieomorphic property naturally arises as a critical property in reg-
istration problems, as it relates to invertibility properties. Such invertibility
properties are also at the core of the denition of kernel approaches, which
implicitly denes mapping operators [26]. As illustrated for the reported clas-
sication experiments, the dieomorphic property prevents the mapping oper-
ator from modifying the topology of the manifold structure of the input data.
When not imposing such properties, for instance in unconstrained ResNet ar-
chitectures as well as, the learned deformation 
ows may present unexpected
topology changes.
The dieomorphic property may be regarded as a regularization criterion
on the mapping operator, so that the learned mapping enables a linear sep-
aration of the classes while guaranteeing the smoothness of the classication
boundary and of the underlying deformation 
ow. It is obvious that a ResNet
architecture with shared weights is a special case of an unconstrained ResNet.
Therefore, the training of a ResNet architecture with shared weights may be
viewed as the training of an unconstrained ResNet within a reduced search
space. The same holds for the symmetry property which further constrains
the search space during training. The later constraint is shown to be numer-
ically important so that the discretized scheme complies with the theoretical
dieomorphic properties.
Overall, this analysis stresses that over an innity of mapping operators
reaching optimal training performance one may favor those depicting dif-
feomorphic properties so that key properties such as generalization perfor-
mance, prediction stability and robustness to adversarial examples may be
greatly improved. Numerical schemes which fulll such dieomorphic proper-
ties during the training process could be further investigated and could ben-
et from the registration literature, including for dieomorphics 
ows gov-
erned by non-stationary velocity elds [30,5,4]. In particular, the impact of
the dieomorphism-based network building on adversarial example estimation
is a open research direction for further studies.
5.2 Computational issues
Besides theoretical aspects, computational properties also derive from the pro-
posed dieomorphism-based formulation. Within this continuous setting, the
depth of the network relates to the integration time step and the precision of
the integration scheme. The deeper the network, the smaller the integration
step. Especially, a large integration time step, i.e.a shallower ResNet archi-
tecture, may result in numerical integration instabilities and hence in non-
dieomorphic transformations. Therefore, deep enough architectures should
be considered to guarantee numerical stability and dieomorphic properties.
The maximal integration step relates to the regularity of the velocity elds
governing the ODEs. In our experiments, we only consider an explicit rst-