Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 5
in [2], in this case, the resulting dieomorphisms dene a subgroup structure in
the underlying Lie group and yield the denition of the exponential operators.
We here only brie
y detail these key properties. We let the reader refer to [1]
for a detailed and more formal presentation of their mathematical derivation.
For a stationary velocity eld, the resulting dieomorphisms belong to the
one-parameter subgroup of dieomorphisms with innitesimal generator V. In
particular, they verify the following property: 8s;t; (t)(s) =(s+t), where
stands for the composition operator in the underlying Lie group. This implies
for instance that computing (1) boils down to applying ntimes(1=2n)
for any integer value n. Interestingly, this one-parameter subgroup yields the
denition of dieomorphisms ( (t))tas exponentials of velocity eld Vdenoted
by (exp(tV))tand governed by the stationary ODE
d(t)
dt=V((t)) (3)
Conversely, any one-parameter subgroup of dieomorphisms is governed by an
ODE with a stationary velocity eld. It may be noted that the above deni-
tion of exponentials of velocity elds generalizes the denition of exponential
operators for matrices and nite-dimensional spaces.
3.2 Dieomorphism-based supervised learning
In this section, we view supervised learning issues as the learning of dieomor-
phisms according to some predened loss function. Let us consider a typical
supervised classication issue which the goal is to predict a class Yfrom an
N-dimensional real-valued observation X. LetLbe a linear classier model
with parameter . Within a neural network setting, Ltypically refers to a
fully-connected layer with softmax activations and parameter vector to the
weight and bias parameters of this layer. Let Dbe the group of dieomor-
phisms in RN. We state the supervised learning as the joint estimation of an
embeddingE, a dieomorphic mapping 2D and linear classication model
Laccording to:
bE;b;b= arg min
E;;loss(fL((E(Xi)));Yigi) (4)
withfXi;Yigithe considered training dataset and loss an appropriate loss
function, typically a cross entropy criterion. Considering the ODE-based parametriza-
tion of dieomorphisms, the above minimization leads to an equivalent esti-
mation of velocity eld sequence ( Vt)
bE;d(Vt);b= arg min
E;(Vt);loss(fL((1) (E(Xi)));Yigi) (5)
subject to8
><
>:d(t)
dt=Vt((t))
(0) =I(6)