10 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
4.1.2 Results
In this work, the dimension of the embedding space is constant throughout
the mapping block. We rst compare ResNet56v2 with the proposed approach
with the same number of parameters, which corresponds to a network depth
of 5 ( i.e.5 residual units). It can be seen in Figure 3 that the performance of
these two networks is similar when using the entire training dataset. Resid-
ual units of the Keras ResNet are built using three layers: convolution, batch
normalization and ReLU. ReLU units are crucial to promote ecient sparse
parametrizations of the velocity elds. However, the obtained results show that
batch normalization in the residual units is not required to reach satisfactory
classication accuracy. Instead, we use a tanh activation layer to restrict the
embedding set to be open and bounded for the whole 
ow of dieomorphisms.
It has to be noted that in the proposed network, the dimension of the trans-
formed embedding space is constant. Similarly to [17], the experimental re-
sults show that progressive dimension changes of the embedding space are not
required, contrary to popular belief that the performance of deep neural net-
works are based on progressive removal of uninformative variability. To study
the generalization performance of the proposed residual unit, we conduct ex-
periments with decreasing number of training samples (see Table 1 for detailed
results). It appears that the use of the proposed residual unit makes the model
more robust to small training sets compared to the Keras ResNet.
We also investigate the impact of the network depth on the classication re-
sults. Increasing the depth leads to more complex models (in term of trainable
parameters). It can thus be expected to observe overtting when using very
small training datasets. However, Figure 3 shows that increasing the depth of
the proposed network does not lead to accuracy decrease. From a dynamical
point of view, increasing the depth corresponds to smaller integration steps
and then to smoother variations of velocity elds. The proposed residual ar-
chitecture is not subject to overtting for small datasets even with a deep
dieomorphic network.
4.2 Spiral data
In this section, we propose to further deepen the understanding of behavior of
networks based on 
ows of dieomorphisms. Following the work on dierential
geometry analysis of ResNet architectures of Hauser et al. in [13], we consider
a classication task of 2-dimensional spiral data.
4.2.1 Experimental setting
No embedding layer is required in this experimental setup. The purpose of the
mapping block is then to warp the input data points Xiinto an unknown space
Xwhere the transformed data Xare linearly separable. We have considered
the following setting: the loss function is the binary cross-entropy between the