Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 15
order Euler scheme. Higher-order explicit schemes, for instance the classic
fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme, seem of great interest as well as implicit
integration schemes [8]. Given the spatial variabilities of the governing velocity
elds, adaptive integration schemes also appear as particularly relevant.
Using dieomorphism-based framework leads to specic architectures of
residual units. In this work, for instance, tanh activation layers are used to
constraint the domain 
to be open and bounded. Such activation layer guar-
antees the dieomorphic properties of the mapping block. The popular use
of ReLU activation in the embedding block cannot provide such guarantee.
Several other reversible architectures have been recently proposed [7,10,17],
showing the potential of such frameworks for the analysis of residual networks.
In the LDDMM framework [5], the parametrization of the velocity eld is often
carried out with Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS). Recent works
have been done in this direction connecting RKHS and deep networks [6].
In our work, vandDvvanish on@
and at innity. This property guaran-
tees that the learned residual units are Lipschitz continuous, which is related
to recent works investigating explicit constraints on Lipschitz continuity in
neural networks [11]. Moreover, this condition implies that the Hilbert space
of admissible velocity elds is a RKHS [34]. Further work could focus on the
parametrization of the velocity elds ( i.e.residual units) using suitable kernels.
Dieomorphic mapping dened as exponential of velocity elds were shown
to be computationally more stable with smoother integral mappings. They lead
to ResNet architectures with shared weights, which greatly lowers the com-
putational complexity and memory requirements compared with the classic
ResNet architectures. They can be implemented as Recurrent Neural Net-
works [19,23]. Importantly, the NN-based specication of the elementary of
velocity eld V(8) becomes the bottleneck in terms of modeling complexity.
The parametrization (Equation 8) may be critical to reach good prediction
performance. Here, we considered a two-layer architecture regarded as a pro-
jection ofVonto basis function. Higher-complexity architecture, for instance
with larger convolution supports, more lters or layers, might be considered
while keeping the numerical stability of the overall ResNet architectures. By
contrast, considering higher-complexity elementary blocks in a ResNet archi-
tectures without shared weights would increase numerical instabilities and may
required complementary regularization constraints across network depth [15,
25].
Regarding training issues, our experiments exploited a classic backpropa-
gation implementation with a random initialization. From the considered con-
tinuous log-Euclidean prospective, the training may be regarded as the pro-
jection of the random initialization onto the manifold of acceptable solutions,
i.e.solutions satisfying both the minimization of the training loss and dieo-
morphic constraints. In the registration literature [27], the numerical schemes
considered for the inference of the mapping usually combine a parametric
representation of the velocity elds and a multiscale optimization strategy in
space and time. The combination of such multiscale optimization strategy to
backpropagation schemes appears as a promising path to improve convergence