12 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
of a specic algorithm. In all the experiments shown in this work, the clas-
sication rate is greater than 99%. Visualization of the decision boundary is
an alternative way to provide complementary insights on the regularity of the
solution in the embedding space. Figure 4 shows the decision boundary for the
four considered ResNets. Although all methods achieved very high classica-
tion rates, it can be seen that adding constraints such as the use of stationary
velocity elds ( i.e.shared weights) and inverse consistency constraints lead to
smoother decision boundaries with no eect on the overall accuracy. This is
regarded as critical for generalization and adversarial robustness [28].
Fig. 4 Decision boundaries for the classication task of 2-dimensional spiral data. From
left to right: ResNet without shared weights, ResNet with shared weights, Data-driven Sym-
metric ResNet with shared weights, Domain-driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights.
We refer the reader to the main text for the correspondence between ResNet architectures
and dieomorphic 
ows.
Decision boundaries correspond to the projection of the estimated linear
decision boundary in the space Xinto the embedding space X. The visual-
ization of decision boundaries does not however provide information regarding
the topology of the manifold in the output space X. We also study the de-
formation 
ow through the spatial conguration of data points through the
network layers as in [13]. Figure 5 shows how each network untangles the spiral
data. Networks with shared weights exhibit smoother layer-wise transforma-
tions. More specically, this visualization provides insights on the geometrical
properties (such as topology preservation / connectedness) of the transformed
set of input data points.
To evaluate the quality of the estimation warping transformation, Figure 6
shows the Jacobian maps for each considered network. Local Jacobian sign
changes correspond to locations where bijectivity is not satised. It can be
seen that adding constraints such as stationary velocity elds and inverse con-
sistency leads to more regular geometrical shapes of the deformed manifold.
The domain-driven regularization applied to a ResNet with shared weights
leads to the most regular geometrical pattern. Adding the symmetry consis-
tency leads to positive Jacobian values over the entire domain, guaranteeing
the bijectivity of the estimated mapping.