4 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
xl+F(xl;Wl). Under the assumption that kF(xl;Wl)kk xlk, the deforma-
tion 
ows generated by ResNet architectures may be expected to implement
the composition of a series of incremental dieomorphic mappings.
In [15,16], it is mentioned that the form of the residual function Fis 
exi-
ble. Several residual blocks have been proposed and experimentally evaluated
such as bottleneck blocks [15], various shortcut connections [16] or aggregated
residual transformations [32]. However, by making the connection between
ResNets and dieomorphic mappings, it appears here that the function Fis a
parametrization of an elementary deformation 
ow, constraining the space of
admissible residual unit architectures.
We argue this registration-based interpretation motivates the denition of
ResNet architectures as the numerical implementation of continuous 
ows of
dieomorphisms. Section 3 details the proposed dieomorphism-based learn-
ing framework in which dieomorphic 
ows are governed by ODEs as in the
LDDMM setting. ResNets with shared weights relate to a particularly inter-
esting case yielding the denition of exponential dieomorphism subgroups
in the underlying Lie algebra. Overall, the proposed framework results in: i)
a theoretical characterization of the mapping block as an integral dieomor-
phic operator governed by an ODE, ii) in considering deformation 
ows and
Jacobian maps for the analysis of ResNets, iii) the derivation of ResNet archi-
tectures with additional dieomorphic constraints.
3 Dieomorphism-based learning
3.1 Dieomorphisms and driving velocity vector elds
Registration issues have been widely stated as the estimation of dieomor-
phic transformations between input and output spaces, especially in medi-
cal imaging [27]. Dieomorphic properties guarantee the invertibility of the
transformations, which includes the conservation of topological features. The
parametrization of dieomorphic transformations according to time-varying
velocity vector elds has been shown to be very eective in medical imaging
[21]. Beyond its computational performance, this framework embeds the group
structure of dieomorphisms and results in 
ows of dieomorphisms governed
by an Ordinary Dierential Equation (ODE):
d(t)
dt=Vt((t)) (2)
with(t) the dieomorphism at time t, andVtthe velocity vector eld at
timet.(0) is the identity and (1) the registration transformation between
embedding space Xand output space X, such that for any element XinXits
mapped version in Xis(1)(X). Given velocity elds ( Vt)t, the computation
of(1)(X) comes from the numerical integration of the above ODE.
A specic class of dieomorphisms refers to stationary velocity elds, that
is to say velocity elds which do not depend on time ( Vt=V;8t). As introduced