Distilling Knowledge from Graph Convolutional Networks
Yiding Yang1, Jiayan Qiu2, Mingli Song3, Dacheng Tao2, Xinchao Wang1†
1Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
2UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
3College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{yyang99, xwang135 }@stevens.edu, jqiu3225@uni.sydney.edu.au,
brooksong@zju.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Student Network Teacher Network Soften 
Labels ReadOut ReadOut
Local 
Structure 
Preserving
NearFar
Teacher
Student w/ LSP
Student w/o LSP
(a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) Unlike existing knowledge distillation methods that focus on only the prediction or the middle activation, our
method explicitly distills knowledge about how the teacher model embeds the topological structure and transfers it to the
student model. (b) We display the structure of the feature space, visualized by the distance between the red point and the
others on a point cloud dataset. Here, each object is represented as a set of 3D points. Top Row : structures obtained from
the teacher; Middle Row : structures obtained from the student trained with the local structure preserving (LSP) module;
Bottom Row : structures obtained from the student trained without LSP. Features in the middle and bottom row are obtained
from the last layer of the model after training for ten epochs. As we can see, model trained with LSP learns a similar structure
as that of the teacher, while the model without LSP fails to do so.
Abstract
Existing knowledge distillation methods focus on con-
volutional neural networks (CNNs), where the input sam-
ples like images lie in a grid domain, and have largely
overlooked graph convolutional networks (GCN) that han-
dle non-grid data. In this paper, we propose to our best
knowledge the ﬁrst dedicated approach to distilling knowl-
edge from a pre-trained GCN model. To enable the knowl-
edge transfer from the teacher GCN to the student, we
propose a local structure preserving module that explic-
itly accounts for the topological semantics of the teacher.
In this module, the local structure information from both
the teacher and the student are extracted as distributions,
and hence minimizing the distance between these distribu-
tions enables topology-aware knowledge transfer from the
†Corresponding author.teacher, yielding a compact yet high-performance student
model. Moreover, the proposed approach is readily extend-
able to dynamic graph models, where the input graphs for
the teacher and the student may differ. We evaluate the pro-
posed method on two different datasets using GCN models
of different architectures, and demonstrate that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art knowledge distillation perfor-
mance for GCN models.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their
unprecedented results in almost all computer vision tasks.
The state-of-the-art performances, however, come at the
cost of the very high computation and memory loads, which
in many cases preclude the deployment of DNNs on the
edge side. To this end, knowledge distillation has been pro-
7074