There are many choices of function h, function gand
the aggregation strategies. Take the graph attention net-
work [35] as an example. it can be formulated as
x′
i=/summationdisplay
j:j,i∈EeMLP 1(xi||xj)
/summationtext
j:(j,i)∈E(eMLP 1(xi||xj))MLP2(xi),(2)
where the function gis designed as a multilayer perceptron,
functionhis another multilayer perceptron that takes pair of
nodes as input and predict the attention between them. The
aggregation strategy is weighted summing all the features
of neighbors according to the attention after normalization.
3.2. Motivation
The motivation of the proposed method is based on the
fundamental of graph convolutional network. As shown
in Eq. 1, the aggregation strategy ( A) plays an important
role in embedding the features of nodes [21, 35], which is
learned during the training process. We thus aim to pro-
vide the student the information about the function that the
teacher has learned. However, it is challenging to distill
knowledge that exactly represents the aggregation function
and transfer it to the student. Instead of distilling the ag-
gregation function directly, we distill the outcomes of such
function: the embedded topological structure. The student
can then be guided by matching the structure embedded by
itself and that embedded by the teacher. We will show in the
following sections how to describe the topological structure
information and distill it to the student.
3.3. Local Structure Preserving
For the intermediate feature maps of a GCN, we can
formulate it as a graph G={V,E}and a set of features
Z={z1,z2,...,zn} ∈RF, wherenis the number of
nodes,Fis the dimension of the feature maps. The lo-
cal structure can be summarized as a set of vectors LS=
{LS1,LS2,...,LS n},LSi∈Rd, wheredis the degree of
the center node iof the local structure. Each element of the
vector is computed by
LSij=eSIM(zi,zj)
/summationtext
j:(j,i)∈E(eSIM(zi,zj)), (3)
SIM(zi,zj) =||zi−zj||2
2. (4)
whereSIM is a function that measures the similarity of
the given pair of nodes, which can be deﬁned as the eu-
clidean distance between the two features. There are also
many other advanced functions can be used here, which we
will give more details in the following section. We take an
exponential operation and normalize the values across all
the nodes that point to center of the local structure. As a
result, for each node i, we can obtain its corresponding lo-
cal structure representation LSi∈Rdby applying Eq. 3.Notice that for different center node, their local structure
representation may be in different dimension, which is de-
pended on it’s local graph.
In the setting of knowledge distillation, we are given a
teacher network as well as a student one, where the teacher
network is trained and ﬁxed. We ﬁrst provide here a local
structure preserving strategy under the situation that both
these two networks take the same graph as input but with
different layers and dimension of embedded features. For
the dynamic graph models, where the graph can be changed
during the optimization process, we will give a solution in
the section 3.5.
Given the intermediate feature maps, we can compute
the local structure vectors for both the teacher and the stu-
dent networks, which are donated as LSsandLSt. For
each center node i, the similarity of the local structure be-
tween the student’s and the teacher’s can be computed as
Si=DKL(LSs
i||LSt
i) =/summationdisplay
j:(j,i)∈ELSs
ijlog(LSs
ij
LSt
ij),(5)
where the Kullback Leibler divergence is adopted.
A smaller Simeans a more similar distribution of the
local structure. Thus, we compute the similarity of the dis-
tributions over all the nodes of the given graph and obtain
the local structure preserving loss as
LLSP=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1Si. (6)
The total loss is formulated as:
L=H(ps,y)+λLLSP (7)
whereyis the label and psis the prediction of the student
model,λis the hyperparameter to balance these two losses
andHrepresents cross entropy loss function that is also
adopted by many other knowledge distillation methods [31,
16, 47].
3.4. Kernel Function
The similarity measurement function shown in Eq. 4
makes a strong assumption about the feature space that the
similarity between pair of nodes is proportional to their eu-
clidean distance, which is typically not the truth. We thus
apply the kernel trick, which is very useful to map the vec-
tors to a higher dimension and compute the similarity, to
address this problem.
Kernel tricks are widely used in the traditional statisti-
cal machine learning methods. In that situation, the original
feature vector will be mapped to a higher dimension by a
implicit function ϕ. The similarity of the feature vector will
then be computed as the inner product of the two mapped
vectors as /an}bracketle{tϕ(zi),ϕ(zj)/an}bracketri}ht. By adopting the kernel function,
7077