posed, which is one of the main streams of model compres-
sion [14, 2, 38, 46]. By treating a pre-trained cumbersome
network as the teacher model, knowledge distillations aims
to learn a compact student model, which is expected to mas-
ter the expertise of the teacher, via transferring knowledge
from the teacher.
The effectiveness of knowledge distillation has been
validated in many tasks, where the performance of the
student closely approaches that of the teacher. Despite
the encouraging progress, existing knowledge distillation
schemes have been focusing on convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs), for which the input samples, such as im-
ages, lie in the grid domain. However, many real-life data,
such as point clouds, take the form of non-grid structures
like graphs and thus call for the graph convolutional net-
works (GCNs) [35, 10, 17, 12]. GCNs explicitly looks into
the topological structure of the data by exploring the local
and global semantics of the graph. As a result, conventional
knowledge distillation methods, which merely account for
the output or the intermediate activation and omit the topo-
logical context of input data, are no longer capable to fully
carry out the knowledge transfer.
In this paper, we introduce to our best knowledge the
ﬁrst dedicated knowledge distillation approach tailored for
GCNs. Given a pre-trained teacher GCN, our goal is to train
a student GCN model with fewer layers, or lower-dimension
feature maps, or even a smaller graph with fewer edges. At
the heart of our GCN distillation is the capability to encode
the topological information concealed in the graph, which is
absent in prior CNN-based methods. As depicted in Fig. 1,
the proposed method considers the features of node as well
as the topological connections among them, and hence pro-
vides the student model richer and more critical information
about topological structure embedded by the teacher.
We illustrate the workﬂow of the proposed GCN knowl-
edge distillation approach in Fig. 2. We design a local
structure preserving (LSP) module to explicitly account for
the graphical semantics. Given the embedded feature of
node and the graph from teacher and student, the LSP mod-
ule measures the topological difference between them and
guides the student to obtain a similar topological embedding
as the teacher does. Speciﬁcally, LSP ﬁrst generates distri-
bution for each local structure from both the student and the
teacher, and then enforces the student to learn a similar local
structure by minimizing the distance between the distribu-
tions. Furthermore, our approach can be readily extended to
dynamic graph models, where the graphs are not static but
constructed by the teacher and student model dynamically.
To see the distillation performance, we evaluate our
method on two different tasks in different domains include
Protein-Protein Interaction dataset for node classiﬁcation
and ModelNet40 for 3D object recognition. The models
used in these two tasks are in different architectures. Ex-periments show that our method consistently achieves the
best knowledge distillation performance among all the com-
pared methods, validating the effectiveness and generaliza-
tion of the proposed approach.
Our contributions are summarized as following:
•We introduce a novel method for distilling knowledge
from graph convolutional network. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst dedicated knowledge distil-
lation method tailored for GCN models.
•We devise a local structure preserving (LSP) method
to measure the similarity of the local topological struc-
tures embedded by teacher and student, enabling our
method to be readily extendable to dynamic graph
models.
•We evaluate the proposed method on two different
tasks of different domains and on GCN models of dif-
ferent architectures, and show that our method outper-
forms all other methods consistently.
2. Related Work
Many methods have been proposed to distill the knowl-
edge from a trained model and transfer it to a student model
with smaller capacity [2, 38, 45]. Although there are many
distillation strategies that do not only utilize the output [14]
but also focus on the intermediate activation [31, 47, 16],
they are all designed for the deep convolutional network
with the grid data as input.
Our method, however, focuses on the graph convolu-
tional networks, which handles a more general input that
lies in the non-grid domain. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst attempt along this line. In what follows, we
brieﬂy review several tasks that are related to our method.
Knowledge Distillation. Knowledge Distillation (KD)
is ﬁrst proposed in [14], where the goal is distilling the
knowledge from a teacher model that is typical large into
a smaller model so that the student model can hold a simi-
lar performance as the teacher’s. In this method, the output
of teacher is smoothed by setting a high temperature in the
softmax function, which make it contains the information
of the relationship among classes. Beside the output, in-
termediate activation can also be utilized to better train a
student network. FitNet [31] forces the student to learn a
similar features as teacher’s by adding an additional fully
connected layer to transfer features of student model. [47]
proposes a method to transfer the attention instead of the
feature itself to get a better distillation performance. More-
over, NST [16] provides a method to learn a similar activa-
tion of the neurons. There are also many other methods in
this ﬁeld [23, 2, 38, 36, 24, 4, 34, 45, 5, 4], but none of them
provide a solution that is suitable for GCN.
7075