Local structure 
preserving
GCN_L GCN_L
…Teacher
GCN_S GCN_S
…StudentSoften 
LabelsLocal structure 
preservingReadOut ReadOut… …Distribution
Matching
Figure 2: Framework of the proposed knowledge distillation method for GCNs. The local structure preserving module is the
core of the proposed method. Given the feature maps and the graphs from the teacher and the student, we ﬁrst compute the
distribution of the local structure for each node and then match the distributions of the teacher with that of the student. The
student model will be optimized by minimizing the difference of distribution among all the local structures.
Knowledge Amalgamation. Knowledge amalgama-
tion [33, 22, 32, 44] aims to learn a student network from
multiple teachers from different domains. The student
model is trained as a multi-task model and learns from
all the teachers. For example, a method of knowledge
amalgamation is proposed in [43] to train a student model
from heterogeneous-task teachers include scene parsing
teacher, depth estimation teacher and surface-normal esti-
mation teacher. The student model will have a backbone
network trained from all the teachers’ knowledge and also
several heads for different tasks trained from the corre-
sponding teacher’s knowledge. MTZ [13] is a framework
to compress multiple but correlated models into one model.
The knowledge is distilled via a layer-wise neuron sharing
mechanism. CFL [25] distills the knowledge by learning a
common feature space, wherein the student model mimics
the transformed features of the teachers to aggregate knowl-
edge. Although many such methods are proposed, the mod-
els involved are usually limited within grid domain.
Graph Convolutional Network. In recent years, graph
convolutional network [9, 6, 21, 27, 10, 42] has been proved
to be a powerful model for non-grid data, which is typi-
cally represented as a set of nodes with features along with
a graph that represents the relationship among nodes. The
ﬁrst GCN paper [17] shows that the GCN can be built by
making the ﬁrst-order approximation of spectral graph con-
volutions. A huge amount of methods have been proposed
to make the GCN more powerful. GraphSAGE [12] gives
a solution to make the GCN model scalable for huge graph
by sampling the neighbors rather than using all of them.
GAT [35] introduces the attention mechanism to GCN to
make it possible to learn the weight for each neighbors auto-
matically. [15] improves the efﬁcient of training by adaptive
sampling. In this paper, instead of designing a new GCN,
we focus on how to transfer the knowledge effectively be-
tween different GCN models.
3D Object Recognition. One of the setups for 3D ob-
ject recognition is predicting the label of the object given aset of 3D points belong to it [28, 30]. Deep learning based
methods [39, 11, 7, 20, 29, 26] outperform the previous
methods that based on hand-crafted feature extractors [1, 3].
Moreover, GCN based methods [8, 19, 37, 18, 41], which
can directly encode the structure information from the set of
points, become one of the most popular directions along this
line. Graph in these methods are typically obtained by con-
necting the k nearest points, where the distance is measured
in the original space [18] or the learned feature space [37].
3. Method
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief description about the
GCN followed by the motivation of the proposed knowl-
edge distillation method that is based on the observation of
the fundamental mechanism of GCN. We then provide the
details about the local structure preserving (LSP) module,
which is the core of our proposed method. Moreover, we
explore the different choices of the distance functions used
in the LSP module. Finally, we give the scheme to extend
LSP to the dynamic graph models.
3.1. Graph Convolutional Network
Unlike the traditional convolutional networks that take
grid data as input and output the high-level features, the in-
put of graph convolutional networks can be non-grid, which
is more general. Such non-grid input data is typically repre-
sented as a set of features X={x1,x2,...,xn} ∈RF, and
a directed/undirected graph G={V,E}. For example, in
the task of 3D object recognition, we can set xias the 3D
coordination and Eas the set of the nearest neighbors.
Given the input XandG, the core operation of graph
convolutional network is shown as:
x′
i=Aj:(j,i)∈Ehθ(gφ(xi),gφ(xj)), (1)
wherehθis a function that considers the features in pair
wise,gφis a function to map the features into a new space,
Ais the strategy of how to aggregate features from the
neighbors and get the new feature of the center node i.
7076