𝑠!𝑠"#𝑠"$
𝑠"%
𝑠"&
𝑠"'𝑠"(
𝑡!𝑡"#𝑡"$𝑡"%
𝑡"&
𝑡"'𝑡"(Student Graph
Teacher Graph𝑠!𝑠"#𝑠"$
𝑠"%
𝑠"&
𝑠"'𝑠"(
𝑡!𝑡"#𝑡"$𝑡"%
𝑡"&
𝑡"'𝑡"(∪
∪Distribution 
matching
Figure 3: Handling models with a dynamic graph, where
the graph may be updated during the training process. We
address this problem by ﬁrst adding virtual edges according
to the union of the two graphs from the student model and
teacher model. The local structure preserving module can
be then applied to the new graph directly.
we can compute the above two steps together without know-
ing the expression of ϕ.
There are several choices of the kernel functions. Three
of the most common used kernel functions are linear func-
tion (Linear), polynomial kernel function (Poly) and radial
basis function (RBF) kernel:
K(zi,zj) =

(zT
izj+c)dPoly
e−1
2σ2||zi−zj||2RBF
zT
izj Linear(8)
In this paper, we adopt and compare these three kernel func-
tions and also the L2Norm. For the polynomial kernel func-
tion,dandcare set to two and zero respectively. For the
RBF,σis set to one.
3.5. Dynamic Graph
While the above method can be applied to the GCN mod-
els that with a ﬁxed graph as input, it lacks ﬂexibility for dy-
namic graph models. In the setup of dynamic graph model,
both the feature of the nodes and the connection among
them can be changed. Take the DGCNN model [37] as an
example, the graph is initially constructed according to the
3D coordination of the input nodes/points and will be re-
constructed once a new feature of nodes are obtained.
The advantage of dynamic graph is that the graph can
represent the topological connection in a learned feature
space rather than always in the initial feature space. How-
ever, such dynamic graph method can cause a problem to
the local structure preserving module we mentioned above.
The left of Fig. 3 is a case of the intermediate graphs gen-
erated by the DGCNN model. For each layer, the graph isconstructed by ﬁnding the Kcloset nodes for each node,
whereKis the hyperparameter. Directly computing the lo-
cal structure vector using above method is meaningless be-
cause the distributions will come from a total different order
of nodes.
We proposed a strategy to deal with such kind of situa-
tion by adding virtual edges to the graph in both the teacher
model and student one. As shown in Fig. 3, given the two
graphs constructed by the teacher and the student, which
typically do not hold the same distribution of edges, we ob-
tain the union of edges Eu
•i={(j,i) : (j,i)∈ Et|(j,i)∈
Es}for each center node i. A similar local structure vector
can be obtained by replacing EwithEuin Eq. 3. Notice that
although we adding the virtual edges for both the graphs, we
only use them for local structure preserving module. The
models still use their original graph to aggregate and update
the feature of nodes. By considering the union structure of
these two graphs, the generated local structure vectors now
involve the nodes with the same distribution, which makes
it possible for the student network to learn the topological
relationship learned by the teacher.
Such strategy not only make it possible to compare
the embedded local structure with different distribution of
neighbors but also compare between local structure with
different size of neighbors. It means that we can distill the
knowledge from a teacher model with a large Kto the stu-
dent model with smaller K.
4. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief description about the
comparison methods. Then, we provide the experimental
setup include the datasets we used, the GCN models we
adopted and the details for each comparison methods. No-
tice that our goal is not to achieve the state-of-the-art per-
formance in each dataset or task but to transfer as mush as
information from the teacher model the student one. This
can be measured by the performance of the student model
when the same teacher pre-trained model is involved.
We adopt two datasets in different domains, One is the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) [48] dataset where the
graphs come from the human tissues. This is a com-
mon used dataset for node classiﬁcation [35, 12]. Another
dataset is ModelNet40 [40] that contains point clouds come
from the CAD models, which is a common used dataset for
3D object analysis [28, 30, 19, 37].
We also evaluate the proposed knowledge distilla-
tion method on GCN models with different architectures.
Speciﬁcally, for the PPI dataset, GAT [35] model is adopted
that takes ﬁxed graph as input. For the ModelNet40 dataset,
DGCNN [37] model with dynamic graph is adopted. We
show in the experiments that our proposed method achieve
the state-of-the-art distillation performance under various
setups.
7078