4.1. Comparison Methods
Since there is no knowledge distillation method designed
for GCN models, we implement three knowledge distilla-
tion methods that can be used directly in a GCN model in-
cludes KD method [14], FitNet method [31] and attention
transfer method (AT) [47]. Neuron selectivity transfer [16]
is also one of the knowledge distillation methods for tra-
ditional convolutional networks. We leave it out since it
makes an assumption that the size of the feature maps of
student’s and teacher’s should be in the same size, which is
not the case of our setup for the student and teacher mod-
els. Besides all the methods, we also set a baseline method
which is training the student model with the original loss.
The summary of the comparison methods is as follow:
•KD method [14] is the ﬁrst attempt for distilling
knowledge from a teacher network. It utilizes a soften
labels generated by the teacher network as an addi-
tional supervision. The intuition behind this method
is that the soften label contains the similarity informa-
tion among the classes learned by the teacher network.
Since this method only relies on the output, it is suit-
able for most kinds of models.
•FitNet method [31] does not only make use of the
output of the teacher model but also consider the in-
termediate feature maps. This method based on an as-
sumption that the feature of the teacher model can be
recovered from the feature of the student when the stu-
dent is well trained. It introduces an additional map-
ping function to map the feature of student’s to that of
the teacher’s and compute the L2distance between the
mapped feature and the teacher’s feature.
•Attention transfer method (AT) [47] provides an-
other way to transfer the knowledge in attention do-
main. In this method, the student model is forced to
focus on the similar spatial areas like the teacher does,
which is achieved by adding an L2loss between their
attention maps. The attention map can be obtained
from the feature maps and keep in the same size with-
out consideration of the different channels.
4.2. Node Classiﬁcation
In the node classiﬁcation task, we are given the input
nodes with associated features and also the graph. The goal
is to generate the embedded feature for each node such that
nodes with different classes can be separated. We adopt
protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset that contains 24
graphs corresponding to different human tissues. We fol-
low the same dataset splitting protocol, wherein 20 graphs
are used for training, two graphs are used for validation and
another two graphs are used for testing. The average num-
ber of nodes for each graph in this dataset is 2372 and eachnode has an average degree of 14. The dimension of input
feature of the nodes is 50 and the number of class is 121.
For this dataset and task, we adopt GAT model for both
the teacher model and student model. Since this is a multi-
label task, where each node can belong to more than one
classes, the binary cross entropy loss is adopted. The archi-
tecture of these two models are shown as follow:
Model Layers Attention heads Hidden features
Teacher 3 4,4,6 256,256,121
Student 5 2,2,2,2,2 68,68,68,68,121
Table 1: Summary of the teacher and student models used
on the PPI dataset for node classiﬁcation. The student net-
work is deeper than the teacher but with lower dimension of
hidden features.
Model Params RunTime Training F1 Score
Teacher 3.64M 48.5ms 1.7s/3.4G 97.6
Student Full 0.16M 41.3ms 1.3s/1.2G 95.7
Student KD [14] - - - -
Student AT [47] 0.16M 41.3ms 1.9s/1.4G 95.4
Student FitNet [31] 0.16M 41.3ms 2.4s/1.6G 95.6
Student LSP (Ours) 0.16M 41.3ms 2.0s/1.5G 96.1
Table 2: Node classiﬁcation results on the PPI dataset.
Teacher model used on this dataset is a GAT model with
three hidden layers. full means the student model is trained
with the ground truth labels without the teacher model.
The results are shown in Tab. 2. Params represents the
total number of parameters; RunTime is the inference time
for one sample and Training is the training time/GPU mem-
ory usage for one iteration, which is measured in a Nvidia
1080Ti GPU. The optimizer, learning rate, weight decay
and training epochs are set to Adam, 0.005, 0 and 500 re-
spectively for all the methods. All other hyperparameters
for each method are tuned to obtain the best results on the
validation set. Speciﬁcally, for AT method, the attention is
computed by as/summationtextC
i=1|Fi|; For ours, the kernel function is
set to RBF and λis set to 100. Notice that the loss function
does not involve the softmax function. Therefore, the KD
method, which is used by setting a high temperature in a
softmax function, is not suitable here.
As what can be seen, all the knowledge distillation meth-
ods expect ours fail to provide a positive inﬂuence to the
student model and lead to a drop of the performance respect
to the performance of model trained with the original loss.
Our method, thanks to the ability to transfer the local struc-
ture information to the student model, provides a positive
inﬂuence and lead to a student model with the best perfor-
mance among all the comparison methods.
4.3. 3D Object Recognition
We adopt ModelNet40 [40] dataset for the 3D object
recognition task, wherein the object is represented by a set
of points with only the 3D coordination as features. There
7079