Learning to Branch for Multi-Task LearningFramework
63x33x33x33x33x33x33x3(a)Framework
73x33x33x33x33x33x33x3(b)Framework
83x33x33x33x33x33x33x3(c)Framework
93x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x33x3(d)
Figure 2. Illustrations of the proposed learning to branch pipeline. (a) We initialize the sampling probability with a uniform distribution so
each parent node has an equal chance to send its activation values to a child node. (b) The computed update gradients then increase the
probability of sampling certain paths that are more likely to reduce the overall loss. (c) Once the overall validation loss converges, each
child node selects one parent node with the highest sampling probability while removing unselected paths and parent nodes. (d) We can
construct a deeper tree-structured multi-task neural network by stacking such branching blocks.
of child nodes can be adjusted based on the desired model
capacity. Different from the greedy layer-wise optimization
approach in GNAS ( Huang et al. ,2018 ), our proposed tree-
structured network topology is end-to-end trainable – the
network architecture ⌦and the weight matrices !of the
network are jointly optimized during training.
3.3. Differentiable Branching Operation
To sample a categorical value from the continuous sam-
pling distribution, we utilize the gumbel-softmax estimator
trick ( Jang et al. ,2017 ;Shazeer et al. ,2017 ;Rosenbaum
et al.,2018 ;Veit & Belongie ,2018 ;Xie et al. ,2019 ) to en-
able the differentiability for the branching operation; During
the feedforward pass, we sample a parent node by a discrete
index value based on a certain probability distribution for
each child node. During the backward pass, we update the
probability distribution by replacing the discrete samples
with gumbel-softmax samples.
For every two layers in a branching block (shown in Fig-
ure1), we construct a matrix M2RI⇥Jto represent the
connectivity from parent nodes ito child nodes j. Each en-
try✓i,jin such a matrix Mstores the probability value that
represents how likely the parent node iwould be sampled to
connect with the child node j. During every forward propa-
gation, each child node jmakes a discrete decision drawn
from a categorical distribution based on the distribution:
dj=onehot{arg max
i(log ✓i,j+✏i)} (4)
Again dj2RIis a one-hot vector with dimension the same
as the number of parent nodes Iat the current level. ✏2RI
is a vector with i.i.d samples draw from gumbel distribution
(0,1)to add a small amount of noise to avoid the arg max
operation always selecting the element with the highest
probability value.
To enable differentiability of the discrete sampling function,
we use the gumbel-softmax trick ( Jang et al. ,2017) to relax
djduring backward propagation as
˜dj=exp((log ✓i,j+✏i)/⌧)P
kexp((log ✓k,j+✏k)/⌧)(5)withiequal to the sampled index value of parent node during
forward pass. The discrete categorical sampling function is
approximated by a softmax operation over the parent nodes,
and the parameter ⌧is the temperature that controls how
sharp the distribution is after the approximation.
We can now utilize the reparameterization trick for random
sample djand rewrite the Eq 3as
@Ltotal
@✓j=@Ltotal
@xl+1
j@
@✓jE✏[˜dj·Yl]
=@Ltotal
@xl+1
jE✏[@˜dj
@✓i]Yl(6)
At this stage, the branching probabilities are fully differ-
entiable with respect to the training loss and can readily
be inserted to a neural network and stacked to construct
a tree-structured neural network. We decay the tempera-
ture⌧gradually during training so the network can explore
freely in the early stage and exploit the converged topology
distribution in the later stage.
3.4. Final Architecture Selection
During the training stage, the network topology distribution
and the weight matrices of the network are jointly optimized
over the loss Ltotalacross all tasks. Once the validation loss
converges, we simply select the ﬁnal network conﬁguration
using the same categorical distribution but without the noise
✏for every block in the network,
dj=onehot{arg max
i(log ✓i,j)} (7)
We then re-train the ﬁnal network architecture from scratch
to obtain the ﬁnal performance. The same procedure has
also been shown effective in previous literature ( Pham et al. ,
2018 ;Sciuto et al. ,2019 ) where such weight sharing net-
work search schema demonstrates high correlation between
the intermediate network performance during search phase
and the ﬁnal performance obtained by re-train the network
from scratch.
Figure 2illustrates our overall training process of a cer-
tain branching block in a DAG. We initialize the sampling