Learning to Branch for Multi-Task Learning
Pengsheng Guo1Chen-Yu Lee1Daniel Ulbricht1
Abstract
Training multiple tasks jointly in one deep net-
work yields reduced latency during inference and
better performance over the single-task counter-
part by sharing certain layers of a network. How-
ever, over-sharing a network could erroneously en-
force over-generalization, causing negative knowl-
edge transfer across tasks. Prior works rely on
human intuition or pre-computed task relatedness
scores for ad hoc branching structures. They pro-
vide sub-optimal end results and often require
huge efforts for the trial-and-error process.
In this work, we present an automated multi-task
learning algorithm that learns where to share or
branch within a network, designing an effective
network topology that is directly optimized for
multiple objectives across tasks. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a novel tree-structured design space that
casts a tree branching operation as a gumbel-
softmax sampling procedure. This enables dif-
ferentiable network splitting that is end-to-end
trainable. We validate the proposed method on
controlled synthetic data, CelebA, and Taskon-
omy.
1. Introduction
Multi-task learning ( Caruana ,1997 ) has experienced rapid
growth in recent years. Because of the breakthroughs in
the performance of individually trained single-task neural
networks, researchers have shifted their attention towards
training networks that are able to solve multiple tasks at the
same time. One clear beneﬁt of such a system is reduced
latency where one network can produce multiple predictions
in one forward propagation. This is particularly critical for
portable devices that have limited computational budget.
Moreover, when training with various supervisory signals,
it induces inductive bias ( Mitchell ,1980 ) where a network
1Apple. Correspondence to: Pengsheng Guo <peng-
sheng guo@apple.com >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).prefers some hypotheses over other hypotheses. From the
point of view of any single task, the other tasks serve as
regularizers in a sense that the network is asked to form
representations that explain well for more than needed for
solving one task, potentially improving generalization.
Contrary to the conventional single-task paradigm, training
multiple tasks simultaneously in one network often encoun-
ters many challenges: some tasks are easier to train than
others, some tasks have noisier ground truth labels than
others, and some tasks are equipped with loss functions
that have drastically different scales than others such as
L1 vs cross-entropy. Most of the work done in this ﬁeld
has focused on establishing some sort of parameter sharing
mechanism by either sharing the whole network across all
tasks or by assigning each task an individual set of parame-
ters with crosstalk connections between tasks ( Ruder ,2017).
However, it is prohibitively expensive to design an optimal
parameter sharing schema based on human intuition. An-
other line of work has tried to balance the importance of
different tasks by manipulating relative weighting between
each task’s loss ( Kendall et al. ,2018 ;Guo et al. ,2018 ;
Chen et al. ,2018 ). But weight balancing alone also limits
the potential performance gain under a ﬁxed pre-deﬁned
network architecture.
There are many ways a network can invest its capacity for
different tasks, and the design choice has a fundamental
impact on its learning dynamics and ﬁnal performance. Note
that an exhaustive search of an optimal parameter sharing
schema has combinatorial complexity as the number of tasks
grows. Prior literature has presented evidence that multi-
task learning in back-propagation networks discovers task
relatedness without the need of supervisory signals, and
has presented results with k-nearest neighbor and kernel
regression models ( Caruana ,1997). In this work we ask the
following question: is it possible to automatically search
a network topology based on the back-propagation signals
computed from the multi-task objective?
Typical neural networks learn the hierarchical nature of the
feature representations. Speciﬁcally for computer vision
applications, convolutional neural networks tend to learn
more general feature representations in earlier layers such
as edges, corners, and conjunctions ( Zeiler & Fergus ,2014).
We therefore expect a network at least shares the ﬁrst few