Learning to Branch for Multi-Task Learning
layers across tasks. A key challenge towards answering
the question is then deciding what layers should be shared
across tasks and what layers should be untied. Over-sharing
a network could erroneously enforce over-generalization,
causing negative knowledge transfer across tasks. In this
work, we propose a tree-structured network design space
that can automatically learn how to branch a network such
that the overall multi-task loss is minimized. The branching
operation is executed by sampling from a categorical latent
variable formed by gumbel-softmax distribution ( Jang et al. ,
2017 ). This data-driven network structure searching ap-
proach does not require prior knowledge of the relationship
between tasks nor human intuition on what layers capture
task-speciﬁc features and should be split.
2. Related Work
Thanks to the genericness and the transferability of a number
of off-the-shelf neural networks ( Simonyan & Zisserman ,
2015;Szegedy et al. ,2015;He et al. ,2016) pre-trained on a
large collection of samples, most of the prior works in the
domain of multi-task learning are based on these popular
backbone architectures and can be commonly categorized
into either soft parameter sharing or hard parameter sharing
(Ruder ,2017 ).
In the soft sharing setting, each task has its own set of
backbone parameters with some sort of regularization mech-
anisms to enforce the distance between weights of the model
to be close. Neural Network Parser ( Duong et al. ,2015 )
uses two backbones, one for source language and one for
target language, to perform multi-task learning. An extra
set of weights are used for cross-lingual knowledge sharing
by connecting activations between the source and target lan-
guage model. Cross-Stitch Networks ( Misra et al. ,2016 )
utilize an extra set of shared units to combine the activa-
tions between backbones from multiple tasks and learn the
strength of information ﬂow between tasks from data. How-
ever, the total number of parameters in a soft parameter
sharing system grows linearly with the number of tasks in
general. Such approaches may encounter over-ﬁtting due to
lack of sufﬁcient training samples to support the parameter
space of multiple full-size backbones across all modalities
or require higher computational cost during inference.
In the hard sharing setting, all tasks share the same set of
backbone parameters, or at least share part of the back-
bone with branches toward the outputs. Deep Relationship
Networks ( Long & Wang ,2015 ) share the ﬁrst ﬁve convo-
lutional layers of AlexNet ( Krizhevsky et al. ,2012) among
the tasks and use task-speciﬁc fully-connected layers tai-
lored to ﬁt different tasks. Fully-Adaptive Feature Sharing
method ( Lu et al. ,2017 ) starts with a thin network and ex-
pands it layer-by-layer based on the difﬁculty of the training
set in a greedy fashion. UberNet ( Kokkinos ,2017 ) jointlysolves seven labelling tasks by sharing an image pyramid
architecture with tied weights. Meta Multi-Task Learning
(Ruder et al. ,2019 ) uses a shared input layer and two task-
speciﬁc output layers. Nonetheless, it is still unclear how
to effectively decide what weights to share given a network
with a set of tasks in interest.
Instead of choosing between soft sharing or hard sharing
approach, a new effort in tackling the multi-task learn-
ing problem is to consider the dynamics between different
losses across tasks. Uncertainty-based weighting approach
(Kendall et al. ,2018 ) weighs multiple loss functions by
utilizing the homoscedastic uncertainty of each task. Grad-
Norm ( Chen et al. ,2018 ) manipulates the magnitude of
gradients from different loss functions to balance the learn-
ing speed between tasks. Task Prioritization ( Guo et al. ,
2018 ) emphasizes more difﬁcult tasks by adjusting the mix-
ing weight of each task’s loss objective. Multi-Objective
Optimization approach ( Sener & Koltun ,2018 ) casts the
multi-task learning problem as ﬁnding a set of solutions
that lies on the Pareto optimal boundary. These methods
can automatically tune the weightings between tasks and
are especially effective when dealing with loss functions
with different scales such as L1, L2, cross-entropy, etc. Yet,
they use pre-deﬁned network structures that might lead to
sub-optimal solutions when the network topologies remain
static.
The general focus in Neural Architecture Search (NAS) lit-
erature ( Zoph & Le ,2017 ;Zoph et al. ,2018 ;Liu et al. ,
2018;Wong et al. ,2018;Liu et al. ,2019a ;Shaw et al. ,2019;
Pasunuru & Bansal ,2019) is on ﬁnding a repetitive cell or a
global structure that is optimized over a single classiﬁcation
loss with a few exceptions that include memory or power
constraint. To better utilize the parameters of a network for
multiple tasks, recently some works present methods to dy-
namically distribute the network capacity based on the com-
plexities of the tasks and relatedness between the tasks. Soft
Layer Ordering ( Meyerson & Miikkulainen ,2018 ) learns
to generate a task-speciﬁc scaling tensor to manipulate the
magnitude of feature activations at different layers. Evolu-
tionary Architecture Search ( Liang et al. ,2018 ) improves
upon the Soft Layer Ordering by a synergetic approach of
evolving custom shared routing units. Soft attention used in
(Liu et al. ,2019b ) allows learning of task-speciﬁc feature-
level weighting for each task. AdaShare ( Sun et al. ,2019 )
learns the sharing pattern through a task-speciﬁc policy that
selectively chooses which layers to execute for a given task
in a multi-task setting. The authors in ( Standley et al. ,2019)
propose to discover an optimal network splitting structure
for different tasks by approximating the enumerative search
process so that the test performances are maximized given
a ﬁxed testing resource budget. Branched Multi-task Net-
works ( Vandenhende et al. ,2019) pre-compute a collection
of task relatedness scores based on the usefulness of a set of