Lvio-Fusion: A Self-adaptive Multi-sensor Fusion SLAM Framework
Using Actor-critic Method
Yupeng Jia1, Haiyong Luo2, Fang Zhao1, Guanlin Jiang1, Yuhang Li1,
Jiaquan Yan1, Zhuqing Jiang3and Zitian Wang4
Abstract — State estimation with sensors is essential for mo-
bile robots. Due to different performance of sensors in different
environments, how to fuse measurements of various sensors
is a problem. In this paper, we propose a tightly coupled
multi-sensor fusion framework, Lvio-Fusion, which fuses stereo
camera, Lidar, IMU, and GPS based on the graph optimization.
Especially for urban trafﬁc scenes, we introduce a segmented
global pose graph optimization with GPS and loop-closure,
which can eliminate accumulated drifts. Additionally, we cre-
atively use a actor-critic method in reinforcement learning to
adaptively adjust sensors’ weight. After training, actor-critic
agent can provide the system better and dynamic sensors’
weight. We evaluate the performance of our system on public
datasets and compare it with other state-of-the-art methods,
which shows that the proposed method achieves high estimation
accuracy and robustness to various environments. And our
implementations are open source and highly scalable.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile robots are complex systems that integrate com-
puter technology, sensor technology, information processing,
electronic engineering, automation, and artiﬁcial intelligence.
With the development of technology, mobile robot with more
functionality can be used in emergency rescue, industrial
automation and other ﬁelds. Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping (SLAM) is the fundamental technical basis for
mobile robots to complete tasks autonomously. At the same
time, with the continuous development of robot technology
and the increasing application of robots, a single sensor
cannot meet the increasingly abundant robot functional re-
quirements, thus multi-source perception information fusion
technology has gradually received widespread attention.
1School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering
School), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
China
2Haiyong Luo is with the Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Com-
puting and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3Zhuqing Jiang is with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing Technology and Business
University, Beijing, China
Corresponding author, email addresses: yhluo@ict.ac.cn
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program under Grant 2019YFC1511400, the Action Plan
Project of the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications sup-
ported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
under Grant 2019XD-A06, the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 61872046 and 62002026, the Joint Research Fund for
Beijing Natural Science Foundation and Haidian Original Innovation under
Grant L192004, the Key Research and Development Project from Hebei
Province under Grant 19210404D, the Science and Technology Plan Project
of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Regio under Grant 2019GG328 and the
Open Project of the Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and
Pervasive Device.To achieve real-time high-precision positioning and map-
ping to support mobile robots’ six-axis state estimation,
researchers have conducted much research, including visual-
based methods and lidar-based methods. But those methods
have some shortcomings. On the one hand, the sensitiv-
ity of monocular or stereo camera used in vision-based
methods to initialization, illumination, and range contributes
to instability. On the other hand, The sparse information
offered by lidar makes it difﬁcult to further directly dig
sematic information. As lidar’s cost continues to decrease,
more user scenarios will choose to use both vision and
lidar together. However, lidar and camera will inevitably
produce accumulated drifts and cannot be used in large-
scale environments. Therefore, the introduction of sensors
such as GPS, barometer, and magnetometer can effectively
eliminate accumulated drifts and provide positioning in the
global coordinate system.
In this paper, we propose a tightly coupled multi-source
fusion framework Lvio-Fusion, which fuses stereo camera,
Lidar, IMU and GPS. The system extracts keyframes through
visual-inertial odometry and optimizes factor graphs based
on keyframes with other sensors. The IMU with higher fre-
quency provides the original motion estimation for the visual
odometer and eliminates the laser point cloud’s distortion.
In the global pose graph optimization stage, the trajectory is
divided into multiple segments according to the differences
of accumulated errors generated when the vehicle is turning
or not. Each segment is optimized separately. Additionally,
we explore the solution of the problem that different sensors
have different conﬁdences in different environments when
the system is running. With the optimization of the factor
graph, we run a parrallel reinforcement learning thread to
adjust the different factors’ weight. The main contributions
of our work can be summarized as follows:
• A tightly coupled multi-sensor fusion framework with
stereo camera, lidar, IMU, and GPS based on optimization,
which achieves highly accurate, real-time mobile robot tra-
jectory estimation.
• A segmented global optimization method for urban trafﬁc
scenes, which can eliminate accumulated drifts and provide
a global position.
• A self-adaptive algorithm using actor-critic method,
which can adaptively adjust sensors’ weight for different
environments.arXiv:2106.06783v3  [cs.RO]  16 Sep 2021