TargetState Actor Action
State' Actor T arget Action'Critic 1
Critic 2Q1
Q2
Q'TD Erorr 1
TD Erorr 2
Critic T arget 1
Critic T arget 2Minimize
NoiseFig. 5. The network architecture of TD3.
Fig. 6. ATE mapped onto the trajectory result of sequence 02 output by
Lvio-Fusion.
Fig. 7. The bottom of this ﬁgure is two images in KAIST urban dataset.
At the top of the ﬁgure, the red line shows GPS trajectory, which drifts
seriously, and the green line shows the trajectory estimated by Lvio-Fusion.TABLE III
ATE INKAIST U RBAN DATASET IN METERS
Seq.VINS-Fusion Lvio-Fusion
mean RMSE mean RMSE
urban39-pankyo 63.30 70.69 5.79 6.31
training stage, we divided the dataset into multiple parts
with keyframes’ size of 10 as environments and randomly
selected one of them for TD3 agent training. Lvio-Fusion
estimated poses with weights output by the agent, then, it
returned a reward and the next observation. After ﬁnishing
ten keyframes in current environment, a “done” signal would
be sent and selected another environment.
In this experiment, we tried different depth of backbone
networks. The Fig.9 shows test reward of each epoch. At
the third epoch when test reward reached a peak, we ended
training and saved the model for the next training of other
training sets. Besides, different numbers of layers of MLP
backbone for the agent were set up. By comparison, shown in
Fig.9, we selected two-layer MLP backbone with the highest
reward and validated the agent.
In the validation phase, we turned off global optimization
and used RPE to evaluate the results, which is more suitable
for situations without global optimization. The results of
Lvio-Fusion assisted by the self-adaptive algorithm on the
KITTI dataset are shown in Table IV, and Fig.9 illustrates
that self-adaptive algorithm signiﬁcantly decreases error. And
the average time-consuming of adjusting factors’ weight of
one keyframe is 5.56ms. Experiments have proved that the
lightweight self-adaptive algorithm effectively improves the
accuracy of the multi-sensor fusion.
TABLE IV
RPE INKITTI DATASET IN METERS
Seq.Lvio-Fusion self-adaptive Lvio-Fusion
RMSE RMSE
00 1.73 1.39