PROJECTION
UNIT
Z
AdaINConv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
Conv3D   3x3x3
LReluConst 4x4x4x512
MLPCamera pose
θAdaINConv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
MLP MLP
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
MLP MLP
Conv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
3D 
TRANSFORM
Figure 3. HoloGAN’s generator network: we employ 3D convolu tions, a 3D rigid-body transformation, the projection unit and 2D convolutions.
We also remove the traditional input layer from z, and start from a learnt constant 4D tensor. The latent vecto rzis instead fed through multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) to map to the affine transformation para meters for adaptive instance normalisation (AdaIN). Input s are coloured gray.
ever, VONs need explicit 3D data for training, and only work f or
single-object images with a simple white background. Our Ho lo-
GAN also learns a 3D representation and renders it to produce a
2D image but without seeing any 3D shapes, and works with real
images containing complex backgrounds and multi-object sc enes.
The work closest to ours is Pix2Scene [ 45], which learns an
implicit 3D scene representation from images, also in an uns uper-
vised manner. However, this method maps the implicit repres en-
tation to a surfel representation for rendering, while Holo GAN
uses an explicit 3D representation with deep voxels. Additi onally,
using a hand-crafted differentiable renderer, Pix2Scene c an only
deal with simple synthetic images (uniform material and lig hting
conditions). HoloGAN, on the other hand, learns to render fr om
scratch, and thus works for more complex natural images.
2.3. Disentangled representation learning
The aim of disentangled representation learning is to learn a fac-
torised representation, in which changes in one factor only affect
the corresponding elements in the generated images, while b eing
invariant to other factors. Most work in disentangled learn ing lever-
ages labels provided by the dataset [ 2,47,55] or benefits from
set supervision (e.g., videos or multiple images of the same scene;
more than two domains with the same attributes) [ 10,14,33].
Recent efforts in unsupervised disentangled representati on
learning, such as β-V AE [ 20] or InfoGAN [ 9,24], have focused
mostly on designing loss functions. However, these models
are sensitive to the choice of priors, provide no control ove r
what factors are learned, and do not guarantee that the learn t
disentangled factors are semantically meaningful. Moreov er,
β-V AE comes with a trade-off between the quality of the
generated images and the level of disentanglement. Finally , these
two methods struggle with more complicated datasets (natur al
images with complex backgrounds and lighting). In contrast , by
redesigning the architecture of the generator network, Hol oGAN
learns to successfully separate pose, shape and appearance , as well
as providing explicit pose control and enables shape/appea rance
editing even for more complex natural image datasets.
3. Method
To learn 3D representations from 2D images without labels,
HoloGAN extends traditional unconditional GANs by introdu cing
a strong inductive bias about the 3D world into the generatornetwork. Specifically, HoloGAN generates images by learni ng
a 3D representation of the world and to render it realistical ly such
that it fools the discriminator. View manipulation therefo re can
be achieved by directly applying 3D rigid-body transformat ions
to the learnt 3D features. In other words, the images created
by the generator are a view-dependent mapping from a learnt
3D representation to the 2D image space. This is different fr om
other GANs which learn to map a noise vector zdirectly to 2D
features to generate images.
Figure 3illustrates the generator architecture of HoloGAN:
HoloGAN first learns a 3D representation (assumed to be in a
canonical pose) using 3D convolutions (Section 3.1), transforms
this representation to a certain pose, projects and compute s visibil-
ity using the projection unit (Section 3.2), and computes shaded
colour values for each pixel in the final images with 2D convo lu-
tions. HoloGAN shares many rendering insights with RenderN et
[40], but works with natural images, and needs neither pre-trai ning
of the neural renderer nor paired 3D shape–2D image training data.
During training, we sample random poses from a uniform
distribution and transform the 3D features using these pose s be-
fore rendering them to images. We assume every image has a
corresponding single global pose, and show that this assump tion
still works with images of multiple objects. This random pos e
perturbation pushes the generator network to learn a disent angled
representation that is suitable for both 3D transformation and gen-
erating images that can fool the discriminator. While pose t ransfor-
mation could be learnt from data, we provide this operation, which
is differentiable and straightforward to implement, expli citly to
HoloGAN. Using explicit rigid-body transformations for no vel-
view synthesis has been shown to produce sharper images with
fewer artefacts [ 40]. More importantly, this provides an inductive
bias towards representations that are compatible with explicit 3D
rigid-body transformations. As a result, the learnt repres entations
are explicit in 3D and disentangled between pose and identit y.
Kulkarni et al. [ 33] categorize the learnt disentangled repre-
sentation into intrinsic andextrinsic elements. While intrinsic
elements describe shape, appearance, etc., extrinsic elem ents de-
scribe pose (elevation, azimuth) and lighting (location, i ntensity).
The design of HoloGAN naturally lends itself to this separat ion
by using more inductive biases about the 3D world: the adopti on
of a native 3D transformation, which controls the pose (show n as
θin Figure 3) directly, to the learnt 3D features, which control the
identity (shown as zin Figure 3).
7590