ElevationAzimuth
a) VON b) HoloGAN
Figure 7. a)Car images generated by VON for an azimuth range of 360 °. Despite using 3D shapes and silhouette masks during traini ng, VON can
only generate images with a simple white background, and str uggles for certain frontal views (highlighted in red) and re ar views (highlighted in blue).
b)HoloGAN generates car images with complex backgrounds and v arying azimuth (range: 360 °) and elevation (range: 35 °) from unlabelled images.
7a, VON also tends to change the identity of the car such as
changing colours or shapes at certain views (highlighted), while
HoloGAN maintains the identity of the car in all views. Moreo ver,
HoloGAN can generate car images in full 360 °views (Figure 7),
while VON struggles to generate images from the back views.
Traditional voxel grids can be very memory intensive.
HoloGAN hints at the great potential of using explicit deep v oxel
representations for image generation, as opposed to using t he full
3D geometry in the traditional rendering pipeline. For exam ple,
in Figure 6c, we generate images of the entire bedroom scene
using a 3D representation of only 16 ×16×16×64 resolution.
5.4. Disentangling shape and appearance
Here we show that in addition to pose, HoloGAN also learns to f ur-
ther divide identity into shape and appearance. We sample tw o la-
tent codes, z1andz2, and feed them through HoloGAN. While z1
controls the 3D features (before perspective morphing and p rojec-
tion),z2controls the 2D features (after projection). Figure 8shows
the generated images with the same pose, same z1, but with a dif-
ferentz2at each row. As can be seen, while the 3D features control
objects’ shapes, the 2D features control appearance (textu re and
lighting). This shows that by using 3D convolutions to learn 3D
representations and 2D convolutions to learn shading, Holo GAN
learns to separate shape from appearance directly from unla belledimages, allowing separate manipulation of these factors. I n the
supplemental document, we provide further results, in whic h we
use different latent codes for 3D features at different reso lutions,
and show the separation between features that control the ov erall
shapes and more fine-grained details such as gender or makeu p.
5.5. Ablation studies
We now conduct a series of studies to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our network design and training approach.
Training without random 3D transformations Randomly
rotating the 3D features during training is crucial for Holo GAN, as
it encourages the generator to learn a disentangled represe ntation
between pose and identity. In Figure 9, we show results with and
without 3D transformation during training. For the model tr ained
without 3D transformation, we generate images of rotated ob jects
by manually rotating the learnt 3D features after the model i s
trained. As can be seen, this model can still generate images with
good visual fidelity, but when the pose is changed, it comple tely
fails to generate meaningful images, while HoloGAN can easi ly
generate images of the same objects in different poses. We be lieve
that the random transformation during training forces the g enerator
to learn features that meaningfully undergo geometric tran sforma-
tions, while still being able to generate images that can foo l the
discriminator. As a result, our training strategy encourag es Holo-
7594