HoloGAN: Unsupervised Learning of 3D Representations From Natural Images
Thu Nguyen-Phuoc1Chuan Li2Lucas Theis3Christian Richardt1Y ong-Liang Y ang1
1University of Bath2Lambda Labs3Twitter
Figure 1. HoloGAN learns to separate pose from identity (sha pe and appearance) only from unlabelled 2D images without sa crificing the visual
fidelity of the generated images. All results shown here are sampled from HoloGAN for the same identities in each row but i n different poses.
Abstract
We propose a novel generative adversarial network (GAN) for the
task of unsupervised learning of 3D representations from na tural
images. Most generative models rely on 2D kernels to generat e
images and make few assumptions about the 3D world. These
models therefore tend to create blurry images or artefacts i n tasks
that require a strong 3D understanding, such as novel-view s ynthe-
sis. HoloGAN instead learns a 3D representation of the world , and
to render this representation in a realistic manner . Unlike other
GANs, HoloGAN provides explicit control over the pose of gen er-
ated objects through rigid-body transformations of the lea rnt 3D
features. Our experiments show that using explicit 3D featu res en-
ables HoloGAN to disentangle 3D pose and identity, which is f ur-
ther decomposed into shape and appearance, while still bein g able
to generate images with similar or higher visual quality tha n other
generative models. HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end from u nla-
belled 2D images only. In particular , we do not require pose l abels,
3D shapes, or multiple views of the same objects. This shows t hat
HoloGAN is the first generative model that learns 3D represe n-
tations from natural images in an entirely unsupervised man ner .
1. Introduction
Learning to understand the relationship between 3D objects and
2D images is an important topic in computer vision and comput er
graphics. In computer vision, it has applications in fields such as
robotics, autonomous vehicles or security. In computer gra phics, it
benefits applications in both content generation and manip ulation.This ranges from photorealistic rendering of 3D scenes or
sketch-based 3D modelling, to novel-view synthesis or reli ghting.
Recent generative image models, in particular, generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs), have achieved impressive results i n gener-
ating images of high resolution and visual quality [ 1,5,27,28,62],
while their conditional versions have achieved great progr ess in
image-to-image translation [ 23,50], image editing [ 11,12,60] or
motion transfer [ 6,30]. However, GANs are still fairly limited in
their applications, since they do not allow explicit contro l over at-
tributes in the generated images, while conditional GANs ne ed la-
bels during training (Figure 2left), which are not always available.
Even when endowed with labels like pose information,
current generative image models still struggle in tasks tha t
require a fundamental understanding of 3D structures, such as
novel-view synthesis from a single image. For example, usin g 2D
kernels to perform 3D operations, such as out-of-plane rota tion
to generate novel views, is very difficult. Current methods
either require a lot of labelled training data, such as multi -view
images or segmentation masks [ 41,52], or produce blurry
results [ 13,14,33,54,57]. Although recent work has made
efforts to address this problem by using 3D data [ 40,64], 3D
ground-truth data are very expensive to capture and reconst ruct.
Therefore, there is also a practical motivation to directly learn
3D representations from unlabelled 2D images.
Motivated by these observations, we focus on designing
a novel architecture that allows unsupervised learning of 3 D
representations from images, enabling direct manipulatio n of view,
shape and appearance in generative image models (Figure 1). The
key insight of our network design is the combination of a stro ng
inductive bias about the 3D world with deep generative model s to
1
7588