z2z1
z2z1
z2z1
z2
Figure 8. Combinations of different latent vectors z1(for 3D features)
andz2(for 2D features). While z1influences objects’ shapes, z2
determines appearance (texture and lighting). Best viewed in colour.
GAN to learn a disentangled representation of identity and p ose.
Training with traditional zinput By starting from a learnt
constant tensor and using the noise vector zas a “style” controller
at different levels, HoloGAN can better disentangle pose fr om
identity. Here we perform another experiment, in which we fe edz
to the first layer of the generator network, like other GAN mo dels.
Figure 9shows that the model trained with this traditional input
is confused between pose and identity. As a result, the model
also changes the object’s identity when it is being rotated, while
HoloGAN can smoothly vary the pose along the azimuth and
keep the identity unchanged.
An additional ablation study showing the effectiveness of t he
identity regulariser is included in the supplemental docum ent.
6. Discussion and conclusion
While HoloGAN can successfully learn to separate pose from
identity, its performance depends on the variety and distri bution of
poses included in the training dataset. For example, for the CelebA
and Cats dataset, the model cannot recover elevation as well as
azimuth (see Figure 6a,b), since most face images are taken at
eye level and thus contain limited variation in elevation. U sing the
HoloGAN w/o 3D transform w. traditional Z input
Azimuth
Figure 9. Ablation study showing images with changing azimu ths (from
left to right). Top: Our approach. Middle: Our approach without using
random 3D transformations during training fails to rotate o bjects. Bot-
tom: Our approach with a traditional input layer mapped from zinstead
of a learnt constant tensor fails to disentangle object pose and identity.
wrong pose distribution might also lead to angles being mapp ed
incorrectly. Currently, during training, we sample random poses
from a uniform distribution. Future work therefore can expl ore
learning the distribution of poses from the training data in an un-
supervised manner to account for uneven pose distributions . Other
directions to explore include further disentanglement of o bjects’
appearances, such as texture and illumination. Finally, it will be
interesting to combine HoloGAN with training techniques su ch
as progressive GANs [ 27] to generate higher-resolution images.
In this work, we presented HoloGAN, a generative image
model that learns 3D representation from natural images in a n
unsupervised manner by adopting strong inductive biases ab out
the 3D world. HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end with only un-
labelled 2D images, and learns to disentangle challenging f actors
such as 3D pose, shape and appearance. This disentanglement
provides control over these factors, while being able to gen erate
images with similar or higher visual quality than 2D-based G ANs.
Our experiments show that HoloGAN successfully learns mean -
ingful 3D representations across multiple datasets with va rying
complexity. We are therefore convinced that explicit deep 3 D rep-
resentations are a crucial step forward for both the interpr etability
and controllability of GAN models, compared to existing exp licit
(meshes, voxels) or implicit [ 14,45] 3D representations.
Acknowledgements We received support from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme und er
the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 665992, the
EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Digital Entertainmen t
(EP/L016540/1), RCUK grant CAMERA (EP/M023281/1), an
EPSRC-UKRI Innovation Fellowship (EP/S001050/1), and an
NVIDIA Corporation GPU Grant. We thank Lambda Labs for
GPU cloud credits and a travel grant.
7595