3.1. Learning 3D representations
HoloGAN generates 3D representations from a learnt constan t
tensor (see Figure 3). The random noise vector zinstead is treated
as a “style” controller, and mapped to affine parameters for adap-
tive instance normalization (AdaIN) [ 21] after each convolution
using a multilayer perceptron (MLP) f:z→γ(z),σ(z).
Given some features Φlat layerlof an image xand the noise
“style” vector z, AdaIN is defined as:
AdaIN(Φl(x),z)=σ(z)/parenleftbiggΦl(x)−µ(Φl(x))
σ(Φl(x))/parenrightbigg
+γ(z). (1)
This can be viewed as generating images by transformation of
a template (the learnt constant tensor) using AdaIN to match
the mean and standard deviation of the features at different
levelsl(which are believed to describe the image “style”) of the
training images. Empirically, we find this network archite cture
can disentangle pose and identity much better than those tha t
feed the noise vector zdirectly to the first layer of the generator.
HoloGAN inherits this style-based strategy from StyleGAN
[28] but is different in two important aspects. Firstly, Holo-
GAN learns 3D features from a learnt 4D constant tensor (size
4×4×4×512, where the last dimension is the feature channel)
before projecting them to 2D features to generate images, wh ile
StyleGAN only learns 2D features. Secondly, HoloGAN learns a
disentangled representation by combining 3D features with rigid-
body transformations during training, while StyleGAN inje cts
independent random noise into each convolution. StyleGAN, as a
result, learns to separate 2D features into different level s of detail,
depending on the feature resolution, from coarse (e.g., pos e, iden-
tity) to more fine-grained details (e.g., hair, freckles). We observe a
similar separation in HoloGAN. However, HoloGAN further se pa-
rates pose (controlled by the 3D transformation), shape (co ntrolled
by 3D features), and appearance (controlled by 2D features) .
It is worth highlighting that to generate images at 128 ×128
(same as VON), we used a deep 3D representation of size up
to 16×16×16×64. Even with such limited resolution, HoloGAN
can still generate images with competitive quality and more com-
plex backgrounds than other methods that use full 3D geometr y
such as VON’s voxel grid of resolution 128 ×128×128×1 [64].
3.2. Learning with view­dependent mappings
In addition to adopting 3D convolutions to learn 3D features ,
during training, we introduce more bias about the 3D world
by transforming these learnt features to random poses befor e
projecting them to 2D images. This random pose transformati on
is crucial to guarantee that HoloGAN learns a 3D representat ion
that is disentangled and can be rendered from all possible vi ews,
as also observed by Tran et al. [ 55] in DR-GAN. However,
HoloGAN performs explicit 3D rigid-body transformation, w hile
DR-GAN performs this using an implicit vector representati on.
Rigid-body transformation We assume a virtual pinhole
camera that is in the canonical pose (axis-aligned and place d along
the negative z-axis) relative to the 3D features being rende red.
We parameterise the rigid-body transformation by 3D rotati on,
scaling followed by trilinear resampling. Although transl ation isinherently supported by our framework, we did not use it in th is
work. Assuming the up-vector of the object coordinate syste m
is the global y-axis, rotation comprises rotation around th e y-axis
(azimuth) and the x-axis (elevation). Details on ranges for pose
sampling are included in the supplemental document.
Projection unit In order to learn meaningful 3D representa-
tions from just 2D images, HoloGAN learns a differentiable
projection unit [ 40] that reasons over occlusion. In particular, the
projection unit receives a 4D tensor (3D features), and retu rns
a 3D tensor (2D features).
Since the training images are captured with different
perspectives, HoloGAN needs to learn perspective projecti on.
However, as we have no knowledge of the camera intrinsics, we
employ two layers of 3D convolutions (without AdaIN) to morp h
the 3D representation into a perspective frustum (see Figur e3)
before their projection to 2D features.
The projection unit is composed of a reshaping layer that
concatenates the channel dimension with the depth dimensio n,
thus reducing the tensor dimension from 4D ( W×H×D×C) to
3D (W×H×(D·C)), and an MLP with a non-linear activation
function (leakyReLU [ 37] in our experiments) to learn occlusion.
3.3. Loss functions
Identity regulariser To generate images at higher resolution
(128×128 pixels), we find it beneficial to add an identity regu-
lariserLidentity that ensures a vector reconstructed from a generated
image matches the latent vector zused in the generator G. We find
that this encourages HoloGAN to only use zfor the identity to
maintain the object’s identity when poses are varied, helpi ng the
model learn the full variation of poses in the dataset. We int roduce
an encoder network Fthat shares the majority of the convolution
layers of the discriminator, but uses an additional fully-c onnected
layer to predict the reconstructed latent vector. The ident ity loss is:
Lidentity(G)=Ez/bardblz−F(G(z))/bardbl2. (2)
Style discriminator Our generator is designed to match the
“style” of the training images at different levels, which ef fectively
controls image attributes at different scales. Therefore, in addi-
tion to the image discriminator that classifies images as re al or
fake, we propose multi-scale style discriminators that perform
the same task but at the feature level. In particular, the sty le
discriminator tries to classify the mean µ(Φl)and standard devi-
ationσ(Φl), which describe the image “style” [ 21]. Empirically,
the multi-scale style discriminator helps prevent mode col lapse
and enables longer training. Given a style discriminator Dl(x)=
/tildewideDl(µ(Φl(x)),σ(Φl(x)))for layerl, the style loss is defined as:
Ll
style(G)=Ez[−logDl(G(z))]. (3)
The total loss can be written as:
Ltotal(G)=LGAN(G)+λi·Lidentity(G)+λs·/summationdisplay
lLl
style(G). (4)
We useλi=λs=1.0for all experiments. We use the GAN loss
from DC-GAN [ 44] forLGAN.
7591