learn better representations for downstream tasks. Conven tional
representations in computer graphics, such as voxels and me shes,
areexplicit in 3D and easy to manipulate via, for example, rigid-
body transformations. However, they come at the cost of memo ry
inefficiency or ambiguity in how to discretise complex obje cts.
As a result, it is non-trivial to build generative models wit h such
representations directly [ 43,46,49].Implicit representations, such
as high-dimensional latent vectors or deep features, are fa voured
by generative models for being spatially compact and semant ically
expressive. However, these features are not designed to wor k with
explicit 3D transformations [ 9,14,20,25,45], which leads to
visual artefacts and blurriness in tasks such as view manipu lation.
We propose HoloGAN, an unsupervised generative image
model that learns representations of 3D objects that are not only
explicit in 3D but also semantically expressive. Such repre senta-
tions can be learnt directly from unlabelled natural images . Unlike
other GAN models, HoloGAN employs both 3D and 2D features
for generating images. HoloGAN first learns a 3D representa tion,
which is then transformed to a target pose, projected to 2D
features, and rendered to generate the final images (Figure 2
right). Different from recent work that employs hand-craft ed
differentiable renderers [ 18,22,29,34,36,51,64], HoloGAN
learns perspective projection and rendering of 3D features from
scratch using a projection unit [ 40]. This novel architecture en-
ables HoloGAN to learn 3D representations directly from nat ural
images for which there are no good hand-crafted differentia ble
renderers. To generate new views of the same scene, we direct ly
apply 3D rigid-body transformations to the learnt 3D featur es, and
visualise the results using the neural renderer that is join tly trained.
This has been shown to produce sharper results than performi ng
3D transformations in high-dimensional latent vector spac e [40].
HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end in an unsupervised
manner using only unlabelled 2D images, without any supervi sion
of poses, 3D shapes, multiple views of objects, or geometry p riors
such as symmetry and smoothness over the 3D representation
that are common in this line of work [ 3,26,45]. To the best
of our knowledge, HoloGAN is the first generative model that
can learn 3D representations directly from natural images in a
purely unsupervised manner. In summary, our main technical
contributions are:
• A novel architecture that combines a strong inductive bias
about the 3D world with deep generative models to learn
disentangled representations (pose, shape, and appearanc e) of
3D objects from images. The representation is explicit in 3D
and expressive in semantics.
• An unconditional GAN that, for the first time, allows nativ e
support for view manipulation without sacrificing visual i mage
fidelity.
•An unsupervised training approach that enables disentangl ed
representation learning without using labels.
2. Related work
HoloGAN is at the intersection of GANs, structure-aware ima ge
synthesis and disentangled representation learning. In th is section,
we review related work in these areas.
Z
 Z
θ 
θ 
Conv2D
 Conv3D 3D TransformationG
DG
D
fake
realfake
realHoloGAN Conditional GAN
Projection unit
 Observed ground truth dataFigure 2. Comparison of generative image models. Data given to the
discriminator are coloured purple. Left: In conditional GANs, the pose
is observed and the discriminator is given access to this inf ormation.
Right: HoloGAN does not require pose labels during training and the
discriminator is not given access to pose information.
2.1. Generative adversarial networks
GANs learn to map samples from an arbitrary latent distribut ion
to data that fool a discriminator network into categorising them
as real data [ 16]. Most recent work on GAN architectures has
focused on improving training stability or visual fidelity of
the generated images, such as multi-resolution GANs [ 27,61],
or self-attention generators [ 1,62]. However, there is far less
work on designing GAN architectures that enable unsupervis ed
disentangled representation learning which allows contro l over
attributes of the generated images. By injecting random noi se and
adjusting the “style” of the image at each convolution, Styl eGAN
[28] can separate fine-grained variation (e.g., hair, freckle s) from
high-level features (e.g., pose, identity), but does not pr ovide
explicit control over these elements. A similar approach pr oposed
by Chen et al. [ 8] shows that this network design also achieves
more training stability. The success of these approaches in dicates
that network architecture can be more important for trainin g
stability and image fidelity than the specific choice of GAN loss.
Therefore, we also focus on architecture design for HoloGAN , but
with the goal of learning to separate pose, shape and appeara nce,
and to enable direct manipulation of these elements.
2.2. 3D­aware neural image synthesis
Recent work in neural image synthesis and novel-view synthe sis
has found success in improving the fidelity of the generated im-
ages with 3D-aware networks. Work that uses geometry templa tes
achieves great improvements in image fidelity [ 15,32], but does
not generalise well to complex datasets that cannot be descr ibed
by a template. RenderNet [ 40] introduces a differentiable renderer
using a convolutional neural network (CNN) that learns to re n-
der 2D images directly from 3D shapes. However, RenderNet
requires 3D shapes and their corresponding rendered images dur-
ing training. Other approaches learn 3D embeddings that can be
used to generate new views of the same scene without any 3D
supervision [ 48,51]. However, while Sitzmann et al. [51]require
multiple views and pose information as input, Rhodin et al. [48]
require supervision from paired images, background segmen tation
and pose information. Aiming to separate geometry from text ure,
visual object networks (VONs) [ 64] first sample 3D objects from
a 3D generative model, render these objects using a hand-cra fted
differentiable layer to normal, depth and silhouette maps, and
finally apply a trained image-to-image translation networ k. How-
7589