Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
where𝑄,𝐾and𝑉are the standard query, key and value components and 𝑑is a scaling factor. Reformer uses a Shared
QK Transformer, i.e., 𝑄=𝐾enabled by sharing the matrix that projects words/hidden layer to 𝑄or𝐾. Further, note
that we are actually only interested in softmax(𝑄𝐾𝑇). Since softmax is dominated by the largest elements, for each
query𝑞𝑖we only need to focus on the keys in 𝐾that are closest to 𝑞𝑖. How can we find the nearest neighbors among
the keys? Reformer uses LSH. LSH is used to cluster (hash-bucket) the positions into various groups, and then every
position needs to focus only on others within the same bucket.
7.2 Transformers with Linear Complexity
Even better, there have been several efforts recently to reduce this quadratic complexity to linear. Most of these efforts
choose a constant number of other positions to “pay attention” to so as to compute a transformed representation for any
given position. They can model sequences tens of thousands of timesteps long using hundreds of layers. The methods
differ in their approach towards selecting this constant number of other positions. We discuss a few of such recently
proposed methods in this section.
In Star-Transformers [ 33], to reduce model complexity from 𝑂(𝑛2)to linear, we replace the fully-connected attention
matrix structure with a star-shaped topology, in which every two non-adjacent nodes are connected through a shared
relay node. While ring connections connect a satellite node with two other satellite nodes, a radical connection connects
a satellite node with the relay node. The idea is to update the star-center relay node based on satellite nodes and then
update satellite nodes using information from the star node, and adjacent satellite nodes.
Linformer architecture [ 128] exploits low-rank factorization of the self-attention matrix to reduce overall self-
attention complexity from 𝑂(𝑛2)to𝑂(𝑛)in both time and space. The main idea is to add two linear projection matrices
𝐸𝑖,𝐹𝑖∈𝑅𝑛×𝑘when computing key and value. We first project the original (𝑛×𝑑)-dimensional key and value layers
into(𝑘×𝑑)-dimensional projected key and value layers. We then compute an (𝑛×𝑘)-dimensional context mapping
matrix using scaled dot-product attention. If we can choose a very small projected dimension 𝑘, such that𝑘<<𝑛, then
we can significantly reduce the memory and space consumption. Overall, it is 𝑂(𝑛𝑘). Further, we can do three other
forms of parameter sharing: (1) Headwise sharing: 𝐸𝑖=𝐸and𝐹𝑖=𝐹across all heads 𝑖in a layer. (2) Key-value sharing:
𝐸𝑖=𝐹𝑖=𝐸across all heads 𝑖in a layer. (3) Layerwise sharing: Single projection matrix 𝐸is used across all layers, all
heads for both key and value.
Sparse Sinkhorn Attention based Transformer [ 115] is based on differentiable sorting of internal representations. First,
they divide the input sequence into 𝐵equal sized blocks each of size 𝑛/𝐵. A meta sorting network learns to generate
latent permutations over these block sequences. Given sorted sequences, we are then able to compute quasi-global
attention with only local windows, improving the memory efficiency of the attention module. They also propose Causal
Sinkhorn Balancing and SortCut algorithms for causal scenarios for tailoring Sinkhorn Attention for encoding and/or
decoding purposes. Their method reduces the memory complexity from 𝑂(𝑛2)to𝑂(𝐵2+(𝑛/𝐵)2). The SortCut variant
further reduces complexity to linear-time, i.e., 𝑂(𝑛𝑘)where𝑘is a user defined budget hyper-parameter much smaller
than𝑛.
Shen et al. [ 105] propose a very simple mathematical trick to reduce quadratic complexity to linear. A typical
dot-product attention can be written as softmax(𝑄𝐾𝑇)𝑉ignoring the scale factor. This is quadratic because 𝑄𝐾𝑇is𝑛2
in size. This can be rewritten as follows.
Attention(𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=softmax𝑟(𝑄)(softmax𝑐(𝐾𝑇𝑉)) (69)
43