TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
which varies the dimension of the output embeddings across words depending on how much model capacity is deemed
suitable for a given word. In particular, it is meaningful to assign more parameters to frequent words than to rare words.
By definition, frequent words occur more often in the training data than rare words and therefore allow to fit more
parameters. They define partitions of the output vocabulary based on word frequency and the words in each partition
share the same embedding size. Partitioning results in a sparse final weight matrix which arranges the embeddings
of the output words in blocks, each one corresponding to a separate partition. The size of the final hidden layer 𝐻is
the sum of the embedding sizes of the partitions. While this method does not involve creation of multiple factors, it
factorizes the original matrix into multiple blocks while setting the remaining part of the matrix to 0.
Variani et al. [ 120] propose a method called Word Encoded Sequence Transducers (WEST) which factorizes a matrix
𝐸=𝐶×𝐷where𝐷is constrained to be a block diagonal matrix. The block diagonal nature of the second factor leads to
large compression rates.
6.3 Tensor Train and Block Term Decomposition
Tensor train decomposition (TTD) [ 88] is a standard tensor decomposition technique which decomposes a high
dimensional tensor into multiple 2D and 3D tensors which can be multiplied together to reconstruct the original tensor.
These factors are called TT-cores and the other dimensions are referred to as TT-ranks. TTD can be leveraged to
compress various weight matrices in RNNs and LSTMs [ 54,117]. The first step is to represent a matrix as a multi-
dimensional tensor by simple reshaping transformation and then use TTD on it. The values of TT–ranks directly define
the compression ratio, so choosing them to be too small or too large will result into either significant performance drop
or little reduction of the number of parameters. Typically TT-ranks around 16 for small matrices and 64-192 for larger
matrices result in a good trade-off between compression ratio and the accuracy metric of interest. Also, when we use
TTD for weight matrices, we also need change the inputs appropriately to be compatible in terms of dimensions.
Compared with TT-RNN, Block-Term RNN (BTRNN) [ 136] is not only more concise (when using the same rank),
but also able to attain a better approximation to the original RNNs with much fewer parameters. BTD decomposes a
high order tensor into a sum of multiple Tucker decomposition models. The redundant dense connections between
input and hidden state is first tensorized to a 𝑑-dimensional tensor and then decomposed using low-rank BTD into a
sum of𝑁different Tucker decompositions where 𝑁is the CP-rank. Each Tucker decomposition in turn consists of a
core𝑑-dimensional tensor and 𝑑3-dimensional factor tensors. While Ye et al. [ 136] used BTD to compress RNNs, Ma et
al. [77] used BTD to compress the self-attention matrix in Transformers. They first build a single-block attention based
on the Tucker decomposition where the query, key and value are mapped into three factor matrices and the core tensor
is trainable and randomly initialized. It is then straightforward to represent the multi-head attention using BTD.
6.4 Summary
Table 7 compares various tensor decomposition methods across different tasks and datasets. Accuracy of both the
original and the compressed (comp.) model are shown. Also, we report model size (in terms of number of parameters or
memory size) for both the student as well as the teacher models. For the same task, dataset and model combination,
different papers report different accuracy of the original model because of slight changes in training hyper-parameters;
hence we report accuracy of the original model for each row.
For CTR prediction, the TT-embedding method [ 54] in Table 7 uses 3 factors with TT-rank of 16. It actually leads to
an embedding compression of 16. With 4 factors and TT-rank=2, test loss increases to 0.4530 with a massive embedding
compression of 4193 and overall model size of 0.53M. Thus, substitution of large embedding layers with TT–embeddings
40