TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
student and an ensemble of teachers. For the student, the middle layer is selected. For each teacher, we select the layer
such that most teachers are consistent with the resulting order relationships under the voting strategy. We discuss the
RD loss given a student and a teacher. Consider a triplet of instances ( 𝑥𝑖,𝑥+
𝑖,𝑥−
𝑖) such that at an intermediate layer of
the teacher network, distance between activations for 𝑥+
𝑖and𝑥𝑖is smaller than the distance between activations for 𝑥−
𝑖
and𝑥𝑖. Let𝑝𝑖be the intermediate output from student for example 𝑥𝑖. Then the RD loss for the triplet ( 𝑥𝑖,𝑥+
𝑖,𝑥−
𝑖) can
be written as follows.
Loss=max(0,𝑑(𝑝𝑖,𝑝+
𝑖)−𝑑(𝑝𝑖,𝑝−
𝑖)+𝛿) (57)
where𝑑is the distance function, and 𝛿is a small constant to prevent the trivial solution. To extend this loss function
definition to multiple teachers, the order between the instances 𝑥+
𝑖and𝑥−
𝑖given𝑥𝑖is decided based on majority voting
between the teachers.
There are also specific settings when distilling from multiple teachers becomes natural, e.g., when the number of
classes is large [ 43] or in multi-lingual settings [ 113]. When the number of classes is very large, the teacher model could
be an ensemble that contains one generalist model trained on all the data and many “specialist” models, each of which
is trained on data that is highly enriched in examples from a very confusable subset of the classes (like different types
of mushroom). Softmax distribution vector of this type of specialist can be made much smaller by combining all of the
classes it does not care about into a single dustbin class. Each specialist model is initialized with the weights of the
generalist model. These weights are then slightly modified by training the specialist with half its examples coming
from its special subset and half sampled at random from the remainder of the training set. To derive groupings of object
categories for the specialists, we focus on categories that the full generalist network often confuses. When training the
student, for each instance, we first find the 𝑠𝑒𝑡k𝑜𝑓𝑛most probable classes according to the generalist model. Then, we
take all the specialist models, 𝑚, whose special subset of confusable classes has a non-empty intersection with 𝑘and
call this the active set of specialists 𝐴𝑘. Given student’s full probability distribution 𝑞over all the classes, we minimize
the following.
Loss=𝐾𝐿(𝑝𝑔,𝑞)+∑︁
𝑚∈𝐴𝑘𝐾𝐿(𝑝𝑚,𝑞) (58)
where𝑝𝑔is output distribution from the generalist model, and 𝑝𝑚is the output distribution from the 𝑚𝑡ℎspecialist
model.
An ensemble of teachers is also very useful in a multi-lingual NMT setting [ 113]. Individual models for each language
pair are first trained and regarded as teachers, and then the multilingual model is trained to fit the training data and
match the outputs of individual models simultaneously through KD. When the accuracy of multilingual model surpasses
the individual model for the accuracy threshold 𝜏on a certain language pair, we remove the distillation loss and just
train the model with original negative log-likelihood loss for this pair. Lastly, when learning from a teacher ensemble, it
is burdensome to load all the teacher models in the GPU memory for distillation. Alternatively, we first generate the
output probability distribution of each teacher model for each instance offline, and then just load the top- 𝐾probabilities
of the distribution into memory and normalize them so that they sum to 1 for distillation. This reduces the memory
cost from the scale of |𝑉|(the vocabulary size) to 𝐾.
28