TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
To summarize, multiple methods have been proposed to reduce the quadratic complexity of the standard Transformer
model. While Sparse Transformers reduce it to 𝑂(𝑛√𝑛), Reformers reduce it to 𝑂(𝑛log𝑛). Other methods like Star
Transformer, Linformer, Sparse Sinkhorn Transformer, Efficient Attention, Linear Transformers and Longformer promise
linear complexity. In particular Sparse Sinkhorn Transformer and Longformer have been shown to result into very
good accuracy, latency and RAM tradeoff across many tasks.
8 SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We discussed various methods for compression of deep learning models for text. Broadly, we discussed pruning,
quantization, knowledge distillation, parameter sharing, tensor decomposition, and sub-quadratic Transformer based
methods. These methods not just help reduce the model size, but also lead to lower prediction latencies and low
power consumption due to reduced computations. Pruning is the oldest method, but not commonly applied for
Transformers. Quantization is effective however it is important to use mixed precision balanced quantization with
GPU architectures that support efficient low-bit computations. Knowledge Distillation is the most popular method for
compression of Transformer models. Parameter sharing is a very useful method but often needs to be combined with
other techniques. Matrix decomposition is not very common but has lots of potential, especially the BTD method. Sub-
quadratic Transformers are very important to enable processing long documents in applications like query-document
similarity, long document summarization, etc.
8.1 Comparison across model compression method types.
In the previous six sections, we have compared across multiple methods within each of the six broad types of model
compression. In this subsection, we attempt to compare across multiple model compression method types.
Table 4 provides a comparison of model size versus accuracy for various methods across various GLUE [ 125]
and SQuAD tasks. We observe that most of the methods tried on GLUE datasets have been based on knowledge
distillation. However, some pruning methods (iterative magnitude pruning, RPP and LayerDrop), quantization (mixed
precision QBERT), parameter sharing (ALBERT), tensor decomposition (FLOP) and linear Transformer (Linformer)
have also been tried. Quantization methods do not reduce the number of parameters but reduce the number of bits per
parameter. Particularly, mixed precision QBERT uses 8 bits for embeddings and 2/3/4 bits for encoder layer weights.
Similarly, Linformer does not reduce number of weights but reduces activation memory as well as latency of the overall
Transformer model. For the remaining models, for each model, we first computed an average GLUE score based on any
of the 9 tasks for which scores have been reported. Next, we computed the ratio GLUE score/model size (in Millions).
We find the following as the top three
•Distilled-BiLSTM [114] (ratio=79.3)
•Mixed-vocab. training [142] (ratio=7.8)
•ALBERT-B [60] (ratio=7.2)
This clearly tells us that Distilled BiLSTMs provide us the best accuracy versus size tradeoff on GLUE. However, each
of these three models actually report results on only 4 out of 9 GLUE tasks. Hence, further, we considered only those
methods for which results on at least 5 tasks have been reported and computed the GLUE score/model size ratio. We
find the following as the top three
•TinyBERT [50] (ratio=5.31)
•BERT-EMD [66] (ratio=5.15)
46