Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
(A) Binary
Quantization(C) General Quantization 
Uniform (with k=3 bits)(D) General Quantization 
Balanced (with k=3 bits)(B) Ternary
Quantization
Fig. 3. Different Types of Quantization: Binary (A), Ternary (B) and General Quantized (C and D). Note that X axis denotes the weight
value while the Y axis denotes frequency.
spectrum between 3 and 32 bits. We discuss such methods in this section. Fig. 3 provides a broad overview of various
quantization styles.
3.1 Binarized Networks
Binarized networks use binary quantization (see Fig. 3(A)), which quantizes weights using 1 bit. Quantizing weights to
1 bit provides a compression of 32x but leads to a significant drop in accuracy across many tasks. However, in a hybrid
quantization scheme, such binary quantization can be very helpful for some layers in a network. Binarization can be
done using deterministic methods or could be stochastic in nature. Also, while naïve binarization has a very simple way
of fixing the binary boundary threshold, one could perform a complex loss aware binarization as well. We discuss these
variants of binarization in this section.
3.1.1 Deterministic Binarization. Simplest way of binary quantization is to set the weight as 1 for non-negative weights,
and to -1 for negative weights. This leads to 32x compression. Also, the matrix multiplication for binary matrices is ∼7x
faster [ 47] leading to faster model inference. In the forward pass, binary networks drastically reduce memory size and
accesses, and replace most arithmetic operations with bit-wise operations, which leads to great increases of power
efficiency. Also, in the simplest version, binarization can be performed in a static manner, i.e., after the training is done.
However, this method leads to large loss in accuracy.
A variant of this simple method is to set the weight to a constant 𝑐1for non-negative weights, and to another constant
𝑐2for negative weights. Binary Scheme (BS)-Fixed method [ 59] stores the original weights and during the forward
pass replaces the values with a masked value of 𝑐1or𝑐2, where𝑐1and𝑐2are fixed and chosen with hyperparameter
tuning. Full precision weights are used during training. At the end of training, the weights are replaced with the index
of its masked value. Choosing the values of 𝑐1and𝑐2can be difficult and time-consuming in BS-Fixed. Thus, in the
BS-flexible method [ 15], we initialize 𝑐1and𝑐2using KMeans with two centroids over the weights, and then update 𝑐1
and𝑐2using back-propagation. Also, in the BS-Flexible method, weights are quantized as follows.
𝑤𝑏= 
𝑐1if𝑤≥(𝑐1+𝑐2)/2
𝑐2if𝑤<(𝑐1+𝑐2)/2(19)
Note that𝑤is the original weight value while 𝑤𝑏is the binarized weight value. These changes eliminate the need
for hyper-parameter tuning.
15