TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
2.4.2 Pruning Layers. Note that dropping attention heads does not reduce runtime as they are usually computed in
parallel. While one can prune weights, neurons or attention heads, how can we design a scheme to prune away layers
(see Fig. 2(G))? The LayerDrop idea proposed in [ 27] is inspired by DropConnect. DropConnect randomly drops weights
while training on a batch. LayerDrop does structured dropout: it drops groups of weights, heads, feed forward network
(FFN) matrices, or layers. The layers to be pruned can be decided using one of these ways:
•Every Other: Prune every other layer (with rate 𝑝), e.g., every 3𝑟𝑑layer in a 12-layer BERT model.
•Search on Validation: Search for a set of layers to be pruned by checking their impact on a validation set. This
entails trying various combinations.
•Data Driven Pruning: Learn the drop rate 𝑝𝑑of each layer in a data driven manner.
Given a target drop rate 𝑝, we learn an individual drop rate 𝑝𝑑for the layer at depth 𝑑such that the average rate
over layers is equal to 𝑝. At inference time, we forward only the fixed top- 𝑘highest scoring layers based on the softmax
output. Across the three methods, “Every Other” strategy works surprisingly well across many tasks and configurations.
“Search on Validation” and “Data Driven Pruning” only offer marginal gains.
2.4.3 Pruning General Structures. Lastly, Prasanna et al. [ 93] experiment with pruning both the FFN layers (see Fig. 2(F))
as well as attention heads (see Fig. 2(E)) in a BERT network. Just like [ 79], they assign a mask variable to each of these
structures. To decide which structures to prune, we look at the expected sensitivity of the model to the mask variables.
High sensitivity implies large impact on the model output and hence corresponding structures should be retained. They
find that it is possible to find a subnetwork of elements that achieves performance comparable with that of the full
model, and similarly-sized subnetworks sampled from the rest of the model perform worse.
2.5 Summary
Table 1 compares various pruning methods across different tasks and datasets. Size and accuracy of both the original and
the pruned model are shown. The papers report multiple (model size, model accuracy) pairs but we carefully chose the
pair such that accuracy is typically within 10% of the original or the best pruned model accuracy reported. For language
modeling, most popular datasets include PTB, Europarl v7 English, Wikitext-103 and AFP from English Gigaword. On
PTB using LSTMs, we observe that Bank-Balanced Sparsity method [ 9] leads to lowest perplexity. For the Linguistic
Acceptability CoLA task, RPP [ 32] resulted into a smaller and a more accurate model compared to iterative magnitude
pruning. As expected in some senses, the pruned model provides better accuracy than the unpruned one since pruning
causes regularization. For the machine reading comprehension, question answering and paraphrasing tasks also, RPP
seems to work better than iterative magnitude pruning. For the machine translation (NMT) task, on English-German
WMT datasets, pruned Transformer models provide better accuracy than pruned LSTM with comparable number
of parameters. For the sentiment analysis task, on SST-2, although RPP leads to a better pruned model compared to
iterative pruning, LayerDrop [ 27] improves further on it with a model less than half of the RPP-pruned model. For the
speech recognition task, experiments have been reported on 2100 hours English speech data, TIMIT, WSJ, Switchboard
and AN4 datasets. On 2100 hours English speech data, Block Sparsity+Group Lasso is better than Block sparsity without
regularization. Also, it is better than plain iterative magnitude pruning. On TIMIT, block sparsity [ 87] leads to a more
accurate 90% pruned LSTM model compared to the unpruned one. For the summarization task, LayerDrop [ 27] can
compress the model to half without any noticeable accuracy change. Finally, for the textual entailment task, experiments
have been done on GLUE [ 125] datasets: MNLI, MNLI-m, QNLI and RTE. Models pruned from BERT-large perform
better than models pruned from BERT-base; RPP performs better than iterative magnitude pruning.
12