Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
from one another. This again highlights the idea that self-attention is highly resistant to quantization and could be
heavily compressed. Later Shen et al. [ 104] showed that comparable performance to full precision BERT can be achieved
with at most 2.3% performance degradation across many tasks, even with ultra-low precision quantization down to 2
bits, corresponding up to 13x compression of the model parameters, and up to 4x compression of the embedding table
as well as activations.
Overall, quantization performs model compression by reducing the number of bits per weight value. Binary quan-
tization does not work well by itself for text based neural models. But ternary and higher-bit quantization lead to
significant model size reduction without loss in accuracy across tasks. One consideration for quantization is that 3-bit
quantized execution is typically not supported in hardware. It is however possible to load 3-bit quantized values and
cast them to higher bit precision such as 4 or 8 bits in the execution units. This would still have the benefit of reduced
memory volume to/from DRAM. Non-uniform quantization methods like balanced quantization or KMeans based
quantization methods are better than uniform quantization methods. Loss aware quantization done while training is
better than static loss-unaware quantization. Mixed-precision quantization combined with pruning is highly effective
for Transformer based models.
4 KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION (KD)
KD methods are the most popular model compression methods for Transformer networks. Also called student-teacher
networks, the main idea is to first train a deep teacher network, and then learn a shallow student network that mimics
the teacher. After training, the student model is deployed. What information (“dark knowledge”) from the teacher
can be used to train the student? What loss functions can be used to ensure right flow of information from teacher
to student? Can we have an ensemble of teachers, or teacher assistants or rather fellow students who can train the
student? We discuss these aspects in this section.
4.1 Various Distillation Architectures
Ba and Caruna [ 3] proposed Student Teacher networks (or mimic models) where the student uses the logits before
softmax from the teacher network for training (see Fig. 4(A)). The student model is not trained on the original labels; it
is trained to learn the function that was learned by the teacher model. Thus, the student model is optimized to minimize
the L2 loss between the teacher logits and the student logits across all training instances. Such distilled student models
are more accurate than the same shallow student trained directly on the original labeled training data mainly because:
(1) Teacher removes noisy labels, if any. (2) The uncertainty from the teacher is more informative to the student than
the original 0/1 labels. (3) The original targets may depend in part on features not available as inputs for learning, but
the student sees targets that depend only on the input features. The dependence on unavailable features has been
eliminated by filtering targets through the teacher.
Yet another way of utilizing logits is to have the student learn from noisy teacher logits [ 102]. After obtaining logits
from the teacher, Gaussian noise with mean 0 and standard deviation 𝜎is added to teacher’s logits. This perturbation
can be applied to samples selected with probability 𝛼. The perturbed outputs produce the effect of a regularizer.
While Ba and Caruna [ 3] suggested using only the logits, Hinton et al. [ 43] suggested training the student by
minimizing the cross entropy loss between the teacher softmax output and the student softmax output, besides
minimizing the cross entropy between student prediction and actual label. The first part is called the soft loss and the
second one is called the hard loss. Typically hard loss is given much lower weight compared to the soft loss term. To
make the softmax output non-peaked and thereby transfer more useful information from teacher to student, softmax
25