Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
Each partition is then mapped to an evenly-divided interval in the closed interval [0, 1]. Finally, the quantization step
maps intervals into discrete values using Eq. 36 and transforms the value range to be approximately the same as input.
A naïve implementation using percentiles as thresholds would require sorting of weight values during each forward
operation in back-propagation, which may slow down the training process. The 2𝑘evenly spaced percentiles required in
histogram equalization can be computed from the recursive application of partitioning of numbers by medians. Further,
the mean𝜇can be used to approximate the median 𝑚. Thus, we can perform approximate histogram equalization
without doing sorting.
3.3.3 KMeans based Quantization Schemes. Yet another way of performing non-uniform quantization is to decide bin
boundaries using clustering in a static manner. In this static-KMeans method [ 84], We first train the neural network
with full-precision parameters. Then apply KMeans to the weights. After clustering, the value of each pixel is set to the
value of the center of the cluster it belongs to. We also need to store mapping from integers to cluster centers. Given 𝑘
clusters, we only need log(𝑘)bits to code the clusters.
A better approach is to perform KMeans clustering during training. In this method [ 36], multiple connections
(belonging to the same cluster) share the same weight, and we fine-tune those shared weights. For the forward pass, the
cluster index stored for each connection is mapped to a centroid which is then used as the weight. For back-propagation,
during update, all the gradients are grouped by the cluster index and summed together, multiplied by the learning
rate and subtracted from the shared centroids from last iteration. We use KMeans clustering to identify the shared
weights for each layer of a trained network, so that all the weights that fall into the same cluster will share the same
weight. Weights are not shared across layers. To calculate the compression rate, given 𝑘clusters, we only need log2𝑘
bits to encode the index. In general, for a network with 𝑛connections and each connection is represented with 𝑏bits,
constraining the connections to have only 𝑘shared weights will result in a compression rate of
𝑟=𝑛𝑏
𝑛log2𝑘+𝑘𝑏(49)
There are two other ways of using KMeans for non-uniform quantization: Product Quantization (PQ) and Residual
Quantization (RQ) [ 30]. In product quantization (PQ), we partition the vector space into many disjoint subspaces, and
perform quantization (KMeans) in each subspace. Weight matrix 𝑊is partitioned columnwise: 𝑊=[𝑊1,𝑊2,...,𝑊𝑠]
where𝑊𝑖∈𝑅𝑚×𝑛/𝑠assuming𝑛is divisible by 𝑠. Then we perform KMeans on each submatrix 𝑊𝑖to obtain clusters
𝑐𝑖
1,...,𝑐𝑖
𝑘. Thus, we get 𝑠codebooks. The reconstructed matrix is ˆ𝑊=[ˆ𝑊1,ˆ𝑊2,...,ˆ𝑊𝑠]where ˆ𝑊𝑖
𝑗is the closest centroid
𝑐𝑖
𝑗. PQ can be applied to either the x-axis or the y-axis of the matrix. We need to store the cluster indexes and codebooks
for each subvector. The compression rate for this method can be written as follows.
𝑟=32𝑚𝑛
32𝑘𝑛+𝑙𝑜𝑔2(𝑘)𝑚𝑠(50)
Residual quantization (RQ) is similar. In RQ, we first quantize the vectors into k-centers. Next we find out the residuals
for each data point ( 𝑤−𝑐) and perform KMeans on the residuals. Do it recursively 𝑡times. Then the resultant weight
vectors are calculated as ˆ𝑊𝑧=𝑐1
𝑗+𝑐2
𝑗+...+𝑐𝑡
𝑗given we have recursively performed 𝑡iterations. We need to store all the
codebooks for each iteration, which potentially needs large amount of memory. The compression rate for this method
can be written as follows.
𝑟=𝑚
𝑡𝑘+𝑙𝑜𝑔2(𝑘)𝑡𝑛(51)
21