Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
schedule ends. Typically, inducing block sparsity with 4x4 blocks in vanilla RNNs and GRUs works well, compared to
larger block sizes. Larger blocks require lower sparsity to maintain similar accuracy.
Unfortunately, it becomes challenging to maintain the same model accuracy when block sparsity is applied. Also,
block sizes (i.e., pruning granularity) are application-sensitive, making it another hyper-parameter to tune. To avoid
these problems, Cao et al. [ 9] proposed a new method called Bank-Balanced Sparsity (BBS). BBS splits each weight
matrix row into multiple equal-sized banks, and adopts fine-grained pruning to each bank independently to obtain
identical sparsity among banks. Each bank has the same number of non-zero values. For example, retaining top two
weights in each bank of size 4 implies a sparsity of 50%. We apply the BBS pruning method iteratively to a pre-trained
network, and fine-tune the network after each pruning iteration to restore the model accuracy. BBS achieves almost the
same model accuracy as unstructured sparsity and significantly outperforms block sparsity when pruning weights
at the same sparsity level. BBS is also amenable to FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Arrays) acceleration because it
inherently provides a balanced matrix partitioning for parallel computing.
2.4 Pruning Heads and Layers
Besides neurons and blocks, for Transformer based models, structured pruning can also be applied to attention heads
and entire layers. In this section, we discuss such methods.
2.4.1 Pruning Attention Heads. BERT-base model consists of 12 layers each with 12 attention heads. Similarly, a typical
NMT encoder-decoder Transformer with 6 layers each for encoder as well as decoder contains 16 attention heads per
layer. Michel et al. [ 79] found that majority of attention heads can be removed without deviating too much from the
original score. Surprisingly, in some cases removing an attention head (see Fig. 2(E)) results in an increase in accuracy.
When these heads are removed individually, only 8 (out of 96) heads in 6-layer WMT NMT Transformer (16 heads/layer)
cause a statistically significant change in performance when they are removed from the model, half of which actually
result in a higher BLEU score. For most layers, one head is indeed sufficient at test time, even though the network was
trained with 12 (BERT) or 16 (WMT Transformer) attention heads. One can also do iterative pruning of multiple heads
(rather than just one at a time) across layers. For iterative pruning, head importance score is defined using the expected
sensitivity of the model to the mask variables 𝜉ℎas follows.
𝐼ℎ=𝐸𝑥∼𝑋𝜕𝐿(𝑥)
𝜕𝜉ℎ=𝐸𝑥∼𝑋Attℎ(𝑥)𝑇𝜕𝐿(𝑥)
𝜕Attℎ(𝑥)(18)
where𝑋is the data distribution, 𝐿(𝑥)is the loss on sample 𝑥, and𝐴𝑡𝑡ℎ(𝑥)is the output of the attention head ℎfor
instance𝑥, . Intuitively, if 𝐼ℎhas a high value then changing 𝜉ℎis liable to have a large effect on the model. Hence, in
every iteration heads with low 𝐼ℎvalues are pruned out. Michel et al. [ 79] observed that pruning up to 20% and 40% of
heads from NMT and BERT models respectively, did not lead to any noticeable negative impact on accuracy.
Voita et al. [ 122] used two other head importance scores to prune attention heads from the NMT model. The two
scoring methods were: (1) Layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) [ 26]. LRP is a method for computing the relative
contribution of neurons at one point in a network to neurons at another. (2) “confidence” of a head which is computed
as the average of its maximum attention weight excluding the end of sentence symbol, where the average is taken over
tokens in a set of sentences used for evaluation. For pruning the heads, they propose a method based on stochastic
gates and a differentiable relaxation of the 𝐿0penalty.𝐿0norm equals the number of non-zero components and pushes
the model to switch off less important heads. They find that only a small subset of heads are important for translation.
On the English-Russian WMT dataset, pruning 38 out of 48 encoder heads results in a drop of only 0.15 BLEU.
11