TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
where softmax𝑟andsoftmax𝑐are softmax applied to rows and columns respectively. This revised formulation has
terms which are only linear in 𝑛. Finally, Katharopoulos et al. [ 53] express the self-attention as a linear dot-product of
kernel feature maps and make use of the associativity property of matrix products to reduce the complexity from 𝑂(𝑛2)
to𝑂(𝑛), where𝑛is the sequence length.
Finally, Longformer [ 6] propose to reduce Transformer complexity to linear by sparsifying the full self-attention
matrix using multiple kinds of attention patterns. The simplest attention pattern is the sliding window pattern which
employs a fixed-size window attention surrounding each token. Given a fixed window size 𝑤, each token attends to 0.5𝑤
tokens on each side. The computation complexity of this pattern is 𝑂(𝑛𝑤)which scales linearly with input sequence
length𝑛. To further increase the receptive field without increasing computation, the sliding window can be “dilated”.
This is analogous to dilated CNNs where the window has gaps of size dilation 𝑑. The windowed and dilated attention
are not flexible enough to learn task-specific representations. Accordingly, Longformer also has “global attention” on
few pre-selected input locations. Moreover, this attention operation is symmetric: that is, a token with a global attention
attends to all tokens across the sequence, and all tokens in the sequence attend to it. Further, two different sets of
projections are used: 𝑄𝑠,𝐾𝑠,𝑉𝑠to compute attention scores of sliding window attention, and 𝑄𝑔,𝐾𝑔,𝑉𝑔to compute
attention scores for the global attention. The pretrained Longformer consistently outperforms RoBERTa on multiple
downstream long document tasks.
7.3 Summary
Table 8 compares various sub-quadratic Transformer methods across different tasks and datasets. Accuracy of both
the original Transformer and the optimized (opt.) model are shown. These models have been applied for various
applications like language modeling (both word level as well as character level), coreference resolution, NER, NLI, NMT,
POS, question answering, sentiment analysis, speech recognition, text classification and text similarity analysis. For the
same task, dataset and model combination, different papers report different accuracy of the original model because of
slight changes in training hyper-parameters; hence we report accuracy of the original model for each row.
Star Transformers were shown to outperform the vanilla Transformer model across various tasks like Sentiment
analysis, Text classification, NLI, POS and NER. On the SST, the Star Transformer achieves 2.5 points improvement
against the standard Transformer. On MTL-16, the Star-Transformer outperform the standard Transformer in all 16
datasets, the improvement of the average accuracy is 4.2. Average test times are 10.94 and 49.31ms per batch with
batch-size=128 for Star Transformer and standard Transformer respectively.
Longformer achieves a new state-of-the-art on both text8 and enwik8 using the small models with BPC of 1.10 and
1.00 on text8 and enwik8 respectively. Longformer-large model of the same size as Sparse Transformer achieves a BPC
of 0.99 on Enwik8, which is the same as that obtained using Sparse Transformer. Also, for both character-level as well
as word-level language modeling, on 1B word benchmark, we observe that Sinkhorn mixture (which is a combination
of the Sinkhorn attention by mixing it with the vanilla standard dot product attention) performs better than Sparse
Transformer.
On question answering, results have been reported across multiple datasets like HotpotQA, NaturalQA, NewsQA,
SearchQA, TriviaQA, WikiHop, SQuAD 1.1 and SQuAD 2.0. We observe that BlockBERT performs better than Sparse-
BERT. Also, it is not surprising that BlockBERT with 2 blocks (n = 2) performs better than that with 3 blocks (n = 3),
because it keeps more attention matrix entries. Also, not shown in the table, Longformer-large achieves scores of 81.9
and 73.2 for WikiHop and HotpotQA beating state-of-the-art results by 3.6 and 4 points respectively.
44