TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
THELSTMCAT
THELSTM
Char-CNNCATChar-CNN
THELSTM
Char-CNNCAT
THEHighway
Char-CNNLSTMLSTMCAT
C2W CNN-Softmax Char-LSTM CNN-Highway-LSTM
Fig. 5. Character-aware Language Models
5.2 Parameter Sharing in the Embedding Matrix
Given a weight matrix 𝑊and a budget 𝐾, we want to share weights within 𝑊to have a max of 𝐾unique values. A
naïve implementation of random weight sharing can be trivially achieved by maintaining a secondary matrix consisting
of each connection’s group assignment. But this needs memory space itself. Hence, Chen et al. [ 12] propose to use
hashing. HashedNets use a low-cost hash function (like xxhash3) to randomly group connection weights into hash
buckets, and all connections within the same hash bucket share a single parameter value.
Unlike HashedNets where weights are randomly grouped, parameter sharing mechanisms in Toeplitz-like structured
matrices [ 76] are highly specific and deterministic. Toeplitz matrices have parameters tied along diagonals. The
displacement rank of all Toeplitz matrices is up to 2. Toeplitz-like matrices allow the displacement rank 𝑟to be higher.
They include products and inverses of Toeplitz matrices, and their linear combinations. The displacement rank 𝑟serves
as a knob on modeling capacity. High displacement rank matrices are increasingly unstructured. With displacement
rank𝑟, there are 2𝑛𝑟free parameters in the Toeplitz-like structured matrix. Toeplitz transforms can be applied not just
to embedding matrix but to all weight matrices in an RNN model. Tay et al. [ 116] use a similar Toeplitz-like structured
matrix method with Hamilton Products in Quaternion Algebra to propose Quaternion Transformers which lead to 75%
parameter reduction in the Transformer architecture.
Another method for parameter sharing is to share low-rank factors across layers in a recurrent model. In this method,
we first represent a weight matrix 𝑊using matrix factorization as 𝑊=𝑊𝑎𝑊𝑏. Thus, hidden layer output for layer 𝑙at
time𝑡can be written as follows.
ℎ𝑙
𝑡=𝜎h
𝑊𝑙
𝑎𝑊𝑙
𝑏ℎ𝑙−1
𝑡+𝑈𝑙
𝑎𝑈𝑙
𝑏ℎ𝑙
𝑡−1+𝑏𝑙i
(59)
But we can share some low-rank factors by setting 𝑊𝑙
𝑏=𝑈𝑙−1
𝑏. The combination of matrix factorization and parameter
sharing leads to large model compression.
Another way of compressing the embedding matrix is to divide the vocabulary 𝑉into frequent and infrequent
word sets𝐵and𝐶respectively. Infrequent words’ embeddings are represented with frequent words’ by sparse linear
combinations [ 13]. This is inspired by the observation that, in a dictionary, an unfamiliar word is typically defined
by common words. A dense embedding is assigned to each common word; an infrequent word, on the other hand,
computes its vector representation by a sparse combination of common words’ embeddings. This compression is useful
3https://code.google.com/p/xxhash/
34