TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
seq2seq models for Neural Machine Translation (NMT). They found that large-sparse models consistently outperform
small-dense models and achieve up to 10x reduction in number of non-zero parameters with minimal loss in accuracy.
2.1 Pruning Weights
The weights to be pruned can be chosen using two heuristics: (1) Using Hessian matrix computation, or (2) using magni-
tude of the weights. Further, magnitude based pruning methods could do pruning in one shot (typically statically after
training is done), or iteratively (also called dynamic or gradual pruning), or iteratively with pruning and densification.
Accordingly, there are four main ways of performing unstructured weight pruning: (1) Hessian based methods, (2)
magnitude pruning, (3) iterative magnitude pruning, and (4) iterative magnitude pruning and densification. In this
subsection, we discuss these methods in detail.
2.1.1 Hessian based Methods. In their seminal work (Optimal Brain Damage or OBD) on proposing weight pruning as
a method for model compression, LeCun et al. [ 62] defined saliency of a weight as change in the objective function
𝐸caused by deleting that parameter. Using Taylor series and making multiple assumptions, they propose to use the
following as a measure of saliency of weight 𝑢𝑖.
𝑠(𝑢𝑖)=1
2∑︁
𝑖ℎ𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑢2
𝑖(1)
whereℎ𝑖𝑖=𝜕2𝐸
𝜕𝑢𝑖𝜕𝑢 𝑗is the𝑖𝑡ℎelement on the diagonal of the Hessian matrix. Weights with low saliency can be pruned
and the pruned network can be retrained to adjust the remaining weights. The procedure for computation of the
diagonal of the Hessian is very similar to the back-propagation algorithm used for computing the first derivatives.
Hence, computing the diagonal of the Hessian is of the same order of complexity as computing the gradient.
OBD ignores cross terms in the Hessian matrix. But on most real datasets, Hessian is strongly non-diagonal. Hence,
to avoid pruning of important weights, Hassibi et al. [ 39] proposed a method called Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS) which
considers cross terms as well. Using a similar derivative of 𝐸wrt weight 𝑤𝑖, saliency of the weight is computed as
follows.
𝐿𝑖=1
2𝑤2
𝑖
[𝐻−1]𝑖𝑖(2)
Computing 𝐻−1is difficult. Hence, they provide a faster recursion relation for calculating 𝐻−1from training data and
structural information of the network. Also, unlike other methods (like OBD or magnitude pruning), OBS does not
demand (typically slow) retraining after the pruning of a weight. In every step, we delete 𝑤𝑖with min𝐿𝑖and update all
weights as follows.
𝛿𝑤=−𝑤𝑖
[𝐻−1]𝑖𝑖𝐻−1𝑒𝑖 (3)
where𝑒𝑖is the unit vector in weight space corresponding to (scalar) weight 𝑤𝑖. Unfortunately, these methods (OBD and
OBS) are computationally prohibitive as second derivative (i.e. Hessian) computations are expensive.
2.1.2 Magnitude Pruning Methods. A more computationally feasible method for pruning connections and relearning
weights based solely on the magnitude of the original weights is to simply prune away weights with small magnitudes.
The idea was first proposed by Han et al. [ 36]. Pruning away low magnitude weights makes the matrix sparse. Sparse
matrices can be stored in Compressed Sparse Row/Column (CSR/CSC) formats. Further space can be saved by storing
the index difference instead of the absolute position, and encoding this difference using small fixed number of bits. See
6