TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
For Speech recognition, Prabhavalkar et al. [ 92] experimented with a 3M Google voice utterances dataset and found
that a joint SVD with explained variance retained after the SVD as 0.6 leads to a 3x smaller RNN model without
much performance loss. They improved upon Sak et al.’s projections method which led to a much higher WER on the
same dataset. On live traffic utterances dataset, WEST [ 120] leads to a 3x smaller model with a slightly reduced word
error rate when using 3-layer LSTMs. Variani et al. [ 120] further compress this model using quantization to obtain
a 11x compressed 3-layer LSTM model without any performance loss. Thus, using quantization along with matrix
decomposition seems to work well.
Overall, matrix decomposition techniques are usually used in combination with parameter sharing and sometimes
with quantization. They have been very effective in dealing with large input/output embedding matrices in RNNs and
LSTMs. SVD, Tensor Train, CP, Tucker, BTD have been the most popular decomposition techniques found to be useful
for model compression.
7 TRANSFORMERS WITH SUB-QUADRATIC COMPLEXITY
Memory usage throughout neural network training can be categorized into three main types: (1) Model memory is used
to store model parameters; (2) Optimizer memory is the additional memory used by the specific learning algorithm during
the process; (3) Activation memory consists of the outputs of each layer, which are cached for reuse in backpropagation
to compute gradients. For a BERT-base model, model memory is around 0.2 GB, optimizer memory is around 1GB,
while activation memory is around 8.5GB [ 94]. Time and activation memory in Transformers grows quadratically with
the sequence length. This is because in every layer, every attention head attempts to come up with a transformed
representation for every position by “paying attention” to tokens at every other position. Quadratic complexity implies
that practically the maximum input size is rather limited. Thus, we cannot extract semantic representation for long
documents by passing them as input to Transformers.
7.1 Transformers with Super-Linear Complexity
A few efforts like BlockBERT [ 94] try to reduce this quadratic complexity by a constant factor by introducing sparse
block structures into the attention matrix. If we split the length- 𝑁input sequence into 𝑛blocks,𝑁×𝑁attention matrix
gets partitioned into 𝑛×𝑛blocks, where each block matrix is of the size𝑁
𝑛×𝑁
𝑛. Thus, BlockBERT reduces 𝑂(𝑁2)
memory consumption by a factor of 𝑛.
Child et al. [ 16] propose sparse transformers where sparse factorizations of the attention matrix reduce the quadratic
complexity to 𝑂(𝑛√𝑛). The key idea is to reduce the dense attention matrix to a sparse version by only computing
attention on a sparse number of (query, key) pairs. They propose two kinds of sparse factorizations: strided and fixed.
Strided attention implies having one head attend to the previous 𝑙locations, and the other head attend to every 𝑙𝑡ℎ
location, where 𝑙is the stride and chosen to be close to√𝑛. More heads could be used with a different stride value. Fixed
attention assumes that specific positions summarize previous locations and propagate that information to all future
positions.
The Reformer architecture [ 58] replaces the dot-product attention in a typical Transformer by one that uses locality-
sensitive hashing (LSH), changing its complexity from 𝑂(𝑛2)to𝑂(𝑛log𝑛), where𝑛is the length of the sequence. In a
standard Transformer, we compute scaled dot-product attention as follows.
Attention(𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=softmax𝑄𝐾𝑇
√
𝑑
𝑉 (68)
42