Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
4.4 Distilling Transformers
Recently, there has been a lot of work around distilling Transformers to smaller Transformers with less number of
layers or to Bidirectional LSTMs. Some of these methods aim at improving the accuracy versus model size tradeoff,
while others focus on complex settings like mismatching student-teacher vocabulary [ 142] or mismatch number of
attention heads.
Zhao et al. [ 142] learn a student with small vocabulary compared to the teacher using a dual training method. During
distillation, for a given training sequence input to the teacher model, they mix the teacher and student vocabularies by
randomly selecting tokens from the sequence to segment using the student vocabulary, with the other tokens segmented
using the teacher vocabulary. As part of the masked language model (MLM) task, the model now needs to learn to
predict words from the student vocabulary using context words segmented using the teacher vocabulary, and vice versa.
The expectation is that the student embeddings can be learned effectively this way from the teacher embeddings as well
as teacher model parameters. We perform dual training only for the teacher model inputs. The student model receives
words segmented exclusively using the student vocabulary. Also, during MLM, the model uses different softmax layers
for the teacher and the student vocabularies depending on which one was used to segment the word in question. Instead
of distilling solely on the teacher model’s final-layer outputs, layer-wise teacher model parameters can also be leveraged
to directly optimize parameters of corresponding layers in the student model.
In Patient KD (PKD) [ 110], the student learns from the teacher’s output after every 𝑘layers (see Fig. 4(H)) or the
output from the last few layers of the teacher (see Fig. 4(I)). The student BERT is initialized using some layers of the
pre-trained teacher BERT. TinyBERT [ 50] further extends this idea by using extensive knowledge from embedding layer,
and attention and hidden sub-layers of multiple teacher layers, and also the overall teacher output (see Fig. 4(J)). Each
student layer is first mapped to a teacher layer before the student training. Liu et al. [ 73] distill a multi-task student
from a multi-task teacher, given the soft targets of the training data across multiple tasks. If task 𝑡has a teacher, the
task-specific loss is the average of two objective functions, one for the correct targets and the other for the soft targets
assigned by the teacher. In MiniLM [ 129], the student is trained by deeply mimicking the self-attention behavior of
the last Transformer layer of the teacher (see Fig. 4(K)). Besides self-attention distributions, MiniLM introduces the
self-attention value-relation transfer to help the student achieve a deeper mimicry. The value-relation is computed as
pairwise correlation between different components of the value matrix across various attention heads of the final layer.
Pretrained Distillation [ 119] pretrains the student model with a self-supervised masked LM objective on a large corpus
first, then performs a standard KD on supervised tasks.
Most of these models learn one-to-one layer mapping, where each student layer is guided by only one specific teacher
layer. Li et al. [ 66] propose a method where each student intermediate layer learns from every teacher intermediate layer
with learnable attention weights. Both the embedding-layer distillation and the prediction-layer distillation employ the
one-to-one layer mapping as in TinyBERT and BERT-PKD.
Tang et al. [ 114] propose distillation of a BERT model to a single layer BiLSTM using KL divergence between student
and teacher logits (see Fig. 4(L)). Mukherjee et al. [ 83] also distill a multi-lingual BERT (mBERT) model to a BiLSTM.
Representation transfer is done from Transformer-based teacher model to BiLSTM-based student model with different
embedding dimensions and disparate output spaces. Distillation features include teacher logits and internal teacher
representations for one teacher layer. To make all output spaces compatible, a non-linear projection of the parameters in
student representation is done to have same shape as teacher representation for each token. The projection parameters
are learned by minimizing the KL-divergence (KLD) between the representations of the student and the chosen layer
29