TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
from the teacher. Overall there are multiple loss functions for the student training: supervised hard loss, soft loss wrt
output logits, and soft loss wrt internal teacher layer. Rather than optimizing for all loss functions jointly, stage-wise
training is performed where each loss function is sequentially used for optimization.
Lastly, there have been recent efforts [ 49,111] to distill Transformer models to slightly modified Transformer
architectures. MobileBERT [ 111] is a thin version of BERT-large, while equipped with bottleneck structures and a
carefully designed balance between self-attentions and feed-forward networks (FFN). To train MobileBERT, we first train
a specially designed teacher model, an inverted-bottleneck incorporated BERT-large model (IB-BERT). The IB-BERT
uses the inverted-bottleneck structures to adjust its feature map size to 512. Thus, in the bottleneck structure, the
inputs to the multi-head attention (MHA) module are from wider feature maps (of inter-block size), while the inputs to
the FFN are from narrower bottlenecks (of intra-block size). To fix this issue, MobileBERT uses stacked feed-forward
networks to re-balance the relative size between MHA and FFN. Each MobileBERT layer contains one MHA but 4
stacked FFN after each MHA. Then, we conduct knowledge transfer from this teacher to MobileBERT using feature map
transfer and attention transfer across all layers. Also, while distilling they perform progressive knowledge transfer, i.e.,
they progressively train each layer in 𝐿stages, where 𝐿is the number of layers. When the 𝑙-th layer is trained, all the
trainable parameters in the layers below are frozen. Another difference in the MobileBERT student architecture is usage
of high information flow residual connections between the high-channel-count layers. MobileBERT is 4.3x smaller and
5.5x faster than BERT-base while achieving competitive results on well-known benchmarks. Iandola et al. [ 49] propose
a new Transformer model architecture called SqueezeBERT which is much like BERT-base, but with the position-wise
fully connected layers implemented as convolutions, and grouped convolutions for many of the layers. Distillation for
SqueezeBERT is rather straightforward. Distillation is applied only to the final layer, and only during finetuning using
soft cross entropy loss with respect to a weighted sum of the teacher’s logits and a one-hot encoding of the ground-truth.
Teacher model is a BERT-base model finetuned independently on each GLUE task, and these task-specific teacher
weights are used for distillation. Xu et al. [ 133] propose a method for progressive module replacement for compressing
BERT. Their approach first divides the original BERT into several modules and builds their compact substitutes. Then,
the original modules are randomly replaced with their substitutes to train the compact modules to mimic the behavior
of the original modules. We progressively increase the probability of replacement through the training. In this way,
their approach brings a deeper level of interaction between the original and compact models.
4.5 Summary
Table 3 compares various knowledge distillation methods across different tasks and datasets. Accuracy of both the
original and the distilled model are shown in the Eval column. Also, we report model size for both the student as well
as the teacher models. Note that sometimes smaller student models perform better than the teacher models. This could
be because (1) for some (task, dataset) pairs, the smaller models are a better regularized fit compared to potentially
overfitted teacher models, and (2) student models can be rigorously trained using additional semi-supervision while
teacher models depend on limited labeled training data.
While knowledge distillation has been used for distilling NLP models across many applications, NMT is the most
popular one. For abstractive summarization, MiniLM [ 129] leads to a student models which is less than one tenth of the
teacher without much loss in ROUGE-L. Similarly, MiniLM shows good results for cross-lingual NLI and multi-lingual
QA as well. For Ad click through rate (CTR) prediction and language modeling, Anil et al. [ 2] show that co-distillation
leads to lower MAE and cross entropy respectively compared to the individually trained models. Zhao et al. [ 142]’s
mixed-vocab training leads to 6-layer model that retains over 95% of the BERT-base model’s slot filling F1 score while
30