Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
mimicking the generated features of the teacher can be a hard constraint for the student. Learning the solution process
from teacher is important. More concretely, the student is trained to minimize the L2 difference between the teacher
and student FSP matrices computed across various pairs of layers and across multiple training instances. A similar
method called Representational distance learning (RDL) has also been proposed in [78].
Lastly, multiple KD variants have been proposed for sequence-level predictions [ 29,56], e.g., for neural machine
translation (NMT). In word-level KD, cross-entropy is minimized between the student/teacher distributions for each
word in the actual target sequence, as well as between the student distribution and the degenerate data distribution,
which has all of its probability mass on one word. In sequence-level KD (Seq-KD) the student network is trained on the
output from beam search of the teacher network that had the highest score. In sequence-level interpolation (Seq-Inter)
the student is trained on the output from beam search of the teacher network that had the highest similarity (say using
BLEU score) with the target sequence.
4.2 Collaborative Learning
Can multiple students learn from each other? Is a powerful teacher really required? In the deep mutual learning
(DML) method [ 141], different from the one-way transfer between a static pre-defined teacher and a student in model
distillation, with DML, an ensemble of students learn collaboratively and teach each other throughout the training
process. Surprisingly, no prior powerful teacher network is necessary – mutual learning of a collection of simple student
networks works, and moreover outperforms distillation from a more powerful yet static teacher. Specifically, each
student is trained with two losses: a conventional supervised learning loss, and a mimicry loss that aligns each student’s
class posterior with the class probabilities of other students.
Anil et al. [ 2] propose a similar method but suggest letting the students learn independently just using the conventional
supervised learning (hard) loss at least for a few burn in iterations (see Fig. 4(E)). After this, the mutual learning can be
done as in DML. They also propose a variant of their Co-Distillation method to perform this training in a distributed
scenario where communication efficiency is also important. To update the parameters of one network using co-
distillation one only needs the predictions of the other networks, which can be computed locally from copies of the
other networks’ weights. Empirically, using stale predictions instead of up-to-date predictions for the other neural
networks has little to no adverse effect on the quality of the final trained model produced by co-distillation.
4.3 Multiple Teachers
So far we have talked about a student mimicing a single teacher. However, it is interesting to explore if the student can
learn better in presence of multiple teachers or from a teacher assistant.
Intuitively and also observed empirically, student network performance degrades when the gap between student and
teacher is large. Given a fixed student network, one cannot employ an arbitrarily large teacher, or in other words, a
teacher can effectively transfer its knowledge to students up to a certain size, not smaller. To alleviate this shortcoming,
Mirzadeh et al. [ 81] introduced multi-step KD, which employs an intermediate-sized network (teacher assistant) to
bridge the gap between the student and the teacher (see Fig. 4(F)). The teacher assistant (TA) models are distilled from
the teacher, and the student is then only distilled from the TAs. One could also perform multi-step TA distillation, for
example, distillation path could be 10→6→4→2.
A simple way to do KD with multiple teachers is to train student with cross entropy loss between student predictions
and average prediction from multiple teachers (see Fig. 4(G)). A more effective method is to augment this with a relative
dissimilarity (RD) loss [ 138] defined over intermediate layer outputs generated for a triplet of instances between the
27