TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
needs to pre-compute the word embeddings for the words, so it couldn’t stay in its compact form during inference. The
Slim embeddings model is much simpler, and easier to tune. And during inference, it uses much less space and can even
decrease the complexity of inference.
5.3 Parameter Sharing in Transformers
A standard Transformer does not share parameters across layers and also has a fixed number of encoder layers.
ALBERT [60] incorporates two parameter reduction techniques:
•Factorized embedding parameterization. That is, it decomposes large vocabulary embedding matrix into two
small matrices. Thus, it reduces the embedding parameters from 𝑂(𝑉×𝐻)to𝑂(𝑉×𝐸+𝐸×𝐻)where𝐻>>𝐸.
•Cross-layer parameter sharing: There are multiple ways to share parameters, e.g., only sharing feed-forward
network (FFN) parameters across layers, or only sharing attention parameters. The default decision for ALBERT
is to share all parameters across layers.
An ALBERT configuration similar to BERT-large has 18x fewer parameters and can be trained about 1.7x faster.
Dehghani et al. [ 21] propose Universal Transformers where the number of encoder layers are not pre-decided, and all
the encoder layers share the parameters. Certain symbols (e.g. some words or phonemes) are usually more ambiguous
than others. It is therefore reasonable to allocate more processing resources to these more ambiguous symbols. Thus,
ambiguous symbols undergo more self-attention transformations compared to non-ambiguous ones. Thus, they provide
a dynamic per-position halting mechanism for dynamically modulating the number of computational steps needed to
process each input symbol (called the “ponder time”) before the representation is passed on as input to the decoder. The
idea of sharing weights across layers in Transformers has also been explored in [4].
5.4 Summary
Table 6 compares various parameter sharing methods across different tasks and datasets. Accuracy of both the original
and the compressed (comp.) model are shown. Also, we report model size (in terms of number of parameters or memory
size) for both the original as well as the compressed models. For the same task, dataset and model combination, different
papers report different accuracy of the original model because of slight changes in training hyper-parameters; hence we
report accuracy of the original model for each row. Since many parameter sharing methods have been used to compress
word embeddings, the most common application is language modeling.
For language modeling, experiments have been done on the One Billion Word Benchmark, ACLW, PTB and Wikipedia
articles datasets across multiple languages using parameter sharing methods like Char-CNN [ 51], LightRNN [ 67], Slim
embeddings [ 68], CNN+Highway networks [ 55] and C2W [ 71]. C2W [ 71] always outperforms word lookup tables
and improvements are especially pronounced in Turkish, which is a highly morphological language, where word
meanings differ radically depending on the suffixes used. Jozefowicz et al. [ 51] observe that Char-CNNs especially with
character embeddings being used both at input as well as output can lead to 4.6x model size reduction with a slight
increase in perplexity. On the One-Billion-Word benchmark, LightRNN [ 67] achieves much lower perplexity compared
to word-LSTMs, whilst reducing the model size by a factor of 40-100, and speeding up the training process by a factor of
2. LightRNN [ 67] significantly reduces the model size, while at the same time outperforms CNN+Highway network [ 55]
method. While the model sizes of the CNN+Highway network method increase linearly with respect to the vocabulary
size, the model size of LightRNN almost keeps constant on the ACLW datasets. Slim embeddings [ 68] is way better
than LightRNN (low perplexity with smaller models). On PTB and 44M giga word corpus datasets, Slim embeddings
36