Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
(B) Pruning Synapses (C) Pruning Neurons (A) No Pruning
(E) Pruning Attention 
Heads(D) Pruning Blocks
(G) Pruning Layers(F) Pruning 
Sub-LayersTrain 
Connectivity
Prune 
Connections
Train weights
Dense Sparse DensePrune Densify
(H) Iterative pruning (I) Iterative pruning and densificationFeed forward
Multi-Head 
AttentionAdd and NormAdd and Norm
Feed forward
Multi-Head 
AttentionAdd and NormAdd and Norm
Fig. 2. Different Types of Pruning: (A) represents no pruning. Filled cells represent pruned entries. (B), (H) and (I) are unstructured
pruning methods discussed in Section 2.1. Remaining are structured pruning methods: (C) is discussed in Section 2.2, (D) in Section 2.3,
(E), (F) and (G) in Section 2.4.
there have been several efforts on designing Transformers with sub-quadratic complexity. Some of these methods are
super-linear while many are linear. Linear complexity methods use various techniques for enforcing linearity – the
broad idea is to compute a transformed representation for every token using attention over a fixed small number of other
tokens. Methods differ in terms of defining the set of other tokens to be used to compute a transformed representation
for the current token. We discuss such methods in Section 7.
2 PRUNING
The first proposed methods for model compression were based on pruning. Pruning can be done in two ways: structured
versus unstructured. In unstructured pruning, individual weight connections are removed from a network by setting
them to 0. One can prune away weights from a weight matrix depending on various criteria (e.g., prune away low
magnitude weights). Such unstructured pruning methods lead to sparse matrices and need special sparse matrix
manipulation libraries at inference time. Hence, various structured pruning methods have also been proposed which aim
to prune away structures like neurons, weight matrix blocks, attention heads or layers. Fig. 2 provides a broad overview
of various pruning styles. Fig 2(B) depicts unstructured pruning. Fig 2(C)-(G) shows various structured pruning methods.
In this section, we discuss unstructured weight pruning methods in Section 2.1 and structured pruning methods in
Sections 2.2-2.4.
In pruning, the main idea is to grow a large model and then prune away weights to end up with a much smaller
but effective model. This is inspired by the following biological observation. Trillions of synapses are generated in the
human brain during the first few months of birth. At one year old, synapse count peaks at 1000 trillion. And then natural
pruning begins to occur. A ten year old child has nearly 500 trillion synapses. This ‘pruning’ mechanism removes
redundant connections in the brain [123].
One natural question is should you prune large networks or build small dense networks? Pruning involves extra
processing plus sparse matrices need special handling. Can we avoid it by training smaller models? Zhu et al. [ 145]
experimented with models of various sizes with/ without pruning of stacked LSTMs models for language modeling, and
5