TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
layers. Zhu et al. [ 145] advise that in order to get the best-performing sparse model of a certain size, we should train a
dense model that is 5x-10x larger and then prune to the desired number of parameters rather than taking the largest
and best-performing dense model and pruning this model by 20x or more to the desired number of parameters. Guo
et al. [ 32] find that RPP is much better than typical iterative pruning. In their experiments with BERT they find that
for both original BERT and BERT pruned with RPP, the low-dimensional manifolds of the language representations
are similar, showing the similar projection. This implies that the BERT applied with RPP keeps most of the language
representation information similar to that from the original BERT.
For block pruning, Narang et al. [ 87] make the following observations: (1) We can create block-sparse RNNs with
sparsity ranging from 80% to 90% with small loss in accuracy. This allows us to reduce the model size by roughly 10 ×.
Block sparsity works with a variety of block sizes up to 32 ×32. (2) For block size 4 ×4, models with sparsity greater 90%
yield a relative accuracy loss of 30% or higher. Similarly, for blocks of 16 ×16, models with sparsity greater than 86%
have 30% or more accuracy loss. A similar trend is observed for block size 32 ×32. This indicates that there is a tradeoff
between sparsity, block size and accuracy of the model. (3) For both block pruning and weight pruning, we see that the
initial layers are pruned more aggressively compared to the final layers. Increasing sparsity in the layers closer to the
output results in poor accuracy. Additionally, the variance in sparsity across the layers increases with the block size.
Further, Cao et al. [ 9] make the following observations comparing block sparsity with BBS: (1) BBS achieves almost
the same model accuracy regardless of the change of bank size. For block sparsity, however, increasing the block size
adversely affects model accuracy.
For pruning of attention heads, Michel et al. [ 79] observe that one can prune up to 20% and 40% of heads from 6-layer
NMT Transformer and BERT resp., without incurring any noticeable negative impact. When trying to remove a head at
a time, only 8 (out of 96) heads in 6-layer NMT Transformer (16 heads/layer) cause a statistically significant change in
performance when they are removed from the model, half of which actually result in a higher BLEU score. Further
Voita et al. [ 122] find that on the English-Russian WMT dataset, pruning 38 out of 48 encoder heads results in a drop of
only 0.15 BLEU.
Overall, to summarize, pruning has been the most popular method for model compression. Pruning methods can be
unstructured (prune weights) or structured (prune neurons, blocks, attention heads, layers). While weight pruning
theoretically leads to pruning to a large extent, practical implementation of sparse data structures is difficult. Pruning
and regularization need to be done together carefully. Also, it is critical to define the importance functions for various
structures carefully. Among weight pruning methods, while iterative magnitude pruning with regularization works
well for RNNs and LSTMs, RPP performs better for Transformer based models. Pruning blocks using BBS is better
than pruning neurons. For Transformer models, pruning just the heads do not provide much model compression, but
dropping a combination of attention heads and layers is better.
3 QUANTIZATION
While pruning saves on the model size by removing weights, quantization aims to reduce the number of bits needed to
store weights. Most computer architectures use 32 bits to represent weights. However, estimated precision of the brain
(hippocampal spine) synapses is around 4.6 bits [ 5]. Empirical evidence suggests that most quantities in the nervous
system (for instance, firing of the neurons) have variability of a few percent due to biological noise, or a precision of 1
in 100 at best [ 70]. Thus, each decision could depend on log2(100)=6.64 bits. Thus, we should be able to store weights
in our artificial neural networks on average in a space of 4–7 bits. Given this motivation, various methods have been
proposed which perform 1-bit (or binary quantization), ternary quantization, and general quantization exploring the
14