Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
et al. [ 103] experimented with these pruning methods on encoder-decoder LSTM NMT (neural machine translation)
models. They perform magnitude pruning on all weight matrices of a 4-layer LSTM. They find that higher layers,
attention and softmax weights are the most important, while lower layers and the embedding weights hold a lot of
redundancy. At the lower layers the parameters for the input are most crucial, but at higher layers the parameters for
the gates also become important. These methods typically have a target pruning percent as a hyper-parameter and
pruning is either performed statically (after training the full model) or dynamically (while training itself). Retraining
the sparse pruned network helps in improving accuracy.
In a typical encoder-decoder LSTM model, there are these weight classes: source embedding weights, target embedding
weights, source layer weights, target layer weights, attention weights and softmax weights. An important consideration
related to magnitude pruning is how do we distribute the pruning over these different weight classes of a model, given
a target𝑥% pruning? Three ways suggested by See et al. [ 103] include class-blind, class-uniform and class-distribution.
In the class-blind way, we take all parameters, sort them by magnitude and prune the 𝑥% with smallest magnitude,
regardless of the weight class. So some classes are pruned proportionally more than others. In the class-uniform way,
Within each class, we sort the weights by magnitude and prune the x% with smallest magnitude. So all classes have
exactly x% of their parameters pruned. In the class-distribution scheme, for each class 𝑐, weights with magnitude less
than𝜆𝜎𝑐are pruned. Here, 𝜎𝑐is the standard deviation of that class and 𝜆is a universal parameter chosen such that in
total,𝑥% of all parameters are pruned. Class-blind pruning is the simplest and adheres to the principle that pruning
weights (or equivalently, setting them to zero) is least damaging when those weights are small, regardless of their
locations in the architecture. Class-uniform pruning and class-distribution pruning both seek to prune proportionally
within each weight class, either absolutely, or relative to the standard deviation of that class. They observe that
class-blind pruning outperforms both other schemes.
2.1.3 Iterative Magnitude Pruning Methods. Typically, it has been seen that rather than pruning in one-shot, it is a
good idea to prune gradually over epochs. This way of pruning is called iterative or gradual pruning (see Fig. 2(H)).
For starting proportion 𝑥% and ending proportion 𝑦%, iterative magnitude pruning procedure prunes 𝑥% of each of
the weights, does re-training, and then prunes (𝑦−𝑥)/𝑇% of the weights every 𝐾iterations.𝑇is the number of times,
pruning is done. Sometimes, pruning is started after few warmup iterations have already been performed. Magnitude
pruning has been seen to be very effective with regularization ( 𝐿1/𝐿2) while training. Dropouts also help in effective
pruning. In some pruning methods, a weight once pruned cannot be a part of the network in future iterations. On the
other hand, other methods do not modify the gradients of a pruned weight in the back-propagation step. In that case, it
is possible for the updates of a pruned weight to be larger than the threshold of that layer, and then the weight will
be involved in the forward pass again. Also, in every pruning iteration, we could either use a fixed threshold [ 38] or
monotonically increase it [86].
In case of gradual pruning [ 86], where pruning threshold 𝜖is monotonically increased, 𝜖is determined as follows in
every iteration 𝑖. Let𝑓be the number of iterations after which 𝜖is updated. Also, after a few warmup iterations, weights
are sorted using absolute values and we pick the weight corresponding to the 90𝑡ℎpercentile as 𝑞. Pruning threshold 𝜖
is increased in two stages. In the first stage (which starts at start iteration 𝑠and continues until ramp iteration 𝑟, we use
𝜃as the initial slope to prune weights. In the second stage (which starts at ramp iteration 𝑟and continues until end
iteration𝑒), we use𝜙as the ramp slope to change the rate of pruning. Typically, 𝜙is set to 1.5𝜃where𝜃is calculated as
7