TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
trained on the Penn Treebank dataset. Similar to [ 89], Hubara et al. [ 47] found that binarization of weight matrices lead
to large accuracy degradation. Later techniques like the one by Xu et al. [ 132] with 2 bits for weights and 3 bits for
activations showed better results.
Table 2 compares various quantization methods across different tasks and datasets. Accuracy of both the original
and the quantized model are shown. Also, we report number of bits used for weights (which indicate the model size) as
well as activations. For the same task, dataset and model combination, different papers report different accuracy of the
full precision model because of slight changes in training hyper-parameters; hence we report accuracy of full precision
model for each row.
For language modeling, PTB, Text-8, WikiText-2, Linux Kernel, IMDB and “War and Peace” are the popular datasets.
Across all the datasets, loss aware binarization outperforms other weight binarization schemes. On the Linux Kernel
dataset, it is even better than the full-precision network. BinaryConnect does not work well here because of the problem
of exploding gradients. On PTB, Xu et al.’s Alternating LAQ [ 132] with 2 bits for weights and 3 bits for activations
leads to an LSTM which is just 2.1 points worse in terms of perplexity per word. By 3-bit quantization, Alternating
LAQ can achieve∼10.5x memory saving and ∼3×real inference acceleration. Uniform and Balanced quantization are
rule-based and not aim at minimizing the error. Balanced quantization proposed by Zhou et al. [ 143] performs better
than HitNet [ 127] and uniform quantization [ 40]. Balanced quantization leads to better results compared to unbalanced
counterparts, especially when quantizing to 2-bit weights. However, for 4-bit weights, there is no clear gap between
scaling by mean and scaling by max (i.e. balanced and unbalanced quantization).
Across multiple tasks like named entity recognition with CoNLL-03, question answering with SQuAD, sentiment
analysis with SST-2, textual entailment using MNLI, Shen et al. [ 104] show that mixed precision quantization (where
different number of bits are used for different groups of neurons – 128 groups in each layer) of BERT is better than
QBERT. The reason behind this is the discrepancy (in QBERT) that not all the layers have the same sensitivity to
quantization. For more sensitive layers, higher bit precision needs to be set, while for layers that are less sensitive, 2-bits
setting is already sufficient. With only additional 5MB memory storage, 2/3-bits mixed-precision Q-BERT is able to
retain the performance drop within 2.3% for MNLI, SQuAD and 1.1% for SST-2, CoNLL-03, with up to 13x compression
ratio in weights. For machine translation, Cheong et al. [15] observe that Transformer architecture is highly resistant
to quantization (unlike to pruning), and are, in essence, able to match the original model up to a 4-bit representation.
Binary Scheme Flexible outperforms 1-bit k-means in both pure 1-bit compression and quantizing only the attention
layers, suggesting not tying the weights to particular centroids improves performance, and outperform Binary Scheme
Fixed, indicating learning the values to be a superior method. After binarizing only the attention layers, we are still able
to recover 90% of the model’s performance. Lam et al. [ 59] experimented with quantization of word embeddings and
showed that 2-bit quantized word vectors outperform full precision vectors on word similarity tasks, but do worse on
word analogy tasks. Intuitively, they reason that full precision Word2Vec is prone to overfitting with increased epochs
of training; quantized training does not seem to suffer as much from this. For sentiment analysis on IMDB, Alom et
al. [1] show that quantization to 4 bits is better than to 3 or 2 bits, which is expected. They also show that the normal
distribution shows better performance against uniform distribution with quantized weights. For speech recognition,
Ott et al. [89] show that pow-2 ternarization is the best.
Cheong et al [ 15] were the first to quantize Transformers. They observed that in the last attention layer of the
decoder over the encoder hidden states, the attention distribution of the original and 4-bit model are highly similar,
indicating 4 bit weights, i.e weights that take on one of 16 values, is enough to get the full effects of attention. Attention
distributions in the encoder layers of the Transformer for the original and 4-bit models are almost indistinguishable
24