TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD Gupta and Agrawal
follows.
𝜃=2𝑞𝑓
2(𝑟−𝑠)+3(𝑒−𝑟)(4)
Thus, from iteration 𝑠to𝑟, we set the pruning threshold as follows.
𝜖=𝜃(𝑖−𝑠+1)
𝑓(5)
From iterations 𝑟+1to𝑒, we set the pruning threshold as follows.
𝜖=𝜃(𝑟−𝑠+1)+𝜙(𝑖−𝑟+1)
𝑓(6)
Typically when pruning, biases are not pruned since they are much fewer in number. Overall, RNN/LSTM model size
can be reduced by 90% and speed-up is around 2x to 7x using gradual pruning with no deterioration in accuracy. Also,
layers closer to input are pruned more aggressively compared to the final layers.
Another way of performing iterative pruning is to set a pruning target per iteration [ 145]. In this scheme, we start
with an initial sparsity value 𝑠0. To achieve a final sparsity value of 𝑠𝑓after𝑛pruning steps with pruning frequency 𝑓,
pruning target in iteration 𝑖can be computed as follows.
𝑠𝑖=𝑠𝑓+(𝑠0−𝑠𝑓)
1−𝑖
𝑛𝑓3
(7)
Thus, the sparsity of the network is gradually increased while allowing the network training steps to recover from any
pruning-induced loss in accuracy. We prune the network rapidly in the initial phase when the redundant connections
are abundant and gradually reduce the number of weights being pruned each time as there are fewer and fewer weights
remaining in the network.
Cheong et al. [ 15] found that iterative pruning leads to poor results when pruning Transformer models like BERT.
Guo et al. [32] found that there are two problems with pruning especially when done with regularization.
•The larger weights 𝑤𝑗are penalized more heavily than smaller weights 𝑤𝑖in𝐿1regularization, which violates
the original intention of weight pruning, “removing the unimportant connections”.
•Direct optimization of a regularization penalty term causes divergence from the original loss function and has
negative effect on the effectiveness of gradient-based update.
They propose to perform reweighted 𝐿1minimization where 𝛼𝑖>0are inversely proportional to magnitude of
corresponding weights |𝑤𝑖|. Thus, they solve the following optimization problem
min𝑤𝑓(𝑤)+𝛾∑︁
𝑖𝛼𝑖|𝑤𝑖| (8)
where𝑓(𝑤)is the original loss function for the network. This optimization is solved using a reweighted proximal
pruning (RPP) method (which depends on proximal operators). RPP decouples the goals of high sparsity from minimizing
loss, and hence leads to improved accuracy even with high levels of pruning for BERT.
2.1.4 Iterative Magnitude Pruning and Densification. Further, the effectiveness of pruning can be improved by performing
pruning and densification [ 19,37] alternately across multiple iterations (see Fig. 2(I)). There are two ways of doing
this. In the first method [ 37], in each iteration, either pruning is performed or densification. The sparse training
regularizes the model, and the dense training restores the pruned weights, increasing the model capacity without
overfitting. Sparsification helps the optimizer escape saddle points, and leads to regularized training which converges
8