Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
applications, it is desirable to run them on local client devices to avoid network delay, to guard user privacy and to
avoid power dissipation in terms of input/output data communication.
Small models can indeed also lead to low prediction latencies. For example, Diamos et al. [ 25] showed that for small
models, one can cache the RNN weights in on-chip memory such as caches, block RAM, or register files across multiple
timesteps. This could lead to as much as 146x speedup if the entire RNN layer can be stored in registers rather than the
GPU DRAM of an NVIDIA TitanX GPU.
Finally, it is easier to perform software development, deployment and updates with smaller models. Large models are
difficult to handle. For example, it is impossible to fine-tune pretrained BERT-large model on a GPU with 12-16 GB RAM.
This poses a large barrier of entry for communities without the resources to purchase several large Graphic Processing
Units (GPUs). For large models, tuning various configuration parameters needs lots of resources. Smaller models lead to
improved speed of learning and allow for more hyper-parameter configurations to be evaluated. Mobile-first companies
dislike large apps. App stores are very sensitive to the size of the binary files. For example, iPhone App Store has the
restriction “apps above 150 MB will not download until you connect to Wi-Fi”. Smaller models are easier to use and
deploy in real world systems. Large models need multiple server nodes. On the other hand, multiple instances of smaller
models can be run simultaneously on the same machine leading to higher QPS (queries per second). Lastly, smaller
models also decrease the communication overhead of distributed training of the models.
Fortunately, there is a large amount of redundancy among the weights of these large neural networks. A small subset
of the weights are sufficient to reconstruct the entire network. Denil et al. [ 23] showed that by simply using ∼5% of the
weights, it is possible to predict the remaining weights without any drop in accuracy. This observation led to a large
number of research efforts across multiple communities on compression of large deep learning models. In this survey,
we aim to systematically explore this large body of literature in the NLP community by organizing it into various
categories. Figure 1 shows a broad organization of model compression methods for text. In this survey we do not focus
on specific methods proposed in other communities like vision and speech only and which make use of image/audio
specific architectures and hence cannot be applied to text. Also, we do not discuss methods on hardware optimizations
to reduce latency. While there are other surveys in the broad area of model compression [ 14,22] also specifically on
knowledge distillation [126], they are either old or focus on computer vision related problems.
1 MODEL COMPRESSION METHODS: OVERVIEW
In this survey, we discuss compression methods using pruning, quantization, knowledge distillation, parameter sharing,
tensor decomposition and sub-quadratic Transformers.
The most obvious way to reduce model size is to sparsify weight matrices. Pruning methods differ based on what is
pruned and the actual logic used to prune. Given a matrix, one can prune
•Some weight entries
•Rows or columns (i.e., neurons)
•Weight blocks
•Attention heads (in case of Transformer based methods)
•Layers or a combination of the structures.
Other interesting aspects of pruning methods include the following.
•How to decide which weights/neurons/blocks/heads to prune?
•Should you prune large networks or build small networks?
3