Compression of Deep Learning Models for Text: A Survey TKDD, Aug 2020, TKDD
size of SqueezeBERT. SqueezeBERT is 4.3x faster than BERT-base, while MobileBERT is 3.0x faster than BERT-base.
On 4 of GLUE tasks SqueezeBERT outperforms the accuracy of MobileBERT, while on the other 4 of the GLUE tasks
MobileBERT outperforms SqueezeBERT. MobileBERT and SqueezeBERT outperform BERT-base significantly across all
tasks.
To summarize, KD is a popular method for text based model compression. Various methods have proposed information
copying using logits, softmax output, attention sub-layer output, value relation, relative dissimilarity information from
both the last layer as well as intermediate layers of the teacher. Many methods have been proposed to handle complex
teacher-student configuration mismatches in terms of vocabulary, number of attention heads, and hidden layer sizes.
Also, KD has been found to be very effective in complex problem settings like multi-lingual tasks and tasks with large
number of classes. Learning from noisy teachers, teacher assistants, an ensemble of teachers has been found to be
effective as well. KD is the best model compression method especially in settings where a large amount of unlabeled
data exists; distillation with data pseudo-labeled by teacher leads to very effective students.
5 PARAMETER SHARING
Rather than removing weights or reducing #bits to store them, parameter sharing methods reduce model size by finding
weight blocks that can share the same weight. Character-based language models learn embeddings for characters
and use them to compose word embeddings. In some senses, we can think of various words sharing these character
embedding parameters. Further, various parameter sharing methods have been proposed to reduce the large word
embedding matrix size. Finally, there are multiple Transformer architectures which benefit from the parameter sharing
philosophy. We discuss these methods in this section.
5.1 Character-aware Language Models
Fig. 5 illustrates various character-aware language model architectures. Ling et al. [ 71] proposed their character to
word (C2W) model which constructs vector representations of words by composing characters using BiLSTMs. Relative
to traditional word representation models that have independent vectors for each word type, C2W requires only a
single vector per character type and a fixed set of parameters for the compositional model. As input, we define an
alphabet of characters 𝐶. For English, this vocabulary would contain an entry for each uppercase and lowercase letter as
well as numbers and punctuation. Thus compared to the word embedding matrix, this model is much smaller. Despite
the compactness of this model, this “composed” word representations yield comparable results across multiple text
classification tasks.
Jozefowicz et al. [ 51] propose two variants for composing word embeddings using character embeddings. In the first
CNN-Softmax variant, they use character CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks) to compose word embeddings from
character embeddings both at the input side as well as at the output softmax layer. The character-CNN sub-networks at
the input or the output do not share weights. The composed word embeddings are fed to an LSTM to generate the
output. In the second Char-LSTM variant, character CNN is used to compose word embeddings on the input side. The
composed word embeddings are fed to an LSTM to generate an output which is further fed to a small LSTM that predicts
the target word one character at a time. Thus, the word and character-level models are combined, and predictions are
made one character at a time, thus allowing to compute probabilities over a much smaller vocabulary. Kim et al. [ 55]
propose another variant where at the output side they continue to use word embeddings, but at the input side they
compose word embeddings using a highway network on top of a character CNN. The highway network’s output is
used as the input to a multi-layer LSTM, whose last hidden state output is fed to the output softmax layer.
33