Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 12 of 36
Accordingly, associated gene variants might be appealing candidate for risk and disease progression
assessment. In this scenario, our group recently demonstrated that established genetic risk factors, like
the di erent APOE -alleles, might be a ected by key genetic backgrounds, making patients di erently
able to manage local iron accumulation [ 158] (Figure 5). Studies focused on the link between iron
and lipid homeostasis [ 159–162] conﬁrmed that the two pathways might share more than expected.
Accordingly, by extensive investigation of common iron-regulating gene variants, a new mechanism
of gene-gene interaction between iron genes and genes involved in the cholesterol metabolism by
APOE -HFE has been proposed, paving the way to translational pharmacogenetic studies focused on
the optimal tune of brain iron burden [ 163]. In this line, it has been found that also among other
common cognitive diseases, males showed signiﬁcantly higher peripheral iron levels compared to
females. Conversely, among AD patients, females reached males levels, suggesting that the APOE -gene
might be the key determinant in the processes of iron deposit in the brain, thus di erently contribute
to cognitive decline in the two sexes.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 12 of 37 
 share more than expected. Accordingly, by extensive investigation of common iron -regul ating gene 
variants, a new mechanism of gene -gene interaction between iron genes and genes involved in the 
cholesterol metabolism by APOE -HFE has been proposed,  paving the way to translational 
pharmacogenetic studies focused on the optimal tune of brain ir on burden [163]. In this line, it has 
been found that also among other common cognitive diseases, males showed significantly higher 
peripheral iron levels compared to females. Conversely, among AD patients, females reached males 
levels, suggesting that the  APOE -gene might be the key determinant in the processes of iron deposit 
in the brain, thus differently contribute to cognitive decline in the two sexes.  
 
Figure 5. Snapshot of key risk factors for the development of AD and other types of dementia.  
Fluctu ations of oestrogen levels during perimenopause to menopause transition have been also 
suggested to be responsible for the increased AD risk experienced by menopausal females [164]. In 
this regard, different APOE  genotypes have been reported to be differen tly responsive to oestrogens 
replacement treatment. Females carrying the APOE -ε4 allele showed the worst cognitive decline 
compared to untreated APOE -ε4 females, while APOE -ε2/3 females reported clinical improvements 
during oestrogen replacement therapy [165,166]. Accordingly, it has been recently suggested that 
different mechanism s, ranging from interactions between oestrogen receptors and ApoE to metabolic 
changes mediated by oestrogens might differentially affect APOE -carrier females [167]. Overall, 
oestrogen levels and oestrogen -based replacement therapies (including gender -transition therapies) 
will need to be carefully considered in the light of the APOE  carrier status to prevent undesired brain 
disorders and cognitive decline.  
Although accumulation/deposition of amyloid -beta (Aβ) peptides and neurofibrillary tangles 
are the main hallmarks of AD, neuroinflammatory markers are receiving growing attention as direct 
mediators of the disease and as potential modulatory factors able to synergize with  Aβ pathways in 
driving the disease progression [168]. 
In a recent work, Belloy and colleagues addressed the overall role of APOE 4 in AD, concluding 
that its pleiotropic nature asks for integrated and synergistic studies, perhaps on extreme clinical 
phenotypes, contextually addressin g neurologic, cardiovascular, and lipid driven inflammatory 
traits of the disease [150]. More efforts to better identify key pathways and molecular mechanisms 
underlying onset and progression of cognitive decline should be made also in the view of  the ongo ing 
Figure 5. Snapshot of key risk factors for the development of AD and other types of dementia.
Fluctuations of oestrogen levels during perimenopause to menopause transition have been also
suggested to be responsible for the increased AD risk experienced by menopausal females [ 164]. In
this regard, di erent APOE genotypes have been reported to be di erently responsive to oestrogens
replacement treatment. Females carrying the APOE -"4 allele showed the worst cognitive decline
compared to untreated APOE -"4 females, while APOE -"2/3 females reported clinical improvements
during oestrogen replacement therapy [ 165,166]. Accordingly, it has been recently suggested
that di erent mechanisms, ranging from interactions between oestrogen receptors and ApoE to
metabolic changes mediated by oestrogens might di erentially a ectAPOE -carrier females [ 167].
Overall, oestrogen levels and oestrogen-based replacement therapies (including gender-transition
therapies) will need to be carefully considered in the light of the APOE carrier status to prevent
undesired brain disorders and cognitive decline.
Although accumulation /deposition of amyloid-beta (A ) peptides and neuroﬁbrillary tangles
are the main hallmarks of AD, neuroinﬂammatory markers are receiving growing attention as direct