Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 22 of 36
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 22 of 37 
 difficult to obtain, is a fruitful tactic to make major progress and contribution in a personalized gender 
medicine [298]. 
 
Figure 8. Proposed sex -omics / gender -omics strategy for research and clinical approach t o diseases.  
Finally, omics sciences if sex and gender -oriented, will also help other important auxiliary 
health -related disciplines, such as those involved in food -sciences and nutrition, where efforts to 
recognize personalized diets in relationship to hea lth is the first step in preventive medicine [299]. 
One extraordinary field in which this could be applied is the multivitamin supplement (e.g. , folic 
acid) during the pre - and peri -conception period, not universally considered safe for every mother in 
absence of a detailed genomic analysis [300–302]. Finally, if part of these advances will be 
accomplished, this will significantly improve the global health at any age and stage and for any sex 
and gender cutting down health care costs of the Public Health Sy stems. Everyone must make their 
own effort, including scientists, governments, pharmaceutical companies, patient associations and 
scientific journals working together to ensure the success of this epochal transformation.  
10. Conclusions  
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that there are sex and gender differences 
between clinical manifestations, disease progression, treatment efficacy and prognosis in several 
common or complex pathologic conditions. A number of faults and underestimations have be en 
performed in the past by not properly considering that different sexes have different genetic, 
biological and psychological features, which greatly influence the natural disease course, symptoms 
and treatment response. As personalized medicine and pharm acogenetics are taking hold in the 
common medical procedures, gender medicine and omics -approaches equally have to become part 
of the clinical practice. The present review article dealt with sex -specific manifestations of classical 
and less known pathologi es and situations in terms of impasse in the diagnostic, prognostic and 
treatment options we have at disposal in the clinical practice. Finally, there is a number of exciting 
challenges to face in the years to come, such as the inclusion of gender in both preclinical and clinical 
studies to understand any unrevealed male and female difference and intersection, with the final aim 
to achieve a fully inclusive personalized medicine : 
“It is also important to note that the study of sex/gender differences benefit s men as much as it benefits 
women. Therefore, when we fail to routinely consider the impact of sex/gender in research, we are leaving 
everyone’s health to chance ” [298]. 
Figure 8. Proposed sex-omics /gender-omics strategy for research and clinical approach to diseases.
Finally, omics sciences if sex and gender-oriented, will also help other important auxiliary
health-related disciplines, such as those involved in food-sciences and nutrition, where e orts to
recognize personalized diets in relationship to health is the ﬁrst step in preventive medicine [ 299]. One
extraordinary ﬁeld in which this could be applied is the multivitamin supplement (e.g., folic acid)
during the pre- and peri-conception period, not universally considered safe for every mother in absence
of a detailed genomic analysis [ 300–302]. Finally, if part of these advances will be accomplished, this
will signiﬁcantly improve the global health at any age and stage and for any sex and gender cutting
down health care costs of the Public Health Systems. Everyone must make their own e ort, including
scientists, governments, pharmaceutical companies, patient associations and scientiﬁc journals working
together to ensure the success of this epochal transformation.
10. Conclusions
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that there are sex and gender di erences between
clinical manifestations, disease progression, treatment e cacy and prognosis in several common or
complex pathologic conditions. A number of faults and underestimations have been performed in the
past by not properly considering that di erent sexes have di erent genetic, biological and psychological
features, which greatly inﬂuence the natural disease course, symptoms and treatment response. As
personalized medicine and pharmacogenetics are taking hold in the common medical procedures,
gender medicine and omics-approaches equally have to become part of the clinical practice. The
present review article dealt with sex-speciﬁc manifestations of classical and less known pathologies
and situations in terms of impasse in the diagnostic, prognostic and treatment options we have at
disposal in the clinical practice. Finally, there is a number of exciting challenges to face in the years
to come, such as the inclusion of gender in both preclinical and clinical studies to understand any
unrevealed male and female di erence and intersection, with the ﬁnal aim to achieve a fully inclusive
personalized medicine:
“It is also important to note that the study of sex /gender di erences beneﬁts men as much as it beneﬁts
women. Therefore, when we fail to routinely consider the impact of sex /gender in research, we are
leaving everyone’s health to chance”. [298]
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
(MIUR) 2017.