Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 7 of 36
a signiﬁcant amount of genes escaping this process to rate greater than 15% of the total. In fact, the
presence of mutations in tumour suppressor genes on a single allele, by retaining two functional
copies, might represent a protective mechanism [ 87]. It is important to note that the X-chromosome
is signiﬁcantly enriched for immune-related microRNAs whose deregulation has been associated
with the pathogenesis of many kinds of cancers. Recent data reported the identiﬁcation of nearly
120 microRNAs on the X-chromosome, in contrast to the four found on the Y-chromosome, whereas
autosomes on average contain 40-50 of them. These small non coding RNAs (20–25 nt long), acting as
post-transcriptional regulators of the gene expression, represent a really powerful regulatory system.
Since the X-chromosome is enriched also for immune-related coding genes, the option of sex-associated
functional loops can also be hypothesized [88].
Considering the role of sex hormones, oestrogens and androgens have been shown to modulate
immune responses, resulting in a di erent gender susceptibility to diseases [ 89]. Indeed, female immune
functions and responses are generally higher than in males, on one side sustaining a stronger immune
response against infections, on the other increasing susceptibility to develop autoimmune diseases [ 90].
Many important examples of cancer-associated gender di erences have been reported, and among
them we can highlight colorectal and bladder cancer as well as melanoma [ 91,92]. Colorectal cancer,
the third most common cancer in the world, is characterized by sex- and gender-speciﬁc di erences,
since women appear more prone than men to develop right-sided colon cancer, a more aggressive
form of this neoplasia. Interestingly, right and left localized tumours are associated with di erent
molecular abnormalities, i.e., microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutations are often observed in
right-sided colon cancer, whereas chromosomal instability and p53 mutations are more frequent in
left-sided tumours. Besides anatomic and physiological di erences of the colon (longer transverse
colon in women), hormonal factors might underlie the observed di erences, since oestrogen appears
to be a protective factor against MSI, as suggested by the increased risk of MSI-high colon cancer in
older women and by the reduced risk in postmenopausal women undergoing hormone replacement
therapy [93,94]. In addition, socio-cultural disparities, as dietary factors, should be considered.
Gender discrepancy also exists in the incidence of bladder carcinoma, the fourth most common
cancer in men and the seventeenth in women worldwide (Figure 3). However, women are more prone
to both recurrence and progression of the disease. One explanation could rely on di erences of female
and male anatomic sites: the higher frequency of infections (e.g., cystitis) in women might cause
delayed diagnoses with negative e ects on prognosis and quality of life. In addition, gender-associated
speciﬁcities, such as smoking habits and occupational risk factors, may play a role [95].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 7 of 37 
 signific ant amount of genes escaping  this process to rate greater than 15% of the total. In fact, the 
presence of mutations in tumour suppressor genes on a single allele, by retaining two functional 
copies, might represent a protective mechanism [87]. It is import ant to note that the X -chromosome 
is significantly enriched for immune -related microRNAs whose deregulation has been associated 
with the pathogenesis of many kinds of cancers. Recent data reported the identification of nearly 120 
microRNAs on the X -chromos ome, in contrast to the four found on the Y -chromosome, whereas 
autosomes on average contain 40 -50 of them. These small non coding RNAs (20 –25 nt long), acting 
as post -transcriptional regulators of the gene expression, represent a really powerful regulator y 
system. Since the X -chromosome is enriched also for immune -related coding genes, the option of sex -
associated functional loops can also be hypothesized [88]. 
Considering the role of sex hormones, oestrogens and androgens have been shown to modulate 
immun e responses, resulting in a different gender susceptibility to diseases [89]. Indeed, female 
immune functions and responses are generally higher than in males, on one side sustaining a stronger 
immune response against infections, on the other increasing su sceptibility to develop autoimmune 
diseases [90]. Many important examples of cancer -associated gender differences have been reported, 
and among them we can highlight colorectal and bladder cancer as well as melanoma [91,92]. 
Colorectal cancer, the third mo st common cancer in the world, is characterized by sex - and gender -
specific differences, since women appear more prone than men to develop right -sided colon cancer, 
a more aggressive form of this neoplasia. Interestingly, right and left localized tumours a re associated 
with different molecular abnormalities, i.e. , microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF  mutations are 
often observed in right -sided colon cancer, whereas chromosomal instability and p53 mutations are 
more frequent in left -sided tumours. Besid es anatomic and physiological differences of the colon 
(longer transverse colon in women), hormonal factors might underlie the observed differences, since 
oestrogen appears to be a protective factor against MSI, as suggested by the increased risk of MSI -
high colon cancer in older women and by the reduced risk in postmenopausal women undergoing 
hormone replacement therapy [93,94]. In addition, socio -cultural disparities, as dietary factors, 
should be considered.  
Gender discrepancy also exists in the incidenc e of bladder carcinoma, the fourth most common 
cancer in men and the seventeenth in women worldwide (Figure 3). However, women are more 
prone to both recurrence and progression of the disease. One explanation could rely on differences 
of female and male an atomic sites: the higher frequency of infections (e.g. , cystitis) in women might 
cause delayed diagnoses with negative effects on prognosis and quality of life. In addition, gender -
associated specificities, such as smoking habits and occupational risk fact ors, may play a role [95]. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic picture showing key examples of sex and gender disparities in cancer.  
Figure 3. Schematic picture showing key examples of sex and gender disparities in cancer.