Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 19 of 36
the same symptoms. Accordingly, prescription of opioids is mainly aimed at men, while for women
the psychological components of the disease are more considered, and gender di erences could be
attributable to cultural inﬂuences [ 266]. Boys and girls grow up with di erent outlooks on pain: girls
often feel free to cry over small injuries, while boys feel extra pressure to hold back the tears [ 267].
Unfortunately for women, an emotional response can make a painful situation worse: women are
more likely than men to develop anxiety or depression that can increase feelings of pain and the risk of
disability [268].
The gender gap in pain threshold and feeling is probably linked to biological and genetics
dierences in male and female bodies and to their capability to respond in a di erent way to
pain. The knowledge of these di erences can shed light on the basic nature of pain and lead to
improved treatments for all patients [ 269]. Oestrogen receptors are distributed in many pain-related
regions in both the central and the peripheral nervous systems, so that oestrogens can inﬂuence the
generation and transmission of pain [ 270]. A connection has been observed between oestrogens and
the N-methyl- d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor 1, which is able to bind an excitatory neurotransmitter,
glutamate, involved in the generation, transmission and maintenance of various types of pain [ 271]. In
particular, NMDA receptors play a primary role in the transmission and regulation of information
regarding neuropathic pain and their expression is increased by the presence of oestrogens [ 272,273].
It has been also observed that gonadal oestradiol (E2) alters the sensation of pain through upregulation
of vanilloid receptors 1 (TRPV1) that plays a critical role in triggering pain. An increase in progesterone
seems to determine a down-regulation of TRPV1 receptors in the plasma membrane of sensory neurons,
decreasing the perception of pain under physiological conditions like pregnancy [ 274]. In contrast,
testosterone has been shown to play a key role in inhibiting the expression of TRPV1 at the sensory
ganglion level in a model of chronic inﬂammatory pain induced in rats, thus conﬁrming the presence
of sex di erences for neuropathic and /or chronic pain in both animals and humans.
Preclinical studies should be performed in male and female animals, and at di erent ages,
because hormonal cycles can also inﬂuence the results, whereas the nerve pathways of pain are
dierent [ 275]. Female rodents have a lower pain threshold in experimental models of hot thermal,
chemical, inﬂammatory and mechanical nociception [ 276]. As a consequence, it is better not just to
assume that data obtained from experiments conducted on male animals can be generalized to both
sexes, and not to transfer the results of clinical trials from male to female [ 277]. Males and females do not
have the same bodies and there are signiﬁcant di erences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
which could modify drug doses, therapeutic e ect and toxicity [ 278]. Regarding the pain transmission
and the cellular involvement, the microglia appears to have a prominent role in the pain for males, but
not for females, who are more sensitive to the control of T-lymphocytes, a type of cell whose role is
known in sensitization to pain [ 279]. Clinical research is fundamental to verify whether the cellular
mechanisms of pain, as well as the involvement of cells and /or microglia, are di erent between men
and women in a similar way to those found in the animal models (Figure 7). It is evident that hormones
inﬂuence perception of pain: oestrogens mitigate pain with concentration-dependent mechanisms,
whereas testosterone reduces the sensitivity to chronic pain [ 280]. Pain responses seem to change
during life depending on hormonal variability: at puberty, the perception of pain increases in women,
while sex di erences in chronic pain rates disappear in menopause [ 281]. The gonadal hormones a ect
the incidence of pain, as it was observed in transsexuals who received cross sex hormones to develop
and maintain somatic characteristics of the opposite sex [ 282]. The male to female transsexuals showed
increased pain sensitivity with oestrogen treatment, whilst the female to male transsexuals treated
with testosterone reported a signiﬁcant reduction of the chronic pain [283].
The pharmaceutical market o ers the same pain-relieving drugs to everyone, even though
sex-di erentiated pharmacological treatments could work better. Numerous di culties have arisen
in identifying a pharmacological dosage according to sex, due to the lack of female subjects in
almost all clinical studies. In general, women in their reproductive age are excluded from the trials
due to rapid hormonal changes and possible pregnancy [ 284]. As far as the analgesic therapy is