Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 20 of 36
concerned, the response is di erent in males and females, since men are more sensitive to the use
of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, while morphine shows greater e cacy in women [ 285].
Several major factors can explain sex-di erences in the modulation of pain with opioids, such as
the neuro-anatomical organization and the neuro-physiological characteristics of the descending
inhibitory circuit, whilst no sex-di erence is known in the plasma concentration of morphine and /or its
metabolites [ 286]. A series of studies carried out on post-operative pain revealed that male patients
consumed morphine doses 2.4-times higher than women, conﬁrming that women are more sensitive
than men to morphine [ 287]. The hepatic metabolism of the opiates is di erent for men and women,
and these di erences depend on the presence of sex hormones in circulation and on their inﬂuence on
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenetics [269,288].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 20 of 37 
  
Figure 7.  Hypothesis of various cellular mechanisms involving pain transmission in females and 
males.  
The pharmaceutical market offers the same pain -relieving drugs to everyone, even though sex -
differentiated pharmacological treatments could work better. Numerous d ifficulties have arisen in 
identifying a pharmacological dosage according to sex, due to the lack of female subjects in almost 
all clinical studies. In general, women in their reproductive age are excluded from the trials due to 
rapid hormonal changes and possible pregnancy [284]. As far as the analgesic therapy is concerned, 
the response is different in males and females, since men are more sensitive to the use of non -steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, while morphine shows greater efficacy in women [285]. Several major 
factors can explain sex -differences in the modulation of pain with opioids, such as the neuro -
anatomical organization and the neuro -physiological characteristics of the descending inhibitory 
circuit, whilst no sex -difference is known in the p lasma concentration of morphine and/or its 
metabolites [286]. A series of studies carried out on post -operative pain revealed that male patients 
consumed morphine doses 2.4 -times higher than women, confirming that women are more sensitive 
than men to morph ine [287]. The hepatic metabolism of the opiates is different for men and women, 
and these differences depend on the presence of sex hormones in circulation and on their influence 
on pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenetics [269,288]. 
The aw areness that the biological basis of pain differs between males and females raises 
important questions in experimental research. Recommendations may be required to improve the 
regulation of the drugs with regard to sex and gender. The development of potent ial drugs with 
fewer negative side effects and more favourable pharmacological properties for both sexes could 
make an important contribution to gender medicine and pharmacology, as well as to the 
development of personalized health care to both women and m en. 
9. Sex/Gender Disparity in the OMICs Era: Sex -Omics and Gender -Omics  
Omics -sciences investigate the role of genes, proteins and metabolic pathways involved in 
disease susceptibility with the aim to improve diagnosis, prognosis and novel drug design. Be sides 
to genomics, proteomics and metabolomics, new omics have been proposed and referred as ”sex -
omics” and “gender -omics” aimed at investigating sex/gender specific aspects in biomedical sciences 
[289–291]. Whilst sex -omics is easier to be faced, knowing  the sex -related side of any pathological 
condition, gender -omics has a more complex and multifaceted nature that makes it difficult to be 
approached.  
Great progresses have been made in the milestones studies of Arthur P. Arnold on the “sexome”, 
defined as  the sum of sex -biased effects on gene networks and cell systems [292]. Several pathological 
conditions differently affect females and males, and this is an extraordinary occasion to find out risk 
Figure 7. Hypothesis of various cellular mechanisms involving pain transmission in females and males.
The awareness that the biological basis of pain di ers between males and females raises important
questions in experimental research. Recommendations may be required to improve the regulation of
the drugs with regard to sex and gender. The development of potential drugs with fewer negative
side e ects and more favourable pharmacological properties for both sexes could make an important
contribution to gender medicine and pharmacology, as well as to the development of personalized
health care to both women and men.
9. Sex /Gender Disparity in the OMICs Era: Sex-Omics and Gender-Omics
Omics-sciences investigate the role of genes, proteins and metabolic pathways involved in disease
susceptibility with the aim to improve diagnosis, prognosis and novel drug design. Besides to
genomics, proteomics and metabolomics, new omics have been proposed and referred as ”sex-omics”
and “gender-omics” aimed at investigating sex /gender speciﬁc aspects in biomedical sciences [ 289–291].
Whilst sex-omics is easier to be faced, knowing the sex-related side of any pathological condition,
gender-omics has a more complex and multifaceted nature that makes it di cult to be approached.
Great progresses have been made in the milestones studies of Arthur P . Arnold on the “sexome”,
deﬁned as the sum of sex-biased e ects on gene networks and cell systems [ 292]. Several pathological
conditions di erently a ect females and males, and this is an extraordinary occasion to ﬁnd out risk
and protection factors di erently expressed in the two sexes [ 293]. In brief, sex-biasing factors include
two X-chromosomes and ovarian secretions in females, and a single X chromosome, the Y-chromosome
and testicular secretions in males. Although, it might be considered a reducing consideration, this
model has dramatic biologic e ects, as shown in mouse tissues not directly involved in reproduction,
where transcriptome analyses showed sex di erences in 72% of the liver genes and in 68% of the