Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 5 of 36
presentation, genetic risk factors and comorbidities, as demonstrated by the higher in-hospital mortality,
the readmission rate within the ﬁrst thirty days or the longer follow-up [ 9]. Interestingly, results
coming from ﬁve Italian prospective registries conducted between 2001 and 2014, concluded that age
and sex speciﬁc di erences exist in the outcome of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI) [ 61,62]. Regardless of age, at discharge, females are at higher risk of re-hospitalization due to
dierent causes. Strong disparities between the two sexes were conﬁrmed also after adjustment for
confounding factors [ 63]. Accordingly, the in-hospital death was 3.2% for males and 8.4% for females,
and the latter have been found signiﬁcantly associated with in-hospital mortality. Finally, females
continue to experience higher post-AMI mortality and global poorer outcome (Figure 2) also despite
the improvements in reperfusion therapy tools [ 64]. In conclusion, despite a worldwide improvement
in STEMI care, females continue to experience higher in-hospital mortality, which is not completely
unexpected, as the most fundamental cardiovascular studies are primarily based on males [9,65].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 5 of 37 
 situations, like different age at presentation, genetic risk factors and comorbidities, as demonstrated 
by the higher in -hospital mortality, the readmission rate within the first thirty days or the longer 
follow -up [9]. Interestingly, results coming from five Italian prospective registries conducted between 
2001 and 2014, concluded that age and sex specific differences exist i n the outcome of patients with 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [61,62]. Regardless of age, at discharge, females are at 
higher risk of re -hospitalization due to different causes. Strong disparities between the two sexes 
were confirmed also after  adjustment for confounding factors [63]. Accordingly, the in -hospital death 
was 3.2% for males and 8.4% for females, and the latter have been found significantly associated with 
in-hospital mortality. Finally, females continue to experience higher post -AMI mortality and global 
poorer outcome (Figure 2) also despite the improvements in reperfusion therapy tools [64]. In 
conclusion, despite a worldwide improvement in STEMI care, females continue to experience higher 
in-hospital mortality, which is not comple tely unexpected, as the most fundamental cardiovascular 
studies are primarily based on males [9,65]. 
 
Figure 2. Extreme clinical phenotypes and prognosis in male and female AMI patients. The increased 
AMI risk in males is balanced by a better prognosis, r esulting in enhanced AMI outcome. Conversely, 
the reduced AMI risk in females is characterized by a worst prognosis, resulting in a poor AMI 
outcome.  
Another key element is that postmenopausal females tend to develop HF with preserved ejection 
fraction, ch aracterized by diastolic dysfunction, whereas age -matching males develop HF with 
reduced ejection fraction, characterized by systolic dysfunction [66]. These differences are important 
because most drugs used to treat HF have been developed to treat those w ith reduced ejection 
fraction, and there are few effective treatment options for HF with preserved ejection fraction [67]. It 
is also possible that the aging process affects the heart of males and females differently, so that the 
latter are predisposed to problems of myocardial relaxation, while males mainly develop pump 
failure. As a result, males and females show a completely opposite trend in terms of hospitalization 
index for HF, which increases significantly with the age of the females compared with ag e-matching 
males [68]. A recent long -term study on LVR after the first AMI reports that, of the total number of 
patients who experienced LVR after one -year follow -up (31–38% in the two cohorts of the study), 
females were significantly over -represented (43 –46.5% vs 27 –36.5% for females and males 
respectively in the two studies) [69]. These data are extremely important since both cohorts of patients 
Figure 2. Extreme clinical phenotypes and prognosis in male and female AMI patients. The increased
AMI risk in males is balanced by a better prognosis, resulting in enhanced AMI outcome. Conversely,
the reduced AMI risk in females is characterized by a worst prognosis, resulting in a poor AMI outcome.
Another key element is that postmenopausal females tend to develop HF with preserved ejection
fraction, characterized by diastolic dysfunction, whereas age-matching males develop HF with reduced
ejection fraction, characterized by systolic dysfunction [ 66]. These di erences are important because
most drugs used to treat HF have been developed to treat those with reduced ejection fraction,
and there are few e ective treatment options for HF with preserved ejection fraction [ 67]. It is also
possible that the aging process a ects the heart of males and females di erently, so that the latter are
predisposed to problems of myocardial relaxation, while males mainly develop pump failure. As a
result, males and females show a completely opposite trend in terms of hospitalization index for HF,
which increases signiﬁcantly with the age of the females compared with age-matching males [ 68]. A
recent long-term study on LVR after the ﬁrst AMI reports that, of the total number of patients who
experienced LVR after one-year follow-up (31–38% in the two cohorts of the study), females were
signiﬁcantly over-represented (43–46.5% vs 27–36.5% for females and males respectively in the two
studies) [ 69]. These data are extremely important since both cohorts of patients in that study had a