Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 21 of 36
adipose [ 20,292]. Of note, di erent sex-speciﬁc evolutionary processes have selected the two sex
chromosomes, and whilst the Y-chromosome would be expected to carry male-beneﬁting genes, the
X-chromosome should contain both male- and female-beneﬁting genes. Accordingly, sex di erences in
development and behavior are necessarily ascribed to those genes, which are di erentially expressed
in male and female cells, and selected for sex-speciﬁc roles. Considering the brain as a sexually
dimorphic organ molded by sex-speciﬁc selection pressures, genes on the sex chromosomes may
probably determine gender (i.e., sexually dimorphic phenotype) by inducing sex di erences and
sex-speciﬁc e ects on XX and XY brain cells [ 294], although the inﬂuence of the environment in any
individual life should not be disregarded.
Scientiﬁc developments in biomedical ﬁelds have identiﬁed the underlying causes of many
inherited or acquired human diseases that can be potentially faced by precision medicine with the
aim to have treatments tailored to each patient. Reductionism in biomedical research has resulted
in the identiﬁcation of the exact mutation in the genome, a defective molecule or a particular cell
phenotype responsible for that human disease counteracted by targeted therapies. To have a more
complete understanding and comprehensive explanation of the molecular pathogenesis of the disease
mechanisms, omics-sciences can greatly help in the recognition of intricate candidate pathways in those
complex diseases in which the one-gene-defect model or one disease-one assay-one drug principle is
not enough. Accordingly, gender medicine is a promising ﬁeld in which multi-omics approaches could
provide signiﬁcant input in terms of personalized medicine: in other words, sexomics and genderomics.
Important di erences between males and females, considered intrinsic natural di erences, are
already recognizable at the stage of the in utero zygote implantation and endure during prenatal
development, childhood and adulthood. Omics technologies, including genomics, epigenomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, can be successfully applied to ﬁrstly investigate
those reasons responsible for the sex- and gender-related diversities in the pathophysiology and
etiopathogenesis of complex multifactorial and multigenic diseases [ 32,33]. Personalized-omics will
transform traditional medicine from symptoms-oriented diagnosis and treatment towards disease
prevention and very early diagnosis.
By considering symptoms-oriented diagnosis, we were focused only on late symptoms of a
manifest disease, neglecting important preclinical signs and speciﬁc symptoms useful as discriminant
in a personalized medicine approach. Also considering the same disease, male and female may
have completely di erent preclinical signs and /or disease progression and prognosis, as during the
acute phases of myocardial infarction. In addition, female /woman-speciﬁc risk factors, as body fat
distribution, or speciﬁc prognostic markers have been identiﬁed by proteomics investigations [ 33].
Accordingly, personalized omics-approaches can be strongly useful in earlier recognition of any
informative data in a broad range of pathologies.
Sex di erences and sexual dimorphism mainly involves the X-chromosome, which contains
high proportions of immune-related genes and regulatory elements, a ecting in turn the di erent
susceptibility to some complex diseases, such as certain kind of cancer, autoimmunity, infections, and
bone homeostasis related disorders, in which noticeable sex-di erences exist [ 295,296]. The rapid
technological progress and the excellent bioinformatics methods currently available yielded us a large
volumes of data needing sophisticate computational analyses for acquisition, storage, handling and
translation in an applicative personalized diagnostic /prognostic protocol [297].
By using multi-omics approaches, to integrate information about gene expression and protein
level and composition, we will have a wide-ranging comprehension on how sex and gender a ects
a particular disease or pathological condition (Figure 8). This novel approach, though complex and
dicult to obtain, is a fruitful tactic to make major progress and contribution in a personalized gender
medicine [298].