Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 4 of 36
genomic signalling [ 39], while the GenCAD Project aimed to improve the knowledge on sex and gender
dierences in cardiovascular and other chronic diseases [ 40]. More recently, the European Network
for Gender Medicine (EUGenMed, EUGenNet) has developed a roadmap for implementing sex and
gender concepts in biomedical and health research [ 21,41–43]. Other actions designed to contribute to
gender equality have also been implemented, including the establishment of the European Institute for
Gender Equality (EIGE, [44]).
For this review, we selected paradigmatic medical issues, in which sex is a determining factor
in symptoms, outcome, treatment e cacy, prognosis or epidemiology, to identify di erent features
not properly considered to date, and ﬁnd possible candidates to overcome the sexual gap we have
created in the past. Speciﬁcally, the most representative gaps and di erences that best characterize
the single disease or a group of them from a biological, genetic, molecular or epidemiological point
of view, and that may inﬂuence the incidence, the course of the disease or the treatment output are
addressed. Overall, we critically discuss facts and mistakes with the aim of verifying whether and what
we have learned from the past, and of ﬁlling the gap in the light of an emerging new personalized
sex/gender-omics medicine.
2. Sex Disparity in Cardiovascular Disease
Among cardiovascular diseases, acute myocardial infarction (AMI) shows signiﬁcant di erences
in occurrence rate, prognosis and e cacy of treatment between male and female patients. Improvement
in the acute treatment has led to a dramatic increasing in the number of AMI survivors among those
with damaged heart. These patients are at risk of developing severe complications, like left ventricular
remodelling (LVR) and heart failure (HF), which are still considered orphans of speciﬁc prognostic
tools and e ective dedicated treatments [ 45,46]. AMI is the most frequent cause of LVR and HF and
patients often undergo to chronic and costly therapies, very frequent re-hospitalization and poor
quality of life, with a signiﬁcant gap among the two sexes [ 9,45,46]. Recently it has been reported that
“the incidence and prevalence of coronary artery disease in women has exceeded that in men over the
past four decades” [47,48].
AMI takes place from a complex interrelationship among genetic /epigenetic and environmental
risk factors, as it was revealed by several studies of pharmacogenetics and -genomics [ 49–51],
and more extensively conﬁrmed by omics investigations [ 32,33]. In addition, a very recent study
from the Multi-Analyte, Genetic, and Thrombogenic Markers of Atherosclerosis group (MAGMA)
found that females with angina are more thrombogenic than males, and this di erence may a ect
sex-related outcomes [ 52], also on the basis of undeniable genomics di erences. Moreover, the
Genetics of Subsequent Coronary Heart Disease consortium (GENIUS-CHD) was established to
discover and validate genetic variants and biomarkers for the risk assessment of subsequent ischemic
events along with novel drug targets for secondary prevention. It is considered a ﬁrst-class
initiative able to generate extraordinary results also in the ﬁeld of sex-oriented cardiology [ 53].
Our group has contributed for a long time to the disclosure of the genetics /pharmacogenetics bases
of myocardial infarction [ 54–59], and very recently we summarized our previous e orts and patents
[US2016363592 (A1); ITTO20130532 (A1)] in a Special Issue belonging to the “Novel Molecular
Targets for Cardioprotection: The EU-Cardioprotection Cost Action (CA16225)”, which suggest useful
sex-oriented prognostic biomarkers [60].
Noteworthy, the incidence of AMI is much lower among females under the age of 50 years
compared with males, but after the menopause, the rate in females dramatically increases, approaching
that of males [ 9,61]. For this reason, oestrogens were postulated to be cardioprotective but results
coming from recent randomized clinical trials challenge this hypothesis [ 61]. In addition, sex di erences
inﬂuence AMI pathophysiology, clinical presentation and clinical outcome. In detail, the mortality rate
after one or ﬁve years is higher in females than in males, and the former more frequently experience
heart wall remodelling, failure and stroke within ﬁve years from the ﬁrst ischemic accident. This
remains the poorest outcome, even considering several concomitant situations, like di erent age at