Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 11 of 36
between serum and CSF NfL levels [ 132], we cannot rule out that possible sex-related di erences
may primarily exist in brain with higher e ects on CSF rather than at systemic level. In addition,
the reduced sample size may also have weakened the statistical power to identify the rather small
eect size of sex (CSF male /female ratio for NfL mean values in untreated RR patients: 1.16; 95%
CI, 1.06-1.27) [ 116]. Nonetheless, the higher NfL values in male MS patients might in part explain
why they are characterized by more aggressive progression of disease and symptoms compared to
females, suggesting that the axonal damage may be more prominent in males. However, the same
pattern observed in healthy males may indicate that this peculiar characteristic is not speciﬁc to the
disease, but rather a sex-based biological feature [ 116]. Finally, brain iron homeostasis is known to
be disturbed in MS, and several genetic studies conﬁrmed di erent distributions of common gene
variant in MS subtypes and in sex [ 133,134]. Rare variants and variations in copy number were also
detected [135,136], as well as altered microRNA expression or dysregulated RNA splicing [137–139].
In conclusion, in vitro studies to explain the possible molecular mechanisms responsible for
the inﬂuence of sex hormone on axonal damage and biomarkers are still lacking. Our analysis
clearly highlights the existence of a knowledge gap responsible for the prevailing disparities in
neurodegenerative disorders. Accordingly, the scientiﬁc community is strongly pursuing this task in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of dedicated and personalized diagnosis and treatment of MS.
4.2. Sex Disparity in Alzheimer’s Disease
The worldwide picture of dementia is dramatically impressive, reporting about 50 million
people with cognitive and related functional disability which results in the ﬁfth leading cause of
death, according to data of WHO [ 140]. It has been estimated that more than one hundred million
people will globally experience dementia in 2050, with massive social and economic impact that
asks for straightforward interventions aimed at reducing this picture by improving and optimizing
earlier diagnosis and personalized treatments [ 140,141]. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifactorial
neurodegenerative disease and it represents the main form of dementia a ecting patients, accounting
for up to 80% of all cases in which sex, genetic, intellectual, as well as psychosocial factors might
play a role in favouring cognitive decline [ 142]. Of note, genetic susceptibility and intellectual /social /
psychosocial dynamics may di erentially a ect the cognitive decline onset and progression, with
crucial e ects on diagnosis time, prognosis and e cacy of therapeutic approaches [ 143]. Overall,
epidemiological studies highlight that females are at greater risk of dementia compared to males,
with a two-fold higher risk of AD [ 144–146], and although the risk of vascular dementia (the second
most common type of dementia accounting for 15–20% of cases [ 147]) is lower than in males, females
experience a more severe clinical phenotype [ 148]. The higher life-expectancy of females compared
to males makes nonetheless di cult to ﬁnd clear associations with the increased risk experienced by
females, that may also be a ected by additional factors like access to education and social or economic
status [143].
Several genetic contributors to the AD risk have been identiﬁed, including gene mutations,
splice variants, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) [ 149]. Among the strongest genetic factor
involved in AD, the E4 allele of the Apolipoprotein E gene ( APOE ), has been deeply investigated and
it is now widely recognized as the strongest genetic factor in determining AD risk in the common
late-onset form [ 150]. Its involvement in other forms of dementia is now also emerging [ 151–154].
Subjects carrying the APOE -"4 allele are at higher risk in the overall population, while sex speciﬁc
analyses showed that females experience a more severe clinical phenotype and are at higher risk to
convert and progress from mild cognitive impairment towards the more severe AD [ 155,156]. Similarly,
variants of the oestrogen receptor -gene (ESR1) have been found involved in sex-speciﬁc delay of
the onset of AD in females [ 157]. Gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in AD signiﬁcantly
contribute to the di erent risk in speciﬁc groups of patients. In this respect, AD and other types of
cognitive impairment share the imbalance /alteration of the homeostasis of iron and lipids involved
in the reported sex-di erences. Iron and cholesterol accumulation has a strong inﬂuence on AD.