Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 2 of 36
identiﬁcation of novel drug-targets /therapeutic protocols, personalized laboratory tests and diagnostic
procedures (sex /gender-omics). In this scenario, the aim of the present review is not to simply resume
the state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld, rather an opportunity to gain insights into gender medicine, spanning
from molecular up to social and psychological stances. The description and critical discussion of
some key selected multidisciplinary topics considered as paradigmatic of sex /gender di erences and
sex/gender inequalities will allow to draft and design strategies useful to ﬁll the existing gap and
move forward.
Keywords: gender medicine; sex disparities; genetics /molecular biomarkers; complex diseases;
pharmacogenetics; personalized medicine; tailored drug therapy; OMICs; sexomics and genderomics
1. Introduction
The risk of experiencing a particular disease characterized by speciﬁc prognosis and outcomes
may go behind the natural history of that pathology. It may depend on disparities in prevention,
diagnosis and treatment not properly targeted in di erent gender or sexes, or both. It is to be taken into
account that sex has biological features greatly inﬂuencing any disease at molecular or epidemiological
level, potentially a ecting in turn incidence, disease course or treatment output (Figure 1). In May
2014, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) announced that researchers should account for sex
and consider it a biological variable (SABV) in NIH-funded preclinical research [1].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 2 of 37 
 of the existing sex/gender gap by means of omics approaches will pave the way to the discovery 
and identification of novel drug -targets /therapeutic protocols, personalized laboratory tests and 
diagnostic procedures (sex/gender -omics). In this scenario, the aim of the present review is not to 
simply resume the state -of-the-art in the field, rather an opportunity to gain insights into gende r 
medicine, spanning from molecular up to social and psychological stances. The description and 
critical discussion of some key selected multidisciplinary topics considered as paradigmatic of 
sex/gender differences and sex/gender inequalities will allow to  draft and design strategies useful 
to fill the existing gap and move forward.  
Keywords:  gender medicine; sex disparities; genetics/molecular biomarkers; complex diseases; 
pharmacogenetics; personalized medicine; tailored drug therapy; OMICs; sexomics and 
genderomics  
 
1. Introduction  
The risk of experiencing a particular disease characterized by specific prognosis and outcomes 
may go behind the natural history of that pathology. It may depend on disparities in prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment not properl y targeted in different gender or sexes, or both. It is to be taken 
into account that sex has biological features greatly influencing any disease at molecular or 
epidemiological level, potentially affecting in turn incidence, disease course or treatment ou tput 
(Figure 1). In May 2014, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) announced that researchers 
should account for sex and consider it a biological variable (SABV) in NIH -funded preclinical 
research [1]. 
 
Figure 1. Modified from Global Health Estimate d 2016 (www.who.int/healthinfo/ 
global_burden_disease/en/ ). d.: disease; PD: Parkinson’s disease; Haemorr.: Haemorrhagic; CVD: 
Cardiovascular Disease; def.: deficiency; circ.: circulatory; neurol.: neurological; MS: M ultiple 
Sclerosis; AD: Alzhe imer’s Dise ase; Musculosk.: musculoskeletal.  
Sex and gender are concepts of primarily relevance in the real world, where disease morbidity, 
risk factors, onset age, clinical phenotype and treatments may strongly differ between males and 
females.  While sex refers to b iological and genetic features, gender includes roles and relationships 
Figure 1. Modiﬁed from Global Health Estimated 2016 (www.who.int /healthinfo /global_burden_
disease /en/). d.: disease; PD: Parkinson’s disease; Haemorr.: Haemorrhagic; CVD: Cardiovascular
Disease; def.: deﬁciency; circ.: circulatory; neurol.: neurological; MS: Multiple Sclerosis; AD:
Alzheimer’s Disease; Musculosk.: musculoskeletal.
Sex and gender are concepts of primarily relevance in the real world, where disease morbidity, risk
factors, onset age, clinical phenotype and treatments may strongly di er between males and females.
While sex refers to biological and genetic features, gender includes roles and relationships also related
to socio-cultural rules and participation [ 2,3]. Everybody agrees that “ being a male or being a female ”