Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 15 of 36
with bone loss in men. Results from study of murine models with cell-speciﬁc deletion of ER and
androgen receptor (AR) demonstrate that there are many cell types that mediate androgens e ects on
the bone in males. Yet, while the oestrogenic anti-resorptive e ect on cancellous bone is a direct one
with an action on osteoclasts, androgens play their anti-resorptive e ect indirectly through osteoblasts
and osteocytes [212].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 15 of 37 
  
Figure 6. Different actors and effects on bone formation/resorption ba lance according to different 
sexes. BMU: Basic Multicellular Unit; OPG: Osteoprotegerin; MHT: Menopausal Hormone Therapy; 
RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa -Β ligand; RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa -Β. 
Since the main risk fa ctor for fragility fractures in postmenopausal women is the bone loss due 
to oestrogen deficiency, the menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) is a rational therapy for prevention 
of osteoporosis [213]. Convergent data from research studies and clinical trials in dicate that MHT, 
both in the form of combined oestrogen and progesterone or oestrogen alone, normalizes bone 
turnover and preserves bone mineral density (BMD) at all skeletal sites, significantly decreasing 
vertebral and non -vertebral fractures in long -term treated subjects [214]. This suggests that MHT 
may, at least in part, fill the gender gap in osteoporosis risk in particular if MHT is starting early after 
menopause. Oestrogen therapy, by influencing the lifespan of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, indeed, 
may reverse the oestradiol dependent component of the remodelling imbalance. It is to emphasize 
that remodelling imbalance occurring around the ages of 45 –50 years, produce irreversible deficits in 
bone volume, microstructural deterioration and bone fragil ity. Starting an anti -resorptive therapy in 
late postmenopause doesn’t reverse existing microstructural deterioration and doesn’t abolish bone 
fragility [215]. Despite the concern emerging from the large, long -term RCT Women’s Health 
Initiative (WHI) study  about the safety of hormonal replacement treatment, post hoc subgroup 
analyses, stratifying women according to their age and time since menopause, have allowed to better 
understand the relationship between MHT and cardio -vascular risk. Timing of MHT initi ation was 
shown to be a critical factor for the development of cardio -vascular diseases. According to the “timing 
hypothesis”, healthy symptomatic women who initiated MHT when aged younger than 60 years, or 
who were within 10 years after last menstrual per iod, have demonstrated a reduction in both 
coronary heart disease risk and all -cause mortality [216–218]. Moreover, the term ‘MHT’ does not 
identify a single treatment but different forms, doses and ways of administration of hormonal 
replacement therapy. T he concept of tailored MHT includes the choice of an effective and appropriate 
dose, type, and regimen that differs according to age, clinical characteristics and goals to achieve for 
each woman. The choice of the right progestin is critical as it can make  the difference in long -term 
outcomes [219]. Lastly, there is an unmet need for providing and approving testosterone treatments 
specific for women, formulated with the aim of approximating physiological testosterone 
concentrations for premenopausal women [220]. Nowadays just a few studies have evaluated the 
musculoskeletal effects of testosterone. The available data do not support an effect of testosterone 
treatment on BMD at the spine or femoral neck at 12 months; nevertheless, there is a need for clinical  
trials to evaluate the impact of testosterone treatment on musculoskeletal tissues. The main indication 
for MHT is the presence of vasomotor symptoms (VMS), which have been clearly associated with the 
Figure 6. Dierent actors and e ects on bone formation /resorption balance according to di erent
sexes. BMU: Basic Multicellular Unit; OPG: Osteoprotegerin; MHT: Menopausal Hormone Therapy;
RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand; RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa-B.
Since the main risk factor for fragility fractures in postmenopausal women is the bone loss due to
oestrogen deﬁciency, the menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) is a rational therapy for prevention of
osteoporosis [ 213]. Convergent data from research studies and clinical trials indicate that MHT, both
in the form of combined oestrogen and progesterone or oestrogen alone, normalizes bone turnover
and preserves bone mineral density (BMD) at all skeletal sites, signiﬁcantly decreasing vertebral and
non-vertebral fractures in long-term treated subjects [ 214]. This suggests that MHT may, at least in part,
ﬁll the gender gap in osteoporosis risk in particular if MHT is starting early after menopause. Oestrogen
therapy, by inﬂuencing the lifespan of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, indeed, may reverse the oestradiol
dependent component of the remodelling imbalance. It is to emphasize that remodelling imbalance
occurring around the ages of 45–50 years, produce irreversible deﬁcits in bone volume, microstructural
deterioration and bone fragility. Starting an anti-resorptive therapy in late postmenopause doesn’t
reverse existing microstructural deterioration and doesn’t abolish bone fragility [ 215]. Despite the
concern emerging from the large, long-term RCT Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study about the
safety of hormonal replacement treatment, post hoc subgroup analyses, stratifying women according
to their age and time since menopause, have allowed to better understand the relationship between
MHT and cardio-vascular risk. Timing of MHT initiation was shown to be a critical factor for the
development of cardio-vascular diseases. According to the “timing hypothesis”, healthy symptomatic
women who initiated MHT when aged younger than 60 years, or who were within 10 years after last
menstrual period, have demonstrated a reduction in both coronary heart disease risk and all-cause
mortality [ 216–218]. Moreover, the term ‘MHT’ does not identify a single treatment but di erent forms,
doses and ways of administration of hormonal replacement therapy. The concept of tailored MHT
includes the choice of an e ective and appropriate dose, type, and regimen that di ers according to age,
clinical characteristics and goals to achieve for each woman. The choice of the right progestin is critical
as it can make the di erence in long-term outcomes [ 219]. Lastly, there is an unmet need for providing