Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 14 of 36
osteoporosis) [ 191–193], or to an abnormal bone density increase (osteopetrosis, Paget’s disease,
poisoning) [ 194,195]. Both occurrences, for di erent reasons (genetic, metabolic, primary, secondary,
etc.), lead to bone fragility and to an increased risk of fractures in females as in males [ 196–198]. Sex
hormones, oestrogens and androgens, inﬂuence the growth and the maintenance of the bones and are
responsible for sexual dimorphisms [ 178,199]. An extensive crosstalk between sex steroids and growth
factors such as IGF-1 and GH has been described, as well as their participation in the transduction of
mechanical signals in bone [ 200–202]. A decline in the circulating levels of these hormones leads to loss
of bone mass and functionality [ 200]. Qualitative and quantitative deﬁciencies drive the development
of osteoporosis, which is the most common pathology a ecting the bone [ 191–193]. This condition is
correlated to physiological aging, being prevalent in particular in post-menopausal women [ 191,203],
but can also occur as a consequence of pharmacologic treatment [ 197,203], or of feminizing hormone
therapy in transsexual men [ 204,205]. Often mistakenly considered a female disease, osteoporotic
fractures a ect one in ﬁve men over the age of 50, and this number is set to increase dramatically as
people around the world are ageing [ 198]. Evidence recently proposed shows that men are becoming
the “weaker sex” in terms of death and disability caused by osteoporosis; the health-care systems
simply disregard their bone health [ 198]. To date, osteoporosis in men remains underdiagnosed and
underestimated. E orts to reduce sex-disparities regarding osteoporosis are becoming imperative not
only to improve the quality of life of the male sex, but also of the transsexual adults [198,204,205].
A further challenge is represented by exploring the functional interactions between bone-related
diseases and molecular biomarkers and networks. Accordingly, omics studies (transcriptomics,
epigenomics, proteomics and metabolomics) performed on the human bone may reveal valuable sex
distinctive changes [ 206,207]. Thus, scientists and physicians who deal with skeletal disorders cannot
ignore anymore sex /gender-omics in both preclinical research and medical clinical trials.
6. Sex Disparity in Osteoporosis Risk and Prevention
Sex is a known key clinical risk factor for involutional osteoporosis, second in importance only to
aging. Oestrogen dependent menopausal bone loss is usually more critical in the spine rather than in
the hip and total body. Trabecular bone is lost by perforation with complete loss of trabeculae leading
to increased trabecular spacing; cortical bone is lost as a result of unbalanced intracortical remodelling,
which increases cortical microporosity, enlarge the intracortical canal surfaces and reduce cortical bone
accrual at the periosteum. With advancing age, trabecular bone loss declines because the trabeculae
disappear and the cortical bone loss become predominant.
In men, the gradual reduction in levels of sexual steroid hormones leads to a bone loss characterized
by reduced bone formation associated with modest increases in bone resorption, which causes a
progressive thinning of the trabeculae. Cortical bone loss in man is delayed over time compared to
women, determining a smaller microstructural deterioration and, consequently, lower reduction in
bone mineral density and a higher fracture risk at an older age [208,209].
Dierent cell types and mechanisms mediate the e ects of sex steroids on cancellous and cortical
bone. As previously reported, oestrogens exert anti-remodelling e ects in di erent ways by decreasing
osteoclastogenesis and inducing apoptosis in osteoclastic cells. Accordingly, they maintain bone
formation organizing commitment and di erentiation of osteoblastic cells, preventing their apoptosis
and modulating their activity. The anti-resorptive action of oestrogens is also due to the induction of
genes expression and synthesis of OPG (osteoprotegerin), a determinant factor of the RANKL /RANK
system. Furthermore, oestrogens reduce the apoptosis of the osteocyte (Figure 6). Recent studies have
shown that oestradiol levels are inversely associated with serum levels of sclerostin, a key inhibitor
of the Wnt-signalling produced by osteocytes, and that oestrogen deﬁciency may contribute to the
development of osteoporosis by decreasing the sensitivity of osteocytes to mechanical loading [ 210].
Finally, the oestrogen ability to improve calcium balance by regulating enterocyte calcium inﬂux
through ER has also been shown [ 211].Epidemiological evidences suggest that bioavailable oestradiol
(E2) and /or sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), but not serum testosterone levels are associated