Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 6 of 36
very high rate of secondary prevention medications after one year (i.e., beta-blockers 90–95% and
ACE inhibitors /angiotensin II R-blockers 93–97% respectively in the two studies). Interestingly, sex
hormones are associated di erently with the morphology of the remodelled heart wall, and a more
androgenic proﬁle is responsible for a greater imbalance in the heart mass /volume ratio in females
than in males [70].
In summary, remodelling is the main determinant of survival after recovery from AMI.
Observational clinical and post-mortem /experimental studies suggest important di erences between
females and males in the cardiac remodelling observed in response to di erent types of cardiac injuries
including infarction. Recommended therapies for AMI in females are similar to those in males, but
studies indicate that females are undertreated, which lead to worse outcomes [ 9,47]. Interestingly,
during the ﬁrst few hours after AMI, complex local healing processes and inﬂammatory reactions are
crucial in determining the risk of wall remodelling. Soluble molecules, resident and circulating cells
and micro-RNAs ﬁnely mediate inﬂammation and regenerative progression by determining the fate of
the heart after the infarction [ 71–74]. Basically, imbalance in any healing process and unrestrained ECM
proteolysis cause a delayed remedy, while lasting chronic lesions in any district may a ect the normal
organ /tissue functions with consequent failure and malfunction [ 75–77]. Since these complex processes
are in part genetically determined, molecular regenerative medicine, by providing molecular predictive
indicators, might help clinicians to recognize at risk populations also in a sex- or gender-oriented
direction [ 78–81]. Reperfusion therapy and systematic use of evidence-based medications have e ects
on LVR or HF but they cannot be considered dedicated therapeutic approaches. Prognostic biomarkers
able to score cases at higher risk to develop severe post-infarction complications (i.e., females) will
allow the early identiﬁcation of patients for whom the available standard care is not adequate. It is to be
taken into account that groups of males at higher risk could also beneﬁt from personalized approaches.
Overall, there is a mandatory need for a “holistic” sex speciﬁc approach (i.e., sex-oriented
omics-investigations “sex /genderomics”), from the use of in vitro and in vivo preclinical models
up to appropriate clinical studies with well-balanced male /female ratio cohorts. This will allow
the identiﬁcation of prognostic biomarkers to e ectively counteract sex-disparities and help in
designing sex-dedicated therapies [ 82]. If appropriately addressed, these approaches will represent a
signiﬁcant improvement in the cardiovascular disease management, and the potential of sex-speciﬁc
risk stratiﬁcation tools will positively inﬂuence the worldwide National Health Care Systems.
3. Sex Disparity in Cancer
Although in the last decades very important results based on novel therapeutic approaches have
been obtained, cancer is still a major cause of death today, with an increasing incidence worldwide [ 83].
It is well known that on average men live less than women (in Italy the average age is 80.8 and 85.2
years, respectively, according to data from the National Institute of Statistics), and this di erence is
even greater in populations with a higher life expectancy [84].
Sex- and /or gender-associated di erences in cancer incidence, prognosis, response to therapy and,
eventually, survival have been fully reported with epidemiological data that show, with few exceptions
(i.e., thyroid carcinoma), a general female advantage [ 85]. According to the Italian Cancer Registry
(AIRTUM), one in two men and one in three women have an average lifetime risk of developing cancer,
while one in three men and one in six women a mean probability of dying from cancer. However, at
present, few data exist on the mechanisms underlying these disparities. Among the key factors, we
primarily should consider the roles of sex chromosomes, sex hormones and immune responses.
Looking at di erences between female XX and male XY cells, evidence based data showed that
female cells have higher capabilities to overcome cellular stress through the induction of protective
mechanisms, like autophagy, and more antioxidant defenses than male cells [ 86]. In addition, the
random inactivation of one X-chromosome in each single female cell leads to mosaicism and in
turn to the advantages associated with genetic heterogeneity. Theoretically, inactivation should
balance the expression of X-linked genes between men and women; practically it is incomplete with