Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 10 of 36
biomarkers of axonal damage, in particular the neuroﬁlament light subunit (NfL), are signiﬁcantly
higher in patients with MS and other neurodegenerative disorders [114–116].
Despite the evident importance of the aforementioned biomarkers in MS physiopathology, the
possible dualistic inﬂuence of sex on the MS features in relation to their levels is still largely unexplored.
This is particularly evident for MMPs, for which the paucity of in vivo studies have only examined
cohorts of patients without MS, despite the undisputed importance of these enzymes in the disease [ 110].
The few studies on MS reported an upregulation of MMP-9 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) of females with the RR form [ 117] and a decreased expression of MMP-9 following treatment
with estriol in the preclinical model of the disease [ 118]. Currently, there is only one in vivo study
showing for the ﬁrst time increased cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) concentration of MMP-1 in females
with MS [ 119]. Because of the paucity of data, it is evident that several gaps and controversies
still exist in literature; therefore, more e ort should be put in this ﬁeld in order to discover novel
sex-speciﬁc biomarker patterns related to MS. Nonetheless, the few in vitro studies conducted so
far suggest that estriol, and in general female hormones, modulates MMPs more likely through an
indirect interference with downstream cascades (e.g., by activating /inhibition NfKB, AP-1 and STAT
transcription factors) mediated by interleukins (ILs) [ 120]. Contrariwise, information about a possible
inﬂuence of androgens on MMPs production from immune cells is still lacking. The aforementioned
connection is all the more important considering the involvement of cytokines derangement in MS.
Indeed, several works suggest that both female and male sex hormones have tremendous e ects on the
response and development of peripheral immune cells, depending on the type of receptor stimulated
and the origin of cells. For instance, a low concentration of the main oestrogen 17 -estradiol (E2)
seems to promote pro-inﬂammatory response. However, a high or supra-physiological concentration
of oestrogens inhibits pro-inﬂammatory responses, an e ect that is probably mediated by interferences
with collateral signalling cascades activated by the receptor [ 121]. Of note, the e ect of oestrogens
on immune cells is complex since their actions could be mediated by oestrogen receptors (ER) ER 
and ER, showing di erent outcomes based on the one stimulated [ 122]. Conversely, androgens seem
to play a positive role in the development and function of the innate immune cells, with a general
inhibitory action on adaptive immune cells [ 123]. Finally, androgens have been shown to inhibit the
Th1 di erentiation of CD4 +cells, a type of cells strictly related to MS [ 121]. These evidences were
also translated to MS with a pilot study showing that the treatment of PBMCs with estriol shifted
the T-cell phenotype from a Th1 proﬁle towards a more predominant Th2 phenotype [ 124]. This was
not the only observation of a sex bias on the cytokine levels in MS. Other studies found an impaired
response of females to myelin peptides (proteolipid protein peptides, PLP), with a stronger release of
IFN-
but no secretion of IL-5 when compared to males, suggesting a skewed Th1 phenotype [ 125].
However, other studies found contrasting results, reporting no signiﬁcant sex di erences in some
cytokines (IFN- 
, IL-2, TNF-, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13). Though, females demonstrated a more predominant
pro-inﬂammatory proﬁle [ 126,127]. In addition, changes in secretion of cytokines were found to
be disease-phase dependent and a ected by sex: female patients compared to males have higher
pro-inﬂammatory cytokine levels in the progressive phase and lower levels in the relapsing phase [ 126].
Taken together, these evidences conﬁrm that the immune system is strongly inﬂuenced by sex and may
play an important role in determining the “gender gap” characteristic of MS, although the cause is
more likely to be multifactorial [128].
Finally, although still in its infancy, several lines of evidence are accumulating on the sex-based
dierences in axonal damage biomarkers in MS, particularly for the neuroﬁlament light chain (NfL).
Indeed, the most recent data coming from a meta-analysis published in 2019 [ 116], which included
more than 1600 MS patients (both RR and progressive), found that males had higher CSF levels of NfL
than females, an observation that was also reported for other neurological conditions like Alzheimer’s
disease [ 129]. Other relatively small single centre studies were unable to conﬁrm the sex inﬂuence on
NfL concentrations [ 130,131], yet some of these studies measured NfL in serum not considering CSF.
Although the employed assays are virtually the same and it has been reported a strong correlation