Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 3 of 36
makes the di erence, not only in a medical /healthcare perspective, but also in a social, economic and
cultural vision [4].
In the past, medicine was characterized by strong androcentric connotation, and for a long time
clinical studies have been mostly performed on male patients, generating results that were merely
transferred to females [ 5–8]. Accordingly, females were just one third of the enrolled patients in clinical
trials performed between 2002 and 2007 to evaluate cardiovascular devices, and unfortunately, the
number of recruited females did not increase over time [ 9]. In another context, it has been demonstrated
that the genomic proﬁle of non-small-cell lung cancer patients had strong sex di erences in signalling
pathways [ 10], suggesting that prognostic biomarkers could be di erent and should be selectively used
depending on sex. Despite this evidence, the female counterpart itself has been involved in studies
restricted to those distinctive branches of female medicine such as gynaecology and reproductive
medicine, or particular types of cancer. Finally, male sex also prevails in preclinical studies on animals,
creating severe bias on the transposition of results to the clinical practice [ 11–13]. The prejudice leading
to the exclusion of female animals was due to their higher biological variability compared to male
animals, mainly justiﬁed by sex hormone ﬂuctuations. Though, several reports highlighted that data
coming from preclinical experimentations based on female animals are useful and reliable [14–16].
In the recent past, there has been a growing attention to sex-based di erences in biology, genetics,
biomedical sciences and general medicine, ranging from the cellular level to whole organs and
organisms. As expected, this process quickly led to the generation of new insights into diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic issues, from basic research to the clinical level [ 17]. The overall message
is indeed the one published by Nature in 2010, which summarizes old and new problems in the title
“Putting gender on the agenda” [ 18]. Starting from the fact that animals have a sex [ 19], well known
dierences in gene expression have to exist in male versus female mice [ 20]. Based on the evidence that
companies and scientists may have arbitrarily performed their preclinical tests on male models, the
Editors of Nature concluded that “Medicine as it is currently applied to women is less evidence-based
than that being applied to men” [ 18]. The increasing attention towards sex and gender, along with
the interest that emerges from this kind of aware research, are now beginning to bridge the gap [ 21].
Thanks to the increased knowledge of the molecular, genetic and epigenetic bases of complex diseases,
and thanks to the personalized pharmacogenetic approach to drug design /prescription, several diseases
are now faced in a tailored fashion [ 22,23]. However, while the inclusion of sex is a process already
underway, with evident results from both preclinical and clinical trials, the impact of gender in
medical /biomedical ﬁelds is still at an early stage, with di culties and delays due to its intrinsic
complexity. Ongoing e orts aim to include and understand the role of gender in pharmacology [ 24,25].
To date, gender-related pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic di erences have been reported with
crucial implications on drugs e ects [ 26–30]. Overall, gender-speciﬁc pre-clinical models will increase
the deﬁnition of gender-oriented therapeutic protocols, in turn accelerating the development of
gender-speciﬁc drugs and the generation of gender-oriented and evidence-based guidelines [11,31].
Further, omic-sciences o er a useful and powerful analytical option in biomedical research, helping
the discovering of novel pharmaceutical targets, bio-molecular markers in a sex /gender-oriented
perspective [ 32–34]. Sex and gender, until now merely considered as confounding variables
(e.g., “sex and age data adjustment”), are becoming crucial variables in both preclinical and clinical
studies. However, while sex has a strong and well deﬁned genetic connotation, the term ‘gender’
shows a broader nuance with di erent meanings in biomedical and social sciences and is often used
improperly as a synonymous of ‘sex’ [ 35,36]. ‘Sex’ and ‘gender’ are no longer synonyms, considering
that cell lines have one sex, preclinical models have one sex, whilst humans have both gender and sex.
In this regard, it should be emphasized the role that the European Union (EU) has in supporting
targeted projects and actions. Among these, the GenderBasic Project was created to promote gender
integration in basic research [ 37,38], whereas the EUGIM Project to establish a European Curriculum
in gender medicine. In the ﬁeld of cardiovascular disease, the EUGeneHeart Project was generated
to develop new approaches for prevention and treatment of heart failure through the analysis of