Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 13 of 36
mediators of the disease and as potential modulatory factors able to synergize with A pathways in
driving the disease progression [168].
In a recent work, Belloy and colleagues addressed the overall role of APOE 4 in AD, concluding
that its pleiotropic nature asks for integrated and synergistic studies, perhaps on extreme clinical
phenotypes, contextually addressing neurologic, cardiovascular, and lipid driven inﬂammatory traits of
the disease [ 150]. More e orts to better identify key pathways and molecular mechanisms underlying
onset and progression of cognitive decline should be made also in the view of the ongoing ageing
process of the worldwide population. The observation that dementia and CVD share common
metabolic risk factors including inﬂammation, oxidative stress and lipids, a ecting in turn both brain
and myocardium [ 158,169–172], encouraged proteomic studies aimed at recognizing sex di erences of
the molecular signature of these complex diseases [ 173–176]. In conclusion, the comprehension of the
molecular bases of the observed sex-di erences in neurological disorders would improve by including
both female and male animals in preclinical studies focused on brain OMICS change investigations [ 177].
The recognition that biological and genetic factors may be responsible for sex-related increased risk
does not make dementia or AD a sex-speciﬁc disease but rather ask for new sex /gender oriented
investigations and pharmacological studies.
5. Sex Disparity in Bone Homeostasis Diseases
A large number of studies have considered pathologies a ecting bone, which are numerous
and extremely heterogeneous. Bone is a highly dynamic tissue, constantly undergoing to catabolic
and anabolic processes to maintain its ﬂexibility and adapt to the demands of the organism for
growth, mechanical loading and mineral balance [ 178]. Bone homeostasis is due to the opposite and
complementary action of bone-forming cells (osteoblasts, OBs) and bone-resorbing cells (osteoclasts,
OCs). Their synergy is implemented in a functional anatomic structure known as the basic multicellular
unit (BMU) [ 179,180]. A considerable body of literature describes the e ects of imbalances in the
formation or resorption of bone, which may give rise to various diseases characterized by di erent levels
of bone-remodelling cycle impairment, like osteoporosis, Paget’s disease and osteopetrosis [ 178,181].
The knowledge on the mechanisms underlying the formation and maintenance of bone is rapidly
increasing, as well as the development of target therapeutic strategies against bone pathologies and
skeletal degeneration [ 178,182,183]. However, extensive investigations are hampered by the limited
accessibility of bone tissue, its mineralized nature, as well as by the complexity of the molecular aspects
of bone turnover processes. As a result, not much work has been done to explore the role of sex /gender
in the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of bone diseases. Many critical issues
remain open and further research is needed to address emerging new challenges in this ﬁeld, and to
identify relevant therapeutic targets.
Currently, the most relevant approach to this complex thematic considers the numerous variables
that may a ect the physio-pathological bone microenvironment, namely:
 the heterogeneity of the cell population: osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and osteocytes are the primary
cells responsible for bone remodelling, yet other cells play a signiﬁcant role, included their progeny,
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), cells of the immune system, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC),
adipocytes, endothelial cells and cells of the perivascular niche [178,184];
 the exposure over time to di erent combinations and doses of soluble molecules (nutrients and
hormones) [178,183,185,186];
 the di erences in the control of energy homeostasis [183,187];
 the signals that inﬂuence the MSC di erentiation, not only in the osteoblasts, but also in the
adipocytes, chondrocytes, and muscle cells [187–189];
 the cellular adaption to mechanical signals [190].
This complex picture is further complicated since all these variables are inﬂuenced by the age, but
also by sex /gender. Structural deterioration of bone tissue may be due to loss of bone mass (osteopenia,