Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 9 of 36
clinical onset and progression, they nonetheless share common patterns like the role of speciﬁc genetic
factors, the impact of gonadal hormones and the role of neuro-inﬂammatory processes /mediators.
Here, we will report on the progression of sex-oriented studies on the two major neurological disorders,
MS and AD.
4.1. Sex Disparity in Multiple Sclerosis
MS can be considered a prototypical sex-dimorphic neurodegenerative disease where (mainly
unknown) genetic and epigenetic factors may interact with environment and sex hormones to increase
disease susceptibility and progression (Figure 4) [ 105]. MS is a chronic inﬂammatory disease of the
central nervous system (CNS) with a supposed autoimmune base and unknown aetiology characterized,
in its more frequent form, by relapsing-remitting (RR) attacks [ 106]. These attacks represent a sequence
of events of inﬂammation, demyelination and axonal damage that recur over time and lead to variable
spectra of neurological symptoms and signs [ 107]. International literature conﬁrms the evidence that
MS is more frequent in females than in males with a ratio of nearly 3:1 and an earlier onset of the
disease, although males generally have a more progressive course and greater disability [104].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 9 of 37 
 like the role of specific genetic factors, the impact of gonadal hormones and the role of neuro -
inflammatory processes/mediators. Here, we will report on the progression of sex -oriented studies 
on the two major neurological disorders, MS and AD.  
4.1. Sex Disparity in Multiple Sclerosis  
MS can be considered a prototypical sex -dimorphic neurodegenerative disease where (mainly 
unknown) genetic and epigenetic factors may interact with  environment and sex hormones to 
increase disease susceptibility and progression (Figure 4) [105]. MS is a chronic inflammatory disease 
of the central nervous system (CNS) with a supposed autoimmune base and unknown aetiology 
characterized, in its more fre quent form, by relapsing -remitting (RR) attacks [106]. These attacks 
represent a sequence of events of inflammation,  demyelination and axonal damage that recur over 
time and lead to variable spectra of neurological symptoms and signs [107]. International l iterature 
confirms the evidence that MS is more frequent in females than in males with a ratio of nearly 3:1 and 
an earlier onset of the disease, although males generally have a more progressive course and greater 
disability [104]. 
 
Figure 4. Factors con curring to different MS risk in females with respect to males. Genetics (e.g. , HLA -
DRB1*1501 allele), epigenetics (e.g. , TLR7, CD40L, FoxP3), environment (e.g. , smoking and Vitamin 
D deficiency) and sex hormones (e.g. , oestradiol, progesterone, oestradiol and testosterone).  
The role of sex hormones in MS has been underlined in several studies, in which the most evident 
example is the so called “pregnancy effect”. Although the mechanisms are still far from clear, it has 
been observed that the symptoms decrea se during pregnancy, in correlation with increased levels of 
progesterone, oestradiol and estriol, thus returning to the previous stage of the disease or even to a 
worse stage after delivery, when the hormones revert to the basal condition [108]. This is n ot 
surprising since several observations confirmed the modulatory actions of sex hormones on immune 
cells [104,105], which is of paramount importance considering their role in MS pathogenesis. Indeed, 
immune cells mediate both neuro -inflammation and partly  axonal damage, the two main disease 
hallmarks leading to disease progression and increased patients’ disability. Basically, MS patients 
exhibit an impaired Blood Brain Barrier (BBB), which indicates infiltration of leukocyte into the CNS, 
reflecting in in creased circulating levels of active Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) [109–111]. The 
same is true for pro -inflammatory cytokines, which are found to be deranged and increased both in 
blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of MS patients compared to controls [112,113]. Similarly, 
biomarkers of axonal damage, in particular the neurofilament light subunit (NfL), are significantly 
higher in patients with MS and other neurodegenerative disorders [114–116]. 
Figure 4. Factors concurring to di erent MS risk in females with respect to males. Genetics (e.g.,
HLA-DRB1*1501 allele), epigenetics (e.g., TLR7, CD40L, FoxP3), environment (e.g., smoking and
Vitamin D deﬁciency) and sex hormones (e.g., oestradiol, progesterone, oestradiol and testosterone).
The role of sex hormones in MS has been underlined in several studies, in which the most evident
example is the so called “pregnancy e ect”. Although the mechanisms are still far from clear, it has
been observed that the symptoms decrease during pregnancy, in correlation with increased levels
of progesterone, oestradiol and estriol, thus returning to the previous stage of the disease or even
to a worse stage after delivery, when the hormones revert to the basal condition [ 108]. This is not
surprising since several observations conﬁrmed the modulatory actions of sex hormones on immune
cells [ 104,105], which is of paramount importance considering their role in MS pathogenesis. Indeed,
immune cells mediate both neuro-inﬂammation and partly axonal damage, the two main disease
hallmarks leading to disease progression and increased patients’ disability. Basically, MS patients
exhibit an impaired Blood Brain Barrier (BBB), which indicates inﬁltration of leukocyte into the CNS,
reﬂecting in increased circulating levels of active Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) [ 109–111]. The
same is true for pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, which are found to be deranged and increased both
in blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) of MS patients compared to controls [ 112,113]. Similarly,