Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 8 of 36
Finally, we should focus on cutaneous melanoma, which show better results in women compared
with men [ 96]. Although male /female incidence ratios vary widely across continents, the female
survival advantage has been reported very consistently everywhere and gender remains an independent
prognostic indicator after adjustment for thickness and body sites. Di erences in detection might be
explained by the known gender di erences in the body-site distribution: more truncal melanomas
in males and limb localization in females. Furthermore, men are less likely to engage in preventive
actions. Since cancer is the result of failed immune surveillance, the divergent e ects of male and
female sex hormones on anticancer immunity could contribute to the higher cancer incidence and
poorer outcome in men, particularly in highly antigenic tumours like melanoma [ 97]. In recent
years, several immunological therapies have been approved for di erent types of tumour, initially
based on blocking antibodies against the programmed death receptor-1 (PD1) or its ligand PDL1.
These target molecules are expressed on T-lymphocytes and on tumour cells and the receptor-ligand
binding interferes with T cell-mediated responses. Treatments with immune checkpoint inhibitors
(now developed against many other surface markers), impairing the receptor-ligand binding and the
consequent inhibitory response, promote the T-cell activation. A number of meta-analyses, run to
evaluate the e cacy of these inhibitors, showed a certain degree of heterogeneity between men and
women. The immune checkpoint inhibitors can improve the overall survival for patients with advanced
cancers, particularly melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer, and the extent of the beneﬁt appears
sex-dependent. Unexpectedly, despite the overall strong female immune responses, the results derived
from clinical trials indicated a smaller beneﬁt for women [ 98,99]. A review paper analysing over 11,000
patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors (i.e., ipilimumab, tremelimumab, nivolumab,
or pembrolizumab) in twenty randomized controlled trials, evidenced that the overall survival was
consistently higher for men than for women, regardless of cancer histotype, line of treatment and type
of administered drug [ 99]. Further analysis, focused on phase III RCTs of ICIs e cacy in advanced
cancers, conﬁrmed the more favourable outcomes in men than in women, particularly with anti-CTLA-4
agents [ 100]. Even though the biological evidences behind the di erent e cacy in the two sexes are
still lacking, we could suppose that the female immune system has per se a strong e ect in determining
the anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 e cacy, thus possibly limiting the e ect of other variables. Although
we could note that the expression of PD-L1 appears to be directly or indirectly controlled by several
X-linked microRNAs [ 101], the suggested role of PD-L1 expression level as a predictive biomarker of
ecacy is quite controversial [102].
In conclusion, it is absolutely relevant that preclinical studies use animals of both sexes to
investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying cancer development and progression. Further, sex
and gender should be considered in clinical trials for more accurate diagnosis, correct stratiﬁcation of
patients and proper therapies. In the era of precision medicine, the goal will be to identify molecular
drivers, possibly di erent in males and females, to predict responders and non-responders and select
the best therapeutic action for each one. According to the recently approved Italian law 3 /2018, for
“Diusion and Application of Gender-speciﬁc Medicine in the National Health Service”, sex and /or
gender should be included in all the health care aspects, hopefully through new speciﬁc guidelines.
4. Sex Disparity in Neurodegenerative Disorders
Sex di erences exist in neurological and neurodegenerative diseases, and epidemiological studies
clearly indicate that both frequency and symptoms presentation have a dimorphic behaviour. The
most evident examples are represented by multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and
Parkinson’s disease, the ﬁrst two with a higher prevalence in females, the latter with a higher frequency
in males [ 103]. It has been established that sex di erences start during neurodevelopment and continue
throughout the growth, a ecting brain morphology and neuronal connectivity [ 104]. As such, sex
dierences may also reveal a di erential vulnerability towards neurodegenerative disorders, thus
providing the premises for the observed sex-based unbalanced frequency and severity. Neurological
and neurodegenerative disorders are characterised by di erent clinical phenotypes, pathogenesis,