Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 16 of 36
and approving testosterone treatments speciﬁc for women, formulated with the aim of approximating
physiological testosterone concentrations for premenopausal women [ 220]. Nowadays just a few
studies have evaluated the musculoskeletal e ects of testosterone. The available data do not support an
eect of testosterone treatment on BMD at the spine or femoral neck at 12 months; nevertheless, there
is a need for clinical trials to evaluate the impact of testosterone treatment on musculoskeletal tissues.
The main indication for MHT is the presence of vasomotor symptoms (VMS), which have been clearly
associated with the risk of cardio-vascular disease, osteoporosis and cognitive decline, as a clinical
marker of susceptibility to oestrogen deprivation. Thus, moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms can
be seen as independent predictors of low BMD and fracture risk [ 219]. By treating younger, healthy but
symptomatic, postmenopausal women, we target the population that can mostly proﬁt from tailored
MHT, with clear evidence of a deﬁnite long-term beneﬁt. Fear of breast cancer risk had probably the
greatest negative e ect on the use of MHT. Recently, The Lancet published a study by the Collaborative
Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer [ 221] in which data from 58 studies were combined
using a nested case-control study design to focus on the long-term e ects of MHT. They concluded
that women who initiated MHT shortly after menopause had a signiﬁcantly increased risk of invasive
breast cancer compared with never users. As pointed out by the International Menopause Society
(IMS) press release [ 222] it is important to emphasize that potential breast cancer risk is one component
of the beneﬁts /risk analysis of MHT use for an individual woman, and that this analysis needs to
include symptoms severity and potential beneﬁcial e ects of MHT on bone, cardiovascular health and
sexual life. Anyway, it is extremely important to note that this paper does not clarify the impact of
currently used hormonal therapy dosage and schemes on breast cancer risk [ 221]. Consequently, it
will be important to perform studies about the long-term risk-beneﬁt ratio of new MHT formulations,
doses and routes of administration. Virtually old hormonal formulations and doses, which are known
to be responsible of adverse breast e ects, can no longer be prescribed. Hence, individualization of
care is necessary in order to achieve a safe personalized menopausal hormonal treatment to counteract
the deleterious e ects of postmenopausal oestrogen deﬁciency on women’s bone health.
7. Sex Disparity in Morbidity /Mortality of Infectious Diseases
Infectious diseases have accompanied the human being likely from the beginning of its existence.
The presence of some kinds of infections may have been enhanced through past events and
cultural transitions, like those of the Neolithic Era, which brought humans and animals in close
contact, possibly fostering the interspeciﬁc spread of transmissible diseases [ 223]. Some trace of
animal-to-human transmission has been retrieved in ancient skeletons of victims [ 224]. The condition
of crowded settlements that can promote epidemic spread of communicable diseases among humans,
including through vectors [ 225,226], may have arisen during the Neolithic as well, about 12,000 years
before present.
In evolutionary terms, the long-lasting and repeated contact between humans and pathogens may
have induced co-evolutionary processes, which have modulated the co-existence of the two systems, if
not the eradication either of the pathogen or of human groups [ 223]. In the long time of coexistence with
their hosts, pathogens should have faced many sources of stress, including the biological variability of
the hosts, their di erent nutritional conditions, body sizes, immune status and physiology [227].
Co-existence may have modulated genomic variability in humans as well, particularly in those
genes distributed on autosomal chromosomes, which, under selective pressure, may have developed
higher incidence of protecting genetic variants. These genes have gained some attention [ 228]. Yet, the
major di erence among mammalian individuals, which persists at least from 180 millions of years [ 229],
the di erence between the two sexes, is not yet taken in account in many studies, despite the increasing
evidence that males and females may be di erently a ected, in terms of morbidity and /or mortality, by
infectious diseases. Notwithstanding, the ﬁrst study in this direction is quite old [230].
On one side, the di erences among sexes in terms of susceptibility, morbidity and mortality can
be due to distinct cultural behaviours, thus be related to their gender more than to their biological