Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 18 of 36
women, due to their unique ability to give rise to vertical transmission through pregnancy, birth and /or
breast-feeding, in addition to the traditional horizontal spread. By developing sex-selective virulence
in favour of women, pathogens would enhance their possibility of dissemination, in particular during
prolonged breast-feeding. The model conﬁrmed that pathogens with a mixed (horizontal and vertical)
transmission evolve to be less virulent, thus providing an explanation for a lower virulence in females
than in males [240].
Nevertheless, during pregnancy there are important changes in the immune system of women,
which are not yet well understood [ 231]. Some diseases are demonstrated to be particularly virulent
during pregnancy or adversely a ect the foetus or breastfeeding baby [ 231]. Among non-immune
women, P . falciparum malaria is often more severe during pregnancy than at other times developing
a much higher parasitaemia. Women with leprosy have a greater risk of nerve deterioration during
pregnancy and lactation than at other times [231].
Yet, in some cases, even if not pregnant or breastfeeding, females are more prone to be a ected by
infections and die than males. Mortality from measles and whooping cough is greater in females, albeit
rates of measles infection are broadly similar for males and females [ 231,259]. Urinal trait infections
exhibit higher susceptibility and prevalence in women, but higher severity in men (reviewed in [ 260]).
This e ect cannot only be due to anatomical di erences of the urinal trait [ 261], since the main
sex-speciﬁc dissimilarities in the incidences of urinal trait infections has been observed in the life
period with the highest levels of sex-hormones [260].
In particular, for epidemic-prone infectious diseases, WHO observed: “Despite the potential
importance of di erences in sex and gender for the transmission, course and outcome of some infectious
diseases, little has been written about the implications of sex and gender for the surveillance of and
response to outbreaks, especially for diseases that are not sexually transmitted”. The WHO attributed
this phenomenon to the lack of interaction among di erent disciplines, like “epidemiology, medical
and biological sciences, social sciences and demography” [ 231]. They o ered to put di erent ﬁndings
together and translate them “into recommendations for WHO operational responses to outbreaks” [ 231].
More than a decade later, apparently, only few researchers have acted on these recommendations.
In conclusion, although evidence is mounting that not only sexual but also other kinds of infectious
diseases di erently act in females and males, researchers do not always distinguish between sexes and
the treatment provided to patients of both sexes tend to be the same [ 237,239,240]. One of the reason
for this gap is the lack of knowledge and information about sex-speciﬁc distinctions in morbidity
and mortality of many infectious pathologies [ 240,262]. Even in the case of epidemic-prone diseases,
more detailed information in the reports on patients would lead to a better understanding of sex bias
in infection and lethality, thus helping in the identiﬁcation of susceptible groups and development
of appropriate responses to avoid or stop outbreaks [ 231]. In the research ﬁeld, the di erential
consideration of data might help in a better understanding of the immune response mechanisms
involved and their evolution over time, which is the ﬁrst step on the pathway of setting a precise
pharmacological defence.
8. Sex Disparity in Pain Threshold and Feelings
Pain is a major healthcare problem worldwide that most a ect women. Acute pain can reasonably
be considered a symptom of disease or injury, whilst chronic and recurrent pain needs speciﬁc
medical and pharmacological care [ 263]. This complex experience, which shows signiﬁcant di erences
with respect to gender, derives from the integration between physical, psychic and socio-cultural
components. According to a survey of over 85 thousand adults in 17 countries around the world,
chronic pain symptoms of any kind a ict 45% of women, compared to 31% of men [ 264]. In recent
decades, the results of many studies examining the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain and its prevention
and treatment strategies have conﬁrmed that the pain threshold is sex-speciﬁc and females appear to
feel pain more intensely with a lower threshold than men [ 265]. Some studies have shown that health
medical sta treat a disease more seriously when a man reports it, even if the other people present