Setting equations (5), (6) equal to 0, we have bσ2
MLE=S(bθ)
nand the normal equation (2). As a result, bθMLE =bθ.In
summary, when the noise follows a normal distribution, the Gauss-Newton iterations to minimize the least squares S(θ)
are exactly the same as the Newton-Raphson iterations to maximize the log-likelihood function with respect to θ, and
hence the maximum likelihood estimator is equivalent to the least squares estimator (Bates and Watts, 1988).
2.2. Asymptotic statistical inference
Let us consider the nonlinear regression model (1) where the ϵii.i.d∼N(0,σ2). We note that as n→ ∞ , the
least squares estimate bθis asymptotically N
θ∗,σ2(JTJ)−1
, where θ∗is the true value of θ, and the matrix J=
[(∂f(xi;θ)/∂θ j]θ∗plays the same role as Xin the linear regression (Saber and Wild, 1989). In particular, by analogy
with the linear confidence region
{θ|(θ−bθ)bJTbJ(θ−bθ)≤ps2Fα
p,n−p}, (7)
is an approximate 100(1 −α)% confidence region for θ. Here s2=S(bθ)/(n−p),bJ=J(bθ), and Fα
p,n−pis the upper a
critical value of the Fp,n−pdistribution. As the linear approximation is valid asymptotically, (7) will have the correct
confidence level of 1 −αasymptotically. As αvaries, the regions (7) are ellipsoid contours of the approximate multi-
variate normal density function of bθ(with Jreplaced by bJ). Since S(θ) measures how the observations are close to the
fitted equation for any θ, it would seem appropriate to also base confidence regions for θon the contours of S(θ). Such
a region could take the form n
θ|S(θ)≤cS(bθ)o
for some c,c>1. Regions of this type are often called the exact confidence regions, as they are not based on any
approximations. However, the confidence levels, or coverage probabilities, of such regions are generally unknown,
though approximate levels can be obtained from asymptotic theory.
For large enough n, the consistent estimator bθwill be su fficiently close to θ∗for the approximation (4) to hold with
Fα
p,n−pin (7). Therefore, substituting
S(θ∗)−S(θ)≈(bθ−θ∗)TbJTbJ(bθ−θ∗) (8)
from (4), we obtain the confidence region
(
θ|S(θ)≤S(bθ) 
1+p
n−pFα
p,n−p!)
(9)
that has the required asymptotic confidence level of 100(1 −α)%. The regions (7) and (9) are asymptotically the same,
and they are identical for linear models. However, for finite n, these regions may be very di fferent, and it indicates
inadequacy of the linear approximation (4). Under the assumption of normal errors we see that the above clash between
the two confidence regions embodies a wider principle. We have a choice between confidence regions based on the
asymptotic normality of the maximum likelihood estimator bθ, which is also the least squares estimator, and those based
on the contours of the likelihood function via the likelihood ratio test.
3. Parameterization and curvature
There are some nonlinear models which are intrinsically linear because they can be made linear in the parameters
by a simple transformation. For example, the reciprocal of the Michaelis-Menten regression mean function
f(x,b)=b1x
b2+x(10)
results in the model
1
y=1
b1+b2
b11
x+ϵ
=β1+β21
x+ϵ,
which is linear in the transformed parameters b1andb2. In such cases, transforming a model to its linear form often pro-
vides better inference procedures and confidence intervals. However, parameterization may a ffect the asymptotic vari-
ance and convergence of the estimation algorithm (Bates and Watts, 1988; Huang et al., 2010). The re-parameterization
4