4.1. Variance heterogeneity
When the residual errors show a trend (e.g., increasing variability as the explanatory variable increases), this can
be addressed by modeling the variance as a function of the independent variable or the fitted values. Di fferent methods
such as the likelihood ratio test, score test, nonparametric test, and certain modelling approaches can be used for the
diagnosis of heteroscedasticity in normal nonlinear regression models (Tsai, 1986; Simono ffand Tsai, 1991; Diblasi
and Bowman, 1997; Lin and Wei, 2003). For non-normal models, the test of departure from the nominal dispersion,
including over-dispersion and under-dispersion were also discussed (Dean, 1992; Wei et al., 1998).
If variance heterogeneity is ignored, the parameter estimates may not be influenced much, but it may result in
severely misleading confidence and prediction intervals (Carroll and Ruppert, 2017). One way of taking into account
variance heterogeneity is by explicitly modelling it by formulating a regression model for the variance. For example,
Chung and Park (2007) investigated regression models in which the conditional variance of the error is an unscaled
function of an integrated time series.
The generalized least squares (GLS) method (Nelder and Wedderburn, 1972) is typically used for correlated resid-
uals with heterogeneous variances using the IRLS (13). Formally, we replace the assumption of the noise distribution
ϵ∼N(0,σ2In) with the assumption of the noise distribution as ϵ∼N(0,Σ) where Σ =V1/2RV1/2. Here Vis a diagonal
matrix of potentially di fferent (heterogeneous) variance terms and Ris a correlation matrix. Vhas a constant diagonal
andRcan be modelled by a variance function (e.g., ai(ϕ) in an exponential family in (12)) or an autoregressive–moving-
average temporal structure. Additionally, Gaussian processes (Rasmussen, 2003) with the Bayesian nonparametric in-
ference have been widely used for heteroscedastic nonlinear regression in which we have f∼N(µ,K). The covariance
matrix Khas elements Ki j=κ(xi,xj), and function κmeasures similarity between two observations xiandxj. For
example, the radial basis function kernel has κ(xi,xj)=expn
−∥xi−xj∥2/γo
with a hyperparameter γ.
5. Model building
Model building aims at finding more realistic ways to describe the stochastic behavior observed in data. We
listed a few widely used models, which are classified by their shape and applied to real data analysis in various fields
(Farebrother, 1983).
•Polynomial models. Linear and quadratic polynomial regression have been widely applied to solve real-world
data problems for scientists and engineers. Quadratic or higher-order polynomials are curved with respect to the
predictors, but they are linear in the parameters so that they can be fitted by using linear regression. However,
they tend to overfit the responses with a large number of predictors. As the availability of nonlinear regres-
sion algorithms increased, the use of polynomials has sensibly decreased. Linear or quadratic polynomials are
mainly used to approximate the observed response within a small range of each predictor for understanding the
relationship with the response.
•Concave /Convex curves models. Concave /convex curves describe nonlinear relationships with asymptotes and
without inflection points.
1. Exponential model. The exponential equation describes an increasing or decreasing trend with constant
relative rate. The most common parameterization is
f(x,θ)=θ1exp(θ2x),
which has the slope of the tangent line through xisθ2. Therefore, the response increases by an amount that
is proportional to xpositively when θ1>0 (exponential growth), and negatively when θ2<0 (exponential
decay). The exponential curve is used to describe the growth of a population in unconstrained environmen-
tal conditions. The exponential function is nonlinear and can be fitted by using nls() or drm() functions in
R (Team et al., 2018).
2. Asymptotic model. The asymptotic regression model describes a limited growth, where yapproaches a
horizontal asymptote as x→∞ . There are several di fferent parameterizations known as the monomolecular
growth model (Fekedulegn et al., 1999). The most widely used parameterization is
y=θ1−(θ1−θ2) exp(−θ3x)+ϵ,
whereθ1is the maximum attainable y,θ2isyatx=0, andθ3is proportional to the relative rate of yincrease
while xincreases.
8