Nonlinear Regression Analysis
Hsin-Hsiung Huang and Qing He
Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of Central Florida, United States
Abstract
Nonlinear regression analysis is a popular and important tool for scientists and engineers. In this article, we introduce
theories and methods of nonlinear regression and its statistical inferences using the frequentist and Bayesian statistical
modeling and computation. Least squares with the Gauss-Newton method is the most widely used approach to param-
eters estimation. Under the assumption of normally distributed errors, maximum likelihood estimation is equivalent to
least squares estimation. The Wald confidence regions for parameters in a nonlinear regression model are a ffected by
the curvatures in the mean function. Furthermore, we introduce the Newton-Raphson method and the generalized least
squares method to deal with variance heterogeneity. Examples of simulation data analysis are provided to illustrate
important properties of confidence regions and the statistical inferences using the nonlinear least squares estimation
and Bayesian inference.
Keywords: Nonlinear regression, variance heterogeneity, iteratively reweighted least squares, Gauss-Newton,
Newton-Raphson, generalized least squares
1. Introduction
1.1. An overview of the nonlinear regression models
Nonlinear regression models have been widely used in various fields including statistics, chemistry, physics, psy-
chology, health science, and biology. Some of them have a linear relationship in the parameters (i.e., linear in the θ).
For example, a polynomial regression fits a curved relationship between the response variable and predictors using
higher-ordered values of the predictors, but it is linear in terms of the parameters. Statistical inference can be derived
from nonlinear regression models (1). The main advantages of nonlinear regression models include interpretability,
parsimony, and prediction (Bates and Watts, 1988). In general, nonlinear models are capable of accommodating var-
ious mean functions, so nonlinear models are appropriate for applications with parsimonious parameters and easily
interpretable due to the fact that the parameters can be associated with meaningful factors.
Assume that there are nobservations of responses y1,..., ynand predictors xikassociated with yionk=1,..., p
independent variables. In nonlinear regression, the y’s and x’s satisfy the nonlinear regression model
yi=f(xi,θ)+ϵi,i=1,..., n, (1)
where fis a function that is nonlinear in the pelements of parameter θwith the unknown true value θ∗, and theϵi’s are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) random errors with mean zero and constant variance σ2. The conditional
mean response E( yi|xi)=f(xi,θ), so we will refer to fas the mean function. For example, the Beverton-Holt model
(Beverton and Holt, 2012) which is similar to the Michaelis-Menten model (Sheiner and Beal, 1980) and used for
modeling discrete-time population gives the expected population y=nt+1as a function of the previous population
x=ntas
nt+1=f(x,(α,β))=αx
1+x/β,
where θ=(α,β) and the parameter αis the slope at 0 and βis the concentration between 0 and the upper limit αβ. It is
a nonlinear regression since the two variables are related in a nonlinear (curved) relationship.
Preprint submitted to International Encyclopedia of Education 4th Edition February 9, 2024arXiv:2402.05342v1  [stat.ME]  8 Feb 2024