is an important issue. Although the shape of the solution locus is fixed, the performance of the Gauss-Newton estima-
tor varies with respect to di fferent parameterizations. This depends on the nonlinearity in the model. There are two
kinds of nonlinearity–intrinsic nonlinearity and parameter-e ffects nonlinearity (Hamilton and Watts, 1985; Bates and
Watts, 1988). The intrinsic nonlinearity is associated with the modeling and is invariant under parameterization. The
parameter-e ffects nonlinearity, however, can be lessened through a proper parameterization. If either component of the
nonlinearity is large, the least squares estimate may not converge. Furthermore, the estimated covariance for bbgiven by
bV(bb)=bσ2
J(bb)TJ(bb)−1,would change greatly in each step of the iteration, and the statistical inference based on the
asymptotic normality becomes unreliable. In other words, the least squares estimator in nonlinear regression depends
on the curvedness of the underlying model as well as the parameterization adopted.
The quality of the linear approximation can be summarized by intrinsic curvature κN
d=∥dTCNd∥and parameter-
effects curvature κT
d=∥dTCTd∥(Bates and Watts, 1988), where dhas unit length, CNis the normal direction curvature
matrix, and CTis the tangent direction curvature matrix. For details on curvatures, please read the Appendix in Huang
et al. (2010).
The two curvatures correspond to two assumptions of linear approximation of a nonlinear mean function. First,
the planar assumption ensures that the nonlinear mean function is approximated by its tangent plane at a given point.
Second, the uniform coordinate assumption means that an equi-spaced, straight and parallel linear coordinate system is
placed on the approximation tangent plane. Intrinsic curvature is related to the planar assumption, and it depends on the
dataset considered and the mean function but not on the parameterization used in the mean function. Parameter-e ffects
curvature is related to the uniform coordinate assumption, and it depends on all aspects of the model, including the
parameterization. Large values of these two curvature measures indicate a poor linear approximation. The function
rms.curv() in the R package MASS can be used to calculate the two measures for a given nls() model fit (Venables and
Ripley, 2002). The intrinsic curvature is generally relatively negligible compared with the parameter-e ffects curvature
(Bates and Watts, 1988), and in such cases the profile likelihood approach is useful.
The Wald, likelihood ratio (LR) and score tests are asymptotically equivalent. They all have the same sampling
distribution which is a chi-square distribution with the same degrees of freedom. However, the Wald test statistics
(bb−b0)ThbV(bb)i−1(bb−b0), which results in an ellipsoidal confidence region, uses bband depends on curvature of the
likelihood at bb. The score test depends on the slope and curvature at bb0, while the LR test uses information from both
bbandbb0. The di fferences among them vanish in large samples if the null hypothesis is true. If the null hypothesis
is false, they may take very di fferent values. The Wald procedures are influenced by both intrinsic curvature and
parameter-e ffects curvature. A model with a lower parameter-e ffects curvature is preferable.
(a)n=50
 (b)n=100
Figure 1: The profile plots of the simulation data analysis. The 95% confidence region of b1andb2using the Wald statistic (dashed),
the likelihood ratio (blue) and Skovgaard’s approximation (red) with simulated data from the Michaelis-Menten model. The left
panel is with sample size n=50, and the right panel is with sample size n=100.
The curvature can a ffect the quality of statistical inferences based on the asymptotic normality. When the mapped
parameter curves onto the tangent plane are not uniform grid lines, the resulting confidence region may not be reliable.
We use the Michaelis-Menten model (10) as an example by simulating data with ϵii.i.d.∼N(0,12),b1=6,b2=5, and
xgenerated from the uniform distribution (1 ,100). We demonstrate how confidence regions of b1andb2are affected
5