An attempt at beating the 3D U-Net
Fabian Isensee1;2and Klaus H. Maier-Hein1
1Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany
2Faculty of Biosciences, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
Abstract. The U-Net is arguably the most successful segmentation ar-
chitecture in the medical domain. Here we apply a 3D U-Net to the 2019
Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation Challenge and attempt to im-
prove upon it by augmenting it with residual and pre-activation residual
blocks. Cross-validation results on the training cases suggest only very
minor, barely measurable improvements. Due to marginally higher dice
scores, the residual 3D U-Net is chosen for test set prediction. With a
Composite Dice score of 91.23 on the test set, our method outperformed
all 105 competing teams and won the KiTS2019 challenge by a small
margin.
1 Introduction
With over 400,000 cases per year, kidney tumors pose a serious health issue.
Right now, surgery is the most common treatment option. Semantic segmenta-
tion of the kidneys and the tumorous tissue is a promising rst step towards
improving the treatment outcome, for example by serving as processing step in
surgery planning [16], or by enabling research that attempts to relate tumor
morphology to surgical outcome [3,8].
Fueled by the availability of publicly available databases, semantic segmenta-
tion is one of the most popular research topics in the medical image computing
domain. This is especially true for abdominal CT scans, where several compe-
titions encourage researchers to continue developing methods to increase their
segmentation performance [1,9,14]. Despite the broad availability of abdominal
CT data, some of which also includes the kidneys as segmentation targets, no
public dataset with kidney tumor labels has been available until now. This natu-
rally also results in a relatively low number of segmentation algorithms that are
specically designed to segment kidney tumours [18,15,17]. The kidney tumor
segmentation challenge (KiTS) [6] aims at tackling this deciency by providing
210 high quality annotated CT scans for training and 90 CT scans for algorithm
testing.
The vast majority of successful algorithms for 3D image segmentation in
the medical domain is based on 3D variants of the U-Net architecture [13,2].
While the U-Net is thereby commonly augmented using residual [11] or dense
[10] connections, recent work has achieved excellent results using just a plain U-
Net architecture [7], questioning the necessity of extensive architecture research
in the medical domain.arXiv:1908.02182v2  [eess.IV]  4 Oct 2019