An attempt at beating the 3D U-Net 5
3 Results
Dice scores for kidney were computed by treating both the actual kidney label as
well as the tumor label as foreground and everything else as background. This
constitutes the same setup that is used in the challenge evaluation. The dice
computation of the tumors is done simply on the tumor labels. No other metrics
are considered as the challenge is evaluated on the geometric mean of kidney
and tumor dice.
All scores shown in this section are based on ve-fold cross-validations on
the KiTS training dataset.
Table 1. Summary of experiments. Results are based on ve-fold cross-validations on
the training cases of the KiTS dataset. Note that our training dataset was slightly
modied. Thus, the cross-validation Dice scores are not necessarily comparable with
other challenge submissions.
Network architecture Kidney Dice Tumor Dice Composite Dice
3D U-Net 97.34 85.04 91.19
Residual 3D U-Net 97.36 85.73 91.54
Preact. Res. 3D U-Net 97.37 85.13 91.25
ensemble 97.43 85.58 91.50
The challenge is decided based on the mean Dice score between kidney and
tumor ('Composite Dice'). In case of a draw between two teams, the tumor dice
is used as a tie breaker. As can be seen in Table 1, the results between the
three 3D U-Net models are remarkably similar, even to a point where we don't
feel comfortable to declare one of the models better than the others. This is
particularly interesting given the amount of publications that claim substantial
performance improvements when altering the U-Net architecture.
Even ensembling, which is typically a go-to technique to improve the seg-
mentation quality over single models, did not yield an improvement. This makes
the decision of what model should be submitted for the test cases particularly
challenging.
Based on the cross-validation results, the Residual 3D U-Net seems most
promising, as it has the highest mean dice and tumor dice scores (the metrics
that matter in the context of this challenge). Still, we would like emphasize that
this decision is being made out of necessity rather than conviction.
We thus use the ve Residual 3D U-Net models from the cross-validation
as an ensemble to predict the 90 test cases. Predictions were consolidated by
averaging softmax outputs.
Table 2 shows the top 5 results on the KiTS 2019 test set. Our method
outperformed all competing methods and thus won the KiTS 2019 challenge.