GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico Yujin Tang, Duong Nguyen, and David Ha
3.2 Self-Attention for Images
Although self-attention is broadly applied to sequential data, it is
straightforward to adapt it to images. For images, the input is a
tensor𝑋∈R𝐻×𝑊×𝐶where𝐻and𝑊are the height and width of
the image,𝐶is the number of image channels (e.g., 3 for RGB, 1 for
gray-scale). If we reshape the image so that it becomes 𝑋∈R𝑛×𝑑𝑖𝑛
where𝑛=𝐻×𝑊and𝑑𝑖𝑛=𝐶, all the operations defined in
Section 3.1 are valid and can be readily applied. In the reshaped 𝑋,
each row represents a pixel and the attentions are between pixels.
Notice that the complexity of Equation 1 grows quadratically with
the number of rows in 𝑋due to matrix multiplication, it therefore
becomes computationally prohibitive when the input image is large.
While down-sampling the image before applying self-attention is
a quick fix, it is accompanied with performance trade-off ([ 18,72]
propose methods to partially overcome this trade-off).
Instead of applying operations on individual pixels of the entire
input, a popular method for image recognition is to organize the
image into patches and take them as inputs as described in previous
work (e.g. [ 10,22,24,30]). In our approach, our agent attends to
patches of the input rather than individual pixels, and we use a
sliding window to crop the input image in our input transformations.
Conceptually, our approach is similar to Spatial Softmax [25,57,95],
which compresses visual inputs into a set of 2D keypoints that
are relevant to the task. This has been shown to work on robot
perception tasks, where the keypoints are spatially interpretable.
3.3 Self-Attention as Indirect Encoding
Indirect encoding methods represent the weights of a neural net-
work, the phenotype, with a smaller set of genotype parameters.
How a genotype encodes a larger solution space is defined by the
indirect encoding algorithm. HyperNEAT [ 90] encodes the weights
of a large network via a coordinate-based CPPN-NEAT [ 89] net-
work, while Compressed Network Search [ 56] uses discrete cosine
transform to compress the weights of a large weight matrix into a
small number of DCT coefficients, similar to JPEG compression.
Due to compression, the space of possible weights an indirect
encoding scheme can produce is only a small subspace of all possi-
ble combination of weights. The constraint on the solution space
resulting from indirect encoding enforces an inductive bias into
the phenotype. While this inductive bias determines the types of
tasks that the network is naturally suited at, it also restricts the
network to a subset of all possible tasks that an unconstrained phe-
notype can (in theory) perform. More recent works have proposed
ways to broaden its task domain of indirect encoding. [ 74] proposed
adapting part of the indirect encoding algorithm itself to the task en-
vironment. Hypernetworks [36] suggested making the phenotype
directly dependent on the inputs, thus tailoring the weights of the
phenotype to the specific inputs of the network. By incorporating
information from the input into the weight-generating process, it
has been shown [ 11,23,69,98] that the phenotype can be highly
expressive as the weights can adapt to the inputs for the task at
hand, while static indirect encoding methods cannot.
Similarly, self-attention enforces a structure on the attention
weight matrix 𝐴in Equation 1 that makes it also input-dependent.
If we remove the Key and Query terms, the outer product 𝑋𝑋𝑇3
3𝑋𝑋𝑇are also known as Gram matrices, and are key to classical statistical learning.defines an association matrix where the elements are large when
two distinct input terms are in agreement. This type of structure
enforced in 𝐴has been shown to be suited for associative tasks
where the downstream agent has to learn the relationship between
unrelated items. For example, they are used in the Hebbian learn-
ing [ 44] rule inspired by neurons that fire together wire together,
shown to be useful for associative learning [ 4,63]. Matrix factor-
ization applied to weights has been proposed in the deep learning
literature [ 32,79], and are also present in recommender systems [ 55]
to represent relationships between different inputs.
As the outer product 𝑋𝑋𝑇so far has no free parameters, the cor-
responding matrix 𝐴will not be suitable for arbitrary tasks beyond
association. The role of the small Key and Query matrices in Equa-
tion 1 allow 𝐴to be modified for the task at hand. 𝑊𝑘,𝑊𝑞∈R𝑑𝑖𝑛×𝑑
are the matrices that contain the free parameters, 𝑑𝑖𝑛is a constant
with image inputs (3 for RGB images and 1 for gray scale images),
therefore the number of free parameters in self-attention is in the
order ofO(𝑑). As we explained previously, when applying self-
attention to images 𝑛can be the number of pixels in an input the
magnitude of which is often tens of thousands for moderately sized
images. On the other hand, 𝑑is the dimension of the transformed
space in which the Key and Query matrices reside and is often much
smaller than 𝑛(𝑑=4in our experiments). This form of indirect en-
coding enables us to represent the phenotype, the attention matrix
𝐴, of sizeO(𝑛2)using onlyO(𝑑)number of genotype parameters.
In our experiments, we show that our attention matrix 𝐴can be
represented using only ∼1200 trainable genotype parameters.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that features from this attention
matrix is especially useful to a downstream decision-making con-
troller. We find that even if we restrict the size of our controller to
only∼2500 parameters, it can still solve challenging vision-based
tasks by leveraging the information provided by self-attention.
4 PROPOSED METHOD
Encouraged by the success of early Deep RL works such as [ 65],
most succeeding works adopted variants of earlier models rooted
from a similar design. For instance, convolution layers for image
down-sampling and feature extraction (the visual feature extrac-
tion module) are first used to extract features that are then fed to
fully-connected or recurrent layers to produce value estimations or
control signals (the controller module). In such a design, the visual
feature extraction module regards each of the elements in the entire
input image of equal importance and relies on the training signal
to direct its learning so that a small fraction of the weights learn to
emphasize task related factors while the others deal with nuances.
Our proposed method is based on a different premise: when the
brain is involved in effort-demanding tasks, it assigns most of its
attention capacity only to task relevant elements and is temporarily
blind to other signals [ 50,61]. In this vein, our agent is designed to
focus on only task critical regions in the input image and ignore the
others, Figure 2 depicts the overview of our proposed method. To
be concrete, given an observation our agent first resizes it into an
input image of shape 𝐿×𝐿, the agent then segments the image into
𝑁patches and regard each patch as a potential region to attend
to. To decide which patches are appropriate, the agent passes the
patches to the self-attention module to get a vector representing
417