Neuroevolution of Self-Interpretable Agents
Yujin Tang
Google Brain, Tokyo
yujintang@google.comDuong Nguyen
Google Japan
duongnt@google.comDavid Ha
Google Brain, Tokyo
hadavid@google.com
ABSTRACT
Inattentional blindness is the psychological phenomenon that causes
one to miss things in plain sight. It is a consequence of the selective
attention in perception that lets us remain focused on important
parts of our world without distraction from irrelevant details. Mo-
tivated by selective attention, we study the properties of artificial
agents that perceive the world through the lens of a self-attention
bottleneck. By constraining access to only a small fraction of the
visual input, we show that their policies are directly interpretable in
pixel space. We find neuroevolution ideal for training self-attention
architectures for vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) tasks,
allowing us to incorporate modules that can include discrete, non-
differentiable operations which are useful for our agent. We argue
that self-attention has similar properties as indirect encoding, in the
sense that large implicit weight matrices are generated from a small
number of key-query parameters, thus enabling our agent to solve
challenging vision based tasks with at least 1000x fewer parameters
than existing methods. Since our agent attends to only task critical
visual hints, they are able to generalize to environments where task
irrelevant elements are modified while conventional methods fail.1
ACM Reference Format:
Yujin Tang, Duong Nguyen, and David Ha. 2020. Neuroevolution of Self-
Interpretable Agents. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference
(GECCO ’20), July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3389847
1 INTRODUCTION
While visual inputs contain rich information, humans are able to
quickly locate several task related spots, extract key information
and reason about them to take actions [ 1,88]. In the field of ma-
chine learning (ML), existing literature has demonstrated successful
applications of deep reinforcement learning (RL) to challenging
tasks with visual inputs, however, it is unclear whether these agents
reason similarly as we do. This lack of interpretability is one of
the major concerns that caused debates in the wider adoption of
ML in safety and security prioritized applications. To get to know
what these agents are “thinking,” some methods relied on dedicated
network architectures and/or carefully designed training schemes
[2,67,87]. Is it possible to build a simple mechanism and design an
agent that behaves similarly to the way humans do?
1Videos of our results and source code available at https://attentionagent.github.io/
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7128-5/20/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3389847
Figure 1: In this work, we evolve agents that attend to a small
fraction of its visual input critical for its survival, allowing for inter-
pretable agents that are not only compact, but also more generaliz-
able. Here, we show examples of our agent’s attention highlighted
in white patches. Note that our agent’s decision-making controller
receives only thepositions of these white patches as visualized here,
nottheir contents. In CarRacing (top), our agent mostly attends to
the road borders, but shifts its focus to the turns before it changes
heading directions. In DoomTakeCover (bottom), the agent is able
to focus on fireballs and monsters, consistent with our intuitions.
One possible solution is to design agents that can encode and
process abstract concepts. Recent works have demonstrated the
importance of learning abstract information from visual inputs.
For example, the world models line of work [ 26,37,39,51] learns
compact representations of input image sequences, and have shown
that agents trained to use these representations do better in various
vision-based tasks. However, not all elements of an input image are
equally important. As is pointed out recently [ 29,84], an agent does
not have to learn representations that are capable of reconstructing
the full observation—it is sufficient if the representation allows pre-
dicting quantities that are directly relevant for planning. Addressing
this, recent works by Risi and Stanley [ 76,77] have demonstrated
that neuroevolution can be leveraged to train an agent’s world
model alongside its controller together, end-to-end, even when
there are millions of model parameters in the agent’s architecture.
They also found that the abstract representations learned end-to-
end are more task-specific. All these suggests a design of agents
that focuses more on and learns from task critical areas of the input.
Most current methods used to train neural networks, whether
with gradient descent or evolution strategies, aim to solve for the
value of each individual weight parameter of a given neural network.
We refer to these methods as direct encoding methods. Indirect
encoding [82,91], on the other hand, offers a radically different
approach. These methods optimize instead for a small set of rules
414