Neuroevolution of Self-Interpretable Agents GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico
each patch’s importance, based on which it selects 𝐾patches of
the highest importance. It then uses the index ( 𝑘) of each of the 𝐾
patches to fetch relevant features with a function 𝑓(𝑘)(described in
Sec. 4.3), which can be either a learned module or a pre-defined func-
tion that incorporates domain knowledge. Finally, the agent inputs
the features to its controller and generates the action corresponding
to the given observation.
To gain a better sense of the magnitudes involved, we summarize
the hyper-parameters used in this work in Table 1. Some of the
parameters are explained in the following sections.
Table 1: Hyper-parameters in this paper. Left: Parameters for
input transformation. After resizing the observation into an image
of shape𝐿×𝐿, we use a sliding window of specified size and stride to
segment the image into 𝑁=(𝐿−𝑀
𝑆+1
)2=(96−7
4+1
)2=529
patches. Right: Parameters for self-attention. Since the attention is
between patches and each patch is RGB, we therefore have 𝑑𝑖𝑛=
𝑀2×𝐶=72×3=147.
Parameter Value Parameter Value
Input size (𝐿) 96𝑑𝑖𝑛 147
Window size ( 𝑀) 7𝑑 4
Stride (𝑆) 4𝐾 10
# of Patches ( 𝑁and𝑛)529 # of LSTM neurons 16
4.1 Input Transformation
Our agent does some basic image processing and then segments
an input image into multiple patches. For all the experiments in
this paper, our agent receives RGB images as its input, therefore
we simply divide each pixel by 255 to normalize the data, but it
should be straightforward to integrate other data preprocessing
procedures. Similarly, while there can be various methods for im-
age segmentation, we find a simple sliding window strategy to
be sufficient for the tasks in this paper. To be concrete, when the
window size 𝑀and stride𝑆are specified, our agent chops an input
of shape(𝐻,𝑊,𝐶)into a batch of 𝑁patches of shape(𝑀,𝑀,𝐶),
where𝐻and𝑊are the height and width of the input image and
𝐶is the number of channels. We then reshape the processed data
into a matrix of shape (𝑁,𝑀×𝑀×𝐶)before feeding it to the self-
attention module. 𝑀and𝑆are hyper-parameters to our model that
determine how large each patch is and whether patches overlap. In
the extreme case when 𝑀=𝑆=1this becomes self-attention on
each individual pixel in the image.
4.2 Importance Voting via Self-Attention
Upon receiving the transformed data in R𝑛×𝑑𝑖𝑛where𝑛=𝑁and
𝑑𝑖𝑛=𝑀×𝑀×𝐶, the self-attention module follows Equation 1
to get the attention matrix of shape (𝑁,𝑁). To keep the agent as
simple as possible, we do not use positional encoding in this work.
By applying softmax, each row in the attention matrix sums
to one, so the attention matrix can be viewed as the results from
a voting mechanism between the patches. To be specific, if each
patch can distribute fractions of a total of 1 vote to other patches
(including itself), row 𝑖thus shows how patch 𝑖has voted and
column𝑗gives the votes that patch 𝑗acquired from others. In this
interpretation, entry (𝑖,𝑗)in the attention matrix is then regarded
as how important patch 𝑗is from patch 𝑖’s perspective. Takingsums along the columns of the attention matrix results in a vector
that summarizes the total votes acquired by each patch, and we
call this vector the patch importance vector. Unlike conventional
self-attention operations, we rely solely on the patch importance
vector and do not calculate a weighted output with Equation 2.
4.3 Patch Selection and Feature Retrieval
Based on the patch importance vector, our agent picks the 𝐾patches
with the highest importance. We pass in the index of these 𝐾patches
(denoted as index 𝑘to reference the 𝑘𝑡ℎpatch) into a feature retrieval
operation𝑓(𝑘)to query the for their features. 𝑓(𝑘)can be static
mappings or learnable modules, and it returns the features related
to the image region centered at patch 𝑘’s position. The following
list gives examples of possible features:
•Patch center position. 𝑓(𝑘):R↦→R2where the output
contains the row and column indices of patch 𝑘’s center.
•Patch’s image histogram. 𝑓(𝑘):R↦→R𝑏where the out-
put is the image histogram calculated from patch 𝑘and𝑏is
the number of bins.
•Convolution layers’ output. 𝑓(𝑘):R ↦→ R𝑠×𝑠×𝑚is a
stack of convolution layers (learnable or fixed with pre-
trained weights). It takes the image region centered at patch
𝑘as input and outputs a tensor of shape 𝑠×𝑠×𝑚.
In this work, we use the first example for its simplicity. These
design choices give us control over our agent’s capabilities and
computational efficiency, and will also affect its interpretability.
By discarding patches of low importance the agent becomes
temporarily blind to other signals, this is built upon our premise
and effectively creates a bottleneck that forces the agent to focus
on patches only if they are critical to the task. Once learned, we can
visualize the 𝐾patches and see directly what the agent is attending
to (see Figure 1). Although this mechanism introduces 𝐾as a hyper-
parameter, we find it easy to tune (along with 𝑀and𝑆). In principle
we can also let neuroevolution decide on the number of patches,
and we will leave this for future work.
Pruning less important patches also leads to the reduction of
input features, so the agent is more efficient by solving tasks with
fewer weights. Furthermore, correlating the feature retrieval opera-
tion𝑓(𝑘)with individual patches can also lower the computational
cost. For instance, if some local features are known to be useful for
the task yet computationally expensive, 𝐾acts as a budget cap and
only compute features from the most promising regions. Notice
however, this does not imply we permit only local features, as 𝑓(𝑘)
also has the flexibility to incorporate global features. In this paper,
𝑓(𝑘)is a simple mapping from patch index to patch position in
the image and is a local feature. But 𝑓(𝑘)can also be a stack of
convolution layers whose receptive fields are centered at patch 𝑘.
If the receptive fields are large, 𝑓(𝑘)can provide global features.
4.4 Controller
Temporal information between steps is important to most RL tasks,
but single RGB images as our input at each time step do not provide
this information. One option is to stack multiple input frames like
what is done in [ 66], but we find this inelegant approach unsatisfac-
tory because the time window we care about can vary for different
tasks. Another option is to incorporate the temporal information
418