GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico Yujin Tang, Duong Nguyen, and David Ha
as a hidden state inside our controller. Previous work [ 19] has
demonstrated that with a good representation of the input image,
even a small RNN controller with only 6–18 neurons is sufficient
to perform well at several Atari games using only visual inputs.
In our experiments, we use Long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 47]
network as our RNN controller so that its hidden state can capture
temporal information across multiple input image frames. We find
that an LSTM with only 16 neurons is sufficient to solve challenging
tasks when combined with features extracted from self-attention.
4.5 Neuroevolution of the Agent
Operators such as importance sorting and patch pruning in our pro-
posed methods are not gradient friendly. It is not straightforward to
apply back-propagation in the learning phase. Besides, restricting
to gradient based learning methods can prohibit the adoption of
learnable feature retrieval functions 𝑓(𝑘)that consist of discrete
operations or produce discrete features. We therefore turn to evolu-
tion algorithms to train our agent. While it is possible to train our
agent using any evolution strategy or genetic algorithms (GA), em-
pirically we find the performance of Covariance Matrix Adaptation
Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) [ 40] stable on a set of tasks [ 34,96].
Despite its power, the computation of the full covariance matrix is
non-trivial, and because of this CMA-ES is rarely applied to prob-
lems in high-dimensional space [ 68] such as the tasks dealing with
visual inputs. As our agent contains significantly fewer parameters
than conventional methods, we are therefore able to train it with
an off-the-shelf implementation of CMA-ES [41].
5 EXPERIMENTS
Our goal in this section is to answer the following questions via
experiments and analysis:
(1)Is our agent able to solve challenging vision-based RL tasks?
If so, what are the advantages over other methods?
(2)How robust is the learned agent? If the agent is focusing on
task critical factors, does it generalize to the environments
with modifications that are irrelevant to the core mission?
We evaluate our method in two challenging vision-based RL
tasks: CarRacing [ 54] and DoomTakeCover [ 53,71]. See the first
column of Figure 3 for sample screenshots from these tasks. Refer
to [38] for an in-depth description of these tasks. For comparison
purposes, we also include World Models [ 37], GA [ 76], DIP [ 77]
and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [60, 85] as baselines.
5.1 Agent Settings
Our network architecture and related parameters are shown in
Figure 4. We resize the input images to 96×96and use the same
architecture for both CarRacing and DoomTakeCover (except for
the output dimensions). We use a sliding window of size 𝑀=7
and stride𝑆=4to segment the input image, this gives us 𝑁=529
patches. After reshaping, we get an input matrix 𝑋of shape(𝑛=
529,𝑑𝑖𝑛=147). We project the input matrix to Key and Query with
𝑑=4, after self-attention is applied we extract features from the
𝐾=10most importance patches and input to the single layer LSTM
controller (#hidden=16) to get the action. Table 2 summarizes the
number of parameters in our agent, we have also included models
from some existing works for the purpose of comparison . For
Figure 3: CarRacing and DoomTakeCover. Left: Original tasks.
The observations are resized to 96x96px and presented to the agent.
Right: Modified CarRacing environments: Color Perturbation, Ver-
tical Frames, Background Blob. Modified DoomTakeCover environ-
ments: Higher Walls, Different Floor Texture, Hovering Text.
feature retrieval function 𝑓(𝑘), we use a simple mapping from patch
index to patch center position in the input image. We normalize
the positions by dividing the largest possible value so that each
coordinate is between 0 and 1.
Table 2: Learnable parameters. GA, DIP share the same world
model architecture. Fully connected (FC) layers include bias term.
Method Component #Params Total
World model [37]
GA [76]
DIP [77]VAE 4,348,547
4,733,485 MD-RNN 384,071
Controller 867
PPO [60]Conv Stack 393,848445,955FC Stack 52,107
OursFC (Query) 592
3,667 FC (Key) 592
LSTM (#hidden=16) 2,483
We use pycma [ 41], an off-the-shelf implementation of CMA-
ES [40] to train our agent. We use a population size of 256, set the
initial standard deviation to 0.1 and keep all other parameters at
default values. To accurately evaluate the fitness of each individ-
ual in the population, we take the mean score over 16 rollouts in
CarRacing and 5 rollouts in DoomTakeCover as the its fitness.
5.2 Results
Not only is our agent able to solve both tasks, it also outperformed
the existing methods, Table 3 summarizes our agent’s scores. In
addition to the SOTA scores, the attention patches visualized in pixel
space also make it easier for humans to understand the decisions
made by our agent. In Figure. 1, we plot the top 𝐾important patches
elected by the self-attention module on top of the input image and
see directly what the agent is attending to (see the accompanying
videos for more results). The opacity indicates the importance, the
whiter the more important.
From the figures, we notice that most of the patches the agent
attends to are consistent with humans intuition. For example in
CarRacing, the agent’s attention is on the border of the road but
shifts its focus to the turns before the car needs to change its heading
direction. Notice the attentions are mostly on the left side of the
road. This makes sense from a statistical point of view considering
that the racing lane forms a closed loop and the car is always
419