GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico Yujin Tang, Duong Nguyen, and David Ha
[−0.2,0.2]and add respectively to the lane and grass field
RGB vectors. Once the perturbation is added, the colors
remain constant throughout the episode.
•CarRacing - Vertical Bars We add black vertical bars to
both sides of the screen. The window size of CarRacing is
800px×1000px, and we add two vertical bars of width 75px
on the two sides of the window.
•CarRacing - Background Blob We add a red blob at a
fixed position relative to the car. In CarRacing, as the lane is
a closed loop and the car is designed to run in the counter
clock-wise direction, the blob is placed to the north east of
the car to reduce lane occlusion.
•DoomTakeCover - Higher Walls We make the wall higher
and keep all other settings the same.
•DoomTakeCover - Different Floor Texture We change
the texture of the floor and keep all other settings the same.
•DoomTakeCover - Hovering Text We place a blue blob
containing text on top part of the screen. The blob is placed
to make sure no task critical visual information is occluded.
For the purpose of comparison, we used the released code (and
pre-trained models, if available) from [ 37,76] as baselines. While
our reproduced numbers do not exactly match the reported scores,
they are within error bounds, and close enough for the purpose of
testing for generalization. For each modification, we test a trained
agent for 100 consecutive episodes and report its scores in Table 4.
Table 4: Generalization tests. We train agents in the original
task and test in the modified environments without re-training. For
comparison, we also include the performance in the unmodified
tasks. Results with significant performance drop highlighted.
CarRacing Original Color Perturb Vertical Bars Blob
WM [37] 901±37 655±353 166±137 446±299
GA [76] 859±79 442±362 675±254 833±135
PPO [60] 865±159 505±464 615±217 855±172
Ours 914±15 866±112 900±35 898±53
TakeCover Original Higher Walls Floor Texture Text
WM [37] 959±564 243±104 218±69 240±63
Ours 1125±589 934±560 1120±613 1035±627
Our agent generalizes well to all modifications while the base-
lines fail. While world model (WM) does not suffer a large perfor-
mance drop in color perturbations in CarRacing, it is sensitive to
all changes. Specifically, we observe >75%score drops in Vertical
Frames, Higher Walls, Floor Texture, Hovering Text and a >50%
score drop in Background Blob from its performances in the un-
modified tasks. Since WM’s controller used as input the abstract
representations it learned from reconstructing the input images,
without much regularization, it is likely that the learned repre-
sentations will encode visual information that is crucial to image
reconstruction but not task critical. If this visual information to be
encoded is modified in the input space, the model produces mislead-
ing representations for the controller and we see performance drop.
In contrast, GA and PPO performed better at generalization tests.
The end-to-end training may have resulted in better task-specific
representations learned compared to World model, which uses an
unsupervised representation based data collected from randompolicies. Both GA and PPO can fine-tune their perception layers to
assign greater importance to particular regions via weight learning.
Through these tests, we are able to answer the second question
in Section 5: The small change in performance shows that our
agent is robust to modifications. Unlike baseline methods that are
subject to visual distractions, our agent focuses only on task critical
positions, and simply relies on the coordinates of small patches
of its visual input identified via self-attention, and is still able to
keep similar performance in the modified tasks without any re-
training. By learning to ignore parts of the visual input that it
deems irrelevant to the task, it can naturally still perform its task
even when irrelevant parts of its environment are modified.
6 DISCUSSION
The paper demonstrated that self-attention is a powerful module
for creating RL agents that is capable of solving challenging vision-
based tasks. Our agent achieves competitive results on CarRacing
and DoomTakeCover with significantly fewer parameters than
conventional methods, and is easily interpretable in pixel space.
Trained with neuroevolution, the agent learned to devote most of
its attention to visual hints that are task critical and is therefore
able to generalize to environments where task irrelevant elements
are modified while conventional methods fail.
Yet, our agent is nowhere close to generalization capabilities of
humans. The modifications to the environments in our experiments
are catered to attention-based methods. In particular, we have not
modified properties of objects of interest, where our method may
perform as poorly (or worse) than methods that do not require
sparse attention in pixel space. We believe this work complements
other approaches (e.g. [ 3,31,45,46,52,58,70,86,101,105]) that ap-
proach the generalization problem, and future work will continue to
develop on these ideas to push the generalization abilities proposed
in more general domains [ 7,16,17,49,59,70,104]. For interesting
failure cases, please visit https://attentionagents.github.io/.
Neuroevolution is a powerful toolbox for training intelligent
agents, yet its adoption in RL is limited because its effectiveness
when applied to large deep models was not clear until only re-
cently [ 76,93]. We find neuroevolution to be ideal for learning
agents with self-attention. It allows us to produce a much smaller
model by removing unnecessary complexity needed for gradient-
based method. In addition, it also enables the agent to incorporate
modules that include discrete and non-differentiable operations
that are helpful for the tasks. With such small yet capable models,
it is exciting to see how neuroevolution trained agents would per-
form in vision-based tasks that are currently dominated by Deep
RL algorithms in the existing literature.
In this work, we also establish the connections between indirect
encoding methods and self-attention. Specifically, we show that
self-attention can be viewed as a form of indirect encoding. An-
other interesting direction for future works is therefore to explore
more specific forms of indirect encoding that, when combined with
neuroevolution, can produce RL agents with useful innate behaviors.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Yingtao Tian,
Lana Sinapayen, Shixin Luo, Krzysztof Choromanski, Sherjil Ozair,
Ben Poole, Kai Arulkumaran, Eric Jang, Brian Cheung, Kory Math-
ewson, Ankur Handa, and Jeff Dean for valuable discussions.
421