GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, Cancún, Mexico Yujin Tang, Duong Nguyen, and David Ha
or operations, referred to as the genotype, that specify how the
(much larger) neural network (the phenotype ) should be generated.
Before the popularity of Deep RL, indirect encoding methods
in the neuroevolution literature have also been a promising ap-
proach for vision-based RL problems. For example, earlier works
demonstrated that large neural networks can be encoded into much
smaller, genotype solutions, that are capable of playing Atari [ 43]
(when it was still considered challenging in 2012) or car racing
directly from pixel-only inputs [ 56], hinting at its potential power.
By encoding the weights of a large model with a small number
of parameters, we can substantially reduce the search space of the
solution, at the expense of restricting our solution to a small sub-
space of all possible solutions offered by direct encoding methods.
This constraint naturally incorporates into our agent an inductive
bias that determines what it does well at [ 28,42,102], and this
bias is dependent on the choice of our indirect encoding method.
For instance, HyperNEAT [ 90] has been successful at robotic gait
control [ 14,15,75], suggesting CPPNs [ 89] to be effective at repre-
senting modular and symmetric properties suitable for locomotion.
But are better there other encoding methods for vision-based tasks?
In this work, we establish that self-attention can be viewed as
a form of indirect encoding, which enables us to construct highly
parameter-efficient agents. We investigate the performance and
generalization properties of these agents for vision-based RL tasks.
Self-attention has been popularized by Transformer [ 97] models
that have been successfully applied in domains such as natural
language processing [ 21,73] and vision [ 6,18,48,72]. As we will
explain, self-attention offers a simple yet powerful approach for
parameterizing a large weight matrix of size O(𝑛2)using only
O(𝑑)number of parameter values, where 𝑛is the size of the visual
input,𝑑is the dimension of some transformed space and 𝑛≫𝑑.
Furthermore, such a parameterization enforces an inductive bias to
encourage our agent to attend to only a small fraction of its visual
input, and as such naturally makes the agent more interpretable.
As we will show, neuroevolution is an ideal method for training
self-attention agents, because not only can we remove unneces-
sary complexity required for gradient-based methods, resulting
in much simpler architectures, we can also incorporate modules
that enhance the effectiveness of self-attention that need not be
differentiable. We showcase self-attention agents trained with neu-
roevolution that require 1000x fewer parameters than conventional
methods and yet is able to solve challenging vision-based RL tasks.
Specifically, with less than 4K parameters, our self-attention agents
can reach average scores of 914 over 100 consecutive trials in a 2D
car racing task [ 9] and 1125 in a 3D VizDoom task [ 100] (the tasks
are considered solved for scores >900and>750), comparable with
existing state-of-the-art results [ 37,76,77]. Moreover, our agent
learns to attend to only task critical visual spots and is therefore
able to generalize to environments where task irrelevant elements
are modified whereas conventional methods fail.
The goal of this work is to showcase self-attention as a powerful
tool for the neuroevolution toolbox, and we will open-source code
for reproducing our experiments. We hope our results will encour-
age further investigation into the neuroevolution of self-attention
models, and also revitalize interest in indirect encoding methods.2 RELATED WORK
Our work has connections to work in various areas:
Neuroscience Although the human visual processing mech-
anisms are not yet completely understood, recent findings from
anatomical and physiological studies in monkeys suggest that visual
signals are fed into processing systems to extract high level con-
cepts such as shape, color and spatial organization [ 1,27]. Research
in consciousness suggests that our brains interpret our surrounding
environment in a “language of thought” that is abstract enough
to interface with decision making mechanisms [ 20]. On the other
hand, while recent works in deep RL for vision-based tasks have
thrived [ 65,66], in most cases it is not clear why they work or fail.
A line of work that narrows the gap is world models [37,39],
where the controller’s inputs are abstract representations of the
visual and temporal information, provided by encouraging a prob-
abilistic “world model” to compress and predict potential future
experiences. Their agent excels in challenging vision-based RL
tasks, and by projecting the abstract representation back to the
pixel space, it is possible to get some insights into the agent’s mind.
[29,84] suggest that not all details in the visual input are equally
important, specifically they pointed out that rather than learning
abstract representations that are capable of reconstructing the full
observation, it is sufficient if the representation allows predicting
quantities that are directly relevant for planning.
While we do not fully understand the mechanisms of how our
brains develop abstract representations of the world, it is believed
that attention is the unconscious mechanism by which we can only
attend to a few selected senses at a time, allowing our conscious-
ness to condense sensory information into a synthetic code that is
compact enough to be carried forward in time for decision mak-
ing [20,61,99]. In this work, in place of a probabilistic world model,
we investigate the use of self-attention to distill an agent’s visual
input into small synthetic features as inputs for a small controller.
Neuroevolution -based methods for tackling challenging RL
tasks have recently gained popularity due to their simplicity and
competitiveness to Deep RL methods, even on vision-based RL
benchmark tasks [ 33,35,62,80,93]. More recent work [ 76,77]
demonstrated that evolution can even train RL agents with millions
of weight parameters, such as the aforementioned world models-
based agents. Because these approaches do not require gradient-
based computation, they offer more flexibility such as discrete latent
codes, being able to optimize directly for the total reward across
multiple rollouts, or ease of scaling computation across machines.
It is worthy to note that even before the popularity of deep RL-
based approaches for vision-based tasks, indirect encoding meth-
ods from the neuroevolution literature have been used to tackle
challenging vision-based tasks such as Atari domain [ 43] and car
navigation from pixels [ 56]. Indirect encoding methods are inspired
by biological genotype–phenotype representations, and aim to rep-
resent a large but expressive neural network with a small genotype
code, reducing a high dimensional optimization problem to a more
manageable one that can be solved with gradient-free methods.
Indirect encoding methods are not confined to neuroevolution.
Inspired by earlier works [ 81,90],hypernetworks [36] are recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) whose weight matrices can change over
time, depending on the RNN’s input and state. It uses an outer
415