Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 4 of 22
with a mean age of 25 years old. Subjects performed trials corresponding to each vowel and word
50 times (40 imagined, 10 overt). Each trial period of 4 s was preceded by a 2 s stimulus presentation
period and followed by a 4 s resting interval (Figure 1a). Stimuli were presented in both visual and
auditory form for all trials. During trials pertaining to vowels, subjects were asked to perform the
task throughout the 4 s of the trial, while trials involving words were accompanied with three audible
clicks indicating when participants should perform the task.
Sensors 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 22 
 4 s of the trial, while trials involving words were ac companied with three audible clicks indicating when 
participants should perform the task. 
 
Figure 1. Experimental paradigm and montage used for data acquisition. ( a) During vowel 
production, subjects performed imag ined speech for the duration of the task period. During the words 
task, subjects received 3 audible cues instructing them to begin. ( b) The 10–20 system of electrode 
placement was used, with the 6 electrodes (F3, F4, C3, C4, P3 and P4) highlighted. 
EEG signals were recorded using an 18-channel Grass® analog amplifier model 8-18-36 and a Data 
Translation® analog-to-digital converter board model DT 9816, sampled at 1024 Hz. Six channels were 
used for data acquisition with electrodes position ed according to the 10–20 international system over 
F3, F4, C3, C4, P3 and P4 (Figure 1b). Recorded si gnals were filtered between 2 Hz and 40 Hz using a 
finite impulse response (FIR) bandpass filter and no further filtering was applied here. The filtered data 
were segmented in order to retain only signals reco rded during imagined or audible speech production. 
For full details of the experimental protocol and reco rding technique, see [56]. Given the division of the 
imagined speech dataset two subcategories, and the fa ct that these signals were recorded using slightly 
different paradigms, a decision was taken to  perform classification  on both subsets. 
Artefact detection and removal were implemen ted using Independent Components Analysis 
(ICA) with Hessian approximation preconditioning. EEG recordings were downsampled by a factor of 3 to improve computation time, and the FastICA method was selected for implementation. This 
approach required identification of an artefact, in this case an eye-blink artefact from subject one, 
which is then used as a template with which to me asure other potential artefacts across subjects. All 
component maps (6 per subject) are mapped onto the template and those returning a correlation 
value above the threshold of 0.8 are identified as potential eye-blink artefacts. Visual inspection of components identified using this approach was performed before thei r final acceptance or rejection. 
In order to replicate the procedure in the original study [56], all data were downsampled to 128 Hz, resulting in 512 samples for each 4 s trial window. For the same reason, a sliding window was not applied. 
2.2. Classification Techniques 
Six classifiers were trained on the imagined speech EEG data. Three traditional machine learning 
approaches were used as benc hmark methods, and three differe nt CNN architectures used to 
determine the performance of deep learning approaches in comparison with standard machine learning methods. 
2.2.1. Benchmark Machine Learning Classifiers 
In order to closely approximate the original study [56], the SVM and RdF classifiers were trained on 
relative wavelet energy (RWE) features extracted from  the EEG. A discrete wa velet transform was first 
computed for each channel using five levels of decomposition. Fourth-order Daubechies were used to achieve the results presented in [56] and were therefore used here. A feature vector was constructed using the RWE of decomposition levels D2 (16–32 Hz), D3 (8–16 Hz), D4 (4–8 Hz), D5 (2–4 Hz), and A5 (<2 Hz), 
for each channel. This resulted in a 30-element feature vector for each trial. In the original study, the linear SVM implemented one-vs-one  multi-class classification and multiple values for the C 
Figure 1. Experimental paradigm and montage used for data acquisition. ( a) During vowel production,
subjects performed imagined speech for the duration of the task period. During the words task, subjects
received 3 audible cues instructing them to begin. ( b) The 10–20 system of electrode placement was
used, with the 6 electrodes (F3, F4, C3, C4, P3 and P4) highlighted.
EEG signals were recorded using an 18-channel Grass®analog ampliﬁer model 8-18-36 and a Data
Translation®analog-to-digital converter board model DT9816, sampled at 1024 Hz. Six channels were
used for data acquisition with electrodes positioned according to the 10–20 international system over
F3, F4, C3, C4, P3 and P4 (Figure 1b). Recorded signals were ﬁltered between 2 Hz and 40 Hz using a
ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) bandpass ﬁlter and no further ﬁltering was applied here. The ﬁltered data
were segmented in order to retain only signals recorded during imagined or audible speech production.
For full details of the experimental protocol and recording technique, see [ 56]. Given the division of
the imagined speech dataset two subcategories, and the fact that these signals were recorded using
slightly di erent paradigms, a decision was taken to perform classiﬁcation on both subsets.
Artefact detection and removal were implemented using Independent Components Analysis (ICA)
with Hessian approximation preconditioning. EEG recordings were downsampled by a factor of 3 to
improve computation time, and the FastICA method was selected for implementation. This approach
required identiﬁcation of an artefact, in this case an eye-blink artefact from subject one, which is then
used as a template with which to measure other potential artefacts across subjects. All component
maps (6 per subject) are mapped onto the template and those returning a correlation value above
the threshold of 0.8 are identiﬁed as potential eye-blink artefacts. Visual inspection of components
identiﬁed using this approach was performed before their ﬁnal acceptance or rejection. In order to
replicate the procedure in the original study [ 56], all data were downsampled to 128 Hz, resulting in
512 samples for each 4 s trial window. For the same reason, a sliding window was not applied.
2.2. Classiﬁcation Techniques
Six classiﬁers were trained on the imagined speech EEG data. Three traditional machine learning
approaches were used as benchmark methods, and three di erent CNN architectures used to determine
the performance of deep learning approaches in comparison with standard machine learning methods.
2.2.1. Benchmark Machine Learning Classiﬁers
In order to closely approximate the original study [ 56], the SVM and RdF classiﬁers were trained
on relative wavelet energy (RWE) features extracted from the EEG. A discrete wavelet transform
was ﬁrst computed for each channel using ﬁve levels of decomposition. Fourth-order Daubechies