Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 18 of 22
number of trials per class (maximum: 40 [ 56]). The CNNs were reasonably robust given the number
of training samples a orded by the dataset. Although the test accuracy tended to be lower than the
training accuracy, possibly indicating some overﬁtting, this is unsurprising given the small sample
size of data which makes it di cult for CNNs to generalize. It is well known that more data typically
improves the performance of a CNN, and we agree with the recommendations in [ 71], where a search
for increasing sample sizes is advocated as a method to ameliorating the large variance and errors
associated with cross-validation approaches and small datasets. The second limitation is the small
number of EEG channels used in data acquisition. Six electrodes is a small number and restricts the
spatial resolution of the EEG data. Given that CNNs work to capture spatial dependencies in the
data, the shortage of electrodes likely impacted negatively on overall performance. Other studies
related to imagined speech decoding have typically used montages ranging from 16 [ 30] to 64 [ 17]
electrodes, thus providing greater information to decoding models. If a DS-BCI is to become a
functional technology, full consideration of each of these issues is essential. It must also be noted
that any additional complexity emerging from the use of deeper neural network architectures and
potentially longer training times, must be accounted for in the development of real-time BCIs using
these models. It can be observed in Figure 5c that optimizing for accuracy often resulted in selection of
80 training epochs. However, the additional training time required may make the total beneﬁt of this
optimization negligible in a real-time scenario.
A weakness of the present study is that the experimental paradigm does not facilitate any
analysis of the di erential e ects of the di erent stimuli as the prompts are presented concurrently.
Additionally, the paradigm has not accounted for possible e ects of user training on BCI performance.
Subject training, in the form of task repetition and learning through neurofeedback (e.g., [ 72]), has been
shown to improve the performance of BCIs using other paradigms. It is likely that similar improvements
to DS-BCI performance can be obtained through use of e ective training strategies aimed at enhancing
a user’s ability to interact with a given system. Although the majority of DS-BCI studies have relied
on single-session protocols [ 23,56], others have used multiple sessions for data collection [ 17,21].
Studies have demonstrated classiﬁcation of imagined speech EEG with as few as 30, 40 or 50 trials
per class [ 25,56]. However, higher-volume data are required to fully exploit DL models such as
CNNs. Multi-session protocols o er several advantages including user training, collection of a greater
number of trials per class, and analysis of multiple paradigms. For example, using up to three
recording sessions, [ 17] were able to collect 100 trials per class while also investigating e ects of using
vowels, short words and long words. Use of multi-session training and neurofeedback within future
experimental protocols is required to ascertain the impact of these strategies.
5. Conclusions
In this study, we evaluated the performance of three di erent EEG-decoding CNN architectures
on imagined speech EEG. Imagined words and vowels were each used to train the CNNs, as well as
benchmark SVM, RdF and rLDA classiﬁers. Each of the classiﬁers was optimized using a nCV approach
to HP optimization. Both an intra- and an inter-subject method of HP selection were implemented and
statistically evaluated.
The results indicated that e ective selection of HPs when using these CNNs for EEG decoding is
critical to performance. In particular, the activation function, learning rate and number of training
epochs were determined to have a highly signiﬁcant impact on the model. Interaction between the
dierent HPs was found to be signiﬁcant, so that selection of an optimal HP value was dependent
upon the values of other HP values. Additionally, the interaction between the HPs investigated and
the di erent CNNs evaluated was also signiﬁcant. Similarities between the shallow and deep CNN
resulted in very similar selection of HPs. In contrast, the EEGNet selected a very di erent set of HPs
for optimal performance.
The results demonstrate that all three CNN networks outperform the benchmark classiﬁers in
terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, and that these results are statistically signiﬁcant. However, variation in