Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 17 of 22
here is one not often applied in DL contexts [ 36], but due to the relatively small quantity of training
data available, it was necessary to use this method to enhance model robustness.
Use of an inter-subject or intra-subject method for selecting HPs was not signiﬁcant for either
words (F(1,14) =0.151, p=0.699) or vowels (F(1,14) =0.626, p=0.432)). Although HP optimization
has clearly been shown to be a signiﬁcant factor in the performance of the CNNs, it is not necessarily
important for these HPs to be optimized on an inter-subject basis. High inter-subject variability has
been a limiting-factor for EEG applications [ 36], so the fact that ﬁnal accuracies obtained could be
achieved with global selection of HPs could have important consequences for inter-subject training.
In each case, the CNN architectures achieved higher classiﬁcation accuracies than the benchmark
classiﬁers and these results were signiﬁcant ( p<110–7). The range of improvement that the CNNs
achieved in comparison with the benchmark (words: 3.94–6.54%; vowels: 3.78–8.02%) is consistent with
the reported 5.4% median improvement attributed to DL approaches in comparison with traditional
ML methods for EEG classiﬁcation [ 36]. The range of accuracies achieved by the ﬁnal models (words:
24.35–24.90%; vowels: 28.95–30.25%) indicate that the di erent CNN architectures are similarly capable
of decoding imagined speech EEG. This is despite the signiﬁcant di erences in the selection of HPs
required to optimize the di erent networks, and di erent inner-fold performance on the validation
set. It should also be noted that the CNNs have vastly di erent numbers of trainable parameters
(Supplementary Table S1), with the compact EEGNet much less computationally complex than either
the shallow or deep CNNs; an important factor in interpreting overall performance. In fact, complexity
is a key aspect in determining the overall e cacy of a model as it comes with a cost in terms of training
time required. Due to the large number of trainable parameters in CNNs, traditional machine learning
approaches have been shown to be less time-consuming [ 71]. However, this work has demonstrated
that CNNs provide a statistically signiﬁcant advance on traditional approaches. This, and the fact that
utilizing trained CNNs to make predictions (with GPUs to help for fast inference) does not di er greatly
from traditional methods, supports the use of CNNs for imagined speech decoding. Taken together,
the results support the claims of the authors’ of the original papers that these CNNs can generalize
well across BCI paradigms [ 34,55] and indicate the potential of DL methods for decoding imagined
speech EEG.
Regarding the classiﬁcation results, it must be made clear that the observed performances of
the models are not at a level that would be required for a working DS-BCI. For such an important
mode of communication it is imperative that users be supplied with a highly accurate and robust
system. Despite recent advances [ 10,14] and high levels of interest, the ﬁeld is not yet at that
stage. Several avenues for investigation are available to researchers seeking to make progress in
this regard. These include systematic improvements such as increasing the number of trials and
the number of recording channels used. Additionally, experimental improvements can be sought
through investigation of the neurolinguistic properties of parts-of-speech and the impact of stimulus
presentation methods. However, the ﬁndings presented here compare favorably with other studies in
the ﬁeld. Many previous studies have applied binary classiﬁcation paradigms to the study of imagined
words, with average accuracies of 58% [ 18], 80.05% [ 17] and 92.46% [ 20] demonstrating the potential
for decoding imagined speech EEG. Mean accuracy of 50.06% in a 3-class classiﬁcation task involving
short imagined words has been reported [ 17]. In this work, we have demonstrated the potential to
decode a greater range of words from imagined speech EEG by classifying six words with a mean
accuracy of 24.90% (EEGNet) and highest single-subject mean of 30.36% (subject 13, deep CNN).
Imagined vowel classiﬁcation has previously been shown to be feasible, with results in the
range of 48.96% for 3-class [ 17], and 77.5–100% for binary classiﬁers [ 29]. Here, we have shown that
classiﬁcation of multiple imagined vowels is possible with a mean accuracy of 30.25% ( chance: 20% )
and highest single-subject mean of 35.83% (subject 7, shallow CNN), providing evidence that linguistic
units below the level of the word or sentence, i.e., phonemes, can be distinguished from EEG. However,
the promise indicated by these results must be tempered by acknowledgement of the limitations
of the study. First among these is the size of the imagined speech dataset and the relatively small