Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 16 of 22
4. Discussion
The study presented here is one investigating the e ects of varying HPs used for constructing and
training multiple CNNs, and the impact of optimizing HPs using intra- and inter- subject methodologies.
Furthermore, overall classiﬁcation accuracies of imagined words and vowels obtained using CNNs
were compared to three traditional ML approaches. Results obtained from the nCV approach to HP
optimization indicate the importance of HP selection when implementing CNNs. For all but the loss
function, varying the values of HPs resulted in e ects that were both signiﬁcant across the di erent
HP values and the di erent CNN architectures. Unsurprisingly, given its current prominence as a
non-linear activation function for CNNs, leaky ReLU achieved highest mean validation accuracy scores
(Figure 3). This result was reﬂected in selection of leaky ReLU for most intra-subject cases and all
inter-subject cases for the shallow and deep CNNs. However, ELU was the optimal activation function
for use with the EEGNet.
Smaller learning rates (0.001–0.1) achieved the best results with both the shallow and deep CNNs
but a swift drop o was apparent when the learning rate was increased to 1. In contrast, the EEGNet
performed best with a learning rate of 1, although it is unclear whether this trend would continue if the
learning rate was further increased. While accuracies obtained by the EEGNet only increase in small
increments after 20 epochs (indicating that less training is required for this network), it nevertheless
selected 80 epochs for inter-subject training. In contrast, the shallow and deep CNNs take statistically
signiﬁcant leaps when trained on 40 ( p<110–8) and 60 epochs ( p<110–60), respectively. This is
reﬂected in the results of inter-subject HP optimization, where the number of epochs selected is
consistently 60 (Table 2).
Taken together, these results highlight the importance of selecting reasonable HPs, and the selection
of learning rates and activation functions indicate that these two HPs are critical to performance
(Table 2). However, they also indicate how critical the interaction among HPs is, and how critical the
interaction between HPs and the network architecture is. These interactions are not always considered
when a CNN is being implemented for classiﬁcation tasks [ 36]. The importance of interactions between
HPs within a given network is evidenced by the selection of a learning rate for the shallow and
deep CNNs. A learning rate of 0.001 clearly obtains the highest inner-fold validation accuracy when
evaluated independently of the other HPs (Figure 4c). However, as selection of HPs for ﬁnal model
training is based on interaction between di erent HP combinations, a di erent learning rate (0.1) is
selected as the optimal (Table 2). The reason for this apparently incongruous result is that the leaky
ReLU activation function performed better with a learning rate of 0.1 than 0.01, whereas the learning
rate of 0.01 performed best across all activation functions. That is, the HPs selected (Table 2) are based
on validation accuracy as a function of the set (activation function, learning rate, loss and number
of epochs), rather than individual maximum values. The criticality of interactions between the HPs
and the speciﬁc CNNs is indicated by the di erential e ects of activation functions, learning rates
and number of epochs on the three CNNs. The dramatic di erences obtained between the shallow
and deep CNNs, and the EEGNet, are particularly visible in Figure 4c,d, where the EEGNet’s optimal
learning rate is 1 and it is able to achieve similar accuracies after 20 epochs and 80 epochs. It is also
clear from Figure 5 and Table 2 that the di erent CNNs respond di erently to the various HPs tested.
Results in Section 5 indicate that optimization of HPs evaluated for the SVM, RdF and rLDA
resulted in di erences that were either not signiﬁcant at all or only signiﬁcant with 0.01 <p<0.05.
In comparison, HPs tested with the CNNs were all highly signiﬁcant, with the exception of the loss
functions. These results suggest that, although time-intensive, HP optimization is of greater importance
with regards to CNN approaches than it is to traditional ML methods.
In this work, we have detailed the HPs that worked best for each of the CNNs when training on
imagined speech EEG data (Table 2, Figure 5). We have also presented future users of these networks
with e ective HPs in relation to activation function, learning rate and number of training epochs.
Along with previous works [ 34,42,55], this should provide researchers with a reasonable benchmark
from which to approach other classiﬁcation problems with these CNNs. The nCV technique applied