Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 7 of 22
case. Additionally, the deep CNN has been used for decoding of intracranial recordings [ 64]. Figure 2b
is a depiction of the architecture of the deep CNN. The ﬁrst block consists of two convolutional layers,
one to perform convolutional ﬁltering over time and one to perform spatial ﬁltering with weights
for all possible pairs of electrodes. Following the ﬁrst block are three identical convolutional blocks
containing dropout (0.5) [ 61], convolution, batch normalization [ 60], exponential linear units (ELU)
and max-pooling layers [ 34]. The output of the network is a softmax layer for classiﬁcation. Full details
of the shallow and deep CNNs are provided in the original paper [34].
EEGNet [ 55] is a CNN designed to be an e ective cross-paradigm EEG classiﬁer while, like the
shallow CNN, retaining a compact architecture. EEGNet has been shown to generalize well across
several BCI paradigms including sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) and movement-related cortical potential
(MRCP) [ 55]. One of the guiding principles of the EEGNet composition is to facilitate training of CNNs
on limited datasets, as is often the case in EEG studies. The design (Figure 2c) includes depthwise
and separable convolutions acting as analogues to traditional EEG feature extraction techniques such
as optimal spatial ﬁltering and ﬁlter bank construction. The depthwise convolution is performed
in the ﬁrst block of the EEGNet, where a 2D convolutional layer is trained to output feature maps
containing the EEG signals at di erent frequencies. Then the depthwise convolution is used to learn
a frequency-speciﬁc spatial ﬁlter. Design of the initial layers of the EEGNet have been inﬂuenced
by FBCSP [ 58]. In the second block of the network, separable convolution is applied, where a
depthwise convolution is followed by a pointwise convolution. The virtue of this approach is its
parameter reduction and decoupling of relationships across feature maps. Batch normalization [ 60],
dropout (0.5) [ 61] and mean pooling aid regularization and dimensionality reduction. Non-linearity
is executed in the form of ELU [ 65]. Finally, a softmax layer consisting of N units (N =number of
classes), is used to classify features extracted by the convolutional layers. Full details of the EEGNet
are provided in the original paper [55].
2.3. Method for Optimizing Hyperparameters
All classiﬁers were optimized using the nCV method, a typical approach to setting parameter
values in traditional ML problems [ 66] but much less commonly used in DL optimization and HP
validation [ 35]. It is often the case that studies implementing DL methods do not perform any
cross-validation on training, or only perform a simple k-fold cross-validation scheme (e.g., [ 24]).
While this is reasonable practice in ﬁelds such as computer vision, where enormous training sets are
available, it is less so in BCIs, where smaller datasets increase the propensity for overﬁtted models.
Therefore, a nCV approach has been employed here to facilitate HP optimization and a more reliable
estimation of performance. Adapted from principles described in [ 66,67], the nCV method depicted in
Algorithm 1 has been speciﬁcally tailored for DL validation. Firstly, the data are split into k folds, one of
which is retained in the outer fold for testing. An inner fold is then instantiated with the remaining
k-1 folds.
The combined inner-fold data are then re-split into k folds, and a validation accuracy is recorded
for each HP combination. That is, for each set of parameters in the HP space, k values for model
validation accuracy are returned. A mean validation accuracy is then calculated for each HP
combination across all inner folds and the highest mean inner fold validation accuracy across folds
is used to determine the optimum set of HPs. Concretely, a single set of HPs is selected for each
classifier based on an aggregate of all inner-fold validation accuracies. The final model, with the
optimized HPs, is then trained on outer-fold train folds and tested on the outer-fold test folds with
the resulting classification accuracy used to report model performance. Model accuracy is reported
as the mean test set accuracy across all k outer folds. In this study, 4-fold nCV has been implemented,
resulting in each outer fold consisting of 75% training and 25% testing data. The training data are
further split in k=4 inner folds, resulting in 75% for training and 25% for validation.