Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 13 of 22
3.3. Intra-Subject Selection of Hyperparameters
The distribution of HPs selected using the intra-subject method is presented in Figure 5. ReLU and
leaky ReLU were selected most often as the activation function for intra-subject training of the Shallow
CNN, and leaky ReLU is selected in 28 out 30 cases for training the deep CNN (Figure 5a). In total
contrast, the EEGNet selects the ELU activation in 96.67% of cases. The square activation function is
selected only twice (shallow CNN). The selection of an optimum learning rate is considerably di erent
across the three CNNs (Figure 5b). The shallow CNN selected 0.01 most often, whereas the deep CNN
selects 0.1 in 66.67% of the cases. However, both of these networks make use of all learning rates
below 1. Once again, the EEGNet di ers signiﬁcantly from the other CNNs. With regards to learning
rate, the EEGNet selects a value of 1 in 76.67% of cases. There is less variation between the CNNs
in relation to the number of training epochs required (Figure 5c). In particular, the deep CNN and
EEGNet exhibit similar distributions of 40, 60 and 80 epochs for training. However, the EEGNet is the
only one of the three to select 20 as the optimal number of epochs. The shallow CNN trends towards
a greater number of training epochs, either 60 or 80 in all cases. Statistical analysis presented in the
previous section indicated that di erences obtained when training with the CE or NLL loss functions
were not signiﬁcant. Further evidence of this is apparent in the distribution of loss functions selected
for intra-subject optimization (Figure 5d). Although the shallow CNN and the EEGNet do slightly
favor one loss function over the other, the deep CNN does not (50% each).
Sensors 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 22 
 3.3. Intra-Subject Selection of Hyperparameters 
The distribution of HPs selected using the intra-su bject method is presented in Figure 5. ReLU 
and leaky ReLU were selected most often as the acti vation function for intra-subject training of the 
Shallow CNN, and leaky ReLU is selected in 28 out 30 cases for training the deep CNN (Figure 5a). 
In total contrast, the EEGNet selects the ELU activa tion in 96.67% of cases. The square activation 
function is selected only twice (shallow CNN). The selection of an optimum learning rate is considerably different across the three CNNs (Figur e 5b). The shallow CNN selected 0.01 most often, 
whereas the deep CNN selects 0.1 in 66.67% of the cases. However, both of these networks make use of all learning rates below 1. Once again, the EEG Net differs significantly from the other CNNs. With 
regards to learning rate, the EEGNet selects a value of 1 in 76.67% of cases. There is less variation 
between the CNNs in relation to the number of trai ning epochs required (Fig ure 5c). In particular, 
the deep CNN and EEGNet exhibit similar distribu tions of 40, 60 and 80  epochs for training. 
However, the EEGNet is the only one of the three to  select 20 as the optimal number of epochs. The 
shallow CNN trends towards a greater number of tr aining epochs, either 60 or 80 in all cases. 
Statistical analysis presented in the previous section indicated that differences obtained when training with the CE or NLL loss functions were not significant. Further evidence of this is apparent 
in the distribution of loss functions selected for in tra-subject optimization (Figure 5d). Although the 
shallow CNN and the EEGNet do slightly favor one loss function over the other, the deep CNN does 
not (50% each). 
 
Figure 5. Distribution of hyperparameters select ed for different CNN architectures. ( a) Number of 
instances each activation function was selected. ( b) Number of instances each learning rate was 
selected. ( c) Number of instances each number of training epochs was selected. ( d) Number of 
instances each loss function was selected. 
3.4. Inter-Subject Selection of Hyperparameters 
HPs selected using the inter-subject method ar e presented in Table 2. The shallow and deep 
CNNs’ selection of HPs were almost identical to each  other, with activation function (leaky ReLU), 
learning rate (0.1) and number of training epochs (60) the same across data types. The only anomaly 
was the selection of NLL as the loss function for the shallow CNN when training on imagined words. However, as the results of the 2-way ANOVA indi cated that there were insignificant differences 
between the two loss functions, this is not a critical variation. Although higher mean inner-fold validation accuracies for the shallow and deep CN Ns were achieved with a learning rate of 0.01 
(Figure 4c), when the best HP combination was selected, the learning rate was 0.1. Just as with the 
Figure 5. Distribution of hyperparameters selected for di erent CNN architectures. ( a) Number of
instances each activation function was selected. ( b) Number of instances each learning rate was selected.
(c) Number of instances each number of training epochs was selected. ( d) Number of instances each
loss function was selected.
3.4. Inter-Subject Selection of Hyperparameters
HPs selected using the inter-subject method are presented in Table 2. The shallow and deep CNNs’
selection of HPs were almost identical to each other, with activation function (leaky ReLU), learning
rate (0.1) and number of training epochs (60) the same across data types. The only anomaly was the
selection of NLL as the loss function for the shallow CNN when training on imagined words. However,
as the results of the 2-way ANOVA indicated that there were insigniﬁcant di erences between the two
loss functions, this is not a critical variation. Although higher mean inner-fold validation accuracies
for the shallow and deep CNNs were achieved with a learning rate of 0.01 (Figure 4c), when the best