Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 3 of 22
Of the reviewed studies, nine considered CNNs in at least one form. Methods vary across these
studies and include grid search [ 47,48], Bayesian methods [ 49–51] (one fails to report the speciﬁc
approach [ 49]), trial and error [ 24,52], and unstated approaches, likely indicating trial and error [ 53,54].
In six of these studies, only partial results are reported in relation to HPs [ 24,48,50,51,53,54]. For example,
in an otherwise excellent paper [ 50], only present optimal values for structural parameters were tested
and the authors completely fail to report on the e ects of optimizing learning rate and learning rate
decay. There are similar omissions in relation to HP optimization in each of the six studies cited above.
In the remaining three CNN studies highlighted by the review papers, no results on HP optimization
are presented at all [ 47,49,52]. Not one of these studies presents any analysis of observed di erences
between HPs or their interaction with a given model, and none report any statistical analysis of results
pertaining to HP optimization. In almost all of these papers, perhaps excluding [ 50,51], reporting of the
approach to HP optimization is poor. Additionally, there are no interpretable results, no comparison of
individual HPs or interaction between HPs, and no statistical analysis of anything relating to HPs.
Other studies cited in the reviews [ 36,44], although employing DL models other than CNNs, follow this
pattern of inadequate reporting of HP optimization.
It is the above points regarding the relative performance of DL and ML methods, and the lack of
interest in HP optimization, that have informed the aims and methodology used here. There were three
main aims to this study. First, we wanted to determine whether DL methods provided a signiﬁcant
improvement over benchmark ML approaches. Second, we wanted to undertake a robust, statistically
validated, analysis of HP optimization, which would make it explicit which HPs were most e ective.
Third, we wished to investigate whether subject-speciﬁc HPs were always necessary, or whether
generalization of HPs across subjects was feasible without signiﬁcant loss of performance.
We take an EEG dataset recorded while participants perform imagined speech tasks in Spanish
and perform classiﬁcation using three di erent CNNs. The performances of the CNNs are compared
to three traditional ML benchmark classiﬁers. The CNNs utilized have been selected for this study
as they have each been speciﬁcally designed for EEG applications [ 34,55]. A nested approach to
cross-validation, more commonly applied to standard ML problems, is here applied in a DL context.
The nCV method facilitates HP optimization for all classiﬁers. Statistical analysis of the relative e ects
of the HP values on the CNNs’ performance, and the interactions between the HPs and the CNNs,
provides important information for future approaches to decoding imagined speech, and EEG in
general. Two modes of HP optimization are tested. The ﬁrst is an intra-subject approach where
subject-speciﬁc HPs are selected. The second is an inter-subject approach where a single set of HPs is
selected for all subjects.
This paper presents the methodology, results and discussion of this study, in which we evaluate
the relative performance of ML and DL approaches to imagined speech decoding, and the signiﬁcance
of HP optimization in relation to several di erent algorithms.
2. Methods
2.1. Dataset and Preprocessing Methods
The dataset used in this study was recorded by Pressel Coretto et al. [ 56] at the o ces of the
Laboratorio de Ingenier ía en Rehabilitaci ón e Investigaciones Neuromusculares y Sensoriales (LIRINS)
in the Faculty of Engineering at the National University of Entre R íos (UNER). EEG were obtained from
15 subjects while they performed overt and imagined speech production in response to two groups
of prompts. The ﬁrst group of prompts contained the vowels /a/,/e/,/i/,/o/and/u/, with the second
containing the six Spanish words “arriba”, “abajo”, “derecha”, “izquierda”, “adelante” and “atr ás”
(corresponding to the English words up, down, left, right, backward and forward). The vowel set was
selected due to its acoustic stationarity and the lack of meaning associated with each unit. The words
were selected as possible commands a user might use when interacting with a BCI. The subject
cohort consisted of 15 healthy Argentinian college students (7 female), all native Spanish speakers,