Sensors 2020 ,20, 4629 5 of 22
were used to achieve the results presented in [ 56] and were therefore used here. A feature vector
was constructed using the RWE of decomposition levels D2 (16–32 Hz), D3 (8–16 Hz), D4 (4–8 Hz),
D5 (2–4 Hz ), and A5 ( <2 Hz), for each channel. This resulted in a 30-element feature vector for each trial.
In the original study, the linear SVM implemented one-vs-one multi-class classiﬁcation and multiple
values for the Cregularization parameter were evaluated. The RdF was constructed using di erent
numbers of features (4, 5, 6) and trees (10, 50, 100, 200, 500). Three subjects were used to evaluate
HPs and select the best conﬁgurations. Accuracies achieved in the original study [ 56] are presented in
Section 3.5, alongside results from this study. Although the feature extraction methodology and the use
of the SVM and RdF classiﬁers are retained from the original study, the approach to cross-validation
and HP optimization is di erent. This is due to our focus on HP optimization and classiﬁcation
performance of the CNNs, and the requirement for application of a consistent methodology across
classiﬁers. The methods implemented here are discussed in Section 2.3.
The rLDA is a regularized version of the LDA algorithm [ 57], which reduces the dispersion of
eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix when a diverging dimension p is large. As a classiﬁcation
method, it has been employed elsewhere in the decoding of EEG signals [57].
Filter bank common spatial patterns (FBCSP) is an approach to feature extraction widely used
across multiple BCI paradigms [ 58]. The algorithm is used to calculate linear combinations of EEG
channels which improve the discrimination of band power features between classes. The method can
be broken down into four principle stages: a ﬁlter bank consisting of several bandpass ﬁlters (here 6),
spatial ﬁltering with the CSP algorithm, CSP feature selection and ﬁnally, classiﬁcation of the selected
features. The method has demonstrated impressive results in MI tasks, including being the winner in
multiple EEG-decoding competitions (e.g., [ 59]). Its position as a leading method in BCIs, and the fact
that FBCSP has been cited as an inﬂuence in the design of the CNNs being evaluated [ 34,55], led to the
selection of FBCSP as a reasonable benchmark. Here, six frequency bands are used to construct the
ﬁlter bank. These are delta (2–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), mu (8–12 Hz), lower beta (12–18 Hz), upper beta
(18–28 Hz), and gamma (28–40 Hz). Three HPs were selected for optimization, i.e., (1). The number
of spatial ﬁlters (nSF) used by the FBCSP algorithm, (2). The mutual information quantization level
(MIQL), whereby mutual information is used to select or rank the best features, and (3). The number of
features (NoF) used per trial. Further detail on these is presented in Section 2.3.
2.2.2. CNN Architectures
The shallow CNN [ 34] is a network speciﬁcally designed to decode band power features from
EEG. Constructed with a compact architecture (Figure 2a), the CNN has been conceived of for BCI
applications with a feature extraction stage analogous to that of FBCSP [ 58]. Temporal and spatial
convolutions performed in the ﬁrst two layers of the shallow CNN correspond to transformations
made during the bandpass and CSP spatial ﬁltering stages of FBCSP . The output feature map is then
fed through a squaring non-linearity, pooling layer (mean-pooling in [ 34]) and a logarithmic activation
function to mimic the log-variance computation in FBCSP . Batch normalization [ 60] and dropout
(0.5) [61] aid regularization (Figure 2a).