World models. Model-based methods have mostly been explored in a reinforcement learning
setting and have been shown to be extremely successful [ 3,27,5]. These methods assume access
to a reward, and online interaction with the environment, although progress has been made on fully
offline reinforcement learning [ 28,29]. Model-based imitation learning has emerged as an alternative
to reinforcement learning in robotic manipulation [ 30] and OpenAI Gym [ 31]. Even though these
methods do not require access to a reward, they still require online interaction with the environment
to achieve good performance.
Learning the latent dynamics of a world model from image observations was first introduced in
video prediction [ 32,33,34]. Most similar to our approach, [ 4,5] additionally modelled the reward
function and optimised a policy inside their world model. Contrarily to prior work, our method
does not assume access to a reward function, and directly learns a policy from an offline dataset.
Additionally, previous methods operate on simple visual inputs, mostly of size 64×64. In contrast,
MILE is able to learn the latent dynamics of complex urban driving scenes from high resolution
600×960input observations, which is important to ensure small details such as traffic lights can be
perceived reliably.
Trajectory forecasting. The goal of trajectory forecasting is to estimate the future trajectories of
dynamic agents using past physical states (e.g. position, velocity), and scene context (e.g. as an
offline HD map) [ 35,36,37,38]. World models build a latent representation of the environment that
explains the observations from the sensory inputs of the ego-agent (e.g. camera images) conditioned
on their actions. While trajectory forecasting methods only model the dynamic scene, world models
jointly reason on static and dynamic scenes. The future trajectories of moving agents is implicitly
encoded in the learned latent representation of the world model, and could be explicitly decoded
given we have access to future trajectory labels.
[35,37,38] forecast the future trajectory of moving agents, but did not control the ego-agent. They
focused on the prediction problem and not on learning expert behaviour from demonstrations. [ 39]
inferred future trajectories of the ego-agent from expert demonstrations, and conditioned on some
specified goal to perform new tasks. [ 36] extended their work to jointly model the future trajectories
of moving agents as well as of the ego-agent.
Our proposed model jointly models the motion of other dynamics agents, the behaviour of the
ego-agent, as well as the static scene. Contrary to prior work, we do not assume access to ground
truth physical states (position, velocity) or to an offline HD map for scene context. Our approach is
the first camera-only method that models static scene, dynamic scene, and ego-behaviour in an urban
driving environment.
3 MILE: Model-based Imitation LEarning
In this section, we present MILE: our method that learns to jointly control an autonomous vehicle and
model the world and its dynamics. An overview of the architecture is presented in Figure 1 and the full
description of the network can be found in Appendix C. We begin by defining the generative model
(Section 3.1), and then derive the inference model (Section 3.2). Section 3.3 and Section 3.4 describe
the neural networks that parametrise the inference and generative models respectively. Finally, in
Section 3.5 we show how our model can predict future states and actions to drive in imagination.
3.1 Probabilistic Generative Model
Leto1:Tbe a sequence of Tvideo frames with associated expert actions a1:Tand ground truth BeV
semantic segmentation labels y1:T. We model their evolution by introducing latent variables s1:T
that govern the temporal dynamics. The initial distribution is parameterised as s1∼ N(0,I), and
we additionally introduce a variable h1∼δ(0)that serves as a deterministic history. The transition
consists of (i) a deterministic update ht+1=fθ(ht,st)that depends on the past history htand
past state st, followed by (ii) a stochastic update st+1∼ N (µθ(ht+1,at), σθ(ht+1,at)I), where
we parameterised stas a normal distribution with diagonal covariance. We model these transitions
with neural networks: fθis a gated recurrent cell, and (µθ, σθ)are multi-layer perceptrons. The full
probabilistic model is given by Equation (1).
3