Our method also relaxes the assumption made in some recent work [ 6,7] that neither the agent nor
its actions influence the environment. This assumption rarely holds in urban driving, and therefore
MILE is action-conditioned, allowing us to model how other agents respond to ego-actions. We
show that our model can predict plausible and diverse futures from latent states and actions over
long time horizons. It can even predict entire driving plans in imagination to successfully execute
complex driving manoeuvres, such as negotiating a roundabout, or swerving to avoid a motorcyclist
(see videos in the supplementary material).
We showcase the performance of our model on the driving simulator CARLA [ 8], and demonstrate a
new state-of-the-art. MILE achieves a 31% improvement in driving score with respect to previous
methods [ 9,10] when tested in a new town and new weather conditions. Finally, during inference,
because we model time with a recurrent neural network, we can maintain a single state that summarises
all the past observations and then efficiently update the state when a new observation is available. We
demonstrate that this design decision has important benefits for deployment in terms of latency, with
negligible impact on the driving performance.
To summarise the main contributions of this paper:
•We introduce a novel model-based imitation learning architecture that scales to the visual
complexity of autonomous driving in urban environments by leveraging 3D geometry as
an inductive bias. Our method is trained solely using an offline corpus of expert driving
data, and does not require any interaction with an online environment or access to a reward,
offering strong potential for real-world application.
•Our camera-only model sets a new state-of-the-art on the CARLA simulator, surpassing
other approaches, including those requiring LiDAR inputs.
•Our model predicts a distribution of diverse and plausible futures states and actions. We
demonstrate that it can execute complex driving manoeuvres from plans entirely predicted
in imagination.
2 Related Work
Our work is at the intersection of imitation learning, 3D scene representation, and world modelling.
Imitation learning. Despite that the first end-to-end method for autonomous driving was envisioned
more than 30 years ago [ 11], early autonomous driving approaches were dominated by modular
frameworks, where each module solves a specific task [ 12,13,14]. Recent years have seen the
development of several end-to-end self-driving systems that show strong potential to improve driving
performance by predicting driving commands from high-dimensional observations alone. Conditional
imitation learning has proven to be one successful method to learn end-to-end driving policies that can
be deployed in simulation [ 15] and real-world urban driving scenarios [ 16]. Nevertheless, difficulties
of learning end-to-end policies from high-dimensional visual observations and expert trajectories
alone have been highlighted [17].
Several works have attempted to overcome such difficulties by moving past pure imitation learning.
DAgger [ 18] proposes iterative dataset aggregation to collect data from trajectories that are likely
to be experienced by the policy during deployment. NEAT [ 19] additionally supervises the model
with BeV semantic segmentation. ChauffeurNet [ 20] exposes the learner to synthesised perturbations
of the expert data in order to produce more robust driving policies. Learning from All Vehicles
(LA V) [ 10] boosts sample efficiency by learning behaviours from not only the ego vehicle, but from all
the vehicles in the scene. Roach [ 9] presents an agent trained with supervision from a reinforcement
learning coach that was trained on-policy and with access to privileged information.
3D scene representation. Successful planning for autonomous driving requires being able to
understand and reason about the 3D scene, and this can be challenging from monocular cameras.
One common solution is to condense the information from multiple cameras to a single bird’s-eye
representation of the scene. This can be achieved by lifting each image in 3D (by learning a depth
distribution of features) and then splatting all frustums into a common rasterised BeV grid [ 21,22,23].
An alternative approach is to rely on transformers to learn the direct mapping from image to bird’s-eye
view [24, 25, 26], without explicitly modelling depth.
2