In the reset state setting, performance decreases as the dimensionality of the latent state increases.
Surprisingly, even though the latent space is larger and has more capacity, driving performance is
negatively impacted. This seems to indicate that optimising the prior and posterior distributions in
the latent space is difficult, and especially more so as dimensionality increases. The prior, which
is a multivariate Gaussian distribution needs to match the posterior, another multivariate Gaussian
distribution. What makes this optimisation tricky is that the two distributions are non-stationary and
change over time during the course of training. The posterior needs to extract the relevant information
from the high-resolution images and incorporate it in the latent state in order to reconstruct BeV
segmentation and regress the expert action. The prior has to predict the transition that matches the
distribution of the posterior.
Even more intriguing is when we look at the results in the fully recurrent deployment setting. When
deployed in a fully recurrent manner in the simulator, without resetting the latent state, the model
needs to discard information that is no longer relevant and continuously update its internal state
with new knowledge coming from image observations. In our original latent state dimension of
512, there is almost no different in driving performance between the two deployment modes. The
picture is dramatically different when using a higher dimensional spatial latent state. For all the
tested dimensions, there is a large gap between the two deployment settings. This result seems to
indicate that the world model operating on high-dimensional spatial states has not optimally learned
this behaviour, contrarily to the one operating on low-dimensional vector states.
6.2 Driving in Imagination
Humans are believed to build an internal model of the world in order to navigate in it [ 49,50,51].
Since the stream of information they perceive is often incomplete and noisy, their brains fill missing
information through imagination. This explains why it is possible for them to continue driving
when blinded by sunlight for example. Even if no visual observations are available for a brief
moment, they can still reliably predict their next states and actions to exhibit a safe driving behaviour.
We demonstrate that similarly, MILE can execute accurate driving plans entirely predicted from
imagination, without having access to image observations. We qualitatively show that it can perform
complex driving maneuvers such as navigating a roundabout, marking a pause a stop sign, or swerving
to avoid a motorcyclist, using an imagined plan from the model (see supplementary material).
Quantitatively, we measure how accurate the predicted plans are by operating in the fully recurrent
setting. We alternate between the observing mode where the model can see image observations, and
theimagining mode where the model has to imagine the next states and actions, similarly to a driver
that temporarily loses sight due to sun glare. In Appendix A.1 we show that our model can retain
the same driving performance with up to 30% of the drive in imagining mode. This demonstrates
that the model can imagine driving plans that are accurate enough for closed loop driving. Further,
it shows that the latent state of the world model can seamlessly switch between the observing and
imagining modes. The evolution of the latent state is predicted from imagination when observations
are not available, and updated with image observations when they become accessible.
7 Conclusion
We presented MILE: a Model-based Imitation LEarning approach for urban driving, that jointly learns
a driving policy and a world model from offline expert demonstrations alone. Our approach exploits
geometric inductive biases, operates on high-dimensional visual inputs, and sets a new state-of-the-art
on the CARLA simulator. MILE can predict diverse and plausible future states and actions, allowing
the model to drive from a plan entirely predicted from imagination.
An open problem is how to infer the driving reward function from expert data, as this would enable
explicit planning in the world model. Another exciting avenue is self-supervision in order to relax
the dependency on the bird’s-eye view segmentation labels. Self-supervision could fully unlock the
potential of world models for real-world driving and other robotics tasks.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Vijay Badrinarayanan, Przemyslaw Mazur, and
Oleg Sinavski for insightful research discussions. We are also grateful to Lorenzo Bertoni, Lloyd
Russell, Juba Nait Saada, Thomas Uriot, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback and
comments on the paper.
10