Model-Based Imitation Learning for Urban Driving
Anthony Hu1,2Gianluca Corrado1Nicolas Griffiths1Zak Murez1Corina Gurau1
Hudson Yeo1Alex Kendall1Roberto Cipolla2Jamie Shotton1
1Wayve, UK.2University of Cambridge, UK.
research@wayve.ai
Abstract
An accurate model of the environment and the dynamic agents acting in it offers
great potential for improving motion planning. We present MILE: a Model-based
Imitation LEarning approach to jointly learn a model of the world and a policy
for autonomous driving. Our method leverages 3D geometry as an inductive bias
and learns a highly compact latent space directly from high-resolution videos of
expert demonstrations. Our model is trained on an offline corpus of urban driving
data, without any online interaction with the environment. MILE improves upon
prior state-of-the-art by 31% in driving score on the CARLA simulator when
deployed in a completely new town and new weather conditions. Our model can
predict diverse and plausible states and actions, that can be interpretably decoded to
bird’s-eye view semantic segmentation. Further, we demonstrate that it can execute
complex driving manoeuvres from plans entirely predicted in imagination. Our
approach is the first camera-only method that models static scene, dynamic scene,
and ego-behaviour in an urban driving environment. The code and model weights
are available at https://github.com/wayveai/mile .
1 Introduction
From an early age we start building internal representations of the world through observation and
interaction [ 1]. Our ability to estimate scene geometry and dynamics is paramount to generating
complex and adaptable movements. This accumulated knowledge of the world, part of what we often
refer to as common sense, allows us to navigate effectively in unfamiliar situations [2].
In this work, we present MILE, a Model-based Imitation LEarning approach to jointly learn a model
of the world and a driving policy. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the autonomous
driving domain, operating on complex visual inputs labelled only with expert action and semantic
segmentation. Unlike prior work on world models [ 3,4,5], our method does not assume access to a
ground truth reward, nor does it need any online interaction with the environment. Further, previous
environments in OpenAI Gym [ 3], MuJoCo [ 4], and Atari [ 5] were characterised by simplified visual
inputs as small as 64×64images. In contrast, MILE operates on high-resolution camera observations
of urban driving scenes.
Driving inherently requires a geometric understanding of the environment, and MILE exploits 3D
geometry as an important inductive bias by first lifting image features to 3D and pooling them into a
bird’s-eye view (BeV) representation. The evolution of the world is modelled by a latent dynamics
model that infers compact latent states from observations and expert actions. The learned latent state
is the input to a driving policy that outputs vehicle control, and can additionally be decoded to BeV
segmentation for visualisation and as a supervision signal.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).