Mapping to a 1D vector. In traditional computer vision tasks (e.g. semantic segmentation [ 41],
depth prediction [ 42]), the bottleneck feature is usually a spatial tensor, in the order of 105−106
features. Such high dimensionality is prohibitive for a world model that has to match the distribution
of the priors (what it thinks will happen given the executed action) to the posteriors (what actually
happened by observing the image input). Therefore, using a convolutional backbone, we compress
the BeV feature btto a single vector x′
t∈RC′. As shown in Section 5.2, we found it critical to
compress in BeV space rather than directly in image space.
Route map and speed. We provide the agent with a goal in the form of a route map [ 9], which is a
small grayscale image indicating to the agent where to navigate at intersections. The route map is
encoded using a convolutional module resulting in a 1D feature rt. The current speed is encoded with
fully connected layers as mt. At each timestep t, the observation embedding xtis the concatenation
of the image feature, route map feature and speed feature: xt= [x′
t,rt,mt]∈RC, with C= 512
3.3.2 Posterior Network
The posterior network (µϕ, σϕ)estimates the parameters of the variational distribution
q(st|o≤t,a<t)∼ N (µϕ(ht,at−1, eϕ(ot)), σϕ(ht,at−1, eϕ(ot))I)withht=fθ(ht−1,st−1).
Note that htwas inferred using fθbecause we have assumed that htis deterministic, meaning
thatq(ht|ht−1,st−1) =p(ht|ht−1,st−1) =δ(ht−fθ(ht−1,st−1)). The dimension of the Gaus-
sian distribution is equal to 512.
3.4 Generative Network θ
The generative network, parameterised by θ, models the latent dynamics (h1:T,s1:T)as well as
the generative process of (o1:T,y1:T,a1:T). It comprises a gated recurrent cell fθ, a prior network
(µθ, σθ), an image decoder gθ, a BeV decoder lθ, and a policy πθ.
The prior network estimates the parameters of the Gaussian distribution
p(st|ht−1,st−1)∼ N (µθ(ht,ˆat−1), σθ(ht,ˆat−1)I)withht=fθ(ht−1,st−1)andˆat−1=
πθ(ht−1,st−1). Since the prior does not have access to the ground truth action at−1, the latter
is estimated with the learned policy ˆat−1=πθ(ht−1,st−1).
The Kullback-Leibler divergence loss between the prior and posterior distributions can be interpreted
as follows. Given the past state (ht−1,st−1), the objective is to predict the distribution of the next
statest. As we model an active agent, this transition is decomposed into (i) action prediction and
(ii) next state prediction. This transition estimation is compared to the posterior distribution that has
access to the ground truth action at−1, and the image observation ot. The prior distribution tries to
match the posterior distribution. This divergence matching framework ensures the model predicts
actions and future states that explain the observed data. The divergence of the posterior from the prior
measures how many nats of information were missing from the prior when observing the posterior.
At training convergence, the prior distribution should be able to model all action-state transitions
from the expert dataset.
The image and BeV decoders have an architecture similar to StyleGAN [ 43]. The prediction starts as
a learned constant tensor, and is progressively upsampled to the final resolution. At each resolution,
the latent state is injected in the network with adaptive instance normalisation. This allows the latent
states to modulate the predictions at different resolutions. The policy is a multi-layer perceptron.
Please refer to Appendix C for a full description of the neural networks.
3.5 Imagining Future States and Actions
Our model can imagine future latent states by using the learned policy to infer actions ˆaT+i=
πθ(hT+i,sT+i), predicting the next deterministic state hT+i+1=fθ(hT+i,sT+i)and sampling
from the prior distribution sT+i+1∼ N(µθ(hT+i+1,ˆaT+i), σθ(hT+i+1,ˆaT+i)I), fori≥0. This
process can be iteratively applied to generate sequences of longer futures in latent space, and the
predicted futures can be visualised through the decoders.
6