30 
 patterns that are not generalizable (Kuhn and Johnson, 2013). It is unadvisable to assess 
the predictive accuracy of a model using the same observation s that were used to 
estimat e the model . Therefore,  to assess the models’ predictive  performance an 
independent data set should be used. We randomly divided  the balanced sampled of 
paired banks into a data set comprising 75% of the observations and a data set 
comprising 25% of the observations. The large r dataset was used to train and fit th e 
XGBoost  model, as previously described . After tuning the parameters , we identified the 
most important variables or features (Figures 6 and 7). The remaining 25% of 
observations constitute d the test or validation set . These observations were used to 
ensur e the model was generalizable . Predictive performance should be estimated using 
a validation or test dataset (independent data) to calculate the test accuracy rate. 
Validation or test data are used to predict the model ’s response to new observations. 
Given a dataset, a particular statistical learning method is appropriate if it yields a high 
accuracy test rate (Hastie  et al. , 2009).  
To measure the overall performance of our XGBoost  model , Figure 8 shows the 
receiver opera ting characte ristic (ROC) curve for the XGBoost  classifier applied to the 
test dataset. The ROC offers a useful visual tool to evaluate a classifier. It simultaneous ly 
display s the true positive rate (sensitivity of a classifier or proportion of correctly 
classified po sitive observations ) and the true  negative  rate (specificity of a classifier or 
proportion of correctly classified negative observations ) for all possible thresholds .4 ROC 
curves do not depend on class probabilities because they summarize performance over 
all possible thresholds . Doing so facilitat es their interpretation and comparison across 
 
4 For binary scoring classifiers , a threshold (or cutoff) value controls how predicted posterior 
probabilities are converted into class labels.