19 
 Regularization or penalty term on weights . A precise choice of this parameter 
reduce s overfitting. When regularization  is equal to 0, the penalty has no effect. A s the 
term increases , however,  the impact of the shrinkage penalty  grows.  The regularization 
term controls the complexity of the model, helping avoid overfitting.  
Regularization fundamentally differentiates XGBoost  from other boosting 
models  such as GBM.  XGBoost constrains or regularizes the weights of variables  or, 
equivalently, shrinks the weights toward zero . Regularization advantage is rooted in the 
bias-variance trade -off.1 As regularization increases , the weights of variables decreases, 
leading to a substantial reduction in  the variance of the predictions  at the expense of an 
increase in bias (James et al.,  2017).  It has the effect of shrinking  the weight of the 
variables toward zero. Penalty regularization reduce s overfitting without producing a 
loss in predictive power. The regularization  will tend to select a model employing simple 
and predictive functions. When the regularization parameter is set to zero, the objective 
reverts to the traditional gradient tree boosting or GBM (Chen and Benesty, 2016).  
The optimal combination of XGBoost’s parameters can be determined using 
cross -validation methods. This techni que enables computation of  the prediction error 
for an independent test sample. In k- fold cross -validation, the samples are randomly 
partitioned into  k sets (called  folds ) of roughly equal size.  An XGBoost  model is fit ted 
using all samples , except the first subset. Then, the prediction error of the fitted model 
is calculated using the first h oldout fold. The same operation is repeated for each fold , 
and the model’s performance is calcul ated by averaging the errors across the test sets.  
 
1 Detailed explanations of the bias -variance t rade -off can  be found at http://scott.fortmann -
roe.com/do cs/BiasVariance.html  (S cott Fortmann -Roe, 2012).