16 
 Boosting is particularly useful to resolve classification problems  because it 
minimiz es overall errors by introducing supplementary models based on errors in 
previous iterations. Boosting methods ensemble  several individual models to produce a 
combined model whose predictive power is better than the individual models when they 
are used alone (Chambers and  Dinsmore, 2015). The tree ensemble model is a set of 
classification or regression trees . Because a  single tree is too weak to be used in practice , 
the tree ensemble model, which sums the prediction of multiple trees , is applied  
instead. Kuhn and Johnson (2013) discussed boosting algorithms developed in the early 
1990s when a number of weak classifiers were combined to produce an ensemble 
classifier with a superior generalized misclassification error rate.  Friedman ’s (2001) 
boosting machine is a method for improving model accuracy because trees depend on past fitted trees, have minimum depth, and contribute unequally to the final model. 
Friedman (2002) updated the boosting machine algorithm with a random sampling 
scheme . The new procedure was termed “stochastic gradient boosting .” Stochasticity 
improves predictive performance, reducing the variance of the final model by using only 
a random subset of data to fit each new tree.  In addition, boosting models all ow for 
extreme results, nonlinearity, and missing data (when the algorithm encounters a 
missing value on a node then learns which path to take) and can handle different types 
of predictor s such as categorical variables ( James  et al.,  2017). 
Fitting multipl e trees in boosting overcomes the biggest drawback of single -tree 
models: their relatively poor predictive performance (Elith  et al.,  2008).  The b oosting 
approach fits a series of small decision trees in a sequential process, with each tree built 
after the previous one. Each individual decision tree is adjusted to the residuals from 
the model and is added into the fitted function to update the residuals. Trees can be