4 
 each of five possible ratings. The SEER rat ing is then calculated as the sum of the five 
rating levels multiplied by their corresponding probabilities. The variables that 
consistently remain statistically significant in each quarter are proxies for, capital adequacy, asset quality, earnings performance, and liquidity among others (Jagtiani  et 
al., 2003). Macroeconomic variables such as unemployment, income per capita, and 
permits per capita are usually not statistically significant.  
In a comprehensive  study , Jones  et al. (2015) compare d the predicti ve 
performance of classifiers ranging from conventional classifiers (such as logi t/probit and 
linear discriminant analysis ) to fully nonlinear classifiers, including neural networks, 
support vector machines , and recent statistic al learning techniques such as generalized 
boosting , AdaBoost , and random forests . The newer classifiers  outperform ed all other 
classifiers. Exploring financial distress, Maciej et al.  (2016) compared methods  based on 
statistical hypothesis testing, statistical modeling (e .g., generalized linear models) , and 
recent artificial intelligence  methods  (e.g., neural networks, support vector m achines, 
and decision tress). They examined the quality of various machine learning approaches 
that are designed to solve two -class p roblems . Extreme Gradient B oosting yielded the 
best results . 
Much of the literature on bank failure prediction is based on conventional 
classifiers . We applie d extreme gradient boosting ( XGBoost ), a state -of-the-art machine 
learning method,  to predict bank failure . The results o f our analysis suggest that this 
method is suited to the banking industry. A key assumption in m achine learning is that 
the generation of  data is a complex process  (Krolikowski, 2018; Rey -Moreno  & Medina -
Molina, 2017 ). Machine learning seeks a response by observing inputs and responses 
and finding predominant patterns (Momparler  et al. , 2016). This process enhances the