Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 5 of 12
Table 2. Smart city strategies that address “artiﬁcial intelligence” or AI and robotics.
City (Country) Term Frequency
Dubai (UAE) Artiﬁcial intelligence (1) =1
Eindhoven (The Netherlands) Robot (1) =1
Helsinki (Finland Artiﬁcial intelligence (3), robot (1) =4
Hong Kong (China) Artiﬁcial intelligence (2), robot (1) =3
London (UK) Artiﬁcial intelligence (5), AI (1), robot (1) =7
Lyon (France) Robot (4) =4
Melbourne (Australia) Robot (1) =1
Moscow (Russia) Artiﬁcial intelligence (5), AI (6), robot (7) =18
New York (USA) Robot (1) =1
Ottawa (Canada) Artiﬁcial intelligence (5) =5
Sydney (Australia) Robot (2) =2
Toronto (Canada) Robot (1) =1
Total: Artiﬁcial intelligence (21), AI (7), robot (20) =48
There are 48 instances where artiﬁcial intelligence ( =21) or AI ( =7) or some form of robot
(e.g., robotics, robotization) ( =20) are mentioned. The use of these two basic terms in the keyword
search appeared in di erent associations or contexts. These can be exhaustively summarized according
to the ﬁve categories of automation, decision-making, education, smart infrastructure, and smart
mobility (Figure 1). More speciﬁcally, the ﬁve main categories of AI and robotics application in these
12 cases are part of:
1. Automation, but also using computer programs for open data and to enable big data for analytics
(e.g., as part of London’s industrial strategy; Hong Kong’s plan for big data analytics; evident in
Lyon; as part of Moscow’s Industry 4.0; and Ottawa’s predictive analytics and machine learning
for enhanced operations).
2. Decision-making (e.g., acting towards preventing managerial errors and facilitate making optimal
decisions in Moscow—applied to the economy and governance).
3. Education (e.g., Eindhoven’s high-tech campus to foster high-tech hardware innovations);
access via training and e-services via “one-stop shops” (e.g., Helsinki; Hong Kong—to nurture
young talent; also evident in Cape Town; Lyon’s robots to teach mathematics and in junior high;
robotic assistants and professional retraining in Moscow; and in Sydney as part of National
Centre of Indigenous Excellence after school program and experiential learning in the City of
Sydney Libraries).
4. Smart infrastructure (e.g., for e-services in Hong Kong; London, including sensors for improved
energy managed as part of Digital Greenwich; sensors used in Moscow for automation /automatic
processing; and New York’s Robotic Monitoring Network for water quality, etc.).
5. Smart mobility (e.g., Dubai Autonomous Transportation Strategy; Melbourne’s robot bike garages;
and Toronto’s Quayside to reduce congestion through last mile delivery).
5. Discussion
Automation is one of the main driving forces behind the use of AI and robotics, enabled by sensors
and web-based platforms for integration and management. In fact, automation was one of the ﬁve
main categories discovered in this study. The other categories a ected the economy and governance
through decision-making and touched upon education as well as smart infrastructure and mobility.
The sample in Table 2 represents di erent city sizes including those that have small central business
districts (CBDs), such as Ottawa, but the majority of cases actually represent a larger metropolis.