Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 1 of 12
A scientometric analysis [ 2] pinpoints the incorporation of AI in smart cities research (as a novel
ﬁeld itself) since 2008. Moreover, it has been linked to sustainable development at the global scale,
including by developing nations (e.g., [ 3]) that are, for example, adopting AI to promote the UN
Sustainable Development Goals. Indeed, according to advocates, AI can be deployed to tackle “wicked”
urban challenges associated with rapidly growing urban populations, environmental degradation and
pollution at various scales (e.g., from industrialization to global warming). Beyond expanding across
scales, AI and robotics are expected to penetrate every aspect of human life. For example, they are
expected to be a vital part of “social infrastructure,” to accommodate social services, to promote the
social functionality and well-being of cities [4].
What represents the particular interest of our study is the actual penetration of plans for AI and
robotics into near-future city visions (as embodied in city strategies themselves) and how these plans
are laid out against cities’ existing functions, and what new functions and roles they suggest. Based on
a roster of 51 smart city strategies collected from around the world, we have discerned trends emerging
from those smart strategies that speciﬁcally convey AI and robotics applications. Before presenting
the details of this analysis, the next section contextualizes it with a more general discussion of the
intersection of smart cities, AI, and robotics.
2. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Robotics, and Their Application in (Smart) Cities
Cities have become test beds for automation and experimenting with robots in managing urban
services and public spaces. These robotics and autonomous systems (RAS), as they are known in
engineering, extend considerably the initial smart city applications. While “smart” technologies embody
a computational logic whereby computers are programmed to perform tasks, the RAS technologies
employ AI and machine learning to make decisions and adapt processes to circumstances without
direct human agency (Table 1) [ 5]. Although AI is currently designed to mimic human brain structures,
in deep learning as part of machine learning [ 6] or to develop the “city brain” as brain-like tissues
interacting with the internet [ 7] and functioning, the ultimate intent as with emotional intelligence
simulations [ 8] is to outdo human performance (cf. [ 9]) and e ciency: “With AI, computers can
[analyze] and learn from information at higher accuracy and speed than humans can” [ 1]. The reason
for this may be that they are intended for service as service robots ([ 10]; including, for example,
autonomous robots operating in public service [ 11]), industrial (and service) robots [ 12], and care
providers in the burgeoning caring robot industry [ 13]. Ultimately, this technology will serve humans,
indicating the future importance of AI and the internet of things or IoT-aided robotic applications [ 14].
In addition to care and assistance applications, research [ 15] has also identiﬁed potential
applications in the areas of security, transportation, construction, sustainability and energy management,
education, government, as well as manufacturing. In the area of transportation, for example, there are
initiatives to promote car-sharing schemes in conjunction with autonomous and connected vehicles that
enable machines to take over driving [ 16]. Further innovations, such as the hyperloop, are expected
to contribute towards this transport revolution, where automated self-driving, on-demand shared
mobility, and big data analytics are to provide more choice as part of a disruptive mobility “ecosystem”
without the need to build much more additional infrastructure ([ 16]—see his ﬁgure 1). The National
Science and Technology Council [ 17] has also noted new opportunities that have opened in association
with AI in the areas of health, education, energy, and the environment. In India, investments in robust
IT infrastructure are based on a host of smart applications, including smart power generation and
distribution, smart tra c management, smart waste management and utilization, smart governance,
and so on [ 18]. GovTech start-ups support the smartiﬁcation of public services and “chatbots” and
“robo-advisors” are expected to provide public engagement and assistance as part of the shift toward
automation [19].