Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 7 of 12
serve society. However, it is questionable to what end. Researchers, practitioners, and decision-makers
need to rigorously consider the impact that automation will have on jobs in the service sector, but also
in manufacturing and elsewhere in the economy and governance.
If machines are doing the work for humanity, what is there left for people to do in order to engage
with society and to earn a living? How will people, especially those in the lower socioeconomic tiers,
be able to a ord to live without jobs that have become automated and delivered to machines? This can
escalate the “degrowth” that is known to have already occurred in many places in the West when
manufacturing shifted to Asia. In the middle of this fourth industrial revolution, perhaps civil revolt
will also ensue. How can this be avoided or dealt with? Advances in robotics could eventually lead to
intelligent machines (such as Sophia—the AI robot launched in 2016 by Hanson Robotics, Hong Kong,
China) and with it raise more socio-ethical questions and concerns.
There are calls to introduce “responsible urban robotics” [ 40], while the ethical artiﬁcial intelligence
movement demands technology companies develop and commercialize AI that prevents harm and
advances humanity, increases societal and environmental well-being, and respects human rights.
This includes, but is not limited to, voluntary ethical codes, ethics-by-design principles in software
development, new governance structures, and employee training programs [41].
6. Conclusions
The smart city concept is non-static, evolves over time, and involves human capital, social capital,
hard infrastructure, and ICT technologies in the provision of a sustainable environment. In this paper,
we have presented our analysis of 51 existing smart city strategies across the world with regard
to their operation with AI and robotics (or RAS). The variety in the results, both geographical and
thematic, represents much interest. While the existence of explicit smart city strategies is uneven
across the world, the use of discourses around AI and robotics in these strategies is further limited to
just a few cities (we were able to identify 12 cases based on a simple, broad keyword search). As the
deployment of these technologies nevertheless becomes more and more widespread, these pioneering
cities serve as antecedents of the growing and future tendencies. We identiﬁed ﬁve main categories in
association with which these cities articulate AI and robotics: automation, decision-making, education,
smart infrastructure, and smart mobility. However, more research is needed from the integrated
socio-technical approach to analyze various social challenges emerging alongside the promotion of
such technologies and practices in city contexts.
Author Contributions: O.G. formulated the original research project and acquired funding. M.T. collected city
strategies as part of the database appearing in Appendix A, performed formal analysis, and prepared the ﬁrst
drafts. O.G. directed the methodology and analysis and revised the drafts. O.G. and M.T. prepared the ﬁnal draft.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was partly supported by the Fund for urban challenges initiative of the School of
Geography and Planning, Cardi University, as well as ESRC Impact Acceleration Account.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.