Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 6 of 12
Australia and Canada are particularly well-represented by multiple cities (including Melbourne and
Sydney as well as Ottawa and Toronto). The discussion extends to some emerging national strategies
in the context of the fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) that is part of cyber–physical systems
and includes a temporal component, where future directions are scrutinized based on emergent and
some critical questions.
Moscow (Russia) is one of the cities that uses artiﬁcial intelligence /AI and robotics most ambitiously
and has a detailed smart city development plan where the role of AI is to enable transparent city
governance based on big data for monitoring and e-government. Here, AI is the basis for Concept 3:
artiﬁcial intelligence for fulﬁlling a city’s tasks. AI drives the digital socioeconomic transformation,
with routine operations performed by robotic devices and decisions by the city administration and
corporate management informed by AI technologies, including AI and big data analytics. To that end,
it is anticipated that AI will assist in the prevention of managerial errors as well as facilitate optimal
decision-making in areas of economics and government. Moscow anticipates becoming a data-driven
city by 2030, using sensors to enable automatic processing and analysis. Monitoring systems will
automatically convey information regarding power, heat, gas, water supply, weather, and ecological
aspects of the city through a multitude of sensors, with the aim to automate and robotize city
infrastructure processes.
This is envisioned as part of its fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) that is part of
cyber–physical systems in manufacturing achieved by a combination of real and virtual environments,
through “ : : :innovative technologies as robotics, AI, 3D simulation, scanning and print, the internet of
things, augmented and virtual reality, and blockchain” (Moscow “Smart City—2030”). Suggested future
professions do not include medicine because AI will be in place to diagnose diseases and administer
medical treatment, monitor patients’ condition, transplant organs, implant medical devices, and so on.
By combining human capacities and technologies, it is possible to have neuro-interfaces and digital
assistants (e.g., smart meters, smart device control, digital teachers, etc.) so that technology becomes
an enabler of the day-to-day experience. Residents will be given the opportunity for professional
retraining in cases where professions have become automated or robotized. Moscow is the only smart
city strategy in our analysis to address viable future careers through professional retraining.
This research addresses only city-level strategies, but there are some instances of emerging
national strategies (as for Portugal) that involve technological ﬁxes embracing AI and robotics.
For example, part of the Neurocity, the city of Évora, located east of Lisbon in the Alentejo region,
is deploying an LED module for its street lighting system based on smart technology and network
communication (founded on the Arqulgest system) that is a simple retroﬁt that does not require the
lamp to be replaced. To this end, 45 lanterns were replaced in Évora using an AI system with sensors
and PLC communication as part of the control system involved in management and monitoring
(see: https: //www.arquiled.com /projeto /iluminacao-publica-led-evora-inovcity /). This endeavor has
been extended to other locations in Portugal, including the Praça do Munic ípio de Lisboa (Lisbon),
and is an e ort towards energy e ciency as part of smart city development.
While these strategies outline their envisaged futures, all these critical transformations raise
new questions, including whether cities are becoming too technocratic. One important dimension
remains a search for new ethical principles for ICT-based smart cities. Problems that are associated
with cybersecurity and big data, including personal privacy—and ultimately democracy—need to be
addressed [ 38]. Smart and digital systems penetrate increasingly deeper into the intimate spheres of
personal life, which allows technology giants to aggregate, analyze, and trade personal data, so that an
individual’s right to privacy becomes increasingly elusive [39].
More attention is needed to address at this early stage where exactly people will ﬁt into a world
with increased automation and robotics. On the one hand, services will become more easily accessible
and ﬂuid in an environment that is sensed and digital. On the other hand, however, will people be
replaced by machines? How will they earn their living and be able to participate in daily life? The use
of AI and robotics is justiﬁed as the deployment of technology to improve the human experience and to