Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 3 of 12
links cyber–physical environments (cf. [ 25]). In their turn, sensors cannot function in isolation. AI is
necessary for data integration and processing. Pattern recognition, for example, is involved in machine
learning, which depends on inputs from sensory information in the environment that is processed
by technology to elicit robotic actions and responses to environmental stimuli. Another key element
is organization, as with swarm intelligence that draws from AI and robotics as well as data mining
for task optimization, optimal routes where sensors’ streams are involved for spatial monitoring [26].
This includes visual sensors for accurate and robust, e cient 3D representation (e.g., necessary for
autonomous navigation, [ 27] and crowd sourcing data reporting for mobile robotic systems [ 28] and
data analysis [29].
While AI is popular, there remain caveats in its application even in smart cities. The shift
toward intelligent capitalism is associated with job loss for people as they are replaced in
automation [ 21]. In a provocative article, [ 30] refer to the “Elysium City,” where a congregation of agents,
including technologists, technocrats, intelligent machines, and wealthy capitalists is expected, who will
embrace AI in cities particularly in physical, intellectual, information, governance, and socioeconomic
domains and self-govern them as city-states. In an AI economy as part of “de-tech migration,” they will
be shedding themselves of the unemployed, who will be (and remain) impoverished.
Other authors present further caveats, such as pointing to the potential of AI trapping people
into an easy life, where they become dependent on intelligent machines [ 31]. Cappelli [ 32] further
asks important questions concerning ethical, legal, and social issues. More of these issues need to be
addressed for more than the autonomous smart car since it seems that AI is here to stay. According to [ 33],
there has been a recent demand for a robust ethical strategy that will ensure the safe use of such
emerging and advanced technologies (e.g., AI, robotics, and automation technologies). Even though
some subdisciplines (e.g., AI ethics, robo-ethics, machine ethics, cyber-ethics, artiﬁcial moral agents,
robotic privacy, robot rights, etc.) have already appeared, they tend to focus on the anticipated impacts
of future technologies. As such, they remain visionary and speculative, only broadly referring to any
potential ethical conﬂicts in “ : : :machine-user relations, accountability, privacy and human /robot
rights, technological singularity, and design of ethical machines,” which they outline in their report [ 33].
There are positive elements of AI, nevertheless, as for instance it is thought to be an enabler of a
circular economy, where restoration and regeneration are possible through reduced resource use,
recycling, and reuse [34]. Thus, both sides need further examination from diverse vantage points.
Table 1. Contribution of robotics and autonomous systems (RAS) to solving urban challenges.
Urban Challenge The Potential of Robotics and Autonomous Systems
Congested transport infrastructure
in growing citiesAutomatic autonomous vehicles (AVs) allow more e cient use of transport
infrastructure and can radically reduce the demand for parking in central areas
and free up valuable space for housing and recreation;
Automated tra c control systems making use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and
real-life sensor information;
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) exploit underused urban airspace.
Low carbon energy networks and
ecological managementAutomation enables buildings and infrastructure to respond to climate change
(e.g., regulating energy use and comfort, air quality);
Sensors and AI can underpin the development and management of green
infrastructure.
Assisted living for an aging
population and inclusionAutomated and robotic health and social care support assisted living. Scope to
extend age- friendly urban environments.
AVs extend personal mobility.
Infrastructure maintenance and
repairMore e cient monitoring, repair, and control through robotics, especially in
contexts where human accessibility is di cult or unpleasant.
Controlled internal environments for
leisure and foodAutomation and AI provide the climate control needed to manage advances in
controlled internal environments for food growing and leisure.
Urban security and policing UAVs and automated robotic policing help extend policing and surveillance.
Source: adapted from UK-RAS ([35]).