Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 4 of 12
The accumulation of those trends, opportunities, and challenges associated with the intersection
of smart cities on the one hand, and AI and robotics on the other, inevitably draws our attention to
very important actors that shape much of the evolution of smart cities; that is, to cities themselves.
Technological change (and various innovation, entrepreneurs, and interests around this change)
notwithstanding, it is cities that, in their diversity of political, social, and material circumstances,
circumscribe the adoption of technologies and the actual pathways of urban socio-technical change.
Thus, analyzing city-based visions for the deployment of AI and robotics will not only reﬂect on the
state of the development of these technologies in general or their variations geographically, but also on
the articulation of these technologies with “actually existing” urban futures.
In what follows we provide our grounded, real-world perspective on this subject using “actually
existing” or planned smart cities to demonstrate the “state of a airs” in the contemporary application
of AI and robotics in smart city development.
3. Methodology
This research is based on the examination of a roster of smart city strategies available online
as PDFs available in English, either through government websites or actual smart city websites
(see Appendix A). Overall, in our study we managed to identity and analyze 51 smart city strategies,
with the following regional representation: Europe (25), North America (12), Asia (8), Australia and
Oceania (3), Africa (2), and South America (1). This result is like ﬁndings by [ 36] and [ 37], who used
a larger sample size of 143 smart green city projects . They found most such currently ongoing or
completed projects to be in Europe (47), Asia (40), North America (35), South America (11), and the
Middle East and Africa (10).
The city strategies were accessed online and downloaded to a database of PDF ﬁles. These were
subsequently searched in a text /narrative analysis for plans relating to “artiﬁcial intelligence” or AI
and “robot” for robotics and related terms contained in the strategies. They, therefore, project what
can be expected in this aspect of the hard or technical domain at some future time as smart cities are
realized in practice at various locations around the world. The results reveal 12 cases that actually
employ these keywords in their smart city strategies.
Related terms such as “machine learning” as well as “pattern recognition” and “sensors” and
“automation” were not deployed to retain a broader focus on the use of AI and robotics in city strategic
visions rather than investigate speciﬁc steps in the evolution of technology or to capture all words
that could have been substituted to represent AI and robotics. Our search from this perspective was
not exhaustive. However, it was su ciently indicative to reveal “core” cases, i.e., with the “active”
application of AI and robotics in city strategies and then analyze their key parameters of the use and
deployment of AI and robotics.
The keyword search was further limited by the availability of PDFs in English that were used
as a basis for collecting information in this topical area. Some had evidently been translated and the
vocabulary of the translation could have restricted access to some content. However, the search was
not temporally limited, so that all available strategies during the time of the search have been included
in the results. Other studies are welcome to adopt the methodology to extend the ﬁndings based on
this approach, including other languages and more recent time frames.
4. Results
The resulting subset of 12 smart city strategies from the search appears in Table 2, which denotes
direct quotes from the relevant text containing these terms from each strategy. Evidently, these “actually
existing” or planned smart cities are mainly based in Europe and North America.