Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 56 2 of 12
Smart Cities 2020 , 3 FOR PEER REVIEW  6 
Smart Cities  2020 , 3, Firstpage-Lastpage; doi: FOR PEER RE VIEW  www.mdpi.com/j ournal/smartcities There are 48 instances where artificial intelligence (=21) or AI (=7) or some form of robot (e.g., 
robotics, robotization) (=20) are mentioned. The use of these two basic terms in the keyword search 
appeared in different associations or contexts. Th ese can be exhaustively summarized according to 
the five categories of automation, decision-mak ing, education, smart infrastructure, and smart 
mobility (Figure 1). More specifically, the five main categories of AI and robotics application in these 12 cases are part of: 
1. Automation, but also using computer programs for open data and to enable big data for 
analytics (e.g., as part of London’s industrial strategy; Hong Kong’s plan for big data analytics; evident in Lyon; as part of Moscow’s Industry 4.0; and Ottawa’s predictive analytics and machine learning for en hanced operations). 
2. Decision-making (e.g., acting towards preventing managerial errors and facilitate making 
optimal decisions in Moscow—applied to the economy and governance). 
3. Education (e.g., Eindhoven’s high-tech campus to foster high-tech hardware innovations); access 
via training and e-services via “one-stop shops”  (e.g., Helsinki; Hong Kong—to nurture young 
talent; also evident in Cape Town; Lyon’s robots to teach mathematics and in junior high; robotic assistants and professional retraining in Moscow; and in Sydney as part of National Centre of Indigenous Excellence after school program and ex periential learning in the City of Sydney 
Libraries). 
4. Smart infrastructure (e.g., for e-services in Ho ng Kong; London, including sensors for improved 
energy managed as part of Digital Greenwich; sensors used in Moscow for automation/automatic processing; and New Yo rk’s Robotic Monitoring Network for water 
quality, etc.). 
5. Smart mobility (e.g., Dubai Autonomous Transp ortation Strategy; Melbourne’s robot bike 
garages; and Toronto’s Quayside to reduce congestion through last mile delivery). 
 
Figure 1. Summary of the five main categories derived from the keyword search performed in this 
study. 
Figure 1. Summary of the ﬁve main categories derived from the keyword search performed in this study.
The role of the smart home for integration is critical as, according to [ 18], these data are used to
develop innovative smart city services, which is part of “machine learning” (cf. [ 17]). There is currently
already simple home technology that controls indoor climate that has led to energy savings based on
smart meters. Another example is the use of Amazon Alexa in the home, which has spanned from
the basic function of playing music and has since been extended to monitoring and security through
doorbell and camera sensing and controls as well as answering the phone, accessing the internet
through voice command, and other functionalities.
However, rather than functioning as merely home appliances do, according to [ 20], it is anticipated
that AI and robotics would entirely replace humans where production and management decisions
are concerned, causing a “disappearance of labor” or “end of labor” due to the automation process in
production as part of intelligent capitalism [ 21]. Romania, for instance, plans to boost production using
cyber–physical systems in its smart factory vision as part of the fourth industrial revolution involving
AI [22]. Essentially, in the “second machine age,” the evolution of AI and robotics depends on the IoT
as another smart city enabler [23] as well as automatization driven by:
1. production controlled by machines
2. real-time production, where intelligent machines determine the optimal utilization capacity
of production
3. decentralization of production, where the machine is self-organized
4. no alterations to machines required by humans.
The progression towards full automation, however, is yet circumscribed; it requires both technology
and integration. Camarinha–Matos and Afsarmanesh [ 24] emphasize collaborative networks,
reiterating that integration is key to better system organization (performance) and optimal resource
use (e ciency). For the convergence of enabling technologies to be possible, however, there needs to
be a network of wireless sensors for detection and “smart environmental monitoring” that e ectively