5 Discussion
In this work, we present a simple framework for semi-supervised ImageNet classiﬁcation in three
steps: unsupervised pretraining, supervised ﬁne-tuning, and distillation with unlabeled data. Although
similar approaches are common in NLP, we demonstrate that this approach can also be a surprisingly
strong baseline for semi-supervised learning in computer vision, outperforming the state-of-the-art
by a large margin.
We observe that bigger models can produce larger improvements with fewer labeled examples. We
primarily study this phenomenon on ImageNet, but we observe similar results on CIFAR-10, a
much smaller dataset (see appendix G). The effectiveness of big models have been demonstrated on
supervised learning [ 64–67], ﬁne-tuning supervised models on a few examples [ 68], and unsupervised
learning on language [ 9,69,10,70]. However, it is still somewhat surprising that bigger models,
which could easily overﬁt with few labeled examples, can generalize much better. With task-agnostic
use of unlabeled data, we conjecture bigger models can learn more general features, which increases
the chances of learning task-relevant features. However, further work is needed to gain a better
understanding of this phenomenon. Beyond model size, we also see the importance of increasing
parameter efﬁciency as the other important dimension of improvement.
Although big models are important for pretraining and ﬁne-tuning, given a speciﬁc task, such
as classifying images into 1000 ImageNet classes, we demonstrate that task-agnostically learned
general representations can be distilled into a more specialized and compact network using unlabeled
examples. We simply use the teacher to impute labels for the unlabeled examples for this purpose,
without using noise, augmentation, conﬁdence thresholding, or consistency regularization. When
the student network has the same or similar architecture as the teacher, this process can consistently
improve the classiﬁcation performance. We believe our framework can beneﬁt from better approaches
to leverage the unlabeled data for improving and transferring task-speciﬁc knowledge. We also
recognize that ImageNet is a well-curated dataset, and may not reﬂect all real-world applications of
semi-supervised learning. Thus, a potential future direction is to explore wider range of real datasets.
6 Broader Impact
The ﬁndings described in this paper can potentially be harnessed to improve accuracy in any ap-
plication of computer vision where it is more expensive or difﬁcult to label additional data than
to train larger models. Some such applications are clearly beneﬁcial to society. For example, in
medical applications where acquiring high-quality labels requires careful annotation by clinicians,
better semi-supervised learning approaches can potentially help save lives. Applications of computer
vision to agriculture can increase crop yields, which may help to improve the availability of food.
However, we also recognize that our approach could become a component of harmful surveillance
systems. Moreover, there is an entire industry built around human labeling services, and technology
that reduces the need for these services could lead to a short-term loss of income for some of those
currently employed or contracted to provide labels.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank David Berthelot, Han Zhang, Lala Li, Xiaohua Zhai, Lucas Beyer, Alexander
Kolesnikov for their helpful feedback on the draft. We are also grateful for general support from
Google Research teams in Toronto and elsewhere.
References
[1]Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05709 , 2020.
[2]Hieu Pham, Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, and Quoc V Le. Meta pseudo labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10580 ,
2020.
[3]Geoffrey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets.
Neural computation , 18(7):1527–1554, 2006.
9