approach leverages unlabeled data in a task-agnostic way during pretraining, as the supervised labels
are only used during ﬁne-tuning. Although it has received little attention in computer vision, this
approach has become predominant in natural language processing, where one ﬁrst trains a large
language model on unlabeled text (e.g., Wikipedia), and then ﬁne-tunes the model on a few labeled
examples [ 5–10]. An alternative approach, common in computer vision, directly leverages unlabeled
data during supervised learning, as a form of regularization. This approach uses unlabeled data in a
task-speciﬁc way to encourage class label prediction consistency on unlabeled data among different
models [11, 12, 2] or under different data augmentations [13–15].
Motivated by recent advances in self-supervised learning of visual representations [ 16–20,1], this
paper ﬁrst presents a thorough investigation of the “unsupervised pretrain, supervised ﬁne-tune”
paradigm for semi-supervised learning on ImageNet [ 21]. During self-supervised pretraining, images
are used without class labels (in a task-agnostic way), hence the representations are not directly
tailored to a speciﬁc classiﬁcation task. With this task-agnostic use of unlabeled data, we ﬁnd that
network size is important: Using a big (deep and wide) neural network for self-supervised pretraining
and ﬁne-tuning greatly improves accuracy. In addition to the network size, we characterize a few
important design choices for contrastive representation learning that beneﬁt supervised ﬁne-tuning
and semi-supervised learning.
Once a convolutional network is pretrained and ﬁne-tuned, we ﬁnd that its task-speciﬁc predictions
can be further improved and distilled into a smaller network. To this end, we make use of unlabeled
data for a second time to encourage the student network to mimic the teacher network’s label
predictions. Thus, the distillation [ 22,23] phase of our method using unlabeled data is reminiscent of
the use of pseudo labels [11] in self-training [24, 12], but without much extra complexity.
In summary, the proposed semi-supervised learning framework comprises three steps as shown in Fig-
ure 3: (1) unsupervised or self-supervised pretraining, (2) supervised ﬁne-tuning, and (3) distillation
using unlabeled data. We develop an improved variant of a recently proposed contrastive learning
framework, SimCLR [ 1], for unsupervised pretraining of a ResNet architecture [ 25]. We call this
framework SimCLRv2. We assess the effectiveness of our method on ImageNet ILSVRC-2012 [ 21]
with only 1% and 10% of the labeled images available. Our main ﬁndings and contributions can be
summarized as follows:
Our empirical results suggest that for semi-supervised learning (via the task-agnostic use of
unlabeled data), the fewer the labels, the more it is possible to beneﬁt from a bigger model
(Figure 1). Bigger self-supervised models are more label efﬁcient, performing signiﬁcantly
better when ﬁne-tuned on only a few labeled examples, even though they have more capacity to
potentially overﬁt.
We show that although big models are important for learning general (visual) representations, the
extra capacity may not be necessary when a speciﬁc target task is concerned. Therefore, with
the task-speciﬁc use of unlabeled data, the predictive performance of the model can be further
improved and transferred into a smaller network.
We further demonstrate the importance of the nonlinear transformation (a.k.a. projection head)
after convolutional layers used in SimCLR for semi-supervised learning. A deeper projection head
not only improves the representation quality measured by linear evaluation, but also improves
semi-supervised performance when ﬁne-tuning from a middle layer of the projection head.
We combine these ﬁndings to achieve a new state-of-the-art in semi-supervised learning on ImageNet
as summarized in Figure 2. Under the linear evaluation protocol, SimCLRv2 achieves 79.8% top-1
accuracy, a 4.3% relative improvement over the previous state-of-the-art [ 1]. When ﬁne-tuned on
only 1% / 10% of labeled examples and distilled to the same architecture using unlabeled examples, it
achieves 76.6% / 80.9% top-1 accuracy, which is a 21.6% / 8.7% relative improvement over previous
state-of-the-art. With distillation, these improvements can also be transferred to smaller ResNet-50
networks to achieve 73.9% / 77.5% top-1 accuracy using 1% / 10% of labels. By comparison, a
standard supervised ResNet-50 trained on all of labeled images achieves a top-1 accuracy of 76.6%.
2 Method
Inspired by the recent successes of learning from unlabeled data [ 19,20,1,11,24,12], the proposed
semi-supervised learning framework leverages unlabeled data in both task-agnostic and task-speciﬁc
2