1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:7969  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86916-6
www.nature.com/scientificreportsApplication of DBN and GWO‑SVM 
in analog circuit fault diagnosis
Xiyuan Su1*, Changqing Cao1, Xiaodong Zeng1, Zhejun Feng1, Jingshi Shen2, Xu Yan1 & 
Zengyan Wu1 
For large‑scale integrated electronic equipment, the complex operating mechanisms make fault 
detection very difficult. Therefore, it is important to accurately identify analog circuit faults in a 
timely manner. To overcome this problem, this paper proposes a novel fault diagnosis method based 
on the deep belief network (DBN) and restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) optimized by the gray 
wolf optimization (GWO) algorithm. First, DBN is used to extract the deep features of the analog 
circuit output signal. Then, GWO is used to optimize the penalty factor c and kernel parameter g of 
support vector machine (SVM). Finally, GWO‑ SVM is used to diagnose the signal features extracted 
by the DBN. Fault diagnosis simulation was conducted for the Sallen–Key band‑pass filter and a 
four ‑opamp biquad highpass filter. The experimental results show that compared with the existing 
algorithms, the algorithm proposed in this paper improves the accuracy of Sallen–Key bandpass filter 
circuit to 100% and shortens the fault diagnosis time by about 90%; for four ‑opamp biquad highpass 
filter, the accuracy rate has increased to 99.68%, and the fault diagnosis time has been shortened by 
approximately 75%, and reduce hundreds of iterations. Moreover, the experimental results reveal that 
the proposed fault diagnosis method greatly improves the accuracy of analog circuit fault diagnosis, 
which solves a major problem in analog circuitry and has great significance for the future development 
of relevant applications.
With the rapid development of science and technology, electronic circuits are increasingly being used in com -
munications, industrial control, medical, household appliances, aerospace, military, and many other fields. As 
the complexity of these electronic circuits increases with circuits becoming more integrated, the requirements 
and dependency on diagnostic technology has also increased accordingly. For critical electronic equipment used 
in important fields, the diagnostic index requirements are stricter and more comprehensive and demanding 
better diagnostic accuracy.
For all electronic circuit equipment types, the size of the analog part accounts for approximately 20% of the 
device size, but the failure probability of the analog part accounts for more than 80% of the failure probability 
of the entire circuit equipment. Therefore, the analog part of the electronic circuit is a key part of the electronic 
circuit and therefore the entire system, and in turn critical to the system’s reliability during operation.
Electronic circuit faults are mainly divided into soft faults and hard faults. The hard fault manifests itself as an 
enormous change in the component parameters. This results in a fundamental change in circuit topology, which 
greatly damages the overall circuit, such as an open circuit or short circuit. Soft failure refers to the deviation of 
the relevant parameters of electronic circuit components from typical values. For example, a switching power 
converter can lose its primary function due to the degradation of the LC filter’s electrolytic capacitors (as would 
be the case in a Sallen–Key bandpass filter and a four-opamp biquad highpass filter). Therefore, it is clear that 
the timely diagnosis of soft faults is vital for safe system  operation1.
Many studies have attempted to solve the key problems of circuit fault  detection2–9. Although these studies 
have solved the non-linear problems and tolerance effects of the circuit’s analog part to some extent, they have 
various disadvantages. Therefore, it is very important to investigate effective and simple feature extraction meth-
ods for extracting the basic features of analog circuit faults. To overcome the limitations of traditional methods, 
this paper proposes a novel analog circuit fault diagnosis method based on deep learning technology and the 
support vector machine (SVM) optimized by the gray wolf optimization (GWO) algorithm (GWO-SVM).
Analog circuit fault diagnosis is generally divided into two steps: the original signal feature extraction and 
fault classification. Notably, the deep belief network (DBN) has many advantages contributing to its superior 
performance in analog circuit fault  detection10–16. First, the DBN has a multi-layer network structure, and its 
unique network training method allows the DBN to autonomously extract the features of a target and the essential OPEN
1School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Xidian University, No. 2 Taibai South Road, Xi’an 710071, 
China. 2Institute of Space Electronic Technology, Hangtian Road, Yantai 264670, China. *email: erinsxy@163.com