5
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:7969  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86916-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Simulation experiments and analysis
Analog circuit fault definition. Active filters are widely used by in many electronic circuits used for 
example in power systems, control systems, utility systems and used by precision electronics companies, medical 
institutions, and so on. Therefore, active filters play a key role in large electronic equipment systems. However, 
in practical applications, filter faults destroy system functions and even cause catastrophic losses. Therefore, in 
this study, the Sallen–Key band-pass filter circuit and a four-opamp biquad highpass filter circuit were selected 
as the test circuits, as shown in Fig. 4.
For the Sallen–Key bandpass filter circuit in Fig.  4a, after sensitivity  analysis16, the center frequency of the 
circuit is more affected by R2, R3, C1, and C2; therefore, R2, R3, C1, and C2 are used as experimental compo -
nents. The same reason, C1, C2, R1, R2, R3, R4 are used as experimental components for four-op-amp biquad 
highpass filter circuit as shown in Fig.  4b. Because the frequency of a single device fault in the filter circuit is 
higher than the frequency of multiple device failures, this study only investigated the case of a single device  fault21.
The first case investigated in this study is the Sallen–Key band-pass filter shown in Fig.  4a (hereinafter referred 
to as Case 1); the nominal values of the components are shown in Fig.  4a. Assuming that only one of the R2, R3, 
C1, and C2 components fails in each test, the circuit forms the nine different fault categories listed in Table  1 that 
including no fault mode, where ↑  and ↓  indicate a value higher or lower than the nominal value, respectively, and 
the tolerance values of the resistance and capacitance are 5% and 10%, respectively. Similarly, the fault categories 
of the four-op-amp biquad highpass filter circuit (hereinafter referred to as Case 2) are listed in Table  2.
Feature extraction and fault classification. The proposed fault detection method for analog circuits 
is described as follows: first, use the DBN model to extract the features of the analog circuit’s output data. Then, 
use the GWO-optimized SVM classifier to classify the fault model. The specific method includes the steps shown 
in Fig. 5.
Step 1  Set the fault circuit mode and tolerance value of the faulty device. Case 1 has nine different fault cat-
egories, and Case 2 has 13 different fault categories.
Step 2  Use time-domain transient analysis to collect the signal information output of the simulation in step 
1 and save it by category.
Step 3  Use Monte Carlo analysis to obtain 240 instances of each fault category.
Step 4  Divide the data obtained in step 3 into a training group and a test group.
Step 5  use the DBN to extract the features of the training group data.
Step 6  Use the GWO optimization algorithm to optimize the c and g parameters of the SVM.
Step 7  Perform fault diagnosis based on the feature data extracted by the DBN and optimal SVM model.
Step 8  Output the fault diagnosis result.
The PSPICE software was used for data generation in the experiment, and the output amplitude-frequency 
characteristic curve of the circuit was obtained through AC analysis. The peak voltage of the circuit was 10 V , 
and a sinusoidal voltage source with a frequency of 1 kHz was selected as the excitation. Within the duration of 
0 -1.2 ms, 128 data points were output in each group mode of the output node. Then Monte Carlo analysis was 
carried out to obtain 240 instances of each fault category. The total number for Case 1 was 2160, and the total 
number of examples for Case 2 was 3120. In the experiment, a DBN with three hidden layers was used.
Figure 3.  Flowchart of SVM optimized by GWO algorithm.