2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:7969  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86916-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/expression of the data. Secondly, the DBN directly extracts the required features from the original signal without 
any function mapping and transformation, which can significantly improve the identification or distinguish-
ability of the extracted original signal’s features. Thirdly, the DBN can solve problems regarding the number of 
label samples and easy localization in training. The SVM  model17,18 is used in the classification of analog circuit 
faults. The optimization effect of the SVM largely depends on its penalty factor c, and kernel parameter g. When 
constructing a diagnostic model, parameters c and g must be set to the optimal values to achieve the best clas -
sification effect. The GWO was proposed in  201419 and implements the global optimization process by imitating 
the gray wolf population hierarchy system and hunting mechanism. The gray wolf optimization algorithm has 
faster convergence, has more stable operation, and can find suitable parameters for complex nonlinear problems.
This paper proposes an analog circuit fault detection method based on a DBN and GWO-optimized SVM for 
fault diagnosis. First, the different initial fault modes of the analog circuit are set; then, the DBN is used to extract 
the circuit’s output signal as a feature. Finally, the GWO-SVM is used to diagnose the fault mode.
Feature extraction method based on DBN
Deep learning finds the essential expression of data through the layer-by-layer nonlinear mapping expression of 
the data and then realizes the deep extraction of features. The effective extraction of features is very important 
for fault diagnosis. The DBN is a typical deep learning method that can effectively extract feature information 
from the original signal.
Restricted Boltzmann machine. Support vector machines have the advantages of robustness, good abil-
ity for learning from small samples, and strong generalization ability. The restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) 
solves the problem of feature division by exploiting high-dimensional  space10,20.
The RBM model is shown in Fig.  1. There is a bidirectional connection between each unit of each layer, but 
no connection between the units in the layer. The input vector corresponds to the visible vector of the RBM. 
The hidden vector is the feature extracted from the visible vector. The energy of the RBM unit configuration is 
defined as follows:
where  Wij is the connection weight of the visible layer unit i and the hidden layer unit j;  ai is the offset of the 
visible layer unit i; bj is the offset of the hidden layer unit j.
The conditional distribution of the visible layer is expressed as follows:
The conditional distribution of the hidden layer is expressed as follows:
where σ generally uses the sigmoid function as the activation function.
The joint probability distribution between the visible layer and the hidden layer is defined as follows:
where Z is obtained by summing all possible visible and hidden vectors, as follows:
When inputting v, the hidden layer neuron h can be calculated using (2 ). Once the hidden layer is obtained, 
the reconstruction of the visible layer can be obtained using ( 3). When each  vi in (3 ) is set to 1, the visible layer 
can be reconstructed.
Feature extraction based on DBN. The DBN training process is essentially the process of mining deep 
representation information from the original features. The DBN is formed by stacking several RBMs, and the (1) E(v,h)=−/summationdisplay I
i=1viai−/summationdisplay J
j=1bjhj−/summationdisplay I
i=1/summationdisplay J
j=1hiviwij
(2) P/parenleftbig
hj=1|v/parenrightbig
=σ/parenleftBig/summationdisplay
iwijvi+bj/parenrightBig
(3) P(vi=1|h)=σ/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
jwijhj+ai/parenrightbigg
(4) P(v,h)=1
Ze−E(v,h)
(5) Z=/summationdisplay
v/summationdisplay
he−E(v,h)
Figure 1.  RBM structure.