8
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:7969  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86916-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/1, and diagnosis accuracy of 99.68% for the classification of circuit faults in Case 2. The circuit fault classification 
result is presented in Fig. 8.
In Fig.  8a, it can be seen that the fault classification in Case 1 is entirely correct. In Fig.  8b, it can be seen that, 
for the fault classification in Case 2, only the first and tenth categories include erroneous data. To verify that the 
GWO-SVM has faster convergence speed and higher accuracy, the GWO-SVM was compared with the GA-SVM 
and PSO-SVM. For fault classification, the fault features extracted by the DBN were input into the GWO-SVM, 
GA-SVM, and PSO-SVM, respectively. The fault diagnosis results of GA-SVM and PSO-SVM are shown in the 
Fig.  9 and Fig.  10. Obviously, compared with GWO-SVM, the fault diagnosis accuracy of GA-SVM and PSO-
SVM for the two circuits is significantly reduced.
Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) can represent the trend of the sensitivity and accuracy of the 
classifier. The closer the curve is to the upper left corner, the better the performance of the classifier is. Gener -
ally, the ROC curve of the classifier is drawn to analyze its performance. By comparing GWO-SVM, GA-SVM, 
PSO-SVM and original SVM, the ROC curve is shown in Fig.  11. It can be seen from the figure that the ROC 
curve of GWO-SVM is closest to the upper left corner, which indicates that GWO-SVM has better performance.
The diagnostic performance of the three different classifiers in the two cases is presented in Tables  4 and 5 . 
By comparison, it can be seen that the performance of GWO-SVM is superior to that of the other three classi-
fiers. The test accuracy of GWO-SVM has a higher value. In Case 1, the classification accuracy of GWO-SVM 
was 100%, and the optimization process was completed in 18.48 s, the fault diagnosis time has been shortened 
by approximately 94%. In Case 2, the classification accuracy of GWO-SVM was 99.68%, and the optimization 
process was completed in 60.07 s, the fault diagnosis time has been shortened by approximately 91%. Figure  12 
shows the fitness curves of the GA-SVM, Fig.  13 shows the fitness curves of the PSO-SVM, and Fig.  14 shows 
the fitness curves of the GWO-SVM. From the three figures, it can be seen that GWO-SVM classification has the 
highest accuracy and fastest convergence rate. Compared with other classifier models, the proposed GWO-SVM 
model only required one iteration in Case 1 to achieve the best fitness. In Case 2, the model only required 10 
iterations to achieve the best fitness and stabilized after 35 iterations, compared with other models, the proposed 
model reduces hundreds of iterations and saves a lot of time. The results reveal that the proposed fault diagnosis 
method does not only significantly improve the convergence speed, but also has a low prediction error and 
achieves more robust prediction results.
Figure 6.  Characteristic distribution diagram of Case 2: (a ) row data; (b ) data after DBN feature extraction.