B. An Impossibility Theorem for Clustering
Given the above three axioms, Kleinberg proves the
following theorem: For every n >= 2, there is no clustering
functionfthat satisﬁes scale invariance, richness, and
consistency. [3]
Determining a “good” clustering is not a trivial problem.
It is impossible for any clustering procedure to be able to
satisfy all three axioms. Practical clustering algorithms must
trade-off the desirable features of clustering results.
Since the three axioms cannot hold simultaneously,
clustering algorithms can be designed to violate one of the
axioms while sarisfying the other two. Kleinberg illustrates
this point by describing three variants of single-link clustering
(an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm): [3]
k-cluster stopping condition: Stop merging clusters when
we havekclusters (violates the richness axiom, since
the algorithm would never return a number of clusters
different to k).
Distance-rstopping condition: Stop merging clusters
when the nearest pair of clusters are farther than r
(violates scale invariance given that every cluster will
contain a single instance when is large, whereas a
single cluster will contain all data when !0).
Scale-stopping condition: Stop merging clusters when
the nearest pair of clusters are farther than a fraction 
of the maximum pairwise distance (scale invariance
is satisﬁed, yet consistency is violated).
Clustering algorithms can often satisfy the properties
of scale invariance and consistency by relaxing their
richness (e.g. whenever the number of clusters is established
beforehand). As we have seen, some algorithms can even be
customized to satisfy two out of three axioms by relaxing the
third one (e.g. simple linkage with different stopping criteria).
III. M ETHODS FOR CLUSTER EVALUATION
Evaluating the results of a clustering algorithm is a very
important part of the process of clustering data. In supervised
learning,“the evaluation of the resulting classiﬁcation model
is an integral part of the process of developing a classiﬁcation
model and there are well-accepted evaluation measures and
procedures” [4]. In unsupervised learning, because of its very
nature, cluster evaluation, also known as cluster validation, is
not as well-developed. [4]
In clustering problems, it is not easy to determine the
quality of a clustering algorithm. This gives rise to multiple
evaluation techniques. Quite often, the evaluation processincludes a notorious particularity: the way the measurement
is performed depends on the algorithm used to obtain the
clustering results.
When analyzing clustering results, several aspects must be
taken into account for the validation of the algorithm results
[4]:
Determining the clustering tendency in the data (i.e.
whether non-random structure really exists).
Determining the correct number of clusters.
Assessing the quality of the clustering results without
external information.
Comparing the results obtained with external information.
Comparing two sets of clusters to determine which one
is better.
The ﬁrst three issues are addressed by internal or
unsupervised validation , because there is no use of external
information. The fourth issue is resolved by external or
supervised validation . Finally, the last issue can be addressed
by both supervised and unsupervised validation techniques.
[4].
Gan et al. [5] propose a taxonomy of evaluation techniques
that comprises both internal and external validation approaches
(see Figure 1).
Cluster 
validity indexStatistical 
testingExternal 
criteria
Internal 
criteria
Nonstatistical 
testingRelative 
criteria 
Figure 1. Taxonomy of clustering evaluation methods (adaptation) [5].
A. Null Hypothesis Testing
One of the desirable characteristics of a clustering process
is to show whether data exhibits some tendency to form
actual clusters. From a statistical point of view, a feasible