approach consists of testing whether data exhibits random
behavior or not [6]. In this context, the null hypothesis testing
can be used: A null hypothesis H0is assumed to be true until
evidence suggests otherwise. In this case, the null hypothesis
is the randomness of data and, when the null hypothesis is
rejected, we assume that the data is signiﬁcantly unlikely to
be random. [5].
One of the difﬁculties of null hypothesis testing in this
context is determining the statistical distribution under which
the randomness hypothesis can be rejected. Jain and Dubes
propose three alternatives [7]:
Random plot hypothesis H0: All proximity matrices of
ordernnare equally likely.
Random label hypothesis H0: All permutations of labels
onnobjects are equally likely.
Random position hypothesis H0: All sets of nlocations
in some region of a d-dimensional space are equally
likely.
Statistical techniques such as Monte Carlo analysis and
bootstrapping can be used to determine the clustering
tendency in data [7].
IV. I NTERNAL VALIDATION
Internal validation methods make it possible to establish
the quality of the clustering structure without having access
to external information (i.e. they are based on the information
provided by data used as input to the clustering algorithm).
In general, two types of internal validation metrics can
be combined: cohesion and separation measures. Cohesion
evaluates how closely the elements of the same cluster are to
each other, while separation measures quantify the level of
separation between clusters (see Figure 2). These measures
are also known as internal indices because they are computed
from the input data without any external information [4].
Internal indices are usually employed in conjunction with
two clustering algorithm families: hierarchical clustering
algorithms and partitional algorithms. [5].
Figure 2. Illustration of cohesion and separation [4].
Internal validation is used when there is no additional
information available. In most cases, the particular metricsused by the evaluation methods are the same metrics that
the clustering algorithm tries to optimize, which can be
counterproductive in determining the quality of a clustering
algorithm and deliver unfair validation results. On the other
hand, in the absence of other sources of information, these
metrics allow different algorithms to be compared under the
same evaluation criterion [8], yet care must be taken not to
report biased results.
Internal evaluation methods are commonly classiﬁed
according to the type of clustering algorithm they are
used with. For partitional algorithms, metrics based on
the proximity matrix, as well as metrics of cohesion and
separation, such as the silhouette coefﬁcient, are often used.
For hierarchical algorithms, the cophenetic coefﬁcient is the
most common (see Figure 3).
Internal 
methodsPartitionalCohesion and 
separation
Proximity 
matrix
Hierarchical 
Figure 3. Internal validation methods [4].
A. Partitional Methods
Several of the measures employed by internal cluster
validations methods are based on the concepts of cohesion
and separation (see Figure 2). In general, the internal
validation value of a set of Kclusters can be decomposed as
the sum of the validation values for each cluster [4]:
general validity =KX
i=1wivalidity (Ci)
This measure of validity can be cohesion, separation, or
some combination of both. Quite often, the weights that
appear in the previous expression correspond to cluster size.
The individual measures of cohesion and separation are
deﬁned as follows [4]:
cohesion (Ci) =X
x2Ci;y2Ciproximity (x;y)
separation (Ci;Cj) =X
x2Ci;y2Cjproximity (x;y)
Cohesion is measured within a cluster (an intra-cluster
metric), whereas separation is measured between clusters