10
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Although Hierarchical Evolution
shows better performance than AE-CNN on CIFAR10, AE-
CNN consumes only 1/10 GPU days as that consumed by
Hierarchical Evolution on CIFAR10. Block-QNN-S shows
a bit worse performance on CIFAR10 but slightly better
performance on CIFAR100 compared to AE-CNN, while AE-
CNN consumes 1/3 of the GPU days as that consumed by
Block-QNN-S, and also the best CNN found by AE-CNN
has a smaller number of parameters than that of Block-QNN-
S. In addition, EAS and AE-CNN perform nearly the same
classiﬁcation error on CIFAR10, while the best CNN evolved
by AE-CNN only has 2.0M parameters, which is only 1/11
of that from EAS. In summary, compared with the semi-
automatic peer competitors, AE-CNN shows the competitive
performance but has signiﬁcantly fewer number of parameters.
It is important to note that domain expertise is still required
when using the algorithms from this category. For example,
EAS only consumes 10 GPU Days for the best CNN on
CIFAR10, which is based on a base CNN with known fairly
good performance. Therefore, the comparison in terms of the
consumed GPU days is not fair to the proposed AE-CNN
algorithm, which is completely automatic without using any
human expertise and/or extra resources.
Among the automatic peer competitors, on both the CI-
FAR10 and the CIFAR100 datasets, AE-CNN shows the best
performance in terms of the classiﬁcation error, number of
parameters and the consumed GPU days. Speciﬁcally, AE-
CNN achieves 4.3% classiﬁcation error on CIFAR10, while the
best and worst classiﬁcation error from the peer competitors
are 5.4% and 6.92%, respectively. In addition, AE-CNN also
shows the lower classiﬁcation error than that of MetaQNN.
On CIFA100, AE-CNN shows 2.15% lower classiﬁcation error
than that of Large-scale Evolution, and has 5.4M number of
parameters which is much smaller than that of Large-scale
Evolution (40.4M). Furthermore, AE-CNN also consumes
much less GPU Days than that of Large-scale Evolution,
NAS and MetaQNN on both CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. The
comparison shows that the proposed algorithm achieves the
best performance among the automatic peer competitors to
which the proposed algorithm belongs.
The rationale for AE-CNN outperforming Large-scale Evo-
lution, CGP-CNN, NAS and Meta-QNN can be justiﬁed as
follows. Firstly, Large-scale Evolution does not apply the
crossover operator which provides the local search ability. The
GA-based design consequently deteriorates its performance.
Secondly, CGP-CNN employs a ﬁxed-length encoding strategy
to design the best CNN architecture. In order to make the
encoding strategy work, CGP-CNN must predeﬁne a maximal
length of CNNs during the architecture design. As can be
seen from [24], the predeﬁned maximal length of CGP-CNN
is smaller than the best one identiﬁed by AE-CNN. Thirdly,
NAS and Meta-QNN are designed based on reinforcement
learning. Because the ﬁtness value is not computed when the
reinforcement learning methods are used, the reinforcement
learning-based methods often consume more computational
resources than GA does for the same performance [7]. Ex-
pectedly, NAS and Meta-QNN perform worse than AE-CNN
given the available computational resources.B. Evolution Trajectory
When the evolutionary algorithms are used to address real-
world problems, we usually like to know whether they have
converged or not when they terminate. A better way to observe
this is to plot the evolutionary trajectories. In this subsection,
the evolutionary trajectories of the proposed algorithm in
terms of the investigated benchmark datasets are provided and
analyzed. To achieve this, we ﬁrstly collect the classiﬁcation
accuracy of each individual in every generation, and then plot
the statistical results.
(a) Evolution trajectory of CIFAR10
(b) Evolution trajectory of CIFAR100
Fig. 7. Evolution trajectories of the proposed algorithm in CIFAR10 (shown
in Fig. 7a) and CIFAR100 (shown in Fig. 7b).
The evolutionary trajectories of the proposed algorithm
are shown in Fig. 7 where Figs. 7a and 7b show those on
CIFAR10 an CIFAR100, respectively. In Fig. 7, the horizontal
axis denotes the generation number, and the vertical axis
denotes the classiﬁcation accuracy; the red line denotes the
mean classiﬁcation accuracy of the individuals in the same
generation, while the light-green area is contoured by the best
and worst classiﬁcation accuracy of the individuals in each
generation.
As can be seen from Fig. 7a, the mean classiﬁcation
accuracy sharply increases from the 1-st generation to the
3-rd generation; and then steadily improves as the evolution
process proceeds until the 14-th generation; from then, the
mean classiﬁcation accuracy has a signiﬁcant increase from
about 75% to about 95%; and ﬁnally the proposed algorithm
converges when it terminates. As can be seen from the lower
boundary of the light-green area, the worst classiﬁcation
accuracy in the ﬁrst two generations is zero, which is caused
because the randomly initialized architecture cannot run on
the employed GPUs due to the out-of-memory problem; From
the 3-rd generation, the individuals with the out-of-memory
architectures are eliminated from the population due to their