11
uncompetitive ﬁtness, and classiﬁcation accuracy steadily im-
proves until the algorithm terminates, although there is an
exception at the 4-th generation. As can be seen from the upper
boundary of the light-area, the best performance almost keeps
the same improvement as the mean classiﬁcation accuracy with
the evolutionary process continues. In addition, the difference
between the best classiﬁcation accuracy and the worst accuracy
also becomes smaller, which implies the population converges
to a steady state.
A similar situation can also be seen from Fig. 7b. Specif-
ically, the mean classiﬁcation accuracy increased from about
30% to about 45% from the 1-st generation to the 4-th gener-
ation, although there is a slight drop at the 3-rd generation;
since the 4-th generation, the mean classiﬁcation accuracy
keeps improving until the 14-th generation; and then increases
from about 50% at the 14-th generation to about 79% at the
17-th generation; after that the mean classiﬁcation accuracy
converges until the evolutionary process terminates. During
the ﬁrst three generations, the worst classiﬁcation accuracy
stays at zero because the randomly initialized out-of-memory
individuals; from the 4-th generation, the worst classiﬁcation
accuracy improves until the 20-th generation with the excep-
tion at the 10- and 15-th generations. As can be seen from
the evolutionary trajectories of the best classiﬁcation accuracy,
the best classiﬁcation accuracy improves almost with the same
trend as that of the mean classiﬁcation accuracy, and also
archives the converged performance from the 17-th generation.
A common trend can both be seen from Figs. 7a and 7b that
the best classiﬁcation accuracy (i.e., the upper boundaries of
the light-green areas) will not be degraded, which is achieved
through the utilized elitism detailed in Subsection III-E, i.e.,
the individual with the best ﬁtness is unconditionally kept
into the next generation. In summary, the proposed algorithm
converges within the default parameter settings in terms of
GAs, which could help the users to employ the proposed
algorithm to ﬁnd the best CNN architectures for their own
data, even though the users have no expertise in GAs. However,
the maximal generation number and the population size can
be set to larger numbers if more computational resources are
available.
C. Designed CNN Architectures
In this subsection, the best CNN architectures found by the
proposed algorithm on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 are provided
in Tables II and III, respectively.
TABLE II
THE INFORMATION OF THE BEST ARCHITECTURE FOUND ON CIFAR10.
id type conﬁguration
1 RBU amount=8, in=3, out=64
2 PU mean pooling
3 RBU amount=5, in=64, out=28
4 PU mean pooling
5 RBU amount=7. in=128, out=64
6 DBU amount=7, in=64, out=204, k=20
7 DBU amount=7, in=204, out=204, k=20
8 PU mean pooling
9 PU max poolingTABLE III
THE INFORMATION OF THE BEST ARCHITECTURE FOUND ON CIFAR100.
id type conﬁguration
1 DBU amount=10, in=3, out=203, k=20
2 PU max pooling
3 PU mean pooling
4 RBU amount=7, in=203, out=256
5 PU mean pooling
6 PU mean pooling
As can be seen from Tables II and III, the best architecture
on CIFAR10 is composed of nine units that are designed in the
proposed encoding strategy in Subsection III-B, and altogether
has 38 layers that consist of 34 convolutional layers and four
pooling layers; while the best architecture on CIFAR100 is
composed of six units that consist of 21 layers, containing 17
convolutional layers and four pooling layer.
Compared to the state-of-the-art CNNs that are solely built
on DenseNet blocks or ResNet blocks, the automatically
found architectures based on both blocks have much simpler
architectures and much better performance. This may serve as
a priori knowledge in hand-crafting CNN architectures that en-
semble blocks may be more effective. In addition, CIFAR100
is commonly viewed as a more complex benchmark than
CIFAR10, and researchers usually consider CNN architectures
with more layers than that of CIFAR10 when dealing with
CIFAR100. However, based on the found architectures shown
in Tables II and III, the best architecture for CIFAR100 has
surprisingly a smaller number of layers than that of CIFAR10.
To this end, ﬁnding the best architecture through evolution
search may also provide useful domain expertise, which is in
contract to our common sense.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this study is to develop a CNN architec-
ture design algorithm by using GAs, which is capable of
designing/searching/learning/evolving the best CNN architec-
ture for the given task in a completely automatic manner
and based on the limited computational resource. This goal
has been successfully achieved by the proposed encoding
strategy built on the state-of-the-art blocks with a variable-
length representation, presenting a crossover operator for the
variable-length individuals, and the corresponding mutation
operators. Building upon the blocks is able to speed up the
CNN architecture design. The variable-length of individuals
can adaptively evolve the proper depth of a CNN for tasks
with different complexity. The presented crossover operator
and the designed mutation operators provide the proposed
algorithm with effective local search and global search ability,
which in turn helps the proposed algorithm to be able to
ﬁnd the best CNN architectures. The proposed algorithm is
examined on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 image classiﬁcation
datasets, against nine state-of-the-art CNNs manually designed,
four peer competitors designing CNN architectures with a
semi-automatic way and ﬁve peer competitors designing CNN
architectures with the completely automatic way. The results
show that the proposed algorithm outperforms all the state-
of-the-art CNNs hand-crafted and all the peer competitors