5
Encoding enables GAs with the ability to model real-
world problems, and then the problems can be solved by the
GAs directly. The encoding is achieved by the corresponding
encoding strategy which is the ﬁrst step of employing GAs.
There is not a uniﬁed encoding strategy that can be used
for all the problems. In the proposed algorithm, we design a
new encoding strategy aiming at effectively modelling CNNs
with different architectures. For the used RBs, based on the
conﬁguration of state-of-the-art CNNs [17], [42], we set the
ﬁlter size of conv 2to33, which is also used for the
convolutional layers in the used DBs. For the used pooling
layers, we set the same stride as the step size to 22based
on the conventions, which means that such a single pooling
layer in the evolved CNN halves the input dimension for one
time. To this end, the unknown parameter settings for RBs
are the spatial sizes of input and output, those for DBs are
the spatial sizes of input and output, as well as k, and that
for pooling layers are only their types, i.e., the max ormean
pooling type. Note that the number of convolutional layers in
a DB is known because it can be derived by the spatial sizes
of input and output as well as k. Accordingly, the proposed
encoding strategy is based on three different types of units
and their positions in the CNNs. The units are the RB Unit
(RBU), the DB Unit (DBU) and the Pooling layer Unit (PU).
Speciﬁcally, an RBU and a DBU contain multiple RBs and
DBs, respectively, while a PU is composed of only a single
pooling layer. Our justiﬁcations are that: 1) by putting multiple
of RBs or DBs into an RBU or a DBU, the depth of the CNN
can be signiﬁcantly changed compared to stacking RBs or
DBs one by one, which will speed up the heuristic search
of the proposed algorithm by easily changing the depth of
the CNN; and 2) one PU consisting of a single pooling layer
is more ﬂexible than consisting of multiple pooling layers,
because the effect of multiple consequent pooling layers can
be achieved by stacking multiple PUs. In addition, we also add
one parameter to represent the unit type for the convenience
of the algorithm implementation. In summary, the encoded
information for an RBU are the type, the number of RBs, the
input spatial size and the output spatial size, which are denoted
astype,amount ,inandout, respectively. On the other hand,
the encoded information for a DBU is the same as those of
an RBU, in addition to the additional parameter k. Only one
parameter is needed in a PU for encoding the pooling type.
Fig. 3. An example of the proposed encoding strategy.
Fig. 3 shows an example of the proposed algorithm in
encoding a CNN containing nine units. Speciﬁcally, each
number in the upper-left corner of the block denotes the
position of the unit in the CNN. The unit is an RBU, a DBU
or a PU if the type is1,2, or3, respectively. Noting that the
proposed encoding strategy does not constrain the maximal
length of each individual, which means that the proposed
algorithm can adaptively ﬁnd the best CNN architecture with
a proper depth through the designed variable-length encodingstrategy.
C. Fitness Evaluation
The ﬁtness of the individuals provides a quantitative mea-
surement indicating how well they adapt to the environment,
and is calculated based on the information these individuals
encode and the task at hand. In AE-CNN, the ﬁtness of
an individual is the classiﬁcation accuracy based on the
architecture encoded by the individual and the corresponding
validation data. According to the principle of evolutionary
algorithms, an individual with a higher ﬁtness has a higher
probability to generate an offspring hopefully with an even
higher ﬁtness than itself. For evaluating the ﬁtness, each
individual in AE-CNN is decoded to the corresponding CNN,
and then added to a classiﬁer to be trained like that of a
common CNN. Typically, the widely used classiﬁer is the
Logistic regression for binary classiﬁcation and the Softmax
regression for multiple classiﬁcation. As formulated by (1), in
AE-CNN, the decoded CNN is trained on the training data,
the ﬁtness is the best classiﬁcation accuracy on the validation
data after the CNN training.
Algorithm 3: Evaluate Fitness
Input: The population Ptfor ﬁtness evaluation, traing
dataDtrain, validation dataDvalid.
Output: The population Ptwith ﬁtness.
1foreach individual in Ptdo
2 cnn Transform the information encoded in
individual to a CNN with the corresponding
architecture;
3 Initialize the weights of cnn;
4 Train cnn onDtrain;
5 acc Evaluate the classiﬁcation accuracy of the
trained cnn onDvalid;
6 Assign accas the ﬁtness of individual ;
7end
8Return Pt.
The ﬁtness evaluation of the proposed algorithm is shown in
Algorithm 3, where each individual in the population is evalu-
ated in the same manner. Firstly, the architecture information
encoded in the individual is transformed to a CNN with the
corresponding architecture (line 2), which is an inverse of the
encoding strategy introduced in Subsection III-B. Secondly,
the CNN is initialized with weights (lines 3) like that of a
hand-crafted CNN and then trained on the provided training
data (line 4). Noting that the weight initialize method and the
training method are the Xavier initializer [43] and the stochas-
tic gradient descend with momentum, respectively, which are
commonly used in deep learning community. Thirdly, the
trained CNN is evaluated on the validation data (line 5),
and the evaluated classiﬁcation accuracy is considered as the
ﬁtness of the individual (line 6).
D. Offspring Generation
In order to generate a population of offspring, parent individ-
uals need to be chosen in advance. Based on the principle of