3
Fig. 1. An example of the ResNet block (RB).
Fig. 2. An example of the DenseNet block (DB) including four convolutional
layers.
designed. In order to help readers easily understand the details
of the proposed algorithm to be shown in Section III, the
fundamentals to GAs, ResNet Blocks (RBs) and DenseNet
Blocks (DBs) are discussed in this section.
A. Genetic Algorithms
GAs [30] are a class of heuristic population-based compu-
tational paradigm. They are also the most popular type of evo-
lutionary algorithms (evolutionary algorithms broadly include
genetic programming [31], evolutionary strategy [32] and so
on, in addition to GAs). Because of the nature of gradient-free
and insensitiveness to the local minimum, GAs are preferred
especially in engineering ﬁelds where the optimization prob-
lems are commonly non-convex and non-differentiable [33],
[34]. GAs address optimization problems by imitating the
biological evolution through a series of bio-inspired operators,
such as crossover, mutation and selection [35], [36]. Generally,
a GA works as follows:
Step 1:Initialization of a population of individuals each of
which represents a candidate solution of the problem
through the employed encoding strategy;
Step 2:Evaluation of the ﬁtness of each individual in the
population based on the encoded information and the
ﬁtness function;
Step 3:Mating selection of promising parent individuals from
the current population, and then generate offspring
with crossover and mutation operators;
Step 4:Evaluation of the ﬁtness of the generated offspring;
Step 5:Environmental selection of a population of individuals
with promising performance from the current popula-
tion, and then replace the current population by the
selected population;
Step 6:Go to Step 3 if the termination cretiration is not met;
otherwise return the individual with the best ﬁtness as
the best solution for the problem.
Commonly, a maximal generation number is predeﬁned as the
termination criterion.
B. ResNet and DenseNet Blocks
ResNet [17] and DenseNet [18] are two state-of-the-art
CNNs proposed in recent years. The success of ResNet and
DenseNet largely owes to their building blocks, i.e., RBs and
DBs, respectively.Fig. 1 shows an example of an RB which is composed of
three convolutional layers2and one skip connection. In this
example, the convolutional layers are denoted as conv 1,conv 2
andconv 3. On conv 1, the spatial size of the input is reduced
by a smaller number of ﬁlters with the size of 11, to lower
the computational complexity of conv 2. On conv 2, ﬁlters with
a larger size, such as 33, are used to learn features with
the same spatial size. On conv 3, ﬁlters with the size of 11
are used again, and the spatial size is increased for generating
more features. The input is added, denoted by , to the output
ofconv 3as the ﬁnal output of the RD. Noting that if the
spatial sizes of input and conv 3’s output are unequal, a group
of convolutional operations with the ﬁlters of 11size is
applied on the input, to achieve the same spatial size as that
ofconv 3’s output, for the addition.
Fig. 2 exhibits an example of a DB. For the convenience
of the introduction, we give only four convolutional layers in
the DB. In practice, a DB can have a different number of
convolutional layers, which is tuned by users. In a DB, each
convolutional layer receives inputs from not only the input data
but also the output of all the previous convolutional layers. In
addition, there is a parameter, k, for controlling the spatial
size of the input and output of the same convolutional layer.
If the spatial size of the input is a, then the spatial size of
the output is a+k, which is achieved by the convolutional
operation using the corresponding number of ﬁlters.
Efforts in [37], [38] have been put on investigating the
mechanism behind the success of RBs and DBs, and revealed
that RBs and DBs are able to mitigate the adverse impact of
the gradient vanishing problem [39], based on which a deep
architecture is capable of effectively learning the hierarchical
representations of the input data, and then improving the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy in turn. In addition, the dense
connections in DBs have also been claimed to be able to
reuse the low-level features, to increase the discrimination of
features learned at the top layers of CNNs [18]. Mainly based
on these good characteristics, RBs and DBs are chosen as the
building blocks in the proposed algorithm.
III. T HEPROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, the framework of the proposed algorithm
and its main components are discussed in detail. For the
convenience of the development, the proposed algorithm is
named AE-CNN (Automatically Evolving CNNs) in short, and
the evolved CNN is used solely for image classiﬁcation tasks.
A. Algorithm Overview
Algorithm 1 shows the framework of AE-CNN, which is
composed of three parts. Firstly, the population is randomly
initialized with a predeﬁned size of N(line 1). Then, the indi-
viduals are evaluated for the ﬁtness (line 2). Next, all individ-
uals in the population take part into the evolutionary process
of GA with the maximal generation number of T(lines 3-
14). Finally, the best CNN architecture is decoded from the
2Here we only detail this type of blocks which is used to build deeper
networks. Indeed, ResNet also has another type of block which is typically
used for building networks with no more than 34 layers.