2
manually requires considerable expertise in CNN architecture,
as well as in the problem domain. This is often not available
in practice. For example, a medical doctor could ﬁnd a CNN
extremely useful in evaluating the results of a Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan. While the doctor clearly
has expertise in the problem domain, they are very unlikely
to have comparable experience in CNN architectures. This
barrier has prevented CNNs from being utilised in a variety of
image classiﬁcation tasks. There is a signiﬁcant demand for
algorithms which are able to effectively and efﬁciently design1
CNN architectures without requiring such expertise.
Fortunately, in the last two years, multiple algorithms de-
veloped for designing CNN architectures have been proposed.
Based on whether the pre- or post-processing in terms of
CNNs is required when these algorithms are used, they can be
divided into two different categories: the semi-automatic CNN
architecture design algorithms and the completely automatic
ones. Particularly, the semi-automatic algorithms cover the
genetic CNN method (Genetic CNN) [19], the hierarchical
representation-based method (Hierarchical Evolution) [20], the
efﬁcient architecture search method (EAS) [21], and the
block design method (Block-QNN-S) [22], to name a few.
The automatic algorithms include the large-scale evolution
method (Large-scale Evolution) [23], the Cartesian genetic pro-
gramming method (CGP-CNN) [24], the neural architecture
search method (NAS) [25], and the meta-modelling method
(MetaQNN) [26]. These algorithms are mainly based on
evolutionary algorithms [27] or reinforcement learning [28].
For example, Genetic CNN, Large-scale Evolution, Hierar-
chical Evolution and CGP-CNN are based on evolutionary
algorithms, while NSA, MetaQNN, EAS and Block-QNN-S
are built on reinforcement learning.
Experimental results from these algorithms have shown their
promising performance in ﬁnding the best CNN architectures
on the given data. However, major limitations remain. Firstly,
the expertise in the investigated data and CNNs is still needed
by the semi-automatic CNN architecture design algorithms.
For example, EAS takes effect on a base network which
already has a fairly good performance on the investigated
problem. However, the base network is manually designed
based on expertise. Block-QNN-S only designs several small
networks, and these networks are then integrated into a larger
CNN framework. However, the other types of layers, such
as the pooling layers, need to be properly assimilated into
the CNN framework with expertise. Secondly, the CNN ar-
chitecture design algorithms based on reinforcement learning
typically consume much more computational resource. For
instance, NAS consumes 28 days on 800 Graphic Process
Unit (GPU) cards for the CIFAR10 dataset [29]. However,
sufﬁcient computation resource is not necessarily available to
every interested user. Thirdly, the CNN architecture design
algorithms based on evolutionary algorithm use only partial
principled merit of the evolutionary algorithms, which inadver-
tently results in the found CNNs usually without the promis-
ing performance for the investigated problems. For example,
1In this paper, the terms “design”, “ﬁnd”, “learn” and “evolve” have
identical meaning when used to describe “CNN architectures”.Genetic CNN employs a ﬁxed-length encoding scheme to
represent CNNs. However, we never know the best depth of
the CNN in solving a new problem. To this end, Large-scale
Evolution utilizes a variable-length encoding scheme where
the CNNs can adaptively change their depths for the prob-
lems. However, Large-scale Evolution uses only the mutation
operator but not any crossover operator during the search
process. In evolutionary algorithms, the crossover operator and
mutation operator play complementary roles of local search
and global search. Without using the crossover operator, the
mutation operator works just like random search at different
start positions. Nevertheless, it is not surprising that Large-
scale Evolution does not use the crossover operator since the
crossover operator is originally designed for the ﬁxed-length
encoding scheme.
To this end, the development of CNN architecture design
algorithms, especially for the completely automatic ones
with promising performance and relying on the limited com-
putational resource, is still in its infancy. The aim of this
paper is to design and develop a new genetic algorithm-
based algorithm to automatically design CNN architectures
by addressing the limitations discussed above. To achieve this
goal, the objectives below have been speciﬁed:
The proposed algorithm does mandate any prerequisite
knowledge from the users in base CNN design, inves-
tigated dataset and genetic algorithms. The CNN whose
architecture is designed by the proposed algorithm can be
directly used without any re-composition, pre-processing,
or post-processing.
The variable-length encoding scheme is employed for
searching the optimal depth of the CNN. To adopt the
variable-length encoding, a new crossover operator and a
mutation operator are designed and incorporated into the
proposed algorithm to collectively exploit and explore the
search space in ﬁnding the best CNN architectures.
An efﬁcient encoding strategy is designed based on
the ResNet and DenseNet blocks for speeding up the
architecture design, and limited computational resource
is utilized, while the promising performance can be
achieved by the proposed algorithm. Noting that, although
the ResNet and DenseNet blocks are used in the proposed
algorithm, the users are not required to have expertise in
these blocks when they are using the proposed algorithm.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
background related to base knowledge of the proposed al-
gorithm is introduced in Section II. Then, the details of the
proposed algorithm are documented in Section III. To evaluate
the performance of the proposed algorithm, the experiment
design and the numerical results are shown in Sections IV
and V, respectively. Finally, the conclusions and future work
are summarized in Section VI.
II. B ACKGROUND
As have highlighted in Section I, the proposed algorithm is
to design a novel Genetic Algorithm (GA), to automatically
design the CNN architectures, by using the blocks of ResNet
and DenseNet that are the state-of-the-art CNNs manually