1
Completely Automated CNN Architecture Design
Based on Blocks
Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE, Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE,
and Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —The performance of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) highly relies on their architectures. In order to design
a CNN with promising performance, extensive expertise in
both CNNs and the investigated problem domain is required,
which is not necessarily available to every interested user. To
address this problem, we propose to automatically evolve CNN
architectures by using a genetic algorithm based on ResNet
and DenseNet blocks. The proposed algorithm is completely
automatic in designing CNN architectures. In particular, neither
pre-processing before it starts nor post-processing in terms of
CNNs is needed. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm does not
require users with domain knowledge on CNNs, the investigated
problem or even genetic algorithms. The proposed algorithm is
evaluated on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 benchmark datasets
against 18 state-of-the-art peer competitors. Experimental results
show that the proposed algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art
CNNs hand-crafted and CNNs designed by automatic peer com-
petitors in terms of the classiﬁcation performance, and achieves
a competitive classiﬁcation accuracy against semi-automatic peer
competitors. In addition, the proposed algorithm consumes much
less computational resource than most peer competitors in ﬁnding
the best CNN architectures.
Index Terms —Convolutional neural networks, genetic algo-
rithms, evolutionary deep learning, automatic architecture design,
neural networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
CONVOLUTIONAL Neural Networks (CNNs) [1] have
been showcasing their promising performance on various
real-world applications [2]–[5]. It has been known that the per-
formance of CNNs highly depends on their architectures, such
as how many building-block layers (e.g., the convolutional and
pooling layers) are used, how the used building-block layers
are composed, and how the parameters related to the used
building-block layers are speciﬁed.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61803277, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities, in part by the National Natural Science Fund of
China for Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant 61625204, and in part by
the Marsden Fund of New Zealand Government under Contracts VUW1209,
VUW1509 and VUW1615, Huawei Industry Fund E2880/3663, and the
University Research Fund at Victoria University of Wellington 209862/3580,
and 213150/3662.
Yanan Sun is with the College of Computer Science, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610065, China, and also with the School of Engineering and
Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New
Zealand (e-mail: ysun@scu.edu.cn).
Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang are with the School of Engineer-
ing and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box
600, Wellington 6140, New Zealand (e-mail: bing.xue@ecs.vuw.ac.nz; and
mengjie.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz).
Gary G. Yen is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA (email:
gyen@okstate.edu).Generally, given a CNN, denoted by A, having narchitec-
ture related parameters 1;; nwhose decision spaces are
1;;n, respectively, the CNN architecture design is to
optimize the problem formulated by (1)
8
<
:arg minL(A;Dtrain;Dvalid)
s:t: 2(1)
where =f1;; ng, =  1 n,Adenotes
the CNNAadopting the architecture parameter setting , and
L()measures the performance of Aon the validation data
Dvalid afterAhas been trained on the training data Dtrain. In
the case of classiﬁcation tasks, L()measures the classiﬁcation
error of the tasks to which Ais applied. Typically, the gradient-
based algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent [6], are
employed to train the weights of AasL()is differentiable
(or approximately differentiable) with respect to the weights.
Unfortunately, with respect to the architecture related param-
eters,L()is often non-convex and non-differentiable because
these parameters usually have discrete values, e.g., the feature
map sizes of convolutional layers are generally speciﬁed as
integers. To this end, the exact optimization algorithms (e.g.,
the gradient-based algorithms) are incapable of or ineffective
in solving the architecture optimization problem [7], [8].
As a result, researchers have proposed various architecture
optimization algorithms based on the heuristic computational
paradigms [9], such as random search [10], Bayesian-based
Gaussian process [11], [12], tree-structured Parzen estima-
tors [13], sequential model-based global optimization [14],
neuroevolution of augmenting topologies [15], evolutionary
unsupervised deep learning [8], etc. However, in CNN architec-
ture optimization, it is impossible to know the optimal numbers
of built layers in advance, e.g., the particular value of nin,
to compose the best CNN architecture, i.e., the number of
decision variables for an optimal CNN architecture is also
unknown before the best CNN architecture is found. This
makes the architecture optimization methods aforementioned
also unable to be effectively and efﬁciently used for CNN
architecture design because they work under the assumption
where the number of optimized parameters is ﬁxed. Although
we could enumerate each potential value of nand then perform
these methods for each different n, the run-time computational
complexity will increase in an order of magnitude as ngrows,
and the satisfactory solutions may not be obtained within the
acceptable time [16].
Due to this, state-of-the-art CNNs such as ResNet [17] and
DenseNet [18] are primarily hand-crafted. Designing CNNs