4
Algorithm 1: Framework of AE-CNN
Input: The population size N, the maximal generation
number T, the crossover propability , the
mutation probability .
Output: The best CNN.
1P0 Initialize a population with the size of Nby
using the proposed encoding strategy;
2Evaluate the ﬁtness of individuals in P0;
3t 0;
4while t < T do
5 Qt ∅;
6 whilejQtj< N do
7 p1; p2 Select two parent individuals from Pt
by using binary tournament selection;
8 q1; q2 Generate two offspring by p1andp2
by crossover operation with the probability of
and mutation operation with the probability
of;
9 Qt Qt[q1[q2;
10 end
11 Evaluate the ﬁtness of individuals in Qt;
12 Pt+1 Select Nindividuals from Pt[Qtby
environmental selection;
13 t t+ 1;
14end
15Select the best individual from Ptand decode it to the
corresponding CNN.
best individual that is chosen from the ﬁnal population based
on the ﬁtness (line 15). During the evolutionary process, an
empty population is initialized for including offspring (line 5),
and then new offspring are generated from selected parents
with the crossover and mutation operations, while the parents
are selected by the binary tournament selection (lines 6-10);
after the ﬁtness of the generated offspring has been evaluated
(line 11), a new population is selected with the environmental
selection operation (line 12) from the current population
(containing the current individuals and the generated offspring)
as the parent solutions surviving into the next evolutionary
process (i.e., the next generation). Noting that the symbol of
jjshown in line 6 is a cardinality operator. In the following
subsections, the phases of “ Population Initialization,” “Fitness
Evaluation,” “Offspring Generation” and “Environmental Se-
lection” are documented in Subsections III-B, III-C, III-D and
III-E, respectively.
B. Population Initialization
Population initialization provides a base population contain-
ing multiple individuals for the following evolutionary process.
Generally, all the individuals are initialized in a random
manner with a uniform distribution. As have introduced in
Subsection II-A that each individual in GAs represents a
candidate solution of the problem to be solved. Because GAs
in the proposed algorithm are employed to ﬁnd the best CNN
architecture, each individual in the proposed algorithm should
represent a CNN architecture. Generally, the architecture of aCNN is constructed by multiple convolutional layers, pooling
layers and fully-connected layers in a particular order, as
well as their parameter settings. In the proposed algorithm,
CNNs are constructed based on RBs, DBs and pooling layers,
which is motivated by the remarkable success of ResNet [17]
and DenseNet [18], while the fully-connected layers are not
considered in the proposed algorithm. The main reason is
that the fully-connected layers easily cause the over-ﬁtting
phenomenon [40] due to their full-connection nature. To
reduce this phenomenon, other techniques must be adopted,
such as Dropout [41]. However, these techniques will also give
rise to extra parameters that need to be carefully tuned, which
will increase the computational complexity of the proposed
algorithm. The experimental results shown in Section V will
justify that the promising performance of the proposed algo-
rithm can still be achieved without using the fully-connected
layers. The details of initializing the population of AE-CNN
are summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Initialize Population
Input: The population size N, the training instance
dimension dd.
Output: The initialized population P0.
1P0 ∅;
2mp Calculate the maximal number of pooling
layers by⌊log2(d)⌋;
3fori 1toNdo
4 k randomly initialize a positive integer;
5 a initialize an empty array with the size of k;
6 forj 1tokdo
7 u Randomly choose one from fRBU, DBU,
PUg;
8 ifuis a PU and the number of used PU is not
less than mpthen
9 u Randomly choose one from fRBU,
DBUg;
10 end
11 Encode uand put the encoded information into
thej-th position of a;
12 end
13 P0 P0[a;
14end
15Return P0.
Next, we will explain details of lines 8 and 11 because
other parts of Algorithm 2 are straightforward. Speciﬁcally,
the pooling layers in CNNs perform the dimension reduction
on their input data, and the most commonly used pooling
operation is to halve the input size, which can be seen from
state-of-the-art CNNs [2]–[5], [17], [18]. To this end, the
employed pooling layers cannot be arbitrarily speciﬁed, but
following the constraint that has been calculated as shown in
line 2. For example, if the input size is 3232, the number
of used pooling layers cannot be larger than six because six
pooling layers will reduce the dimension of the input data to
11, and one extra pooling layer on the dimension of 11
will lead to the logic error.