6
evolutionary algorithms, the generated offspring are expected
to have higher ﬁtness than their parents, through inheriting the
quality traits from both parents. To this end, the individuals
having the best ﬁtness should be chosen as the parent individ-
uals. However, adopting the best ones as the parents could
easily cause the loss of diversity in the population, which
in turn leads to the premature convergence [44], [45], and
as a result the best performance of the population cannot be
achieved [46], [47] due to trapping into the local minima [48],
[49]. To address this problem, a general way is to select
promising parents via the random way. In the proposed AE-
CNN algorithm, the binary tournament selection [50] is used
for this purpose [50], [51], based on the conventions of the GA
community. The binary tournament selection randomly selects
two individuals from the population, and the one with a higher
ﬁtness is chosen as one parent individual. By repeating this
process again, another parent individual is chosen, and then
these two parent individuals perform the crossover operation.
Noting that two offspring are generated after each crossover
operation, and Noffspring are generated in each generation,
i.e., the crossover operation is performed N=2times during
each generation where Nstands for the population size.
In traditional GAs, the crossover operation is performed on
two individuals with the same length, which is biologically
evident. Based on the proposed encoding strategy, individuals
in the proposed algorithm have different lengths, i.e., the
corresponding CNNs are with different depths. In this regard,
the traditional crossover operator cannot be used. However,
the crossover operator often refers to the local search ability of
GAs, exploiting the search space for a promising performance.
The performance of the ﬁnal solution may be deteriorated
due to the lacking of the crossover operation in GAs. In
the proposed algorithm, we employ the one-point crossover
operator. The reason is that the one-point crossover has been
widely used in Genetic Programming (GP) [31]. GP is another
important class of evolutionary algorithms, and the individuals
in GP are commonly with different lengths. Algorithm 4 shows
the crossover operation in the proposed algorithm.
(a) Selected parent individuals
(b) Generated offspring
Fig. 4. The two selected parent individuals for the crossover operation (shown
in Fig. 4a) and the generated offspring (shown in Fig. 4b). The numbers in
each block denote the corresponding conﬁguration, and the red numbers in
Fig. 4b denote the necessary changes after the crossover operation.Algorithm 4: Crossover Operation of AE-CNN
Input: Two parent individuals, p1andp2, selected by
the binary tournament selection, crossover
propability .
Output: Two offspring.
1r Uniformly generate a number from [0;1];
2ifr <  then
3 Randomly choose a position from p1andp2,
respectively;
4 Separate p1andp2based on the chosen positions;
5 q1 Combine the ﬁrst part of p1and the second
part of p2;
6 q2 Combine the ﬁrst part of p2and the ﬁrst part
ofp1;
7else
8 q1 p1;
9 q2 p2;
10end
11Return q1andq2.
Noting that some necessary changes are automatically made
on the generated offspring if required. For example, the inof
the current unit should be equal to the outof the previous
unit, and other cascade adjustments caused by this change.
For a better understanding of the crossover operation, an
example is shown in Fig. 4 where Fig. 4a shows the two
parent individuals. Supposing the separation positions of these
two parent individuals are the 3-th and 4-th units, respectively,
then Fig. 4b shows the corresponding generated offspring, the
red numbers imply the corresponding changes needed after the
crossover operation for the logic representing a valid CNN.
The mutation operation typically performs the global search
in GAs, exploring the search space for promising performance.
It works on one generated offspring with a predeﬁned probabil-
ity and the allowed mutation types. Available mutation types
are designed based on the proposed encoding strategy. In the
proposed algorithm, the available mutation types are:
Adding (adding an RBU, adding a DBU, or adding a PU
to the selected position);
Removing (removing the unit at the selected position);
Modifying (modifying the encoded information of the
unit at the selected position).
The mutation operation in the proposed algorithm is detailed
in Algorithm 5. Because all the generated offspring use the
same routine for the mutation, Algorithm 5 shows only the
process of one offspring for the reason of simplicity. Noting
that the offspring will be kept the same if it is not mutated.
In addition, a series of necessary adjustments will also be
automatically performed based on the logic of composing
a valid CNN as highlighted in the crossover operation. For
better understanding the mutation, an example in terms of the
“adding an RBU” is shown in Fig. 5, where Fig. 5a shows
the selected individual for the mutation and the randomly
initialized RBU, and Fig. 5b shows the mutated individual.The