In this work we gather evidence to answer these
questions by designing the Bounding Boxes in
Text Transformer, B2T2 for short, a neural archi-
tecture for multimodal encoding of natural lan-
guage and images, and we evaluate B2T2 on
the Visual Commonsense Reasoning benchmark
(VCR, Zellers et al. 2019).
Figure 1 shows an illustrative example from the
VCR benchmark. VCR is well suited to test rich
multimodal representations because it requires the
analysis of images depicting people engaged in
complex activities; it presents questions, answers
and rationales created by human annotators rather
than automatic generation; it has a clean multiple-
choice interface for evaluation; and yet it is still
challenging thanks to a careful selection of answer
choices through adversarial matching. VCR has
much longer questions and answers compared to
other popular Visual Question Answering (VQA)
datasets, such as VQA v1 (Antol et al., 2015),
VQA v2 (Goyal et al., 2017) and GQA (Hudson
and Manning, 2019), requiring more modeling ca-
pacity for language understanding.
In our experiments, we found that early fusion
of co-references between textual tokens and vi-
sual features of objects was the most critical fac-
tor in obtaining improvements on VCR. We found
that the more visual object features we included in
the model’s input, the better the model performed,
even if they were not explicitly co-referent to the
text, and that positional features of objects in the
image were also helpful. We ﬁnally discovered
that our models for VCR could be trained much
more reliably when they were initialized from pre-
training on Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al.,
2018), a public dataset of about 3M images with
captions. From the combination of these model-
ing improvements, we obtained a new model for
visual question answering that achieves state-of-
the-art on VCR, reducing error rates by more than
25% relative to the best published and documented
model (Zellers et al., 2019).
2 Problem Formulation
In this work, we assume data comprised of 4-
tuples (I;B;T;l )where
1.Iis an image,
2.B= [b1;:::;b m]is a list of bounding boxes
referring to regions of I, where each biisSymbol Type Description
m N number of extracted bounding boxes
n N number of tokens input to BERT
k N number of positional embeddings for im-
age coordinates, usually 56
d N visual features dimension, usually 2048
h N hidden dimension of BERT, usually 1024
lf0;1g a binary label
I R 3an image
B Rm4rectangular bounding boxes on I, as co-
ordinates of opposite corners
Rf0;1gmnmatrix encoding which bounding boxes
inBcorrespond to which tokens in T
T Nn2input tokens, each expressed as word
piece id and token type
 R 3!Rda function to extract visual feature vec-
tors from an image
 R4!Rda function to embed the position and
shape of a bounding box
	 Rnh!Rha function to compute a passage embed-
ding from per-token embeddings
ENn2!Rnhnon-contextualized token embeddings,
encoding word piece ids, token types and
positions
Table 1: Glossary of mathematical symbols used in this
work.
identiﬁed by the lower left corner, height and
width,
3.T= [t1;:::;t n]is a passage of tokenized
text, with the peculiarity that some of the to-
kens are not natural language, but explicit ref-
erences to elements of B, and
4.lis a binary label in f0;1g.
While it might seem surprising to mix natural
text with explicit references to bounding boxes,
this is actually a quite natural way for people to
discuss objects in images and the VCR dataset is
annotated in exactly this way.
We assume an image representation function 
that converts an image, perhaps after resizing and
padding, to a ﬁxed size vector representation of
dimensiond.
We similarly assume a pretrained textual repre-
sentation capable of converting any tokenized pas-
sage of text, perhaps after truncating or padding,
into a vector representation of dimension h. We
assume a context independent token representa-
tionEin the shape of a vector of dimension h
for each token and a passage level representation
	which operates on E(T)and returns a passage
level vector representation of dimension h.
We refer the reader to Table 1 for an overview of
the notation used in this work. Full details on how
the VCR dataset is encoded into this formalism are
given in Section 4.