In Examples 2 and 3, no speciﬁc bounding box
appears to contain critical clues for answering the
question, but B2T2 outperforms models without
access to the image or without access to bounding
boxes. It is possible that B2T2 might be gaining
deeper understanding of a scene by combining in-
formation from important regions of the image.
In Examples 4 and 5, we see failure cases of
both the dual encoder and B2T2 compared to the
text only-model. Both these examples appear to
point to a limitation in the amount of information
that the we are able to extract from the image. In-
deed our vision model is trained on ImageNet, and
so it might be very good at recognizing objects,
but might be unable to recognize human expres-
sions and activities. Our models could have cor-
rectly answered the question in Example 4 if they
were able to recognize smiles. Similarly our mod-
els could have ruled out the incorrect answer they
picked for the question in Example 5 if they were
able to see that both people in the picture are sit-
ting down and are not moving.
6 Related Work
Modeling visual contexts can aid in learning use-
ful sentence representations (Kiela et al., 2017)
and even in training language models (Ororbia
et al., 2019). This paper takes these more general
ideas to a downstream task that requires model-
ing of visual input. Similar to B2T2, VideoBERT
(Sun et al., 2019) jointly processes video frames
and text tokens with a Transformer architecture.
However, VideoBERT cannot answer questions,
nor does the model consider bounding boxes.
Our B2T2 model is similar to the Bottom-Up
Top-Down attention model (Anderson et al., 2018)
in how bounding boxes generated at preprocessing
time are attended to by the VQA model. “Bottom-
Up” refers to the idea of attending from the text
to the bounding boxes of objects detected in the
image, while “Top-Down” refers to the idea of at-
tending to regions constructed as a regular grid
over the image. The Bottom-Up Top-Down model
however reduces the text to a ﬁxed length vec-
tor representation before attending to image re-
gions, while B2T2 instead treats image regions as
special visual tokens mixed in the text. In this
sense, Bottom-Up Top-Down model is a late fu-
sion model, while B2T2 is early fusion.
The Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner (Mao
et al., 2019) also uses bounding boxes to learn vi-sually grounded concepts through language. The
Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner however relies
on a semantic parser to intepret language, while
B2T2 uses a Transformer to construct a joint rep-
resentation of textual tokens and visual tokens.
Another recently proposed model for VQA is
MAC (Hudson and Manning, 2018). As presented,
MAC does not make use of bounding boxes, which
makes it a Top-Down model in the nomenclature
of Anderson et al. (2018). MAC also reduces
the textual information to a vector of ﬁxed length.
However MAC makes use of a new neural archi-
tecture designed to perform an explicit multi-step
reasoning process and is reported to perform bet-
ter than Anderson et al. (2018) on the GQA dataset
(Hudson and Manning, 2019).
After the submission of this paper, several new
works were published with excellent results on
VCR, in some cases exceeding the performance of
our system. In particular we mention ViLBERT
(Lu et al., 2019), VL-BERT (Su et al., 2019),
Unicoder-VL (Li et al., 2019a), and VisualBERT
(Li et al., 2019b).
VCR is only one of several recent datasets
pertaining to the visual question answering task.
VQA (Antol et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016; Goyal
et al., 2017) contains photos and abstract scenes
with questions and several ground-truth answers
for each, but the questions are less complex than
VCR’s. CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017) is a vi-
sual QA task with compositional language, but the
scenes and language are synthetic. GQA (Hudson
and Manning, 2019) uses real scenes from Visual
Genome, but the language is artiﬁcially generated.
Because VCR has more complex natural language
than other datasets, we consider it the best evalu-
ation of a model like B2T2, which has a powerful
language understanding component.
7 Conclusion
In this work we contrast different ways of com-
bining text and images when powerful text and vi-
sion models are available. We picked BERT-Large
(Devlin et al., 2018) as our text model, ResNet-
152 (He et al., 2016) as our vision model, and
the VCR dataset (Zellers et al., 2019) as our main
benchmark.
The early-fusion B2T2 model, which encodes
sentences along with links to bounding boxes
around identiﬁed objects in the images, produces
the best available results in the visual question an-