167 Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity  
and reporting, seduction by the power of expertise, and their 
personal beliefs and prejudices; responsible CTI cannot 
therefore be the preserve of machines alone (Collier 2019). 
These everyday decisional acts constitute ‘little security 
nothings’ that have even greater import in the aggregrate 
than in their individual existence alone (Husymans 2011)
Furthermore, as Aradau and Blanke (2018) identify in 
their critique of ‘algorithmic rationalities’, the hunt for 
anomalies in big data security environments subtly alters 
the logics of security in three specific ways. Referring to 
intelligence and counter-terrorism, rather than cybersecu-
rity, they note first how advanced analytics are, as outlined 
above, a response to the increased data volumes of interest to 
security practitioners. Anomaly-based analytics are geared, 
therefore, to the practical requirement for ‘actionable infor -
mation’, rather than ‘good or truthful information’, which 
unravels claims to ‘algorithmic objectivity’ and shows ‘how 
uncertainty is radically embedded within algorithmic rea-
soning’ (Aradau and Blanke 2018, 20). This is compounded 
by the lack of standardised data collection and classification 
procedures, which complicates comparisons between data 
sets. Second, anomalies are constructed by their divergence 
from normality, which is defined as similarity between data 
points rather than predetermined categories. ‘Otherness’ is 
expressed as ‘dots, spikes or nodes’ in geometric or topo-
logical space that are anomalous in their dissimilarity to 
the ‘normal’ so constructed. Whilst this may seem to avoid 
the questions of bias previously noted, this unmooring from 
negative categorisations presents a political problem: how to 
‘reconnect techniques of producing dots, spikes and nodes 
with vocabularies of inequality and discrimination’? (Ara -
dau and Blanke 2018 , 20). Third, stable categories—as in 
statistical analyses—give way to ‘continuous calculations of 
similarity and dissimilarity’, thereby refusing direct politi-
cal contestation, particularly as those calculations ‘remain 
invisible, often even to the data analysts themselves’ (Aradau 
and Blanke 2018, 21). Hidden within the archetypal ‘black 
box’ of technology, defined in terms of inputs and outputs 
only (Von Hilgers 2011), the computation of AI technolo-
gies is frequently unknowable and therefore radically opaque 
(Castelvecchi 2016).
The complexity, uncertainty and lack of transparency 
of anomaly-based AI technologies in cybersecurity and 
elsewhere raise questions of AI trust, safety and control. 
The postulated solution is either to double down on AI as 
an engineering solution to these problems, or to figure out 
precisely where humans should be located in respect of 
the ‘loop’ of AI decision-making. In the context of lethal 
autonomous weapons systems and the use of AI in war, the 
question has become: should humans be in, on or out of this 
loop? (Jensen et al. 2019; Scharre 2018) In cybersecurity, 
as in war, analysts and operators are enmeshed in hybrid 
human–machine assemblages that generate knowledge of particular utility in specific decision-making circumstances. 
The production of cyber threat intelligence is referred to in 
terms of hybrid configurations of people, data, machines 
and organisations, tasked with meeting specific operational 
and strategic demands (Jasper 2017 ). Srnicek ( 2014 , 45) 
captures this dynamic when he analyses the ‘delegation of 
thought’ to machines in ‘cognitive assemblages’ of socio-
technical composition. In these epistemic loci, heteroge-
neous human and nonhuman actors, including algorithms, 
contribute to the creation of expert knowledges, which are 
‘collective and distributed rather than individual or solely 
social’ (Srnicek 2014 , 45; Hayles 2016 ). They establish ‘col -
laborations of influence’ (Kaufmann 2019) that have agency 
in how and what kind of knowledge is produced. Are we ‘in 
the loop’ if our choices are between paths of action relayed 
by machines? (Weber and Suchman 2016) If unsupervised 
learning systems develop their own questions and goals, 
what becomes of the human at all? The traditional mantra 
that cybersecurity is a ‘team sport’ is better read as a ‘dance 
of agency’ (Pickering 2010) once this relational process of 
delegation and complex agency in AI-rich environments 
takes hold.
Beyond the everyday
The foregoing review has addressed the everyday cyberse-
curity necessary to maintain the ordinary functioning of the 
information systems on which daily life depends. AI has 
an important role in this diverse landscape, automating 
the mundane, learning from its environment and promot-
ing better protection for users, organisations and societies. 
However, as alluded to above, the role of algorithms in cre-
ating and sustaining specific socioeconomic and political 
arrangements is never neutral (Kitchin 2017; Berry 2019). 
AI-driven anomaly detection creates new subjectivities in 
the grey zone of modern informational conflict and risks sac-
rificing ‘truth’ for ‘utility’ and ‘convenience’ in the manage-
rial practices of organisational cybersecurity. This radical 
contingency creates political problems as AI substitutes for 
human cognition as the arbiter of network decision-making 
and regulation of data flows. Anomalies may escape easy 
mapping to established groupings of people and behaviours, 
but there are multiple examples of the insidious effects of 
this computational logic. Tools of data manipulation similar 
to those in AI-fuelled cybersecurity are easily turned to eco-
nomic and political projects of worrisome scale and impact. 
From the ‘behavioural futures markets’ of surveillance capi-
talism (Zuboff 2019) to the Chinese social credit system 
(Matsakis 2019), from the excesses of domestic surveillance 
(Bauman et al. 2014) to online information operations in a 
post-truth era (Woolley and Howard 2018 ), algorithms con -
stitute new modalities and mediators of political influence