Vol:.(1234567890)Digital War (2020) 1:164–170
https://doi.org/10.1057/s42984-020-00007-w
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity
Tim Stevens1
Published online: 31 March 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Cybersecurity protects citizens and society from harm perpetrated through computer networks. Its task is made ever more 
complex by the diversity of actors—criminals, spies, militaries, hacktivists, firms—operating in global information net -
works, so that cybersecurity is intimately entangled with the so-called grey zone of conflict between war and peace in the 
early twenty-first century. To counter cyber threats from this environment, cybersecurity is turning to artificial intelligence 
and machine learning (AI) to mitigate anomalous behaviours in cyberspace. This article argues that AI algorithms create 
new modes and sites of cybersecurity knowledge production through hybrid assemblages of humans and nonhumans. It 
concludes by looking beyond ‘everyday’ cybersecurity to military and intelligence use of AI and asks what is at stake in the 
automation of cybersecurity.
Keywords Algorithms · Artificial intelligence · Automation · Cybersecurity · Grey zone · Knowledge
Cybersecurity in the grey zone
Discussions of ‘digital war’ quickly resolve to an under -
standing that global digital connectivity has disturbed our 
orthodox understandings of war and peace. In the so-called 
grey zone (Wirtz 2017) below the threshold of armed con-
flict, a diverse and fluid cast of actors attempts to derive 
political, strategic and economic gain through the ever-
proliferating assemblage of information communications 
technologies. Even if it is a step too far to label many of 
these activities—political activism, crime, espionage, sub-
version—as ‘war’ or ‘war-like’ (Levinson, this volume), it 
is not unreasonable to characterise the wider environment 
of cybersecurity as one of persistent grey-zone conflict 
(Corn 2019, 347–354). At the strategic level, for instance, 
suitably equipped states view ‘cyber’ as a coercive tool 
worth exploiting for national gain, be it in military opera -
tions, intelligence-gathering or commercial cyberespionage 
(Brantly 2018; Valeriano et al. 2018). As most of this occurs 
below the level of conventional conflict, it is seen as a way of 
limiting conflict escalation, albeit always with the potential 
to generate just the opposite (Brands 2016; Schneider 2019).The twists and turns of operations in this digital domain 
may be surprising and their effects—inasmuch as causal-
ity can ever be demonstrated—remarkable, but the vectors 
of their propagation are familiar, omnipresent and quotid-
ian, including the global internet and the myriad consumer 
electronics that share and shape our lives. So too the prac-
tices of cybersecurity, which, for all the justifiable inter -
est in ‘cyberwarfare’ and ‘cyberespionage’, constitute the 
‘everyday’ of digital conflict in the grey zone. In the daily 
exchanges of technical cybersecurity, there is a constant to-
and-fro between network defenders and attackers. Cyberse-
curity practitioners tend to wring the most out of existing 
technologies to wrest the upper hand from their adversar -
ies, whether the humblest hacker or the best-resourced state 
entity. Inevitably, however, they also seek to employ innova-
tive technologies as the environment evolves. In tune with 
the zeitgeist, artificial intelligence and machine learning 
(hereafter, AI) are proposed as an essential ‘solution’ to all 
manner of cybersecurity threats.
The following discussion addresses the identification of 
cyber threats through AI and algorithmic means and demon-
strates a shift from signature- to anomaly-based approaches 
to threat detection and mitigation. It then moves to the spe-
cific application of AI to anomaly detection, particularly in 
relation to the construction of ‘normal’ organisational ‘pat-
terns of life’. The epistemic implications of this technical 
orientation are then unpacked, specifically how AI creates  * Tim Stevens 
 tim.stevens@kcl.ac.uk
1 King’s College London, London, UK