165 Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity  
new sites of knowledge production through new human–non-
human subjectivities. This brief exploration concludes by 
looking beyond everyday cybersecurity to military and intel-
ligence ‘cyber’ and asks what is at stake in the automation 
of cybersecurity.
From signatures to anomalies
Cybersecurity cannot proceed without data. Access to and 
protection of data are core practical considerations for cyber -
security professionals. As more computing devices become 
networked in the ‘Internet of Things’ and data volumes—at 
rest and in transit—continue to grow, the ‘attack surface’ of 
the global information environment expands continuously. 
Understood as the totality of weak points exploitable by 
nefarious actors, the attack surface is less a physical bound-
ary to be defended than a logical membrane of potential 
vulnerability distributed in space and time. Preventing 
exploitation of flaws in this integument, through which mali-
cious code can be inserted or valuable data extracted, is a 
near-impossible task, not least as vulnerabilities are inherent 
in information systems. As Libicki (2009, 14) notes, there 
is ‘no forced entry in cyberspace. Whoever gets in enters 
through pathways produced by the system itself’. This onto-
logical insecurity is compounded by the sheer diversity and 
growth of this environment, so that defence can never be per -
fect and attackers seem always to be one step ahead. Cyber -
security is about making visible those vulnerabilities and 
threats in order to counter them, an informational challenge 
that relies on timely and intelligible data for interpretation 
and effective use in prevention and remediation.
The collection and filtering of data about the status of 
information systems and threats to their intended function-
ing have long been largely automated. Humans do not have 
the cognitive or sensory capacity to cope with the enormous 
data volumes produced by software and hardware dedicated 
to alerting systems administrators to problems inside and 
outside their networks. Add to this a human capital shortfall 
in the cybersecurity industry (Shires 2018) and automation 
is a reasonable technical fix for some of these problems. 
Cybersecurity vendors, for example, offer thousands of dif-
ferent products for automated malware detection. These soft-
ware packages inspect network traffic and match data packets 
to known signatures of malicious software (malware) that 
install themselves on users’ machines and act in deleterious 
ways. Now much more than just ‘anti-virus’ protection, these 
software packages also detect and deny worms, Trojans, 
spyware, adware, ransomware, rootkits and other software 
entities searching for and exploiting digital vulnerabilities. 
Automated in this fashion, malware can be repelled, quar -
antined, destroyed or otherwise prevented from infecting a 
system and opening it up for exploitation. Effective as this has been in the past, new types of polymorphic and meta-
morphic malware, which change their ‘appearance’ every 
few seconds, can evade traditional techniques of ‘signature-
based’ detection that rely on existing knowledge of malware 
species. You cannot defend against these rapidly mutating 
threats if they have no signature matches in databases that 
are inevitably always out of date.
Signature-based detection is still effective against known 
malware, but technical cybersecurity is developing ‘anom-
aly-based’ capabilities that compare network traffic to con-
tinuously revised baselines of ‘normal’ behaviour to detect 
intrusions, analyse malware and detect spam and phishing 
attacks. Traffic classified as legitimate against a given base-
line is permitted across network boundaries, but unusual 
behaviours will be detected automatically and flagged for 
further investigation, including by human analysts. Yet, as 
the number of alerts triggered increases, many requiring 
human attention, we are thrown back again on the limits 
of organisational and cognitive capacity. This situation is 
exacerbated by the persistent creation of false negatives (bad 
behaviour treated as good) and false positives (good behav -
iour labelled as bad), which further drain resources (Libicki 
et al. 2015, 28–29). One response has been to add a new 
layer of automation to the parsing and analysis of these ‘big 
data’ sets, using emerging technologies of AI to process and 
interpret anomalous behaviour and feed it back into cyberse-
curity decision-making processes in ever-shortening cycles 
of action and reaction. Cybersecurity and AI have not always 
been obvious bedfellows. In the early days of each field, 
computer security researchers viewed with some distrust 
the relative unpredictability of AI system behaviours, their 
multiple possible outputs anathema to the order sought by 
software engineers (Landwehr 2007). Now, the possibility 
that AI can learn and adapt in dynamic ways makes it more 
attractive for countering similarly adaptive cybersecurity 
threats.
The promise of AI
The use of AI in cybersecurity is not entirely new. If we 
understand ‘AI’ as a placeholder for a set of algorithmic 
machine learning heuristics rather than a new form of ‘intel-
ligence’, cybersecurity has been alive to its potential since 
at least the 1990s. Early applications include the filtering 
of spam email using Bayesian logic and the classification 
of spam by large neural networks (Brunton 2013). AI has 
increased significantly in sophistication since then and its 
development has partly been occasioned by adversaries’ use 
of those same technologies. Learning algorithms fuel the 
evolution of the aforementioned polymorphic and metamor -
phic malware, for instance. They have also been created to 
detect vulnerabilities in target systems and assist in their