168 T. Stevens 
and control. Whilst we have few grounds for assuming that 
AI is inferior to human intelligence (Collins 2019), ques-
tions of knowledge, power and subjectivity are intimately 
bound up with these algorithmic rationalities (Aradau and 
Blanke 2018).
AI and cybersecurity are also far from neglected in the 
realms of secret intelligence and military operations. AI is 
a sine qua non for modern militaries (Lewis 2019) and a 
potent augmentation to strategic planning (Payne 2018). 
Without AI in cyberspace, the former head of US Cyber 
Command remarked in Senate testimony, ‘you are always 
behind the power curve’ (Congressional Research Service 
2019, 11). Militaries and intelligence agencies are investing 
heavily in AI-enabled cyber, including the US Department of 
Defense’s new Joint Artificial Intelligence Centre (Corrigan 
2019) and numerous other initiatives leveraging AI to gen-
erate operational and strategic effect in and through cyber -
space. The UK is developing ‘human–machine teaming’ in 
AI-rich environments including cyber, so as to promote ‘the 
effective integration of humans, artificial intelligence (AI) 
and robotics into warfighting systems … that exploit the 
capabilities of people and technologies to outperform our 
opponents’ (Ministry of Defence 2018, 39). Known in the 
USA as ‘centaur warfighters’, these hybrids will ‘leverage 
the precision and reliability of automation without sacri-
ficing the robustness and flexibility of human intelligence’ 
(Scharre 2018 , 321). This continues a long lineage of hybrid 
military subjectivities (Coker 2013), oriented now to predic-
tive machine cognition providing decision advantage to the 
new military operations of ‘cognitive manoeuvre’ in global 
information space (Dear 2019). These hybrid entities are 
not just network defenders but agents of cyberwarfare and 
cyberespionage. As the US adopts new doctrines of ‘per -
sistent engagement’ and ‘defending forward’ in cyberspace 
(Healey 2019), they will be on the front lines of digital 
warfare and intelligence, with as-yet unknown autonomy in 
decision-making and target discrimination. In this assem-
blage, ‘we may never know if a decision is  a decision … 
or if it has been “controlled by previous knowledge” and 
“programmed”’ (Amoore and de Goede 2008, 180).
Militaries and intelligence agencies join firms, citizens, 
criminals, hacktivists and others using AI-enabled cyber 
tools in the complex battlespaces of the grey zone. Tech-
nical cybersecurity exploits AI to overcome constraints on 
human cognition, to speed decision-making and to provide 
better protection to organisations and end-users of informa-
tion systems. In so doing, it prioritises operational efficiency 
over truth and creates new subjectivities and targets of inter -
vention. Algorithms and automation also create new sites 
of knowledge production whilst simultaneously obfuscat -
ing the precise calculations that lead to particular outputs. 
This draws attention to problematic aspects of the delega-
tion of thought to machines, in that it portends a decrease in opportunities for meaningful oversight and regulation. 
The stakes could not be higher in military cyber targeting 
or digital intelligence—strategic cybersecurity—by which 
standards the use of AI in everyday cybersecurity is a 
straightforward proposition. Nevertheless, the role of AI in 
cybersecurity generally, a core modality of offence–defence 
dynamics in the grey zone, remains open to contestation, 
modulating as it does the global flows of data in our nomi-
nal ‘information age’. In considering AI in cybersecurity 
and elsewhere, perhaps we should revisit Lewis Mumford’s 
(1964, 273) provocation: ‘Unless you have the power to stop 
an automatic process, you had better not start it’. Where is 
agency in the new cybersecurity assemblage and who or 
what makes the decisions that matter?
Acknowledgements  I am grateful to Joe Devanny, Lilly Pijnenburg 
Muller, Erik Reichborn-Kjennerud, Max Smeets and the editors for 
their insightful comments and suggestions.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.
References
Amoore, Louise. 2013. The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security 
Beyond Probability. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Amoore, Louise, and Marieke de Goede. 2008. Transactions after 9/11: 
the banal face of the preemptive strike. Transactions of the Insti-
tute of British Geographers 33 (2): 173–185.
Anderson, Chris. 2000. The end of theory: The data deluge makes the 
scientific method obsolete. Wired, 23 June. https ://www.wired  
.com/2008/06/pb-theor  y/.
Aradau, Claudia, and Tobias Blanke. 2018. Governing others: Anom-
aly and the algorithmic subject of security. European Journal of 
International Security 3 (1): 1–21.
Bauman, Zygmunt, Didier Bigo, Paulo Esteves, Elspeth Guild, Vivi-
enne Jabri, David Lyon, and R.B.J. Walker. 2014. After Snowden: 
Rethinking the impact of surveillance. International Political 
Sociology 8 (2): 121–144.
Berry, David M. 2019. Against infrasomatization: Towards a critical 
theory of algorithms. In Data Politics: Worlds, Subjects, Rights, 
ed. Didier Bigo, Engen Isin, and Evelyn Ruppert, 43–63. London: 
Routledge.
Betz, David, and Tim Stevens. 2013. Analogical reasoning and cyber 
security. Security Dialogue 44 (2): 147–164.
Brands, Hal. 2016. Paradoxes of the gray zone. Foreign Policy Research 
Institute, 5 February. https ://www.fpri.org/artic le/2016/02/parad  
oxes-gray-zone/.