166 T. Stevens 
exploitation and subversion: the cybersecurity industry is 
deeply worried by the future deployment of ‘adversarial’ 
or ‘offensive’ AI, a concern shared with governments and 
military and intelligence agencies (Brundage et al. 2018). 
In this respect, AI deployments are part of an emerging 
‘arms race’ between attackers and defenders (Scharre 2018, 
229–230). This message is not lost on enterprises, 61% of 
which reported in 2019 that they could not detect network 
breaches without AI technologies and 69% believed AI 
would be necessary to respond to those breaches (Capgemini 
2019).
One notable response to this market demand has been 
the development of cybersecurity AI platforms that claim 
to mimic natural ‘immune systems’, borrowing from a long 
analogical association between cybersecurity and notions 
of public health and epidemiology (Betz and Stevens 2013; 
Weber 2017 ). Companies promote anomaly-based AI as a 
way of learning what ‘normal’ means for an organisation 
and then begin to explore unusual behaviours. The toler -
ance of the AI engine to anomalous behaviours can then 
be adjusted, based on the risk appetite of the organisation 
and its resourcing levels (Wilkinson 2019). The ‘immune 
system’ metaphor plays out in a platform’s putative capacity 
to detect, root out and inoculate against further suspicious 
behaviours. In one firm’s account of its ‘Enterprise Immune 
System’ package, ‘[b]y detecting subtle deviations from the 
organisation’s “pattern of life”, it can distinguish friend from 
foe—and highlight true cyber threats or attacks that would 
otherwise go unnoticed’ (Darktrace n.d.). These vendors 
claim another benefit for potential clients, in that they free 
up analysts’ time to focus on more important tasks, instead 
of being mired in ‘low-priority or benign events from the 
start’ (Darktrace n.d.). This is a recognition of the frequency 
of false negatives and positives—although AI promises to 
reduce their incidence by learning what is ‘normal’ over 
time—but is also a legitimate comment on the exigencies 
of life in modern security operations centres. These are 
bombarded with security reports, whose importance at first 
glance can be difficult to discern. Automated AI systems can 
handle the bulk of low-level threat detection and response, 
allowing analysts to tackle high-level behaviours and inci-
dents instead. This includes developing profiles of the 
human actors behind sophisticated cyber campaigns, such 
as so-called advanced persistent threats (APTs), in order to 
tailor deterrence and response regimes. A further promising 
avenue of research is to capture analysts’ real-life behaviours 
and feed this data back into learning algorithms as a way of 
shaping AI responses to cybersecurity incidents (Bresniker 
et al. 2019).
AI systems learn about the threat environment within 
and without the notional perimeters of organisations. This 
includes employees and other people interacting with those 
networks: clients, customers and, in the case of government agencies, citizens and service-users. Monitoring these 
individuals allows AI to establish an organisation’s inter -
nal rhythms and patterns, a normal baseline against which 
anomalies can be registered, such as ‘insider threats’ posed 
by disgruntled employees, leakers and whistle-blowers (Wall 
2013). AI-powered behavioural analytics might detect, for 
instance, unusual employee activities at odd times of the 
night or unexpected spikes in transfers of sensitive com-
mercial data or intellectual property. Combined with mul-
tiple other data streams, a picture is developed of anoma-
lous behaviour within an organisation’s immediate purview 
organisation, leading to further investigation and possible 
censure. Using AI to predict human rather than just machine 
behaviour is an important contributor to ‘sociotechnical’ 
framings of cybersecurity that address how technology, 
users and processes interact in complex organisational sys-
tems (Coles-Kemp and Hansen 2017). An uneasy tension 
exists in this field between designing computer networks that 
enhance the human security of end-users (Coles-Kemp et al. 
2018 ) and using technology to discern anomalous behav -
iours, a perspective that tends to perceive all end-users as 
potential vectors of threat (Schneier 2016).
AI, anomalies and episteme
The search for anomalies shifts the emphasis of cybersecu-
rity from known threats to the prolepsis of as-yet-unknown 
threats and into an anticipatory posture that has received 
much attention in the critical security literature (e.g. Amoore 
2013). It also suggests a more inductive approach to the 
creation of useful cybersecurity knowledge from big data 
sets. Driven by AI, anomaly-based cybersecurity practices 
search for patterns, associations and correlations that cannot 
be identified solely by signature analysis, the latter under -
stood as a form of deductive reasoning. In part, this chan-
nels the infamous claim made of big data analytics that they 
make the hypothetico-deductive method ‘obsolete’ (Ander -
son 2000). As critics of this position observe, all enquiry, 
big data analytics included, instantiates any number of theo-
retical assumptions and biases (Kitchin 2014). In AI-driven 
machine learning, parameters and data categories are often 
set in advance by human programmers. This ‘supervised 
learning’ is very different from ‘unsupervised’ learning tech-
niques, in which algorithms do the labelling and categorisa-
tion themselves and might therefore be ‘unbounded from the 
bias of specific localities’ (Parisi 2019, 98). The quality of 
training data is therefore key to determining output quality, 
and supervised machine learning can give rise to outcomes 
that reproduce programmers’ biases (McDonald 2019). In 
cybersecurity, the assembling of ‘cyber threat intelligence’ 
(CTI) from multiple data streams is prone to various biases, 
as analysts are swayed by groupthink, external social media