FastDiff: A Fast Conditional Diffusion Model for High-Quality Speech Synthesis
Rongjie Huang1y,Max W. Y. Lam2y,Jun Wang2,Dan Su2,Dong Yu3,Yi Ren1,Zhou Zhao1z
1Zhejiang University2Tencent AI Lab, China3Tencent AI Lab, USA
frongjiehuang, rayeren, zhouzhao g@zju.edu.cn,fmaxwylam, joinerwang, dansu, dyu g@tencent.com
Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs)
have recently achieved leading performances in
many generative tasks. However, the inherited it-
erative sampling process costs hindered their ap-
plications to speech synthesis. This paper pro-
poses FastDiff, a fast conditional diffusion model
for high-quality speech synthesis. FastDiff em-
ploys a stack of time-aware location-variable con-
volutions of diverse receptive ﬁeld patterns to ef-
ﬁciently model long-term time dependencies with
adaptive conditions. A noise schedule predictor is
also adopted to reduce the sampling steps without
sacriﬁcing the generation quality. Based on FastD-
iff, we design an end-to-end text-to-speech synthe-
sizer, FastDiff-TTS, which generates high-ﬁdelity
speech waveforms without any intermediate feature
(e.g., Mel-spectrogram). Our evaluation of Fast-
Diff demonstrates the state-of-the-art results with
higher-quality (MOS 4.28) speech samples. Also,
FastDiff enables a sampling speed of 58x faster
than real-time on a V100 GPU, making diffusion
models practically applicable to speech synthesis
deployment for the ﬁrst time. We further show that
FastDiff generalized well to the mel-spectrogram
inversion of unseen speakers, and FastDiff-TTS
outperformed other competing methods in end-to-
end text-to-speech synthesis.1
1 Introduction
With the recent development of deep generative models,
speech synthesis has seen an extraordinary progress. Among
the conventional speech synthesis methods, WaveNets [Oord
et al. , 2016 ]were demonstrated to generate high-ﬁdelity
audio samples in an autoregressive manner yet suffering
from prohibitively expensive computational costs. In con-
trast, non-autoregressive approaches such as ﬂow-based and
GAN-based models [Prenger et al. , 2019; Jang et al. , 2021;
Work done during internship at Tencent AI Lab
yEqual contribution
zCorresponding author
1Audio samples are available at https://FastDiff.github.io/.Kong et al. , 2020a; Huang et al. , 2021 ]were also proposed
to generate speech audios with satisfactory speed. However,
these models were still criticized for other problems, e.g., the
limited sample quality or sample diversity [Xiao et al. , 2021 ].
In speech synthesis, our goal is mainly two-fold:
• High-quality: generating high-quality speech is a chal-
lenging problem especially when the sampling rate of an
audio is high. It is vital to reconstruct details at different
timescales for waveforms of highly variable patterns.
• Fast: high generation speed is essential when consider-
ing real-time speech synthesis. This poses a challenge
for all high-quality neural synthesizers.
As a blossoming class of generative models, denoising
diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [Hoet al. , 2020;
Song et al. , 2020a; Lam et al. , 2022; Liu et al. , 2022 ]has
emerged to prove its capability to achieve leading perfor-
mances in both image and audio syntheses [Dhariwal and
Nichol, 2021; San-Roman et al. , 2021; Kong et al. , 2020b;
Chen et al. , 2020; Lam et al. , 2022 ]. However, current devel-
opment of DDPMs in speech synthesis was hampered by two
major challenges:
• Different from other existing generative models, diffu-
sion models are not trained to directly minimize the dif-
ference between the generated audio and the reference
audio, but to de-noise a noisy sample given an optimal
gradient. This in practice could lead to overly de-noised
speech after a large number of sampling steps, in which
natural voice characteristics including breathiness and
vocal fold closure are removed.
• While DDPMs inherently are gradient-based models, a
guarantee of high sample quality typically comes at a
cost of hundreds to thousands of de-noising steps. When
reducing the sampling steps, an apparent degradation in
quality due to perceivable background noise is observed.
In this work, we propose FastDiff, a fast conditional dif-
fusion model for high-quality speech synthesis. To improve
audio quality, FastDiff adopts a stack of time-aware location-
variable convolutions of diverse receptive ﬁeld patterns to ef-
ﬁciently model long-term time dependencies with adaptive
conditions. To accelerate the inference procedure, FastDiff
also includes a noise schedule predictor, which derives a short
and effective noise schedule and signiﬁcantly reduces the de-arXiv:2204.09934v1  [eess.AS]  21 Apr 2022