OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 6
occurs when a certain class is over-represented. This prob-
lem can manifest itself as either “foreground-background
imbalance,” where the background instances signiﬁcantly
outnumber the positive ones; or “foreground-foreground
imbalance,” where typically a small fraction of classes dom-
inate the dataset (as observed from the long-tail distribution
in Figure 5). The class imbalance is usually handled at the
“sampling” stage in the object detection pipeline (Figure 1).
Scale imbalance (Section 5; green branch in Figure 2)
is observed when object instances have various scales and
different number of examples pertaining to different scales.
This problem is a natural outcome of the fact that objects
have different dimensions in nature. Scale also could cause
imbalance at the feature-level (typically handled in the
“feature extraction” phase in Figure 1), where contribution
from different abstraction layers (i.e. high and low levels)
are not balanced. Scale imbalance problem suggests that a
single scale of visual processing is not sufﬁcient for detect-
ing objects at different scales. However, as we will see in
Section 5, proposed methods fall short in addressing scale
imbalance, especially for small objects, even when small
objects are surprisingly abundant in a dataset.
Spatial imbalance (Section 6; orange branch in Figure
2) refers to a set of factors related to spatial properties of
the bounding boxes. Owing to these spatial properties, we
identify three sub-types of spatial imbalance: (i) “imbalance
in regression loss” is about the contributions of individual
examples to the regression loss and naturally the problem
is related to loss function design (ii) “IoU distribution im-
balance” is related to the biases in the distribution of IoUs
(among ground-truth boxes vs. anchors or detected boxes),
and typically observed at the bounding-box matching and
labeling phase in the object detection pipeline (Figure 1) (iii)
“object location imbalance” is about the location distribution
of object instances in an image, which is related to both the
design of the anchors and the sampled subset to train the
detection network.
Finally, objective imbalance (Section 7; purple branch
in Figure 2) occurs when there are multiple objectives (loss
functions) to minimize (each for a speciﬁc task, e.g. classiﬁ-
cation and box-regression). Since different objectives might
be incompatible in terms of their ranges as well as their
optimum solutions, it is essential to develop a balanced
strategy that can ﬁnd a solution acceptable in terms of all
objectives.
Figure 2 gives an overall picture of the attention that
different types of imbalance problems have received from
the research community. For example, while there are nu-
merous methods devised for the foreground-background
class imbalance problem, the objective imbalance and object
location imbalance problems are examples of the problems
that received relatively little attention. However, recently
there have been a rapidly increasing interest (Figure 3)
in these imbalance problems as well, which necessitates a
structured view and perspective on the problems as well as
the solutions, as proposed in this paper.
Note that some imbalance problems are directly owing
to the data whereas some are the by-products of the speciﬁc
methods used. For example, class imbalance, object location
imbalance etc. are the natural outcomes of the distribution
of classes in the real world. On the other hand, objective
2015 2016 2017 2018 20190246810Class Imbalance §4
Scale Imbalance §5
Spatial Imbalance §6
Objective Imbalance §7Fig. 3: Number of papers per imbalance problem category
through years.
imbalance, feature-level imbalance and imbalance in regres-
sion loss are owing to the selected methods and possibly
avoidable with a different set of methods; for example, it is
possible to avoid IoU distribution imbalance altogether by
following a bottom-up approach where, typically, IoU is not
a labeling criterion (e.g. [23], [49]).
4 I MBALANCE 1: C LASS IMBALANCE
Class imbalance is observed when a class is over-
represented, having more examples than others in the
dataset. This can occur in two different ways from the
object detection perspective: foreground-background imbal-
ance and foreground-foreground imbalance.
Figure 4 illustrates the presence of class imbalance. To
generate the ﬁgure, we apply the default set of anchors
from RetinaNet [22] on the MS-COCO dataset3[90] and
calculated the frequencies for the cases where the IoU of
an anchor with a ground truth bounding box exceeds 0:5
and where it is less than 0:4(i.e. it is a background box)
following the labeling rule of RetinaNet [22]. When an
anchor overlaps with a foreground class (with IoU>0.5),
we kept a count for each class separately and normalized
the resulting frequencies with the number of images in the
dataset.
These two types of class imbalance have different char-
acteristics and have been addressed using different types
of solutions. Therefore, in the following, we will cover
them separately. However, some solutions (e.g. generative
modeling) could be employed for both problem types.
4.1 Foreground-Background Class Imbalance
Deﬁnition. In foreground-background class imbalance, the
over-represented and under-represented classes are back-
ground and foreground classes respectively. This type of
problem is inevitable because most bounding boxes are
labeled as background (i.e. negative) class by the bounding
box matching and labeling module as illustrated in Fig-
ure 4(a). Foreground-background imbalance problem occurs
during training and it does not depend on the number of
examples per class in the dataset since they do not include
any annotation on background.
3. Throughout the text, unless otherwise speciﬁed, “COCO”, “PAS-
CAL”, and “Open Images” respectively correspond to the Pascal VOC
2012 trainval [51], MS-COCO 2017 train [90], Open Images v5 training
(subset with bounding boxes) [91] and Objects365 train [92] dataset
partitions. And, when unspeciﬁed, the backbone is ResNet-50 [93].