OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 28
Explanation. We illustrate this inter-dependency using a toy
example in Figure 18. In this ﬁgure, we shift an input
bounding box with a high IoU (see Figure 18(a)) to worse
qualities in terms of IoU in two steps (see Figure 18(b-c))
and observe how this shift affects the different imbalance
problems. For the base case in Figure 18(a), there are two
positive bounding boxes (relevant for class imbalance) with
different scales (relevant for scale imbalance), loss values
(relevant for objective imbalance) and IoUs (relevant for BB
imbalance). Shifting the box to the right, we observe the
following:
In Figure 18(b), we still have two positives, both
of which now have less IoU with the ground truth
(compared to (a)).
This leads to the following: (i) There are more hard
examples (considering hard example mining [24],
[29]), and less prime samples [30]. For this reason,
the methods for class imbalance are affected. (ii) The
scales of the RoIs and ground truth do not change.
Considering this, the scale imbalance seems not af-
fected. (iii) Objective imbalance is affected in two
ways: Firstly, the shifted BB will incur more loss (for
regression, and possibly for classiﬁcation) and thus,
become more dominant in its own task. Secondly,
since the cumulative individual loss values change,
the contribution to the total loss of the individual
loss values will also change, which implies its effect
on objective imbalance. (iv) Finally, both BB IoU
distribution and spatial distribution of the positive
examples will be affected by this shift.
In Figure 18(c), by applying a small shift to the same
BB, its label changes.
This leads to the following: (i) There are less positive
examples and more negative examples. The ground
truth class loses an example. Note that this example
evolves from being a hard positive to a hard negative
in terms hard example mining [24], [29], and the cri-
terion that the prime sample attention [30] considers
for the example changed from IoU to classiﬁcation
score. For this reason, in this case, the methods in-
volving class imbalance and foreground-foreground
class imbalance are affected. (ii) A positive RoI is
removed from the set of RoIs with similar scales.
Therefore, there will be less positive examples with
the same scale, which affects scale imbalance. (iii)
Objective imbalance is affected in two ways: Firstly,
the now-negative BB is an additional hard example
in terms of classiﬁcation possibly with a larger loss
value. Secondly, the shifted example is totally free
from the regression branch, and moved to the set
of hard examples in terms of classiﬁcation. Hence,
the contribution of the regression loss to the total
loss is expected to decrease, and the contribution
of classiﬁcation would increase. (iv) Finally, the IoU
distribution of the positive examples will be affected
by this shift since a positive example is lost.
Therefore, the aforementioned imbalance problems have
an intertwined nature, which needs to be investigated and
identiﬁed in detail to effectively address all imbalance prob-
lems.9.2 Measuring and Identifying Imbalance
Open Issue. Another critical issue that has not been ad-
dressed yet is how to quantify or measure imbalance, and
how to identify imbalance when there is one. We identify
three questions that need to be studied:
1) What is a balanced distribution for a property that is
critical for a task? This is likely to be uniform dis-
tribution for many properties like, e.g. class distri-
bution. However, different modalities may imply a
different concept of balance. For example, OHEM
prefers a skewed distribution around 0:5for the IoU
distribution; left-skewed for the positives and right-
skewed for the negatives.
2) What is the desired distribution for the properties that are
critical for a task? Note that the desired distribution
may be different from the balanced distribution
since skewing the distribution in one way may be
beneﬁcial for faster convergence and better general-
ization. For example, online hard negative mining
[24] favors a right-skewed IoU distribution towards
0.5 [29], whereas prime sample attention prefers the
positive examples with larger IoUs [30] and the
class imbalance methods aim to ensure a uniform
distribution from the classes.
3) How can we quantify how imbalanced a distribution is?
A straightforward approach is to consider optimal
transport measures such as the Wasserstein dis-
tance; however, such methods would neglect the ef-
fect of a unit change (imbalance) in the distribution
on the overall performance, thereby jeopardizing a
direct and effective consideration (and comparison)
of the imbalance problems using the imbalance mea-
surements.
9.3 Labeling a Bounding Box as Positive or Negative
Open Issue. Currently, object detectors use IoU-based thresh-
olding (possibly with different values) for labeling an ex-
ample as positive or negative and there is no consensus on
this (i.e. Fast R-CNN [17], Retina Net [22] and RPN [21]
label input BBs with IoUs 0:5,0:4and 0:3as negatives
respectively.). However, a consensus on this is critical since
labeling is very relevant to determining whether an example
is a hard example.
Explanation. Labeling bounding boxes is highly relevant to
imbalance problems since this is the step where the set
of all bounding boxes are split as positives and negatives
in an online manner. Of special concern are the bounding
boxes around the decision boundary, which are typically
considered as hard examples, and a noisy labeling over
them would result in large gradients in opposite directions.
In other words, in order to deﬁne the hard negatives reliably,
the number of outliers should be as small as possible. For
this reason, consistent labeling of the input bounding boxes
as positive or negative is a prerequisite of the imbalance
problems in object detection.
Currently the methods use a hard IoU threshold (gener-
ally0:5) to split the examples; however, Li et al. [59] showed
that this scheme results in a large number of noisy examples.
In Figure 19, we illustrate two input bounding boxes that