OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 10
[100]. In a similar vein, the objects can be swapped between
images: Progressive and Selective Instance-Switching (PSIS) [65]
swaps single objects belonging to the same class between a
pair of images considering also the scales and shapes of the
candidate instances. Producing images by swapping objects
of low-performing classes improves detection quality. For
this reason, they use the performance ranking of the classes
while determining the objects to swap and the number of
images to generate.
A more prominent approach is to use GANs to generate
images rather than copying existing objects: an example is
Task Aware Data Synthesis [64] which uses three competing
networks to generate hard examples: a synthesizer, a dis-
criminator and a target network where the synthesizer is
expected to fool both the discriminator and the target net-
work by yielding high quality synthetic hard images. Given
an image and a foreground object mask, the synthesizer
aims to place the foreground object mask onto the image
to produce realistic hard examples. The discriminator is
adopted in order to enforce the synthesizer towards realistic
composite images. The target network is an object detector,
initially pretrained to have a baseline performance.
Instead of generating images, the Positive RoI (pRoI)
Generator [66] generates a set of positive RoIs with given
IoU, BB relative spatial and foreground class distributions.
The approach relies on a bounding box generator that is able
to generate bounding boxes (i.e. positive example) with the
desired IoU with a given bounding box (i.e. ground truth).
Noting that the IoU of an input BB is related to its hardness
[29], the pRoI generator is a basis for simulating, thereby
analyzing, hard sampling methods (Section 4.1.1).
4.2 Foreground-Foreground Class Imbalance
Deﬁnition. In foreground-foreground class imbalance, the
over-represented and the under-represented classes are both
foreground classes. This imbalance among the foreground
classes has not attracted as much interest as foreground-
background imbalance. We discuss this problem in two
categories according to their origin: (i) dataset-level, and (ii)
batch-level.
4.2.1 Foreground-Foreground Imbalance Owing to the
Dataset
Deﬁnition. Objects exist at different frequencies in nature,
and therefore, there is naturally an imbalance among the
object classes in datasets – see Figure 5(a) which shows that
the datasets suffer from signiﬁcant gap in class examples.
For this reason, overﬁtting in favor of the over-represented
classes may be inevitable for naive approaches on such
datasets.
Solutions. Owing to the fact that some of the generative
methods are able to generate new images or bounding
boxes (see Section 4.1.4) that cannot be obtained by the
conventional training pipeline, these methods can also be
adopted to alleviate the foreground-foreground class imbal-
ance problem.
Another method addressing this imbalance problem
from the object detection perspective is proposed by
Ouyang et al. [25]. Their method of ﬁnetuning long-tail
distribution for object detection (here, “long tail” correspondsto under-represented classes) provides an analysis on the
effects of this level to the training process and uses cluster-
ing based on visual similarity. In their analysis, two factors
affecting the training are identiﬁed: (i) the accuracy of the
prediction, and (ii) the number of examples. Based on this
observation, they handcrafted a similarity measure among
classes based on the inner product of the features of the
last layer of the pretrained backbone network (i.e. GoogLe
Net [101]), and grouped the classes hierarchically in order
to compensate for dataset-level foreground class imbalance.
For each node in the designed hierarchy tree, a classiﬁer
is learned based on the conﬁdence scores of the classiﬁer.
The leaves of the tree are basically an SVM classiﬁer that
determines the ﬁnal detection for the given input BB.
4.2.2 Foreground-Foreground Imbalance Owing to the
Batch
Deﬁnition. The distribution of classes in a batch may be
uneven, introducing a bias in learning. To illustrate the
batch-level foreground imbalance, Figure 4(b) provides the
mean number of anchors per class on the MS COCO dataset
[90]. A random sampling approach is expected to allocate an
unbalanced number of positive examples in favor of the one
with more anchors, which may lead the model to be biased
in favor of the over-represented class during training. Also
see Figure 5(b) and (c), which display that the numbers of
objects and classes in an image vary signiﬁcantly.
Solutions. A solution for this problem, Online Foreground
Balanced (OFB) sampling by Oksuz et a. [66], shows that
the foreground-foreground class imbalance problem can be
alleviated at the batch level by assigning probabilities to
each bounding box to be sampled, so that the distribution
of different classes within a batch is uniform. In other
words, the approach aims to promote the classes with lower
number of positive examples during sampling. While the
method is efﬁcient, the performance improvement is not
signiﬁcant. Moreover, the authors have not provided an
analysis on whether or not batch-level imbalance causes
a bias in learning, therefore, we discuss this as an open
problem in Section 4.4.
4.3 Comparative Summary
In early deep object detectors, hard sampling methods were
commonly used to ensure balanced training. OHEM [24]
was one of the most effective methods with a relative
improvement of 14:7%over the Fast R-CNN baseline (with
VGG-16 backbone) on MS COCO 2015. On the other hand,
recent methods aim to use all examples either by soft
sampling or without sampling. Among the seven papers
investigated under these categories, six of them have been
published during the last year. The pioneering Focal Loss
method [22] achieves 9:3%relative improvement compared
to the baseline alpha-balanced cross entropy on Retina-Net
(i.e. from 31:1to34:0mAP5). AP Loss [61], with a relative
improvement of 3:9%over Focal Loss (i.e. from 33:9to35:0
mAP), is also promising.
Sampling methods for positive examples are not many.
One approach, prime sample attention (PISA) [30], reported
5. Unless otherwise stated, MS COCO 2017 minival results are re-
ported using the COCO-style mAP .