OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 27
Note that neither semi-hardness nor adaptive setting of the
hardness level is considered by object detectors.
As a different approach, Cui et al. [169] consider to ex-
ploit humans to label false positives during training, which
are identiﬁed as hard examples and be added to the mini-
batch for the next iteration. Song et al. [170] mine hard
negatives not only for the anchor but also for all of the
positives. Note that no object detection method considers
the relation between all positives and the negative example
while assigning a hardness value to a negative example.
One promising idea shown by Huang et al. [171] is that
larger intra-class distances can confuse the hard example
mining process while only inter-class distance is considered
during mining. For this reason, a position-dependent deep
metric unit is proposed to take into account the intra-class
variations.
Similar to the generative methods for object detection
(Section 4.1.4), Generative Methods have been used for
generating examples or features for metric learning as well.
Deep Adversarial Metric Learning [172] simultaneously
learns and embedding and a generator. Here, the generator
outputs a synthetic hard negative example given the orig-
inal triplet. Similar to Tripathi et al. [64], Zhao et al. [173]
also use a GAN [174] in order to generate not only hard
negatives but also hard positives. The idea to consider inter-
class similarity have proven well as in the work by Huang
et al. [171]. Finally, a different approach from the previous
generative models, Hardness Aware Metric Learning [175],
aims to learn an autoencoder in the feature space. The idea
is as follows: The authors ﬁrst manipulate the features after
the backbone such that the hardness of the example can be
controlled by linearly interpolating the embedding towards
the anchor by employing a coefﬁcient relying on the loss
values at the last epoch. Since it is not certain that the
interpolated embedding preserves the original label, a label
preserving mapping back to the feature space is employed
using the autoencoder. Also, similar to Harwood et al.
[168], the hardness of the examples in the latter epochs is
increased.
Comparative Summary. Looking at the studies presented
above, we observe that the metric learning methods are able
to learn an embedding of the data that preserves the desired
similarity between data samples. Object detection literature
have used different measures and metrics that have been
designed by humans. However, as shown by the metric
learning community, a metric that is directly learned from
the data itself can yield better results and have interesting
properties. Moreover, the self-paced learning, where the
hardness levels of the examples is increased adaptively, is
deﬁnitely an important concept for addressing imbalance in
object detection. Another idea that can be adopted by the
object detectors is to label the examples by humans in an
online manner (similar to the work by Yao [176]) during
training and to use the semi-hardness concept.
8.3 Multi-Task Learning
Multi-task learning involves learning multiple tasks (with
potentially conﬂicting objectives) simultaneously. A com-
mon approach is to weigh the objectives of the tasks to
balance them.
Ground TruthPositive Example
(a)(b)(c)Negative ExampleFig. 18: An example suggesting the necessity of considering
different imbalance problems together in a uniﬁed manner.
Blue, green and red colors indicate ground-truth, positive
example (prediction) and negative examples, respectively.
The larger example (i.e. the one with higher IoU with the
blue box) in (a) is shifted right. In (b), its IoU is signiﬁcantly
decreased and it eventually becomes a negative example
in (c). This example shows the interplay between class
imbalance, scale imbalance, spatial imbalance and objective
imbalance by a change in BB positions.
Many methods have been proposed for assigning the
weights in a more systematic manner. For example, Li et al.
[177] extended the self-paced learning paradigm to multi-
task learning based on a novel regularizer. The hyperpa-
rameters in the proposed regularizer control the hardness of
not only the instances but also the tasks, and accordingly,
the hardness level is increased during training. In another
work motivated by the self-paced learning approach, Guo
et al. [135] use more diverse set of tasks, including ob-
ject detection. Their method weighs the losses dynamically
based on the exponential moving average of a predeﬁned
key performance indicator (e.g. accuracy, average precision)
for each task. Similar to image classiﬁcation, one can also use
the uncertainty of the estimations [178] or their loss values
[179] to assign weights to the tasks.
In addition to the importance or hardness of tasks, Zhao
Chen and Rabinovich [180] identiﬁed the importance of the
pace at which the tasks are learned. They suggested that the
tasks are required to be trained in a similar pace. For this
end, they proposed balancing the training pace of different
tasks by adjusting their weights dynamically based on a
normalization algorithm motivated by batch normalization
[117].
Comparative Summary. Being a multi-task problem, object de-
tection can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the multi-task learning
approaches. However, this aspect of object detectors has not
received attention from the community.
9 O PENISSUES FOR ALLIMBALANCE PROBLEMS
In this section, we identify and discuss the issues relevant
to all imbalance problems. For open issues pertaining to
a speciﬁc imbalance problem, please see its corresponding
section in the text.
9.1 A Uniﬁed Approach to Addressing Imbalance
Open Issue. One of the main challenges is to come up with a
uniﬁed approach that addresses all imbalance problems by
considering the inter-dependence between them.