OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 3
which is still relevant for object detection; however, object
detection also has a “search” aspect, in addition to the
recognition aspect, which brings in the background (i.e.
negative) class into the picture. Secondly, except Johnson
et al. [43], they consider machine learning approaches in
general without any special focus on deep learning based
methods. Finally, and more importantly, these works only
consider foreground class imbalance problem, which is only
one of eight different imbalance problems that we present
and discuss here (Table 1).
1.3 A Guide to Reading This Review
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief
background on object detection, and the list of frequently-
used terms and notation used throughout the paper. Section
3 presents our taxonomy of imbalance problems. Sections 4-
7 then cover each imbalance problem in detail, with a critical
review of the proposed solutions and include open issues for
each imbalance problem. Each section dedicated to a speciﬁc
imbalance problem is designed to be self-readable, contain-
ing deﬁnitions and a review of the proposed methods. In
order to provide a more general perspective, in Section 8,
we present the solutions addressing imbalance in other but
closely related domains. Section 9 discusses open issues that
are relevant to all imbalance problems. Finally, Section 10
concludes the paper.
Readers who are familiar with the current state-of-the-art
object detection methods can directly jump to Section 3 and
use Figure 1 to navigate both the imbalance problems and
the sections dedicated to the different problems according to
the taxonomy. For readers who lack a background in state-
of-the-art object detection, we recommend starting with
Section 2.1, and if this brief background is not sufﬁcient,
we refer the reader to the more in-depth reviews mentioned
in Section 1.1.
2 B ACKGROUND , DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION
In the following, we ﬁrst provide a brief background on
state-of-the-art object detection methods, and then present
the deﬁnitions and notations used throughout the paper.
2.1 State of the Art in Object Detection
Today there are two major approaches to object detection:
top-down and bottom-up. Although both the top-down
and bottom-up approaches were popular prior to the deep
learning era, today the majority of the object detection meth-
ods follow the top-down approach; the bottom-up methods
have been proposed relatively recently. The main difference
between the top-down and bottom-up approaches is that,
in the top-down approach, holistic object hypotheses (i.e.,
anchors, regions-of-interests/proposals) are generated and
evaluated early in the detection pipeline, whereas in the
bottom-up approach, holistic objects emerge by grouping
sub-object entities like keypoints or parts, later in the pro-
cessing pipeline.
Methods following the top-down approach are catego-
rized into two: two-stage and one-stage methods. Two-
stage methods [16], [17], [18], [21] aim to decrease the large
number of negative examples resulting from the predeﬁned,TABLE 2: Frequently used notations in the paper.
Symbol Domain Denotes
B See.Def. A Bounding box
CA set of
integersSet of Class labels in a dataset
jCij jCij 2Z+ Number of examples for the ith
class in a dataset
Ci i2Z+Backbone feature layer at depth i
I(P) I(P)2 f0;1gIndicator function. 1if predicate P
is true, else 0
Pi i2Z+Pyramidal feature layer
corresponding to ith backbone
feature layer
pi pi2[0;1]Conﬁdence score of ith class (i.e.
output of classiﬁer)
ps ps2[0;1]Conﬁdence score of the ground
truth class
p0 p02[0;1]Conﬁdence score of background
class
u u2C Class label of a ground truth
^x ^x2R Input of the regression loss
dense sliding windows, called anchors, to a manageable
size by using a proposal mechanism [21], [44], [45] which
determines the regions where the objects most likely appear,
called Region of Interests (RoIs). These RoIs are further
processed by a detection network which outputs the object
detection results in the form of bounding boxes and associ-
ated object-category probabilities. Finally, the non-maxima
suppression (NMS) method is applied on the object de-
tection results to eliminate duplicate or highly-overlapping
results. NMS is a universal post-processing step used by all
state-of-the-art object detectors.
One-stage top-down methods, including SSD Variants
[19], [46], YOLO variants [15], [20], [47] and RetinaNet [22],
are designed to predict the detection results directly from
anchors – without any proposal elimination stage – after
extracting the features from the input image. We present a
typical one-stage object detection pipeline in Figure 1(a). The
pipeline starts with feeding the input image to the feature
extraction network, which is usually a deep convolutional
neural network. A dense set of object hypotheses (called
anchors) are produced, which are then sampled and labeled
by matching them to ground-truth boxes. Finally, labeled
anchors (whose features are obtained from the output of the
feature extraction network) are fed to the classiﬁcation and
regression networks for training. In a two-stage method,
object proposals (or regions-of-interest) are ﬁrst generated
using anchors by a separate network (hence, the two stages).
On the other hand, bottom-up object detection methods
[23], [48], [49] ﬁrst predict important key-points (e.g. cor-
ners, centers, etc.) on objects and then group them to form
whole object instances by using a grouping method such as
associative embedding [50] and brute force search [49].
2.2 Frequently Used Terms and Notation
Table 2 presents the notation used throughout the paper,
and below is a list of frequently used terms.