OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 26
in the feature space. An interesting approach that has not
been utilized in object detection yet is to focus training on
examples on which the classiﬁer is uncertain (based on its
prediction history) [148]. Another approach is to generate
hard examples by randomly cropping parts of an image as
in Hide and Seek [146], or adopting a curricular learning
approach by ﬁrst training the classiﬁer on easy examples
and then on hard examples [145].
Another related set of methods addresses image clas-
siﬁcation problem from the data redundancy perspective
[149], [150], [151], [152], [153]. Birodkar et al. [153] showed
that around 10% of the data in ImageNet [52] and CIFAR-10
datasets is redundant during training. This can be exploited
not only for balancing the data but also to obtain faster
convergence by ignoring useless data. The methods differ
from each other on how they mine for the redundant exam-
ples. Regardless of whether imbalance problem is targeted
or not, a subset of these methods uses the active learning
paradigm, where an oracle is used to ﬁnd out the best
set of training examples. The core set approach [151] uses
the relative distances of the examples in the feature space
to determine redundant samples whereas Vodrahalli et al.
[152] determine redundancies by looking at the magnitude
of the gradients.
Another mechanism to enrich a dataset is to use weak
supervision for incorporating unlabelled examples. An ex-
ample study is by Mahajan et al. [154], who augment the
dataset by systematically including Instagram images with
the hashtags as the labels, which are rather noisy. In another
example, Liu et al. [155] selectively add unlabeled data to
the training samples after labeling these examples using the
classiﬁer.
Generative models (e.g. GANs) can also be used for
extending the dataset to address imbalance. Many studies
[156], [157], [158] have successfuly used GANs to generate
examples for under-represented classes for various image
classiﬁcation problems.
Special cases of image classiﬁcation (e.g. face recogni-
tion) are also affected by imbalance [159], [160], [161]. The
general approaches are similar and therefore, due to the
space constraint, we omit imbalance in specialized classi-
ﬁcation problems.
Comparative Summary. Our analysis reveals that object de-
tection community can beneﬁt from the imbalance studies in
image classiﬁcation in many different aspects. The discussed
methods for image classiﬁcation are (by deﬁnition) the
present solutions for the foreground-foreground class imbal-
ance problem (see Section 4.2); however, they can possibly
be extended to the foreground-background class imbalance
problem. Foreground-background class imbalance is gen-
erally handled by under-sampling for the object detection
problem, and other advanced resampling or transfer learn-
ing methods are not adopted yet for object detection from a
class imbalance perspective. While there are loss functions
(discussed in Section 4.1.2) that exploit a weighting scheme
[22], [59], Cui et al. [144] showed that class-balanced loss is
complementary to the focal loss [22] in that focal loss aims
to focus on hard examples while class-balanced loss implies
balancing over all classes. However, since the number of
background examples is not deﬁned, the current deﬁnition
does not ﬁt into the object detection context. Similarly, theadoption of weakly supervised methods to balance under-
represented classes or data redundancy by also decreasing
the samples from an over-represented class can be used
to alleviate the class imbalance problem. Finally, there are
only a few generative approaches in object detection, much
less than those proposed for addressing imbalance in image
classiﬁcation.
8.2 Metric Learning
Metric learning methods aim to ﬁnd an embedding of the
inputs, where the distance between the similar examples
is smaller than the distance between dissimilar examples.
In order to model such similarities, the methods generally
employ pairs [162], [163] or triplets [164], [165], [166] during
training. In the pair case, the loss function uses the informa-
tion about whether both of the samples are from the same or
different classes. In contrast, training using triplets require
an anchor example, a positive example from the same class
with the anchor and a negative example from a different
class from the anchor. The triplet-wise training scheme
introduces imbalance over positive and negative examples
in favor of the latter one, and the methods also look for the
hard examples as in object detection in both the pair-wise
and triplet-wise training schemes. Accordingly, to present
the imbalance and useful example mining requirement, note
that there are approximately O(n2)pairs andO(n3)triplets
assuming that the dataset size is n. This increase in the
dataset size makes it impossible to mine for hard examples
by processing the entire dataset to search for the most
useful (i.e. hard) examples. For this reason, similar to object
detection, a decision is to be made on which samples to be
used during training.
The metric learning methods use sampling, generative
methods or novel loss functions to alleviate the problem.
Note that this is very similar to our categorization of
foreground-background class imbalance methods in Section
4.1, which also drove us to examine metric learning in
detail. Owing to its own training, and resulting loss function
conﬁguration, here we only examine sampling strategies
and generative methods.
Sampling Methods aim to ﬁnd a useful set of training
examples from a large training dataset. The usefulness crite-
rion is considered to be highly relevant to the hardness of an
example. Unlike the methods in object detection, some of the
methods avoid using the hardest possible set of examples
during traning. One example proposed by Schroff et al.
[164] use a rule based on Euclidean distance to deﬁne “semi-
hard” triplets since selecting the hardest triplets can end up
in local minima during the early stages of the training. This
way, they decrease the effect of confusing triplets and avoid
repeating the same hardest examples. Another approach
that avoids considering the hardest possible set of examples
is Hard-Aware Deeply Cascaded Embedding [167], which
proposes training a cascaded model such that the higher
layers are trained with harder examples while the ﬁrst layers
are trained with the entire dataset. Similarly, Smart Mining
[168] also mines semi-hard examples exploiting the distance
between nearest neighbor of anchor and the corresponding
anchor and one novelty is that they increase the hardness
of the negative examples in the latter epochs adaptively.