OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 14
5.1.2 Methods Based on Feature Pyramids
Methods based on feature hierarchies use features from
different levels independently without integrating low-level
and high-level features. However, the abstractness (semantic
content) of information varies among different layers, and
thus it is not reliable to make predictions directly from a
single layer (especially the lower layers) of the backbone
network.
To address this issue, the Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN)
[26] combine the features at different scales before making
predictions. FPN exploits an additional top-down pathway
along which the features from the higher level are supported
by the features from a lower level using lateral connections
in order to have a balanced mixed of these features (see
Figure 8(c)). The top-down pathway involves upsampling to
ensure the sizes to be compatible and lateral connections are
basically 11convolutions. Similar to feature hierarchies,
a RoI pooling step takes the scale of the RoI into account
to choose which level to pool from. These improvements
allow the predictor network to be applied at all levels which
improves the performance especially for small and medium
sized objects.
Although FPN was originally proposed for object de-
tection, it quickly became popular and has been used for
different (but related) tasks such as shadow detection [107],
instance segmentation [108], [109] and panoptic segmenta-
tion [110].
Despite its beneﬁts, FPN is known to suffer from a major
shortcoming due to the straightforward combination of the
features gathered from the backbone network – the feature
imbalance problem . We discuss this problem in Section 5.2.
5.1.3 Methods Based on Image Pyramids
The idea of using multi-scale image pyramids, presented in
Figure 8(d), for the image processing tasks goes back to the
early work by Adelson et al. [111] and was popular before
deep learning. In deep learning, these methods are not
utilized as much due to their relatively high computational
and memory costs. However, recently, Singh and Davis [27]
presented a detailed analysis on the effect of the scale im-
balance problem with important conclusions and proposed
a method to alleviate the memory constraint for image
pyramids. They investigated the conventional approach of
training object detectors in smaller scales but testing them
in larger scales due to memory constraints, and showed
that this inconsistency between test and training time scales
has an impact on the performance. In their controlled ex-
periments, upsampling the image by two performed better
than reducing the stride by two. Upon their analysis, the
authors proposed a novel training method coined as SNIP
based on image pyramids rather than feature pyramids.
They argue that, while training scale-speciﬁc detectors by
providing the input to the appropriate detector will lose
a signiﬁcant portion of the data, and that using multi-
scale training on a single detector will increase the scale
imbalance by preserving the variation in the data. Therefore,
SNIP trains multiple proposal and detector networks with
images at different sizes, however, for each network only the
appropriate input bounding box scales are marked as valid,
by which it ensures multi-scale training without any lossin the data. Another challenge, the limitation of the GPU
memory, is overcome by an image cropping approach. The
image cropping approach is made more efﬁcient in a follow-
up method, called SNIPER [28].
5.1.4 Methods Combining Image and Feature Pyramids
Image pyramid based methods are generally less efﬁcient
than feature pyramid based methods in terms of computa-
tional time and memory. However, image pyramid based
methods are expected to perform better, since feature pyra-
mid based methods are efﬁcient approximations of such
methods. Therefore, to beneﬁt from advantages of both
approaches, they can be combined in a single model.
Even though there are different architectures, the generic
approach is illustrated in Figure 8(e). For example, Efﬁcient
Featurized Image Pyramids [72] uses ﬁve images at different
scales, four of which are provided to the light-weight featur-
ized image pyramid network module (i.e. instead of addi-
tional backbone networks) and the original input is fed into
the backbone network. This light-weight network consists
of4consecutive convolutional layers designed speciﬁcally
for each input. The features gathered from this module are
integrated to the backbone network features at appropriate
levels according to their sizes, such that the image features
are combined with the features extracted from the backbone
network using feature attention modules. Furthermore, after
attention modules, the gathered features are integrated with
the higher levels by means of forward fusion modules before
the ﬁnal predictions are obtained.
A similar method that is also built on SSD and uses
downsampled images is Enriched Feature Guided Reﬁnement
Network [58] in which a single downsampled image is
provided as an input to the Multi-Scale Contextual Fea-
tures (MSCF) Module. The MSCF consists of two consec-
utive convolutional layers followed by three parallel dilated
convolutions, which is also similar to the idea in Trident
Networks [74]. The outputs of the dilated convolutions are
again combined using 11convolutions. The authors set the
downsampled image size to meet the ﬁrst prediction layer
in the regular SSD architecture (e.g. for 320320input, the
size of the downsampled image is 4040). While Pang et al.
[72] only provide experiments with the SSD backbone, Nie
et al. [58] show that their modules can also be used in the
ResNet backbone.
An alternative approach is to generate super-resolution
feature maps. Noh et al. [73] proposed super-resolution for
small object detection for two-stage object detectors which lack
strong representations of small RoIs after RoI standardiza-
tion layers. Their architecture adds four additional modules
to the baseline detector: (i) Given the original image, target
extractor outputs the targets for the discriminator by using
dilated convolutions. This network also shares parameters
with the backbone network. (ii) Given the features obtained
from the backbone network using the original image and a
0:5x downsampled image, the generator network generates
super resolution feature maps for small RoIs. (iii) Given
the outputs of (i) and (ii), a discriminator is trained in the
conventional GAN setting. (iv) Finally, if the RoI is a small
object according to a threshold, then the prediction is carried
out by the small predictor, or else by the large predictor.