OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 13
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Normalized Width103104105106Frequency
Normalized Width Distribution
Objects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC
(a)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Normalized Height103104105106Frequency
Normalized Height Distribution
Objects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC (b)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Normalized Area103104105106107Frequency
Normalized Area Distribution
Objects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC (c)
Fig. 7: Imbalance in scales of the objects in common datasets: the distributions of BB width (a), height (b), and area (c).
Values are with respect to the normalized image (i.e. relative to the image). For readability, the yaxes are in log-scale.
C2C3C4C5Predict
C2C3C4C5PredictPredictPredictPredict
C2C3C4C5P2P3P4P5PredictPredictPredictPredict
I1I2I3I4PredictPredictPredictPredict(a)(b)(c)
(d)(e)
C2C3C4C5PredictPredictPredictPredictLight NetBackbone
Fig. 8: An illustration and comparison of the solutions
for scale imbalance. “Predict” refers to the prediction per-
formed by a detection network. The layered boxes cor-
respond to convolutional layers. (a)No scale balancing
method is employed. (b) Prediction is performed from
backbone features at different levels (i.e. scales) (e.g. SSD
[19]). (c)The intermediate features from different scales are
combined before making prediction at multiple scales (e.g.
Feature Pyramid Networks [26]). (d)The input image is
scaled ﬁrst and then processed. Each I corresponds to an
image pyramidal feature (e.g. Image Pyramids [27]). (e)
Image and feature pyramids are combined. Rather than
applying backbones, light networks are used in order to
extract features from smaller images.
scales of the objects and input bounding boxes. The second
part, Feature Imbalance, analyses the problems arising at
the feature extraction level and concerns the methods using
pyramidal features.
5.1 Object/Box-Level Scale Imbalance
Deﬁnition. Scale imbalance occurs when certain sizes of the
objects or input bounding boxes are over-represented in the
dataset. It has been shown that this affects the scales of the
estimated RoIs and the overall detection performance [27].
Figure 7 presents the relative width, height and the area
of the objects in the MS-COCO dataset [90]; we observe a
skewness in the distributions in favor of smaller objects.
Many of the deep object detectors rely on a backbone
convolutional neural network (e.g. [93], [101], [103], [104],[105]), pretrained on an image classiﬁcation task, in order
to extract visual features from the input image. Li et al.
[106] discuss the cons of employing such networks designed
for the classiﬁcation task and propose a backbone specially
designed for the object detection task where they limit
the spatial downsampling rate for the high level features.
Overall, these networks, also called the backbones, play an
important role for the performance of the object detectors,
but they alone are insufﬁcient for handling the scale diver-
sity of the input bounding boxes.
Solutions. First examples of deep object detectors made
predictions from the ﬁnal layer of the backbone network (see
[16], [17] and Figure 8(a)), and therefore, neglected the scale-
diversity of BBs. The solutions to addressing scale imbalance
can be grouped into four (Figure 8): methods predicting
from the hierarchy of the backbone features (Figure 8(b)),
methods based on feature pyramids (Figure 8(c)), methods
based on image pyramids (Figure 8(d)) and ﬁnally methods
combining image and feature pyramids (Figure 8(e)).
5.1.1 Methods Predicting from the Feature Hierarchy of
Backbone Features
These methods make independent predictions from the
features at different levels of the backbone network (Figure
8(b)). This approach naturally considers object detection at
multiple scales since the different levels encode information
at different scales; e.g., if the input contains a small object,
then earlier levels already contain strong indicators about
the small object [69].
An illustratory example for one-stage detectors is the
Single Shot Detector ( SSD ) [19], which makes predictions
from features at different layers.
Two-stage detectors can exploit features at different
scales while either estimating the regions (in the ﬁrst stage)
or extracting features from these regions (for the second
stage). For example, the Multi Scale CNN (MSCNN) [70]
uses different layers of the backbone network while esti-
mating the regions in the ﬁrst stage whereas Yang et al.
[69] choose an appropriate layer to pool based on the scale
of the estimated RoI; called Scale Dependent Pooling (SDP),
the method, e.g., pools features from an earlier layer if the
height of the RoI is small. Alternatively, the Scale Aware Fast
R-CNN [71] learns an ensemble of two classiﬁers, one for the
small scale and one for the large scale objects, and combines
their predictions.