OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 4
BB Matching & Labeling
Anchor/ RoISetGT Set
Feature Extraction Detection BB Matching, Labeling and Sampling
Blue GTBlack GT
PositiveNegativeSampling
Ground Truth Scales2-Scale Imbalance (§5)
Loss Values of Tasks4-Objective Imbalance (§7) 1-Class Imbalance (§4)
Class 1 Class 23-Spatial Imbalance (§6)
IoUof Positive Input BB0.6 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9# of ExamplesDetections & Loss Value
Classification RegressionBBs
toTrainLabeled
BBs
(a)
(b)Example Numbers
Black GT Blue GT
Feature 
Extraction 
Network
Fig. 1: (a)The common training pipeline of a generic detection network. The pipeline has 3 phases (i.e. feature extraction,
detection and BB matching, labeling and sampling) represented by different background colors. (b)Illustration of an
example imbalance problem from each category for object detection through the training pipeline. Background colors
specify at which phase an imbalance problem occurs.
Feature Extraction Network/Backbone: This is the part of
the object detection pipeline from the input image until the
detection network.
Classiﬁcation Network/Classiﬁer: This is the part of the
object detection pipeline from the features extracted by the
backbone to the classiﬁcation result, which is indicated by a
conﬁdence score.
Regression Network/Regressor: This is the part of the
object detection pipeline from the features extracted by the
backbone to the regression output, which is indicated by
two bounding box coordinates each of which consisting of
an x-axis and y-axis values.
Detection Network/Detector: It is the part of the object
detection pipeline including both classiﬁer and regressor.
Region Proposal Network (RPN): It is the part of the two
stage object detection pipeline from the features extracted
by the backbone to the generated proposals, which also have
conﬁdence scores and bounding box coordinates.
Bounding Box: A rectangle on the image limiting certain
features. Formally, [x1;y1;x2;y2]determine a bounding box
with top-left corner (x1;y1)and bottom-right corner (x2;y2)
satisfyingx2>x 1andy2>y 1.
Anchor: The set of pre deﬁned bounding boxes on which the
RPN in two stage object detectors and detection network in
one stage detectors are applied.
Region of Interest (RoI)/Proposal: The set of bounding
boxes generated by a proposal mechanism such as RPN on
which the detection network is applied on two state object
detectors.
Input Bounding Box: Sampled anchor or RoI the detection
network or RPN is trained with.
Ground Truth: It is tuple (B;u)such thatBis the bounding
box anduis the class label whereu2CandCis the
enumeration of the classes in the dataset.Detection: It is a tuple (B;p)such that Bis the bounding
box andpis the vector over the conﬁdence scores for each
class2and bounding box.
Intersection Over Union: For a ground truth box Band a
detection box B, we can formally deﬁne Intersection over
Union(IoU) [51], [52], denoted by IoU(B;B), as
IoU(B;B) =A(B\B)
A(B[B); (1)
such thatA(B)is the area of a bounding box B.
Under-represented Class: The class which has less samples
in a dataset or mini batch during training in the context of
class imbalance.
Over-represented Class: The class which has more samples
in a dataset or mini batch during training in the context of
class imbalance.
Backbone Features: The set of features obtained during the
application of the backbone network.
Pyramidal Features/Feature Pyramid: The set of features
obtained by applying some transformations to the backbone
features.
Regression Objective Input: Some methods make predic-
tions in the log domain by applying some transformation
which can also differ from method to method (compare
transformation in Fast R-CNN [17] and in KL loss [53] for
Smooth L1 Loss), while some methods directly predict the
bounding box coordinates [23]. For the sake of clarity, we
use^xto denote the regression loss input for any method.
2. We use class and category interchangeably in this paper.