OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 11
TABLE 4: Comparison of major generative methods addressing class imbalance.
Generative Method Generates
Adversarial-Fast-RCNN [63] Occluded and spatially transformed features during RoI pooling in order
to make the examples harder
Task Aware Data Synthesis [64] Images with hard examples in a GAN setting in which given foreground
mask is to be placed onto the given image by the generator.
PSIS [65] Images by switching the instances between existing images considering
the performance of the class during training
pRoI Generator [66] Positive RoIs (i.e. BBs) following desired IoU, spatial and foreground class
distributions
100
101
102
Class sorted position100101102103104105106Number of boxes
Objects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC
(a)
20 40 60 80
Number of objects per image100101102103104105106Number of imagesObjects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC (b)
10 20 30
Number of distinct classes per image100101102103104105106Number of images
Objects365
Open Images
COCO
PASCAL-VOC (c)
Fig. 5: Some statistics of common datasets (training sets). For readability, the yaxes are in logarithmic scale. (a)The total
number of examples from each class. (b)The number of images vs. the number of examples. (c)The number of images vs.
the number of classes. (This ﬁgure is inspired from Kuznetsova et al. [91] but calculated and drawn from scratch).
a relative improvement of 4:4%(from 36:4to38:0mAP
when applied to positives only) and showed that sampling
also matters for positives. We notice several crucial points
regarding prime sampling. First of all, contrary to the pop-
ular belief that hard examples are more preferable over
easy examples, PISA shows that, if balanced properly, the
positive examples with higher IoUs, which normally incur
smaller loss values, are more useful for training compared
to OHEM [24] applied to positives. Moreover, the results
suggest that the major improvement of the method is on
localization since there is no performance improvement in
AP@0:50, and there is signiﬁcant improvement for APs
with higher IoUs (i.e. up to 2:6%inAP@0:75). As a result,
the improvement can be due to the changing nature of the
IoU distribution rather than presenting more descriptive
samples to the classiﬁer since the classiﬁer performs worse
but the regressor improves (see the discussion on IoU dis-
tribution imbalance in Section 6.2).
4.4 Open Issues
As we have highlighted before, class imbalance problem can
be analyzed in two main categories: foreground-background
class imbalance and foreground-foreground class imbal-
ance. In the following, we identify issues to be addressed
with a more focus on foreground-foreground imbalance
since it has received less attention.4.4.1 Sampling More Useful Examples
Open Issue. Many criteria to identify useful examples (e.g.
hard example, example with higher IoUs etc.) for both
positive and negative classes have been proposed. However,
recent studies point out interesting phenomena that need
further investigation: (i) For the foreground-background
class imbalance, soft sampling methods have become more
prominent and optimal weighting of examples needs further
investigation. (ii) Hard example mining [24] for the positive
examples is challenged by the idea that favors examples
with higher IoUs, i.e. the easier ones [30]. (iii) The usefulness
of the examples are not considered in terms of foreground-
foreground class imbalance.
Explanation6.In terms of the usefulness of the examples,
there are two criteria to be identiﬁed: (i) The usefulness
of the background examples, and (ii) the usefulness of the
foreground examples.
The existing approaches mostly concentrated around the
ﬁrst criterion using different properties (i.e. IoU, loss value,
ground truth conﬁdence score) to sample a useful example
for the background. However, the debate is still open after
Li et al. [59] showed that there are large number of outliers
during sampling using these properties, which will result in
higher loss values and lower conﬁdence scores. Moreover,
the methods preferring a weighting over all the examples
6. Issues that may not be immediately clear include a detailing
explanation section