OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 23
Fig. 14: The (relative) spatial distributions of 1KRoIs with
IoU between 0:5to0:6from the RPN (of Faster R-CNN with
ResNet101 backbone) collected from Pascal [51] during the
last epoch of the training. A bias is observed around the
top-left corners of ground truths such that RoIs are densely
concentrated at the top-left corner of the normalized ground
truth box.
and its gradient with respect to the inputs. To illustrate
such an analysis, in Focal Loss [22], the authors plot the
loss function with respect to the conﬁdence score of the
ground truth class with a comparison to the cross entropy
loss, the baseline. Similarly, in Balanced L1 Loss [29], both
the loss function itself and the gradients are depicted with
a comparison to Smooth L1 Loss. Such an analysis might
be more difﬁcult for the recently proposed more complex
loss functions. As an example, AP Loss [61] is computed
considering the ranking of the individual examples, which
is based on the conﬁdence scores of all BBs. So, the loss
depends on the entire set rather than individual examples,
which makes it difﬁcult to plot the loss (and its gradient)
for a single input as conventionally done. Another example
is GIoU Loss [85], which uses the ground truth box and
the smallest enclosing box in addition to the detection box.
Each box is represented by four parameters (see Section 6.1),
which creates a total of twelve parameters. For this reason,
it is necessary to develop appropriate analysis methods to
observe how these loss functions penalize the examples.
6.5.3 Designing Better Anchors
Designing an optimal anchor set with high recall has re-
ceived limited attention. The Meta Anchor [133] method
attempts to ﬁnd an optimal set of aspect ratios and scales
for anchors. More recently, Wang et al. [67] have improved
recall more than 9% on MS COCO dataset [90] while using
90% less anchors than RPN [21]. Addressing the imbalanced
nature of the locations and scales of the objects seems to be
an open issue.
6.5.4 Relative Spatial Distribution Imbalance
Open Issue. As we discussed in Section 6, the distribution of
the IoU between the estimated BBs and the ground truth is
imbalanced and this has an inﬂuence on the performance. A
closer inspection [66] reveals that the locations of estimated
BBs relative to the matching ground truths also have an
imbalance. Whether this imbalance affects the performance
of the object detectors remains to be investigated.
Explanation. During the conventional training of the object
detectors, input bounding boxes are labeled as positive
234210235321125432124322112111(a)
(c)GroundTruthPositiveInputBBNegativeInputBB
(a)(b)Fig. 15: An illustration of the imbalance in overlapping BBs.
The grid represents the pixels of the image/feature map,
and blue bounding box is the ground-truth. (a)Four nega-
tive input bounding boxes. (b)Two positive input bounding
boxes. (c)Per-pixel number-of-overlaps of the input bound-
ing boxes. Throughout the image, the number of sampling
frequencies for the pixels vary due to the variation in the
overlapping number of bounding boxes.
when their IoU with a ground truth is larger than 0:5. This
is adopted in order to provide more diverse examples to
the classiﬁer and the regressor, and to allow good quality
predictions at test time from noisy input bounding boxes.
The work by Oksuz et al. [66] is currently the only study
that points to an imbalance in the distribution of the relative
location of BBs. Exploiting the scale-invariance and shift-
invariance properties of the IoU, they plotted the top-left
point of the RoIs from the RPN (of Faster R-CNN) with
respect to a single reference box representing the ground
truth (see Figure 14). They reported that the resulting spatial
distribution of the top-left points of the RPN RoIs are
skewed towards the top-left point of the reference ground
truth box. We see that the samples are scarce away from the
top-left corner of the reference box.
6.5.5 Imbalance in Overlapping BBs
Open Issue. Due to the dynamic nature of bounding box
sampling methods (Section 4.1), some regions in the input
image may be over-sampled (i.e. regions coinciding with
many overlapping boxes) and some regions may be under-
sampled (or not even sampled at all). The effect of this
imbalance caused by BB sampling methods has not been
explored.
Explanation. Imbalance in overlapping BBs is illustrated in
Figure 15(a-c) on an example grid representing the image
and six input BBs (four negative and two positive). The
number of overlapping BBs for each pixel is shown in Figure
15(c); in this example, this number ranges from 0to5.
This imbalance may affect the performance for two
reasons: (i) The number of highly sampled regions will
play more role in the ﬁnal loss functions, which can lead
the method to overﬁt for speciﬁc features. (ii) The fact
that some regions are over-sampled and some are under-
sampled might have adverse effects on learning, as the size
of sample (i.e. batch size) is known to be related to the
optimal learning rate [134].
6.5.6 Analysis of the Orientation Imbalance
Open Issue. The effects of imbalance in the orientation distri-
bution of objects need to be investigated.
Explanation. The distribution of the orientation of object in-
stances might have an effect on the ﬁnal performance. If
there is a typical orientation for the object, then the detector
will likely overﬁt to this orientation and will make errors