OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 2
TABLE 1: Imbalance problems reviewed in this paper. We state that an imbalance problem with respect to an input property
occurs when the distribution regarding that property affects the performance. The ﬁrst column shows the major imbalance
categories. For each Imbalance problem given in the middle column, the last column shows the associated input property
concerning the deﬁnition of the imbalance problem.
Type Imbalance Problem Related Input Property
ClassForeground-Background Class Imbalance (§4.1) The numbers of input bounding boxes pertain-
ing to different classesForeground-Foreground Class Imbalance (§4.2)
ScaleObject/box-level Scale Imbalance (§5.1) The scales of input and ground-truth bounding
boxes
Feature-level Imbalance (§5.2) Contribution of the feature layer from different
abstraction levels of the backbone network (i.e.
high and low level)
SpatialImbalance in Regression Loss (§6.1) Contribution of the individual examples to the
regression loss
IoU Distribution Imbalance (§6.2) IoU distribution of positive input bounding
boxes
Object Location Imbalance (§6.3) Locations of the objects throughout the image
Objective Objective Imbalance (§7) Contribution of different tasks (i.e. classiﬁca-
tion, regression) to the overall loss
background knowledge on object detection is required to
make the most out of this paper. For a thorough background
on the subject, we refer the readers to the recent, compre-
hensive object detection surveys [31], [32], [33]. We provide
only a brief background on state-of-the-art object detection
in Section 2.1.
Our main aim in this paper is to present and discuss
imbalance problems in object detection comprehensively. In
order to do that,
1) We identify and deﬁne imbalance problems and
propose a taxonomy for studying the problems and
their solutions.
2) We present a critical literature review for the exist-
ing studies with a motivation to unify them in a sys-
tematic manner. The general outline of our review
includes a deﬁnition of the problems, a summary
of the main approaches, an in-depth coverage of
the speciﬁc solutions, and comparative summaries
of the solutions.
3) We present and discuss open issues at the problem-
level and in general.
4) We also reserved a section for imbalance problems
found in domains other than object detection. This
section is generated with meticulous examination of
methods considering their adaptability to the object
detection pipeline.
5) Finally, we provide an accompanying webpage1as
a living repository of papers addressing imbalance
problems, organized based on our problem-based
taxonomy. This webpage will be continuously up-
dated with new studies.
1.2 Comparison with Previous Reviews
Recent object detection surveys [31], [32], [33] aim to present
advances in deep learning based generic object detection.
To this end, these surveys propose a taxonomy for object
1. https://github.com/kemaloksuz/ObjectDetectionImbalancedetection methods, and present a detailed analysis of some
cornerstone methods that have had high impact. They also
provide discussions on popular datasets and evaluation
metrics. From the imbalance point of view, these surveys
only consider the class imbalance problem with a limited
provision. Additionally, Zou et al. [32] provide a review for
methods that handle scale imbalance. Unlike these surveys,
here we focus on a classiﬁcation of imbalance problems
related to object detection and present a comprehensive
review of methods that handle these imbalance problems.
There are also surveys on category speciﬁc object de-
tection (e.g. pedestrian detection, vehicle detection, face
detection) [34], [35], [36], [37]. Although Zehang Sun et
al. [34] and Dollar et al. [35] cover the methods proposed
before the current deep learning era, they are beneﬁcial
from the imbalance point of view since they present a
comprehensive analysis of feature extraction methods that
handle scale imbalance. Zafeiriou et al. [36] and Yin et al.
[38] propose comparative analyses of non-deep and deep
methods. Litjens et al. [39] discuss applications of various
deep neural network based methods i.e. classiﬁcation, detec-
tion, segmentation to medical image analysis. They present
challenges with their possible solutions which include a
limited exploration of the class imbalance problem. These
category speciﬁc object detector reviews focus on a single
class and do not consider the imbalance problems in a
comprehensive manner from the generic object detection
perspective.
Another set of relevant work includes the studies specif-
ically for imbalance problems in machine learning [40], [41],
[42], [43]. These studies are limited to the foreground class
imbalance problem in our context (i.e. there is no back-
ground class). Generally, they cover dataset-level methods
such as undersampling and oversampling, and algorithm-
level methods including feature selection, kernel modiﬁ-
cations and weighted approaches. We identify three main
differences of our work compared to such studies. Firstly,
the main scope of such work is the classiﬁcation problem,