OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 15
C2C3C4C5P2P3P4P5
High LevelLow LevelLow to HighLevel Features
Fig. 9: Feature-Level imbalance is illustrated on the FPN
architecture.
Another approach, Scale Aware Trident Networks [74],
combines the advantages of the methods based on fea-
ture pyramids and image pyramids without using multiple
downsampled images but employing only dilated convo-
lutions. The authors use dilated convolutions [112] with
dilation rates 1;2and3in parallel branches in order to
generate scale-speciﬁc feature maps, making the approach
more accurate compared to feature pyramid based methods.
In order to ensure that each branch is specialized for a
speciﬁc scale, an input bounding box is provided to the
appropriate branch according to its size. Their analysis on
the effect of receptive ﬁeld size on objects of different scales
shows that larger dilation rates are more appropriate for
objects with larger scales. In addition, since using multiple
branches is expected to degrade the efﬁciency due to the
increasing number of operations, they proposed a method
for approximating these branches with a single parameter-
sharing branch, with minimal (insigniﬁcant) performance
loss.
5.2 Feature-level Imbalance
Deﬁnition. The integration of the features from the backbone
network is expected to be balanced in terms of low- and
high-level features so that consistent predictions can follow.
To be more speciﬁc, if we analyze the conventional FPN
architecture in Figure 9, we notice that, while there are
several layers from the C2layer of the bottom-up pass with
low-level features to the P5layer of the feature pyramid,
theC2layer is directly integrated to the P2layer, which
implies the effect of the high-level and low-level features in
theP2andP5layers to be different.
Solutions. There are several methods to address imbalance
in the FPN architectures, which range from designing im-
proved top-down pathway connections [56], [57] to com-
pletely novel architectures. Here, we consider the methods
to alleviate the feature-level imbalance problem using novel
architectures, which we group into two according to what
they use as a basis, pyramidal or backbone features.
5.2.1 Methods Using Pyramidal Features as a Basis
These methods aim to improve the pyramidal features gath-
ered by FPN using additional operations or steps – see an
overview of these methods in Figure 10(a,b).
Path Aggregation Network (PANet) [75] is the ﬁrst to
show that the features gathered by an FPN can be further
enhanced and an RoI can be mapped to each layer of
the pyramid rather than associating it with a single one.
The authors suggest that low-level features, such as edges,corners, are useful for localizing objects, however, the FPN
architecture does not sufﬁciently make use of these features.
Motivated from this observation, PANet, depicted in Figure
10(a), improves the FPN architecture with two new contri-
butions:
1) Bottom-up path augmentation extends the feature
pyramid in order to allow the low-level features to
arrive at the layers where the predictions occur in
shorter steps (see red arrows in Figure 10(a) within
FPN and to the ﬁnal pyramidal features to see the
shortcut). For this reason, in a way a shortcut is
created for the features in the initial layers. This is
important since these features have rich information
about localization thanks to edges or instance parts.
2) While in the FPN, each RoI is associated with a
single level of feature based on its size, PANet asso-
ciates each RoI to every level, applies RoI Pooling,
fuses using element-wise max or sum operation and
the resulting ﬁxed-sized feature grid is propagated
to the detector network. This process is called Adap-
tive Feature Pooling .
Despite these contributions, PANet still uses a sequential
pathway to extract the features.
Different from the sequential enhancement pathway of
PANet, Libra FPN [29] aims to learn the residual features
by using all of the features from all FPN layers at once (see
Figure 10(b)). Residual feature layer computation is handled
in two steps:
1) Integrate: All feature maps from different layers are
reduced to one single feature map by rescaling and
averaging. For this reason, this step does not have
any learnable parameter.
2) Reﬁne: The integrated feature map is reﬁned by
means of convolution layers or non-local neural
networks [113].
Finally the reﬁned features are added to each layer of the
pyramidal features. The authors argue that in addition to
FPN, their method is complementary to other methods
based on pyramidal features as well, such as PANet [75].
5.2.2 Methods Using Backbone Features as a Basis
These methods build their architecture on the backbone fea-
tures and ignore the top-down pathway of FPN by employ-
ing different feature integration mechanisms, as displayed
in Figure 10(c-h).
Scale-Transferrable Detection Network (STDN) [76] gen-
erates the pyramidal features from the last layer of the
backbone features which are extracted using DenseNet [114]
blocks (Figure 10(c)). In a DenseNet block, all the lower level
features are propagated to every next layer within a block.
In Figure 10(c), the number of DenseNet (dense) blocks is
four and the ith block is denoted by Di. Motivated by the
idea that direct propagation of lower-level layers to the sub-
sequent layers also carries lower-level information, STDN
builds pyramidal features consisting of six layers by using
the last block of DenseNet. In order to map these layers to
lower sizes, the approach uses mean pooling with different
receptive ﬁeld sizes. For the fourth feature map, an identity
mapping is used. For the last two layers which the feature