OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 12
[22], [59] rather than discarding a large portion of samples
have proven to yield more performance improvement. For
this reason, currently, soft sampling approaches that assign
weights to the examples are more popular, but which nega-
tive examples are more useful needs more investigation.
For the foreground examples, Cao et al. [30] apply a
speciﬁc sampling methodology to the positives based on
the IoU, which has proven useful. Note that, this idea
conﬂicts with the hard example mining approach since
while OHEM [24] offers to pick the difﬁcult samples, prime
samples concentrate on the positive samples with higher
IoUs with the ground truth, namely the easier ones. For
this reason, currently it seems that the usefulness of the
examples is different for the positives and negatives. To sum
up, further investigation is required for identifying the best
set of examples, or ﬁguring out how to weigh the positive
examples during training.
Moreover, sampling methods have proven to be useful
for foreground-background class imbalance, however, their
effectiveness for the foreground-foreground class imbalance
problem needs to be investigated.
4.4.2 Foreground-Foreground Class Imbalance Problem
Open Issue. Foreground-foreground class imbalance has not
been addressed as thoroughly as foreground-background
class imbalance. For instance, it is still not known why
a class performs worse than others; a recent work [65]
discredits the correlation between the number of examples
in a class and its detection performance. Moreover, despite
its differences, the rich literature for addressing imbalance in
image classiﬁcation has not been utilized in object detection.
Explanation. One important ﬁnding of a recent study [65]
is that a class with the fewest examples in the dataset can
yield one of the best detection performances and thus the
total number of instances in the dataset is not the only
issue to balance the performance of foreground classes. Such
discrepancies presents the necessity of an in-depth analysis
to identify the root cause and investigate for better sampling
mechanisms to employ while balancing a dataset.
Moreover, we identify a similarity and a difference be-
tween the class imbalance from image classiﬁcation per-
spective and the foreground-foreground class imbalance
problem. The similarity is that neither has a background
class. On the other hand, the input BBs are labeled and
sampled in an online fashion in object detection, which
makes the data that the detector is trained with not static.
Class imbalance problem is addressed in image classiﬁ-
cation from a larger scope by using not only classical over-
sampling and under-sampling methods but also (i) transfer
learning to transfer the information from over-represented
to under-represented classes, (ii) data redundancy meth-
ods to be useful for under-sampling the over-represented
classes, (iii) weak supervision in order to be used in favor
of under-represented class and (iv) a speciﬁc loss function
for balancing foreground classes. Such approaches can be
adopted for addressing foreground-foreground imbalance
in object detection as well.
PersonParking Meter
PersonParking Meter(a)
PersonParking Meter
PersonParking Meter (b)
Fig. 6: Illustration of batch-level class imbalance. (a)An
example that is consistent with the overall dataset (person
class has more instances than parking meter). (b)An exam-
ple that has a different distribution from the dataset. Images
are from the MS COCO dataset.
4.4.3 Foreground-Foreground Imbalance Owing to the
Batch
Open Issue. The distribution of the foreground classes in a
batch might be very different than that of the overall dataset,
especially when the batch size is small. An important ques-
tion is whether this may have an inﬂuence on the overall
performance.
Explanation. A speciﬁc example is provided in Figure 6
from the MS COCO dataset [90]: An over-represented class
(‘person’ class in this example) across the dataset may
be under-represented in a batch or vice versa. Similar to
the foreground-background class imbalance problem, over-
representing a class in a batch will increase the probability
of the corresponding class to dominate more.
Even when a batch has uniform foreground-foreground
class distribution, an imbalance may occur during sampling
due to the fact that sampling algorithms either select a
subset or apply a weighting to the large number of boxes.
If the sampling mechanism tends to choose the samples
from speciﬁc classes in the image, balancing the dataset (or
the batch) may not be sufﬁcient to address the foreground-
foreground class imbalance entirely.
4.4.4 Ranking-Based Loss Functions
Open Issue. AP Loss [61] sorts the conﬁdence scores pertain-
ing to all classes together to make a ranking between the
detection boxes. However, this conﬂicts with the observa-
tion that the optimal conﬁdence scores vary from class to
class [102].
Explanation. Chen et al. [61] use all the conﬁdence scores
all together without paying attention to the fact that the
optimal threshold per class may vary [102]. Therefore, a
method that sorts the conﬁdence scores in a class-speciﬁc
manner might achieve a better performance. Addressing
this issue is an open problem.
5 I MBALANCE 2: S CALE IMBALANCE
We discuss scale the imbalance problem in two parts: the
ﬁrst part, Object/Box-Level Scale Imbalance, analyses the
problems arising from the imbalanced distribution of the