OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 18
prediction layers is 3and5respectively (while keeping the
number of predictions almost equal). Therefore, once ad-
dressed in the detection pipeline, scale imbalance methods
can signiﬁcantly boost performance.
Feature pyramid based methods increased the perfor-
mance signiﬁcantly compared to SSD. Once included in
Faster R-CNN with ResNet-101, the pioneering FPN study
[26] has a relative improvement of 3:7% on MS COCO
testdev (from 34:9to36:2). Another virtue of the feature
pyramids is the efﬁciency due to having lighter detection
networks: e.g., the model with FPN is reported to be more
than two times faster than baseline Faster R-CNN with
ResNet-50 backbone ( 150ms vs 320ms per image on a single
NVIDIA M40 GPU) [26]. Currently, the most promising
results are obtained via NAS by learning how to com-
bine the backbone features from different levels. Using the
ResNet-50 backbone with 10241024 image size, a 10:2%
relative improvement is obtained on MS COCO testdev
(from 40:1to44:2) by NAS-FPN [81] but it needs also to be
noted that number of parameters in the learned structure
is approximately two times higher and inference time is
26% more ( 92:1ms vs 73:0ms per image on a single P100
GPU). Inference time is also a major drawback of the image
pyramid based methods. While SNIP reports inference at
approximately 1image/sec, the faster version, SNIPER,
improves it to 5images/sec on a V100 GPU ( 200ms/image).
In order to adjust the inference time-performance trade-
off in scale imbalance, a common method is to use multi-
scale images with one backbone and multiple lighter net-
works. All methods in Section 5.1.4 are published last year.
To illustrate the performance gains: Pang et al. [72] achieved
19:5%on MS COCO test-dev relative improvement with
12ms per image inference time compared to SSD300 with
the same size image and backbone network having 10ms
per image inference time (mAPs are 25:1vs30:0).
5.4 Open Issues
Here we discuss open problems concerning scale imbalance.
5.4.1 Characteristics of Different Layers of Feature Hierar-
chies
In feature-pyramid based methods (Section 5.2), a promi-
nent and common pattern is to include a top-down path-
way in order to integrate higher-layer features with lower-
layer ones. Although this approach has yielded promising
improvements in performance, an established perspective
about what critical aspects of features (or information) are
handled differently in those methods is missing. Here, we
highlight three such aspects:
(i) Abstractness . Higher layers in a feature hierarchy carry
high-level, semantically more meaningful information about
the objects or object parts whereas the lower layers represent
low-level information in the scene, such as edges, contours,
corners etc. In other words, higher-layer features are more
abstract.
(ii) Coarseness . To reduce dimensions, feature networks
gradually reduce the size of the layers towards the top of the
hierarchy. Although this is reasonable given the constraints,
it has an immediate outcome on the number of neurons
that a ﬁxed bounding box at the image level encapsulatesat the different feature layers. Namely, the BB will include
less neurons when projected to the highest layer. In other
words, higher layers are more coarse.
(iii) Cardinality . In FPN and many of its variants, prediction
is performed for an object from the layer that matches the
object’s scale. Since the scales of objects are not balanced,
this approach has a direct affect on the number of predic-
tions and backpropagation performed through a layer.
We argue that analyzing and addressing these aspects in
a more established manner is critical for developing more
profound solutions. Although we see that some methods
handle imbalance in these aspects (e.g. Libra FPN [29]
addresses all three aspects, Path Aggregation Network [75]
handles abstractness and cardinality, whereas FPN solves
only abstractness to a certain extent), these aspects should
be quantiﬁed and used for comparing different methods.
5.4.2 Image Pyramids in Deep Object Detectors
Open Issue. It is hard to exploit image pyramids using neural
networks due to memory limitations. Therefore, ﬁnding
solutions alleviating this constraint (e.g., as in SNIP [27])
is still an open problem.
Explanation. The image pyramids (Figure 8(d)) were com-
monly adopted by the pre-deep learning era object detec-
tors. However, memory limitations motivated the methods
based on pyramidal features which, with less memory, are
still able to generate a set of features with different scales al-
lowing predictions to occur at multiple scales. On the other
hand, feature-pyramids are actually approximations of the
features extracted from image pyramids, and there is still
room for improvement given that using image pyramids is
not common among deep object detectors.
6 I MBALANCE 3: S PATIAL IMBALANCE
Deﬁnition. Size, shape, location – relative to both the image
or another box – and IoU are spatial attributes of bounding
boxes. Any imbalance in such attributes is likely to affect
the training and generalization performance. For example,
a slight shift in position may lead to drastic changes in the
regression (localization) loss, causing an imbalance in the
loss values, if a suitable loss function is not adopted. In this
section, we discuss these problems speciﬁc to the spatial
attributes and regression loss.
6.1 Imbalance in Regression Loss
Deﬁnition. This imbalance problem is concerned with the
uneven contributions of different individual examples to the
regression loss. Figure 11 illustrates the problem using L1
andL2losses, where the hard example (i.e. the one with low
IoU, the yellow box) is dominating the L2loss, whereas L1
loss assigns relatively more balanced errors to all examples.
Solutions. The regression losses for object detection have
evolved under two main streams: The ﬁrst one is the Lp-
norm-based (e.g. L1,L2) loss functions and the second
one is the IoU-based loss functions. Table 5 presents a
comparison of the widely used regression losses.
ReplacingL2regression loss [17], [123], SmoothL1Loss
[17] is the ﬁrst loss function designed speciﬁcally for deep
object detectors, and it has been widely adopted (e.g. [19],