OKSUZ et al. : IMBALANCE PROBLEMS IN OBJECT DETECTION: A REVIEW 29
Fig. 19: An illustration on ambiguities resulting from la-
beling examples. The blue boxes denote the ground truth.
The green boxes are the estimated positive boxes with
IoU > 0:5. The input image is from the MS COCO [90].
can be misleadingly labeled as positive; and once they are
labeled as positive, it is likely that they will be sampled as
hard positives:
The estimated (positive) box for the bicycle (green)
has two problems: It has occlusion (for the bicycle),
and a big portion of it includes another object (a
person). For this reason, during training, this is not
only a hard example for the bicycle class but also a
misleading example for the person class in that this
speciﬁc example will try to suppress the probability
of this box to be classiﬁed as person.
The estimated (positive) box for the person class
(green) consists of black pixels in most of it. In other
words, the box does hardly include any visually
descriptive part for a person. For this reason, this is a
very hard example which is likely to fail in capturing
the ground truth class well.
9.4 Imbalance in Bottom-Up Object Detectors
Open Issue. Bottom-up detectors [23], [48], [49] adopt a
completely different approach to object detection than the
one-stage and the two-stage detectors (see Section 2.1).
Bottom-up detectors might share many of the imbalance
problems seen in the top-down detectors, and they may
have their own imbalance issues as well. Further research
needs to be conducted for (i) analyzing the known methods
addressing imbalance problems in the context of bottom-
up object detectors, and (ii) imbalance problems that are
speciﬁc to bottom-up detectors.
Explanation. Addressing imbalance issues in bottom-up ob-
ject detectors has received limited attention. CornerNet
[23] and ExtremeNet [49] use focal loss [22] to address
foreground-background class imbalance, and the hourglass
network [104] to compensate for the scale imbalance. On the
other hand, use of hard sampling methods and the effects of
other imbalance problems have not been investigated. For
the top-down detectors, we can recap some of the ﬁndings:
from the class imbalance perspective, Shrivastava et al. [24]
show that the examples with larger losses are important;
from the scale imbalance perspective, different architectures
[29], [75], [81] and training methods [27], [28] involving
feature and image pyramids are proven to be useful andﬁnally from the objective imbalance perspective, Pang et al.
[29] showed that smooth L1loss underestimates the effect
of the inliers. Research is needed to come up with such
ﬁndings for bottom-up object detectors.
10 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided a thorough review of the im-
balance problems in object detection. In order to provide
a more complete and coherent perspective, we introduced
a taxonomy of the problems as well as the solutions for
addressing them. Following the taxonomy on problems, we
discussed each problem separately in detail and presented
the solutions with a unifying yet critical perspective.
In addition to the detailed discussions on the studied
problems and the solutions, we pinpointed and presented
many open issues and imbalance problems that are critical
for object detection. In addition to the many open aspects
that need further attention for the studied imbalance prob-
lems, we identiﬁed new imbalance issues that have not been
addressed or discussed before.
With this review and our taxonomy functioning as a
map, we, as the community, can identify where we are
and the research directions to be followed to develop better
solutions to the imbalance problems in object detection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the Scientiﬁc and
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜB ˙ITAK)
through the project titled “Object Detection in Videos with
Deep Neural Networks” (grant number 117E054). Kemal
Öksüz is supported by the TÜB ˙ITAK 2211-A National Schol-
arship Programme for Ph.D. students.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Fan, L. Brown, and J. Smith, “A closer look at faster r-cnn for
vehicle detection,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium , 2016.
[2] Z. Fu, Y. Chen, H. Yong, R. Jiang, L. Zhang, and X. Hua, “Fore-
ground gating and background reﬁning network for surveillance
object detection,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing-Accepted ,
2019.
[3] A. Geiger, P . Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for au-
tonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
2012.
[4] X. Dai, “Hybridnet: A fast vehicle detection system for au-
tonomous driving,” Signal Processing: Image Communication ,
vol. 70, pp. 79 – 88, 2019.
[5] P . F. Jaeger, S. A. A. Kohl, S. Bickelhaupt, F. Isensee, T. A.
Kuder, H. Schlemmer, and K. H. Maier-Hein, “Retina u-net:
Embarrassingly simple exploitation of segmentation supervision
for medical object detection,” arXiv , vol. 1811.08661, 2018.
[6] S.-g. Lee, J. S. Bae, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, and S. Yoon, “Liver
lesion detection from weakly-labeled multi-phase ct volumes
with a grouped single shot multibox detector,” in Medical Image
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) , A. F.
Frangi, J. A. Schnabel, C. Davatzikos, C. Alberola-López, and
G. Fichtinger, Eds., 2018.
[7] M. Rad and V . Lepetit, “Bb8: A scalable, accurate, robust to partial
occlusion method for predicting the 3d poses of challenging
objects without using depth,” in The IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017.
[8] W. Kehl, F. Manhardt, F. Tombari, S. Ilic, and N. Navab, “Ssd-
6d: Making rgb-based 3d detection and 6d pose estimation great
again,” in The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , 2017.