ence of dataset bias. This setting is problematic because
it is challenging to identify what kinds of bias exist and
which attributes involve spurious correlations without thor-
ough analysis of model and dataset. Note that, even with the
information about dataset bias, the relevant annotations over
all training examples is challenging. Contrary to the super-
vised approaches, [25,30] tackle a more challenging setting,
where the bias information is unavailable, via failure-based
learning or subgroup-based penalizing.
This paper presents a simple but effective unsupervised
debiasing technique via feature clustering and cluster re-
weighting. We first observe that the examples with the
same label for a certain attribute other than the target at-
tribute tend to have similar representations in the feature
space by the model trained sufficiently. Based on this ob-
servation, we estimate bias pseudo-attributes in an unsuper-
vised manner from the clustering results within each class.
To exploit the bias pseudo-attributes for learning debiased
representations, we introduce a reweighting scheme for the
corresponding clusters, where each cluster has an impor-
tance weight depending on its size and task-specific accu-
racy. This strategy encourages the minority clusters to par-
ticipate in the optimization process actively, which is crit-
ical to improving worst-group generalization. Despite its
simplicity, our method turns out to be effective for debias-
ing without any supervision of bias information; it is even
comparable to the supervised debiasing method. The main
contributions of our work are summarized below:
•We propose a simple but effective unsupervised debi-
asing approach, which requires no explicit supervision
about spurious correlations across attributes.
•We introduce a technique to learn debiased representa-
tions by identifying bias pseudo-attributes via cluster-
ing and reweighting the corresponding clusters based
on both their size and target loss.
•We provide extensive experimental results and achieve
outstanding performance in terms of unbiased and
worst-group accuracies, which are even as competitive
as supervised debiasing methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We re-
view the prior research in Section 2. Section 3 presents the
proposed framework for learning debiased representations,
and Section 4 demonstrates its effectiveness with extensive
empirical analysis. We conclude our paper in Section 5.
2. Related Work
2.1. Bias in computer vision tasks
Real-world datasets are inevitably biased due to their in-
sufficiently controlled collection process, and consequently,deep neural networks often capture unintended correla-
tions between the true labels and the spuriously correlated
ones. Measuring and mitigating the potential risks posed by
dataset or algorithmic bias has been extensively investigated
in various computer vision tasks [3,6,16,21,31,33,36]. For
example, VQA models frequently exploits statistical regu-
larities between answer occurrences and patterns of ques-
tions while ignoring visual information [3, 7]. Semantic
segmentation models typically take advantage of scene con-
text for pixel-level predictions of semantic labels [6]. To
prevent using undesirable correlation in biased datasets, ex-
isting approaches often rely on human supervision for bias
annotations and present several technical directions such as
data augmentation [13,39], model ensembles [3,7], and sta-
tistical regularizations [1]. Such supervised debiasing tech-
niques have been applied to various computer vision tasks
by exploiting known application-specific bias information,
including uni-modality of the dataset in visual question an-
swering [3], stereotype textures in image recognition [13],
temporal invariance in action recognition [20], and demo-
graphic information in facial image recognition [26,35,39].
2.2. Handling distribution shifts
Distribution shift has recently emerged as a critical chal-
lenge in machine learning, where the goal of the optimiza-
tion is to learn a robust model in a test environment with
a different distribution. Distributionally robust optimiza-
tion (DRO) [2, 9, 11, 17] has been proposed to improve the
worst-case generalization performance over a family of tar-
get distributions, and has provided theoretical background
of Group DRO [26] and its variation [30]. However, the ob-
jective of DRO often leads to an overly conservative model
and results in performance degeneration on unseen environ-
ments [10, 15]. To relax the constraints for the uncertainty
set of test distributions, some approaches pose additional
assumptions. For instance, the dataset consists of multiple
groups with the shared properties and the uncertainty set is
represented by a mixture of these groups. This assumption
is also used in robust federated learning [19, 24], algorith-
mic fairness [5,8,37], and domain generalization [4,18,29].
Our framework also takes advantage of this assumption but
does not rely on the supervision of group information.
2.3. Debiasing via loss-based reweighting
There exist several generic debiasing techniques via
sample reweighting based on observed task-specific losses
under the supervised environment [26] or the unsupervised
setting [25, 30]. Group DRO [26] exploits the group in-
formation specified by the bias attributes and aims to im-
prove the worst-group generalization performance. On the
other hand, Nam et al. [25] employ the difference between
the generalized and standard cross-entropy loss to capture
the bias-alignment for sample reweighting while Sohoni et
16743