train both the base and target models using the Adam opti-
mizer with a learning rate of 1×10−4, a batch size of 256,
and a weight decay rate of 0.01. For the Colored MNIST
dataset, we adopt a multi-layer perceptron with three hidden
layers, each of which has 100 hidden units. We also employ
the same Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1×10−3.
We train the models for 100 epochs for all experiments, and
decay the learning rate using the cosine annealing [23].
For clustering, we extract features from a separately
trained base network with the standard classification loss
and perform k-means clustering with K= 8 in all experi-
ments. The cluster weight of the kthcluster, ωk, is updated
by exponential moving average at each iteration with a mo-
mentum mof 0.3. All the results reported in our paper are
obtained from the average of three runs.
4.3. Evaluation protocol
To evaluate the unbiased accuracy with an imbalanced
evaluation set, we measure the accuracy of each group g=
(at,ab), defined by a pair of target and bias attribute values.
We finally report the average accuracy of each group and
worst-group accuracy among all groups as in [25].
4.4. Results
We present our main results on the standard benchmarks
including CelebA, WaterBirds, and Colored-MNIST. In the
rest of this section, our method is denoted by BPA, which
stands for bias pseudo-attribute.
CelebA Before evaluating our frameworks, we first thor-
oughly analyze the CelebA dataset in terms of algorithmic
bias among the attributes. There are a total of 40 attributes
in the CelebA dataset. The bias attribute is fixed to gen-
der, and we analyze its relation to the attributes of the tar-
get candidates given by the rest of 39 attributes. We ac-
cept the target attributes if the smallest group given by its
combinations with the bias attribute in the test split con-
tains at least 10 examples for statistical stability4. We sup-
pose that the spurious correlation exists between target and
bias attributes when a baseline model gives a large perfor-
mance gap between its overall accuracy and unbiased ac-
curacy ( e.g.,>5% points). We found that 26 out of 32 at-
tributes have spurious correlation to gender , and report the
results for the attributes. See our supplementary files for
more detailed analysis.
Table 1 presents the experimental results of the proposed
algorithm on the CelebA dataset, in comparison to the ex-
isting methods as well as the baseline model. Our model
significantly outperforms the baseline and LfF [25] for all
target attributes in terms of both unbiased and worst-group
accuracies. Note that our model is almost competitive to
4The removed target attributes are 5 o’clock shadow ,bald,rosy cheeks ,
sideburns ,goatee ,mustache , and wearing necktie .a supervised approach, Group DRO [26], without the ex-
plicit bias information. On the other hand, we observe that
training the model with LfF deteriorates performance even
compared to the baseline. This is because it fixes the fea-
ture extractor and only trains its classification layer at the
end5. To conduct a meaningful comparison with the sta-
ble version of LfF, we first train the baseline model used in
our experiment for 100 epochs and then fine-tune the clas-
sification layer only using the LfF algorithm; this revised
version is referred to as LfF∗in the rest of this section. Al-
though the performance of LfF∗is stable, the improvement
by debiasing is still limited compared to Group DRO and
our approach. Additional experimental results for other bias
attributes are provided in our supplementary documents.
Waterbirds We also evaluate our model on the Water-
birds dataset and present the results in Table 2. As in
the CelebA dataset, our model achieves the best accuracies
among the unsupervised methods in terms of both the unbi-
ased and worst-group accuracies, and presents comparable
results to the supervised method [26]. Our successful results
on Waterbirds imply that the proposed method is robust to
small-scale datasets as well.
Colored-MNIST Table 3 shows that our model achieves
consistent accuracy in the digit classification with color
bias. Besides, the color classification performance, where
the algorithmic bias does not exist, turns out to be also com-
petitive to the baseline, while the supervised approach is not
good at this setting.
4.5. Analysis
Results with no algorithmic bias We test our algorithm
on unbiased datasets to make sure that it is dependable on
the cases without algorithmic bias. The unbiased setting is
defined by the configuration that a baseline model involves
a marginal difference between its overall accuracy and un-
biased accuracy ( e.g.,<5% points). Similar to Table 1,
we identify a subset of target attributes in CelebA, which is
not spuriously correlated to gender; there exist 6 out of 32
attributes. Table 4 illustrates the results of the 6 target at-
tributes, where the accuracy of our approach is most consis-
tent among the 4 methods. This implies that our framework
can be incorporated into the existing recognition models di-
rectly, without knowing the presence of dataset bias. Note
that color classification with digit bias on Colored-MNIST
or background place classification with object bias on Wa-
terbirds are also qualified as unbiased settings, where our
model gives consistent results.
Multiple bias attributes Thanks to the unsupervised na-
ture of our method, we can simply evaluate our model on
5https://github.com/alinlab/LfF
16747