Unsupervised Learning of Debiased Representations with Pseudo-Attributes
Seonguk Seo1Joon-Young Lee3Bohyung Han1,2
1ECE &1ASRI &1,2IPAI, Seoul National University3Adobe Research
{seonguk, bhhan }@snu.ac.kr jolee@adobe.com
Abstract
Dataset bias is a critical challenge in machine learning
since it often leads to a negative impact on a model due to
the unintended decision rules captured by spurious correla-
tions. Although existing works often handle this issue based
on human supervision, the availability of the proper annota-
tions is impractical and even unrealistic. To better tackle the
limitation, we propose a simple but effective unsupervised
debiasing technique. Specifically, we first identify pseudo-
attributes based on the results from clustering performed in
the feature embedding space even without an explicit bias
attribute supervision. Then, we employ a novel cluster-wise
reweighting scheme to learn debiased representation; the
proposed method prevents minority groups from being dis-
counted for minimizing the overall loss, which is desirable
for worst-case generalization. The extensive experiments
demonstrate the outstanding performance of our approach
on multiple standard benchmarks, even achieving the com-
petitive accuracy to the supervised counterpart. The source
code is available at our project page1.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive perfor-
mance by minimizing the average loss on training datasets.
Although we typically adopt the empirical risk minimiza-
tion framework as a training objective, it is sometimes prob-
lematic due to dataset bias leading to significant degrada-
tion of worse-case generalization performance as discussed
in [2, 12, 18, 37, 38]. This is because models do not always
learn what we expect, but, to the contrary, rather capture
unintended decision rules from spurious correlations. For
example, on the Colored MNIST dataset [1, 21, 25], where
each digit is highly correlated to a certain color, a network
often learns the color patterns in images, not the digit in-
formation, while ignoring few conflicting samples. Such an
unintended rule works well on most of the training samples
but incurs unexpected worst-case errors for the examples in
1https://github.com/skynbe/pseudo-attributes
Target Attribute  : Hair Color Bias Attribute  : Gender  (Unknown) 
 
 Male Female Blond Non-blond 
    Overall accuracy : 
Unbiased accuracy : 
Unbiased accuracy (Ours) : 
Acc. : 99.5% Acc. : 41.1% 
Acc. : 85.6% Acc. : 95.6% 
 
 Male Female Blond Hair Non-blond Hair 
Acc : 99.5% Acc : 41.1% 
Acc : 85.6% Acc : 95.6% 95.70% 
80.42%  ( -15.28%p) 
90.18% 
Figure 1. Representative examples on the CelebA dataset for the
problem that we focus on. Since most of the people with blond
hair are women, hair color attribute has a spurious correlation with
gender attribute. Thus, when trained to classify the hair color , a
network captures the unintended decision rule using gender , lead-
ing to poor worst-group and unbiased accuracies, despite its high
overall accuracy. Our model aims to learn debiased representa-
tion, which gives better worst-group and unbiased accuracies, es-
pecially when the bias information is unavailable.
minority groups, which makes the model unable to general-
ize on test environments with distribution shifts or robust-
ness constraints. Figure 1 illustrates the problem that we
mainly deal with in this paper.
To mitigate the bias issue, learning debiased representa-
tions from a biased dataset has received growing attention
from machine learning community [1, 3, 14, 21, 26, 28, 34].
However, most previous works rely on the explicit supervi-
sion or prior knowledge under the assumption of the pres-
16742