2 4 6 8 10
The number of clusters (K)60708090Unbiased accuracy (%)
Blond Hair
Heavy Makeup
Pale Skin
Wearing LipstickFigure 2. Sensitivity analysis on the number of clusters in our
framework on the CelebA dataset.
where the group information at test time is not fully pro-
vided during training. The bias attribute specified during
training, which is exploited by group DRO, is fixed to gen-
der. To evaluate the performance in this setting, we measure
a set of unbiased accuracies corresponding to the combina-
tions of the specified bias attribute, gender , and each of 25
unspecified bias attributes except the target attribute6. Note
that the unspecified bias attributes are not introduced dur-
ing training but used to define groups at test time. Table 7
clearly shows that our model outperforms Group DRO in
the bias-unspecified setting, where we only report the av-
erage and standard deviation of the set of unbiased accu-
racies due to space limitation. This implies that, although
Group DRO handles group shifts well within the simplex
of the specified group distributions, it suffers from worst-
case generalization for unspecified group shifts. Note that
the proposed approach is free from the issue because it does
not use any information about bias for training.
Sensitivity analysis on the number of clusters We con-
duct ablation study on the number of groups for cluster-
ing on the feature embedding space to obtain bias pseudo-
attributes on the CelebA dataset. We set gender as the bias
attribute and evaluate the unbiased accuracies for several
target attributes. Figure 2 presents that the results are stable
over a wide range of the number of clusters and the accuracy
is saturated when K≥4.
Feature visualization Figure 3 illustrates the t-SNE re-
sults of instance embeddings for the baseline model (left)
and ours (right) on the CelebA dataset for the blond hair
attribute classification, where we visualize only negative
(blond hair = false ) examples for an effective visualization.
Blue and orange colors indicate values—female and male,
respectively—of the bias attribute, gender . We observe that
our model helps to mix the examples in different groups
within the same class, which is desirable for debiasing.
6There exist 26 (out of 39) valid attributes as described in Section 4.4.
Figure 3. The t-SNE plots of feature embeddings using baseline
(left) and ours (right) trained to classify hair color . We visualize
the distribution of samples that have the same target value ( blond
hair = false ). Blue and orange colors denote different gender val-
ues, female and male, respectively. Our framework helps mix sam-
ples which have the same target but different bias attribute values.
5. Conclusion
We presented a generic unsupervised debiasing frame-
work using pseudo-attribute. We observed that the exam-
ples sampled from the same groups are closely located in
the feature embedding space. Based on our empirical ob-
servation, we claim that it is possible to identify the pseudo-
attributes by taking advantage of the embedding results even
without the attribute supervision. Inspired by this fact,
we introduced a novel cluster-based weighting strategy for
learning debiased representations. We demonstrated the ef-
fectiveness of our method on multiple standard benchmarks,
which is even as competitive as the supervised debiasing
method, group DRO. We also conducted a thorough analy-
sis of our framework in many realistic scenarios, where our
model provides substantial gains consistently.
Potential societal impact and limitation Machine learn-
ing models typically focus on performance improvement
unconditionally. Hence, it is often exposed to the risk
caused by dataset and/or algorithmic bias, which need to
be carefully addressed for enhancing reliability and robust
of models. This research contributes to a positive societal
impact from this point of view. Although the proposed al-
gorithm turns out to be effective for bias identification, there
may be blind spots due to unexplored types of bias. There-
fore, we believe that the identification of hidden and un-
observable biases without prior knowledge is a promising
research direction.
Acknowledgments This work was partly supported by
the IITP grants [2021-0-02068, Artificial Intelligence In-
novation Hub; 2021-0-01343, Artificial Intelligence Grad-
uate School Program (Seoul National University)] and
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant
[2022R1A2C3012210] funded by the Korean government
(MSIT) and by Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. [IO210917-
08957-01].
16749