map. The predicted inter-chain contact map accurately recalls a large
portion of the true inter-chain contacts.
Methods
Attention-based neural network architecture
Figure 6illustrates the overall architecture of CDPred based on the
channel-wise and spatial-wise attention mechanisms. CDPred takes thetertiary structures of monomers of a dimer as input and extracts themonomer sequences and intra-chain distance maps. For homodimers,since the sequences of the two monomers of a homodimer are thesame, only one monomer tertiary structure is used as input. The
monomer sequences are used to search the protein sequence data-
bases to generate MSAs of dimers, which are used to generate residue-residue co-evolutionary scores, row attention maps, and position-speci ﬁc scoring matrix (PSSM) as input features (see Features Sub-
section 4.2 for details). The complete input for CDPred is the con-catenation of all the input features.
The input features stored in 2D tensors of multiple channels are
ﬁrst transformed by a 2D convolutional layer, followed by a Maxout
layer
30to reduce the dimensionality. The output of the Maxout layer is
used as input for a series of deep residual network blocks empoweredby the attention mechanism. The residual network has been widely
used in computer vision and protein intra-chain distance and contact
prediction
5,7,31. Here, we combine the residual connection with other
useful components to construct a residual block, which includes thenormalization block (called RCIN) consisting of a row normalizationlayer (RN), column normalization layer (IN)
32, and instance normal-
ization (IN)33for normalizing the feature maps, a channel attention
squeeze-and-excitation (SE) block34for capturing the important
information of different feature channels, and a spatial attentionblock
35that captures signals between residues right after the channel
attention block. Following the residual blocks, a 2D convolutionallayer with the softmax function is used to classify the distance betweenany two residues from two monomers in a dimer into 42 distance bins
(i.e., 40 bins from 2 to 22 Å with a bin size of 0.5 Å, plus a 0 –2Åb i na n d
a >22 Å bin). Two kinds of inter-chain residue-residue distance arepredicted at the same time: (1) the distance between the twoclosest heavy atoms from two residues used by most existingworks in the ﬁeld and (2) the C
b-Cbdistance between two residues usedby some recent works36, resulting in two kinds of distance maps
predicted.
Features
The input features of CDPred contain (1) the tertiary structure infor-mation of monomers in the form of an intra-chain distance map, (2)pairwise co-evolutionary features, and (3) sequential amino acid con-servation features, which are stored in an L × L × N tensor (L is thelength of the sequence of a monomer for a homodimer or the sum ofthe length of two monomers (L1 + L2) for a heterodimer). N is thenumber of feature channels for each pair of residues.
Tertiary structure information of monomers . The protein tertiary
structure information of a monomer in a dimer is represented as anintra-chain distance map storing the distance between C
batoms of two
residues in the monomer. For a homodimer, an intra-chain distancemap (L × L × 1) computed from the tertiary structure of only onemonomer is used. For a heterodimer, two intra-chain distance maps(L1 × L1 × 1 and L2 × L2 × 1) of the two monomers in the heterodimer arecomputed from their tertiary structures and added as the top leftsubmatrix and the bottom right submatrix of the input distance map ofthe dimer of (L1 + L2) × (L1 + L2) × 1 dimension. The values of the other
area of the input distance map of the heterodimer are set to 0. In the
training phase, the true tertiary structures of monomers in the dimersare used to compute the intra-chain distance maps above. During thetest/prediction phase, the tertiary structures of monomers predictedby AlphaFold are used to generate the intra-chain distance maps asinput. Using predicted tertiary structures as input is more challengingbut can more objectively evaluate the performance of inter-chaindistance prediction because, in most situations, the true tertiarystructures of the monomers are not known. A predicted tertiarystructure also corresponds to an unbound tertiary structure, a termcommonly used in the protein docking ﬁeld.
Co-evolutionary features . MSAs are generated for homodimers or
heterodimers as input for the calculation of their co-evolutionaryfeatures. To challenge the deep learning method to effectively predictinter-chain distance maps from noisy inputs, in the training phase, weuse less sensitive tools or smaller sequence databases to generate
Monomer structurePQA
A
DIVI
A
DAQA
T
Psequence
Multiple sequence alignment
Distance mapAttention mapsCCmpredPSSM
SoftMaxInput
Conv2D
ResNetBlockMaxout
Conv2DBlock_Input
NormalizationB
lock
Conv2D
Conv2D (3*3)
Channel Attention
BlockConv2D (7*1)Conv2D (1*7)
Spatial Attention 
blockNormalizationB
lock
Conv2DNormalizationB
lock
Block_Output+
Fig. 6 | Overview of the CDPred architecture. CDPred simultaneously uses the
tertiary structural information (i.e., intra-chain distance map of monomers),
sequential information (PSSM), and residue-residue co-evolutionary information(i.e., co-evolutionary scores calculated by CCMpred and attention maps by MSAtransformer) as input to predict inter-chain distance maps. The dimension of the
input for the homomer dimer is L × L × 186 (L is the length of the monomer
sequence), while the dimension of the input for the heterodimer is (L1 + L2) x(L1 + L2) × 186 (L1 and L2 are the length of the two different monomers in the
heterodimer). Each of the two output matrices has the same dimension as the input
except for the number of output channels. The number of the output channels ofthe output layer is 42, storing the predicted probability of the distance in 42 dis-tance bins. Two output matrices are generated, representing the two kinds of
predicted inter-chain distance maps.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34600-2
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:6963 7