Many works in fairness [ 15,19,50,14] work within the disparate impact (DI) doctrine [ 28]. Broadly
speaking, the doctrine posits that any “protected class” must have approximately equal representation
in the decisions taken (by an algorithm). Although the DI doctrine is a law [ 1,27] in the United
States, violating the DI doctrine is by itself notillegal [ 3]; it is illegal only if the violation cannot be
justiﬁed by the decision maker. In the clustering setting, this translates to the following algorithmic
question : what is the loss in quality of the clustering when all protected classes are required to have
approximately equal representation in the clusters returned?
Motivated thus, Chierichetti et al. [ 19], and later Rösner and Schmidt [ 50], model the set of points
as partitioned into ℓcolors, and the color proportion of each returned cluster should be similar to
that in the original data. There are three shortcomings of these papers: (a) the fairness constraint
was too stringent and brittle, (b) good algorithms were given only for the k-center objective, and (c)
the color classes weren’t allowed to overlap. We remark that the last restriction is limiting since an
individual can lie in multiple protected classes (consider an African-American senior woman). In our
work we address all these concerns: we allow the user to specify the fairness constraints, we give
simple algorithms with provable theoretical guarantees for a large suite of objective functions, and
we allow overlapping protected classes.
Our fairness notion. We propose a model which extends the model of [ 19] to have ℓ≥2groups
of people which are allowed to overlap. For each group i, we have two parameters βi,αi∈[0,1].
Motivated by the DI doctrine, we deem a clustering solution fairif each cluster satisﬁes two properties:
(a)restricted dominance (RD) , which asserts that the fraction of people from group iin any cluster is
at mostαi, and (b) minority protection (MP) , which asserts that the fraction of people from group i
in any cluster is at least βi. Note that we allow βi,αi’s to be arbitrary parameters, and furthermore,
they can differ across different groups. This allows our model to provide a lot of ﬂexibility to users.
For instance, our model easily captures the notions deﬁned by [19] and [50].
We allow our protected groups to overlap. Nevertheless, the quality of our solutions depend on the
amount of overlap. We deﬁne ∆(similar to [ 15]) to be the maximum number of groups a single
individual can be a part of. This parameter, as we argued above, is usually not 1, but can be assumed
to be a small constant depending on the application.
Our results. Despite the generality of our model, we show that in a black-box fashion , we can get
fair algorithms for anyℓp-norm objective (this includes, k-center,k-median, and the widely used
k-means objective) if we allow for very small additive violations to the fairness constraint. We show
thatgiven any ρ-approximation algorithm Afor a given objective which could be returning widely
unfair clusters, we can return a solution which is a (ρ+ 2) -approximation to the best clustering
which satisﬁes the fairness constraints (Theorem 1). Our solution, however, can violate both the RD
and MP property additively by4∆+3 . This is negligible if the clusters are large, and our empirical
results show this almost never exceeds 3. Further in our experiments, our cost is at most 15%more
than optimum, which is a much better factor compared to (ρ+2) .
The black-box feature of our result is useful also in comparing the performance of any particular
algorithm A. This helps if one wishes to justify the property of an algorithm one might be already
using. Our results can be interpreted to give a way to convert any clustering algorithm to its fair
version. Indeed, our method is very simple – we use the solution returned by Ato deﬁne a fair
assignment problem and show that this problem has a good optimal solution. The fair assignment
problem is then solved via iterative rounding which leads to the small additive violations. In the case
of∆ = 1 (disjoint groups), we can get a simpler, one-iteration rounding algorithm.
Comparison with recent works. In a very recent independent and concurrent work, Schmidt et
al. [51] consider the fair k-means problem in the streaming model with a notion of fairness similar to
ours. However, their results crucially assume that the underlying metric space is Euclidean. Their
main contributions are deﬁning “fair coresets” and showing how to compute them in a streaming
setting, resulting in signiﬁcant reduction in the input size. Although their coreset construction
algorithm works with arbitrary number of groups, their fair k-means algorithms assume there are only
two disjoint groups of equal size. Even for this, Schmidt et al. [ 51] give an(5.5ρ+1)-approximation,
given any ρ-approximation for the vanilla k-means problem; the reader should compare with our
(ρ+2) -approximation. Backurs et al. [ 9] consider the problem of designing scalable algorithm for
the fair k-median problem in the Euclidean space. The notion of fairness is balance , as deﬁned by
Chierichetti et al. [ 19], and hence works only for two disjoint groups. Their approximation ratio is
Or,b(dlogn)whererandbare fairness parameters, and dis the dimension of the Euclidean space. In
2