Fair Algorithms for Clustering
Suman K. Bera
UC Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
sbera@ucsc.eduDeeparnab Chakrabarty
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
deeparnab@dartmouth.edu
Nicolas J. Flores
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
nicolasflores.19@dartmouth.eduMaryam Negahbani
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
maryam@cs.dartmouth.edu
Abstract
We study the problem of ﬁnding low-cost fair clusterings in data where each data
point may belong to many protected groups. Our work signiﬁcantly generalizes the
seminal work of Chierichetti et al. (NIPS 2017) as follows.
•We allow the user to specify the parameters that deﬁne fair representation.
More precisely, these parameters deﬁne the maximum over- and minimum
under-representation of any group in any cluster.
•Our clustering algorithm works on any ℓp-norm objective (e.g. k-means,k-
median, and k-center). Indeed, our algorithm transforms any vanilla clustering
solution into a fair one incurring only a slight loss in quality.
•Our algorithm also allows individuals to lie in multiple protected groups. In
other words, we do not need the protected groups to partition the data and we
can maintain fairness across different groups simultaneously.
Our experiments show that on established data sets, our algorithm performs much
better in practice than what our theoretical results suggest.
1 Introduction
Many important decisions today are made by machine learning algorithms. These range from showing
advertisements to customers [ 49,23], to awarding home loans [ 38,46], to predicting recidivism [ 6,
24,21]. It is important to ensure that such algorithms are fairand are not biased towards or against
some speciﬁc groups in the population. A considerable amount of work [ 37,57,19,36,15,56,55]
addressing this issue has emerged in the recent years.
Our paper considers fair algorithms for clustering. Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning
problem where one wants to partition a given data-set. In machine learning, clustering is often
used for feature generation and enhancement as well. It is thus important to consider the bias and
unfairness issues when inspecting the quality of clusters. The question of fairness in clustering was
ﬁrst asked in the beautiful paper of Chierichetti et al. [ 19] with subsequent generalizations by Rösner
and Schmidt [50].
In this paper, we give a much more generalized and tunable notion of fairness in clustering than
that in [ 19,50]. Our main result is that any solution for a wide suite of vanilla clustering objectives
can be transformed into fair solutions in our notion with only a slight loss in quality by a simple
algorithm.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.