MuRel Cell Input Unit Output Unit
yes
GRU Encoder Faster RCNN 
Is she
wearing
a ring?Step #1
Argmax
MuRel Cell Step #2
Argmax
MuRel Cell Step #3
ArgmaxMax
 vi
 q s1
i s2
i s3
i s  yˆGlobal 
Pooling Bilinear 
Fusion  aˆ
 q v
Figure 3. MuRel network. The MuRel network merges the question embedding qinto spatially-grounded visual representations {vi}by
iterating through a single MuRel cell. This module takes as input a set of localized vectors {si}and updates their representation using a
multimodal fusion component. Moreover, it models all the possible pairwise relations between regions by combining spatial and semantic
information. To construct the importance map at step t, we count the number of time each region provides the maximal value of maxi{st
i}
(over the 2048 dimensions).
Connection to previous work We can draw a comparison
between our MuRel network and the FiLM network pro-
posed in [ 37]. Beyond the fact that their model is built for
the synthetic CLEVR dataset [ 21] and ours processes real
data, some connections can be found between both models.
In their work, the image passes through multiple residual
cells, whereas we only have one cell through which we it-
erate. In FiLM, the multimodal interaction is modeled with
a feature-wise afﬁne modulation, while we use a bilinear
fusion strategy [ 8] which seems better suited to real world
data. Finally, both MuRel and FiLM leverage the spatial
structure of the image representation to model the relations
between regions. In FiLM, the image is represented with
a fully-convolutional network which outputs a feature map
disposed in a ﬁxed spatial grid. With this structure on image
features, the relations between regions are modeled with a
3×3convolution inside each residual block. Thus, the rep-
resentation of each region depends on its neighbours in the
locally-connected graph induced by the ﬁxed grid structure.
In our MuRel network, the image is represented as a set of
localized features. This makes the relational modeling non
trivial. As we want to model relations between regions that
are potentially far apart, we consider that the set of regions
forms a complete graph, where each region is connected to
all the others.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental setup
Datasets : We validate the beneﬁts of the MuRel cell
and the MuRel network on three recent datasets. VQA 2.0
[17] is the most used dataset. It comes with a training set,
a validation set and an online testing set. We provide a
ﬁne grained analysis on the validation set, while we com-
pare MuRel to the state-of-the-art models on the testing set.
Then, we use VQA Changing Priors v2 [ 2] to demonstrateModel VQA 2.0 VQA CP v2 TDIUC
Attention baseline 63.44 38.04 86.96
MuRel 65.14 39.54 88.20
Table 1. Comparing MuRel to Attention. Comparison of the
MuRel strategy against a strong Attention-based model on the
VQA 2.0 val, VQA-CP v2 and TDIUC datasets. Both models have
an equivalent number of parameters ( ∼60 million) and are trained
on the same features following the same experimental setup.
the generalization capacity of MuRel. VQA-CP v2 uses the
same data as in VQA 2.0, but proposes different distribu-
tion of answers per question between training and valida-
tion splits. Finally, we use the TDIUC dataset [ 23] to con-
struct a more detailed analysis of our model’s performance
on 12 well-deﬁned types of question. TDIUC is currently
the biggest dataset for visual question answering.
Hyper-parameters : We use standard features extrac-
tion, preprocessings and loss function [ 16]. We use the re-
cent Bottom-up features provided by [ 3] to represent our
image as a set of 36 localized regions. For the question em-
bedding, we use the pretrained Skip-thought encoder from
[27]. Inspired by recent works, we use Adam as optimizer
[26] with a learning scheduler [ 46]. More details about the
experimental setup are given in appendix.
4.2. Model validation
We compare MuRel against models trained on the same
Bottom-up features [ 3] which are required to reach the best
performances.
Comparison to Attention-based model In Table 1, we
compare MuRel against a strong attentional model based on
bilinear fusions [ 8], which encompasses a multi-glimpses
attentional process [ 16]. The goal of this experiments is to
compare our approach with strong baselines for real VQA in
controlled conditions. In addition to using the same bottom-
1993