MUREL: Multimodal Relational Reasoning for Visual Question Answering
Remi Cadene1∗Hedi Ben-younes1,2∗Matthieu Cord1Nicolas Thome3
1Sorbonne Universit ´e, CNRS, LIP6, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
2Heuritech, 110 avenue de la R ´epublique, 75011 Paris
3Conservatoire National des Arts et M ´etiers, 75003 Paris
remi.cadene@lip6.fr, hedi.ben-younes@lip6.fr, matthieu.cord@lip6.fr, nicolas.thome@cnam.fr
Abstract
Multimodal attentional networks are currently state-of-
the-art models for Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks
involving real images. Although attention allows to focus
on the visual content relevant to the question, this simple
mechanism is arguably insufﬁcient to model complex rea-
soning features required for VQA or other high-level tasks.
In this paper, we propose MuRel, a multimodal relational
network which is learned end-to-end to reason over real im-
ages. Our ﬁrst contribution is the introduction of the MuRel
cell, an atomic reasoning primitive representing interac-
tions between question and image regions by a rich vec-
torial representation, and modeling region relations with
pairwise combinations. Secondly, we incorporate the cell
into a full MuRel network, which progressively reﬁnes vi-
sual and question interactions, and can be leveraged to de-
ﬁne visualization schemes ﬁner than mere attention maps.
We validate the relevance of our approach with vari-
ous ablation studies, and show its superiority to attention-
based methods on three datasets: VQA 2.0, VQA-CP v2 and
TDIUC. Our ﬁnal MuRel network is competitive to or out-
performs state-of-the-art results in this challenging context.
Our code is available: github.com/Cadene/
murel.bootstrap.pytorch
1. Introduction
Since the success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) at the ILSVRC 2012 challenge [ 29], Deep
Learning has become the baseline approach for any com-
puter vision problem. Beyond their outstanding perfor-
mances for perception tasks, e.g. classiﬁcation or detec-
tion [ 14], deep ConvNets have also been successfully used
for new artiﬁcial intelligence tasks like Visual Question An-
swering (VQA) [ 4,17,23]. VQA requires a high level un-
derstanding of images and questions, and is often consid-
ered to be a good proxy for visual reasoning. However, it
∗Equal contributionDonut
Step #1 Step #2 Step #3MuRel network 
✔What is she
eating?  
Figure 1. Visualization of the MuRel approach. Our MuRel
network for VQA is an iterative process based on a rich vectorial
representation between the question and visual information explic-
itly modeling pairwise region relations. MuRel is thus able to ex-
press complex analysis primitives beyond attention maps: here the
two regions corresponding to the head and the donuts are selected
based on their visual cues and semantic relations to properly an-
swer the question ”what is she eating?”
is not straightforward to use ConvNets in a context where a
high level of reasoning is required. The question of leverag-
ing the perception power of deep CNNs for reasoning tasks
is crucial if we want to go further in visual scene under-
standing [ 21,11].
It is also not trivial to deﬁne nor evaluate a model’s
capacity to reason about the visual modality in VQA. To
ﬁll this need, synthetic datasets have been released, e.g.
CLEVR [ 21], which speciﬁc structure controls the exact
reasoning primitives required to give the answer [ 22,19,
34]. However, methods that tackle the VQA problem on
real data struggle to integrate this explicit reasoning pro-
cedure. Instead, state-of-the-art methods often rely on the
much simpler attentional framework [ 16,8,25,12]. Despite
its effectiveness, this mechanism restricts visual reasoning
to a soft selection of regions that are relevant to answer the
question. This arguably limits the modeling power of such
models to bridge the gap between the perceptual strengths
of ConvNets and the high-level reasoning demand for VQA.
In this paper, we propose MuRel, a multimodal relational
network that goes one step further towards reasoning about
questions and images. Our ﬁrst contribution is to introduce
the MuRel cell, an atomic reasoning primitive enabling to
1
1989