Step #1
What game are they
playing on the WII?
bowling   Step #2 Step #3 Original image
What is the 
man holding? 
kite  What position is 
the front dog in? 
sitting  
✔✔✔
What is on the top 
of her head? 
hat  ✔
Figure 5. Qualitative evaluation of MuRel . Visualization of the importance maps with colored regions related to the relational mechanism.
As in Figure 3, the most selected regions by the implicit attentional mechanism are shown in brighter. The green region is the most impacted
by the pairwise modeling, while the red regions impact the green regions the most. These colored regions are only represented if they are
greater than a certain threshold.
ModelBottomYes/No Num. Other Allup
HAN [ 32] ✗ 52.25 13.79 20.33 28.65
GVQA [ 1] ✗ 57.99 13.68 22.14 31.30
Attention ✓ 41.56 12.19 43.29 38.04
MuRel ✓ 42.85 13.17 45.04 39.54
Table 5. State-of-the-art comparison on the VQA-CP v2
dataset. The Attention model was trained by us using the Bottom-
up features.
wise links match human intuition. In the ﬁrst row, the most
relevant relations according to our model are between the
player’s hand, containing the WII controller, and the screen,
which explains the prediction bowling . In the third row, the
model answers kiteusing the relation between the man’s
hand and the kite he is holding. Finally, in the last row, our
model is able to address a third question on the same image
as in Figure 1and3. Here, the relation between the head of
the woman and her hat is used to provide the right answer.
As VQA models are often subject to linguistic bias [ 17,1],
these visualizations tend to show the ability of the MuRel
network to rely on visual information to answer questions.5. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced MuRel, a multimodal rela-
tional network for Visual Question Answering task. Our
system is based on rich representations of visual image re-
gions that are progressively merged with the question repre-
sentation. We also included region relations with pairwise
combinations in our fusion, and the whole system can be
leveraged to deﬁne visualization schemes helping to inter-
pret the decision process of MuRel.
We validated our approach on three challenging datasets:
VQA 2.0, VQA-CP v2 and TDIUC. We exhibited vari-
ous ablation studies, clearly demonstrating the gain of our
vectorial representation to model the attention, the use of
pairwise combination, and the multi-step iterations in the
whole process. Our ﬁnal MuRel network is very compet-
itive and outperforms state-of-the-art results on two of the
most widely used datasets.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported within the Labex SMART
supported by French state funds managed by the ANR
within the Investissements d’Avenir programme under ref-
erence ANR-11-LABX-65.
1996