resentation, more expressive than scalar attention maps, to
model the semantic interaction between each region’s vi-
sual content and the question. In addition, we include a no-
tion of spatial and semantic context in the representations by
representing pairs of image regions through interactions be-
tween their visual embeddings and spatial coordinates. Dif-
ferently than the approach followed in [ 36] where a locally
connected graph structure is built, we use the relations be-
tween all possible pairs of regions.
Our MuRel network embodies an iterative process with
inspiration from works driven by the synthetic reasoning
CLEVR dataset, e.g., MAC [ 20] or FiLM [ 37], which we
adapt to the real data VQA purpose. In particular, we im-
prove the interactions between image regions and questions
by using richer bilinear fusion models and by explicitly in-
corporating relations between regions.
3. MuRel approach
Our VQA approach is depicted in Figure 3. Given an
imagev∈ I and a question q∈ Q about this image, we
want to predict an answer ˆa∈ A that matches the ground
truth answer a⋆. As very common in VQA, the prediction ˆa
is given by classiﬁcation scores:
ˆa= argmax
a∈Apθ(a|v,q) (1)
wherepθis our trainable model. In our system, the im-
age is represented by a set of vectors {vi}i∈[1,N], where
eachvi∈Rdvcorresponds to an object detected in the
picture. We also use the spatial coordinates of each region
bi= [x,y,w,h ], where(x,y)are the coordinates of the
top-left point of the box, and handwcorrespond to the
height and the width of the box. Note that xandw(respec-
tivelyyandh) are normalized by the width (resp. height) of
the image. For the question, we use a gated recurrent unit
network to provide a sentence embedding q∈Rdq.
In Section 3.1, we present the MuRel cell, a neural mod-
ule that learns to perform elementary reasoning operations
by blending question information into the set of spatially-
grounded visual representations. Next, in Section 3.2, we
leverage the power of this cell using the MuRel network, a
VQA architecture that iterates through a MuRel cell to rea-
son about the scene with respect to a question.
3.1. MuRel cell
The MuRel cell takes as input a bag of Nvisual features
si∈Rdv, along with their bounding box coordinates bi.
As shown in Figure 2, it is a residual function consisting
of two modules. First, an efﬁcient bilinear fusion module
merges question and region feature vectors to provide a lo-
cal multimodal embedding. This fusion is directly followed
by a pairwise modeling component, designed to update each
multimodal representation with respect to its own spatial
and visual context.Bilinear 
FusionPairwise 
Relational 
Modeling 
+
skip-connection  si sˆi q
 xi
 m i
Figure 2. MuRel cell. In the MuRel cell, the bilinear fusion
represents rich and ﬁne-grained interactions between question and
region vectors qandsi. All the resulting multimodal vectors mi
pass through a pairwise modeling block to provide a context-aware
embedding xiper region. The cell’s output ˆsiis ﬁnally computed
as a sum between siandxi, acting as residual function of si.
Multimodal fusion We want to include question infor-
mation within each visual representation si. Multiple
multimodal fusion strategies have been recently proposed
[25,16,8,44,45] to model the relevant interactions be-
tween two modalities. One of the most efﬁcient technique
is the one proposed by [ 9], based on the Tucker decomposi-
tion of third-order tensors. This bilinear fusion model learns
to focus on the relevant correlations between input dimen-
sions. It models rich and ﬁne-grained multimodal interac-
tions, while keeping a relatively low number of parameters.
Each input vector siis fused with the question embedding
qusing the same bilinear fusion:
mi= B(si,q;Θ) (2)
whereΘare the trainable parameters of the fusion module.
Each dimension mofmican be written as a bilinear func-
tion in the form/summationtext
s,qws,q,mss
iqq. Thanks to the Tucker de-
composition, the tensor {ws,q,m}is factorized into the list
of parameters Θ. We set the number of dimensions in mi
todvto facilitate the use of residual connections throughout
our architecture.
In classical attention models, the fusion between image
region and question features sandqonly learns to encode
whether a region is relevant. In the MuRel cell, the local
multimodal information is represented within a richer vec-
torial form miwhich can encode more complex correla-
tions between both modalities. This allows to store more
speciﬁc information about what precise characteristic of a
particular region is important in a given textual context.
Pairwise interactions To answer certain types of ques-
tion, it can be necessary to reason over multiple object that
interact together. More generally, we want each representa-
tion to be aware of the spatial and semantic context around
it. Given that our features are structured as a bag of local-
ized vectors [ 3], modeling the visual context of each region
is not straightforward. Similarly to the recent work of [ 36],
we opt for a pairwise relationship modeling where each re-
gion receives a message based on its relations to its neigh-
bours. In their work, a region’s neighbours correspond to
1991