theKmost similar regions, whereas in the MuRel cell the
neighbourhood is composed of every region in the image.
Besides, instead of using scalar pairwise attention and graph
convolutions with Gaussian kernels as they do, we merge
spatial and semantic representations to build relationship
vectors. In particular, we compute a context vector ˇeifor
every region. It consists in an aggregation of all the pairwise
linksri,jcoming into i. We deﬁne it as ˇei= max jri,j,
whereri,jis a vector containing information about the con-
tent of both regions, but also about their relative spatial po-
sitioning. We use the max operator in the aggregation func-
tion to reduce the noise that can be induced by average or
sum poolings, which oblige all the regions to interact with
each other. To encode the relationship vector, we use the
following formulation:
ri,j= B(bi,bj;Θb)+B(mi,mj;Θm) (3)
Through the B(.,.;Θb)operator, the cell is free to learn
spatial concepts such as on top of, left, right, etc. In par-
allel,B(.,.;Θs)encodes correlations between multimodal
vectors(si,sj), corresponding to semantic visual concepts
conditioned on the question representation. By summing
up both spatial and semantic fusions, the network can learn
high-level relational concepts such as wear, hold, etc.
The context representation ˇeiis obtained by aggregating
the representations ri,jprovided by its neighbours through
an element-wise max pooling. Using this operator, the net-
work can learn to ﬁlter our irrelevant interactions for each
features dimension. Then, the multimodal vector miis up-
dated in an additive manner:
xi=mi+ˇei (4)
This formulation of the pairwise modelling is actually
closer to the Graph Networks [ 7], where the notion of re-
lational inductive biases is formalized.
Finally, the MuREL cell’s output is computed as a resid-
ual function of its input, to avoid the vanishing gradient
problem. Each visual feature siis updated as: ˆsi=si+xi.
The chain of operations that updates the set of localized
region embeddings {si}i∈[1,N]using the multimodal fusion
withqand the pairwise modeling operator is noted:
{ˆsi}= MurelCell( {si};{bi},q) (5)
3.2. MuRel network
The MuRel network mimics a simple form of iterative
reasoning by leveraging the power of bilinear fusions to iter-
atively merge visual information into context-aware visual
embeddings. As we can see in Figure 3, the region state
vectors{si}are updated by a MuRel cell through multiple
steps, each time reﬁning the representations with contextual
and question information. More speciﬁcally, for each step
t= 1..TwhereTis the total number of steps, a MuRel cell
processes and updates the state vectors as follows:{st
i}= MurelCell/parenleftbig
{st−1
i};{bi},q/parenrightbig
(6)
The state vectors are initialized with the features outputted
by the object detector; for each region i,s0
i=vi.
The MuRel network represents each region regarding the
question, but also using its own visual context. This rep-
resentation is done iteratively, through multiple steps of a
MuRel cell. The residual nature of this module makes it
possible to align multiple cells without being subject to gra-
dient vanishing. Moreover, the weights of our model are
shared across the cells, which enables compact parametriza-
tion and good generalization.
At stept=T, the representations {sT
i}are aggregated
with a global max pooling operation to provide a single vec-
tors∈Rdv. This scene representation contains information
about the objects, the spatial and semantic relations between
them, with respect to a particular question.
The scene representation sis merged with the question
embedding qto compute a score for every possible answer
ˆy= B(s,q;Θy). Finally, ˆais the answer with maximum
score inˆy.
Visualizing MuRel network Our model can also be
leveraged to deﬁne visualization schemes ﬁner than mere
attention maps. Especially, we can highlight important rela-
tions between image regions for answering a speciﬁc ques-
tion. At the end of the MuRel network, the visual fea-
tures{sT
i}are aggregated using a max operation, yield-
ing adv−dimensional vector s. Thus, we can compute a
contribution map by measuring to what extent each region
contributes to the ﬁnal vector. To do so, we compute the
point-wise c= argmax i{sT
i} ∈[1,N]dv, and measure the
occurrence frequency of each region in this vector c. This
provides a value for each region that estimates its contri-
bution to the ﬁnal vector. Interestingly, this process can be
done after each cell, and not exclusively at the last one. In-
tuitively, it measures what the contribution map would have
been if the iterative process had stopped at this point. As
we can see in Figures 1,3,5, these relevance scores match
human intuition and can be used to explain the model’s de-
cision, even if the network has not been trained with any
selection mechanism.
Similarly, we are able to visualize the pairwise relation-
ships involved in the prediction of the MuRel cell. The ﬁrst
step is to ﬁnd i⋆, which is the region that is the most im-
pacted by the pairwise modeling. It is the region such that
/bardblˇei
xi/bardbl2is maximal (cf. Equation ( 4)). This bounding box is
shown in green in all our visualizations. We then measure
the contribution of every other region to i⋆using the oc-
currence frequencies in argmax jri,j. We show in red the
regions whose contribution to i⋆is above a certain thresh-
old (0.2 in our visualizations). If there is no such region, the
green box is not shown.
1992