Pairwise Iter. VQA 2.0 VQA CP v2 TDIUC
✗ ✗ 64.13 38.88 87.50
✓ ✗ 64.57 39.12 87.86
✗ ✓ 64.72 39.37 87.92
✓ ✓ 65.14 39.54 88.20
Table 2. Ablation study of MuRel . Experimental validation of
the pairwise module and the iterative processing on the VQA 2.0
val, VQA-CP v2 and TDIUC datasets.
up features, which are crucial for fair comparisons, we also
dimension the attention-based baseline to have an equiva-
lent amount of learned parameters than MuRel ( ∼60 mil-
lions including those from the GRU encoder). Also, we
train it following the same experimental setup to insure
competitiveness. MuRel reaches a higher accuracy on the
three datasets. We report a signiﬁcant gain of +1.70 on
VQA 2.0 and +1.50 on VQA CP v2. Not only these results
validate the ability of MuRel to better model interactions
between the question and the image, but also to generalize
when the distribution of the answers per question are com-
pletely different between the training and validation set as in
VQA CP v2. A gain of +1.24 on TDIUC demonstrates the
richer modeling capacity of MuRel in a ﬁne-grained context
of 12 well delimited question types.
Ablation study In Table 2, we compare three ablated in-
stances of MuRel to its complete form. First, we validate
the beneﬁts of the pairwise module. Adding it to a vanilla
MuRel without iterative process leads to higher accuracy
on every datasets. In fact, between line 1 and 2, we report a
gain of +0.44 on VQA 2.0, +0.24 on VQA CP v2 and +0.36
on TDIUC. Secondly, we validate the interest of the itera-
tive process. Between line 1 et 3, we report a gain of +0.59
on VQA 2.0, +0.49 on VQA CP v2 and +0.42 on TDIUC.
Notably, this modiﬁcation does not add any parameters, be-
cause we iterate over a single MuRel cell. Unsharing the
weights by using a different MuRel cell for each step gives
similar results. Finally, the pairwise module and the iter-
ative process are added to create the complete MuRel net-
work. This instance (in line 4) reaches the highest accuracy
on the three datasets. Interestingly, the gains provided by
the combination of the two methods are sometimes larger
than those of each one separately. For instance, we report a
gain of +1.01 on VQA 2.0 between line 1 and 4. This attests
to the complementary of the two modules.
Number of reasoning steps In Figure 4, we perform an
analysis of the iterative process. We train four different
MuRel networks on the VQA 2.0 train split, each with a
different number of iterations over the MuRel cell. Per-
formance is reported on valsplit. Networks with two and
three steps respectively provides a gain of +0.30 and +0.57
in overall accuracy on VQA 2.0 over the network with a
single step. An interesting aspect of the iterative process
Figure 4. Number of iterations . Impact of the number of steps
in the iterative process on the different question types of VQA 2.0
val.
of MuRel is that the four networks have exactly the same
amount of parameters, but the accuracy signiﬁcantly varies
with respect to the number of steps. While the accuracy for
the answer type involving numbers keeps increasing, we re-
port a decrease in overall accuracy at four reasoning steps.
Counting is a challenging task: not only does the model
need to detect every occurrence of the desired object, but
also the representation computed after the ﬁnal aggregation
must keep the information of the number of detected in-
stances. The complexity of this question may require deeper
relational modeling, and thus beneﬁt from a higher number
of iterations over the MuRel cell.
4.3. State of the art comparison
VQA 2.0 In Table 3, we compare MuRel to the most re-
cent contributions on the VQA 2.0 dataset. For fairness con-
siderations, all the scores correspond to models trained on
the VQA 2.0 train+val split, using the Bottom-up visual
features [ 3]. Interestingly, our model surpasses both MU-
TAN [ 8] and MLB [ 25], which correspond to some of the
latest development in visual attention and bilinear models.
This tends to indicate that VQA models can beneﬁt from
retaining local information in mulitmodal vectors instead of
scalar coefﬁcients. Moreover, our model greatly improves
over the recent method proposed in [ 36] where the regions
are structured using pairwise attention scores, which are
leveraged through spatial graph convolutions. This shows
the interest of our spatial-semantic pairwise modeling be-
tween all possible pairs of regions. Finally, even though we
did not extensively tune the hyperparameters of our model,
our overall score on the test-dev split is highly competitive
with state-of-the-art methods. In particular, we are compa-
rable to Pythia [ 46] who won the VQA Challenge 2018.
Please note that they improve their overall scores up to
70.01% when they include multiple types of visual features
and more training data. Also, we did not report the score of
69.52% obtained by BAN [ 24] as they train their model on
extra data from the Visual Genome dataset [ 28].
1994