Energies 2021 ,14, 6958 9 of 21
Figure 9. Base architecture of the GRU model used.
For the experiments, the dataset was divided into train and test subsets. The test set
was used for validation during the training process and for ﬁnal evaluation. The samples
were not included in the training set. The training set consisted of 70% of the samples and
the test set contained the remaining 30% of the samples.
Experiments were performed with different resampling rates. Using aggressive re-
sampling, the size of the dataset is greatly reduced, which increases speed and decreases
the inﬂuence of outliers in the data. However, for more precision, lower resampling rates
must be used.
To determine the best size for the sliding window, experiments were performed,
resampling to just one sample per day, which gave a total of 1004 samples, 70% of which
were used for train and 30% for test. Experiments were also performed to determine the
best resample rate, showing that using one sample per hour was a good compromise
between the computation required and the performance of the model, as explained in
Section 6.
Different experiments were performed to compare the performance of the LSTM and
the GRU, with different sets of hyperparameters. The parameters were varied and tested
one-by-one. Dense search methods, such as grid-search, were not used because of the
processing time required.
6. Experiments and Results
Experimental work was performed to conﬁrm the ability of the models to learn, and
then to determine the optimal hyperparameters of the LSTM and GRU.
6.1. Testing the Convergence of the Learning Process
Figure 10 shows the learning curve of a GRU model, with 40 units in the hidden layer
and window of 12 samples. The graph shows the loss measured in the train and in the
test set. The learning process converges and takes less than 10 epochs to reach a small loss.
This is similar to previous results obtained for the LSTM [59].
Although the learning curve shows that the model learns very quickly, in less than
10 epochs, in the following experiments, the number of epochs was limited to 15.