Energies 2021 ,14, 6958 12 of 21
In the present experiments, the dataset contains a large number of samples, so only
undersampling techniques are necessary in order to reduce the number of data points. The
method used was to average a number of samples, depending on the size of the dataset
desired. Experiments were performed undersampling to obtain one sample per 12 h (two
per day), one per six hours (four samples per day), one per each three hours, and ﬁnally
one sample per hour. So the dataset size was greatly reduced.
The window sizes were the best of the previous experiments: a window size of 4 days
for the LSTM and 12 days for the GRU, with the ReLU. A window size of 6 days for the
LSTM and 10 days for the GRU, with the sigmoid.
Figure 13 shows the average RMSE errors for both models. As the results show,
sometimes the LSTM overperformed the GRU, namely when using the sigmoid function
with periods of six and three hours. However, the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant.
On the other hand, the GRU was able to learn in all the situations and the RMSE error was
always approximately 1. So, the GRU is robust and accepts larger periods with minimal
impact on the performance, while the LSTM model is much more unstable.
(a)Using ReLU function at the output layer
 (b)Using sigmoid at the output layer
Figure 13. RMSE value for LSTM and GRU model with ReLU and sigmoid at the output layer, for
different undersampling rates: using one data point per 12 h, one per six hours, one per 3 h, and one
per hour.
Figure 14 shows the MAE and MAPE errors calculated for each variable. It is possible
to verify that, in general, the errors are much smaller with the sigmoid function. The LSTM
model with the ReLU function is able to learn when a period of 12 h is used. When the
sampling period is six hours, it seems the error gradient explodes for all variables and the
errors become extremely large. For lower sampling periods, the LSTM does not learn. The
GRU model continues to learn with acceptable errors. Table 3 shows the best results for the
LSTM model with different resampling rates. Table 4 shows the best results for the GRU
model with different resampling rates.
Table 3. Summary of the best prediction errors obtained with the LSTM models, using different resampling rates.
MAPE
Resampling-AF C. Intensity Hydraulic Torque Pressure Velocity Temperature
12-ReLU 2.42 2.92 3.72 10.36 17.19 2.30
MAE
Resampling-AF C. Intensity Hydraulic Torque Pressure Velocity Temperature
12-ReLU 0.71 2.22 0.55 1.57 0.64 0.88