Energies 2021 ,14, 6958 18 of 21
depend on the model. However, the ReLU–tanh is perhaps one of the best models, on
average.
The results also demonstrate that training the models using just one output variable,
thus optimizing a model for each variable separately, is not advantageous when compared
to training one model to predict all six variables at the same time.
The present work shows that a GRU network, with encoding and decoding layers, can
be used to anticipate future behavior of an industrial paper press. It shows better overall
performance, with less processing requirements, when compared to an equivalent LSTM
model. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time such a study has been
made. The prediction errors are smaller than those presented by the LSTM neural network
and the GRU is more immune to exploding or vanishing gradient problems, so it learns in
a wider range of conﬁgurations.
Compared to the literature, previous research has shown that the GRU is often the
best predictor [ 69–71]. However, those studies were performed for univariate data only.
The present work uses six variables in a time series and compares the multivariate and
the univariate models. In [ 72], the model that presents the lowest RMSE is the ARIMA.
However, that is just for a small dataset and forecast with 6 samples advance. In [ 44,73],
forecasting models with LSTM, including encoding and decoding, are proposed, although
not compared to GRU.
8. Conclusions
In the industrial world, it is important to minimize downtime. Equipment downtime,
due to failure or curative maintenance, represents hours of production lost. To solve this
problem, predictive maintenance is, nowadays, the best solution. Artiﬁcial intelligence
models have been employed, aimed at anticipating the future behavior of machines and,
therefore, avoiding potential failures.
The study presented in this paper compares the performance of LSTM and GRU
models, predicting future values of six sensors, installed at an industrial paper press
30 days in advance.
The GRU models, in general, operate with less data and offer better results, with a
wider range of parameters, as demonstrated in the case study based on pulp presses.
Future work will include testing the performance of the GRU with different time gaps,
in order to determine the best performance for different time gaps.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.T.F., A.M.C., M.M.; methodology, J.T.F. and M.M.; soft-
ware, B.C.M. and M.M.; validation, J.T.F., M.M., R.A.; formal analysis, J.T.F. and M.M.; investigation,
B.C.M. and M.M.; resources, J.T.F., A.M.C. and M.M.; writing—original draft preparation, B.C.M.;
writing—review and editing, J.T.F., R.A. and M.M.; project administration, J.T.F. and A.M.C.; fund-
ing acquisition, J.T.F. and A.M.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: Our research, leading to these results, has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowvska-Curie grant agree-
ment 871284 project SSHARE and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through the
Operational Programme for Competitiveness and Internationalization (COMPETE 2020), under
project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-029494, and by national funds through the FCT—Portuguese Foun-
dation for Science and Technology, under projects PTDC/EEI-EEE/29494/2017, UIDB/04131/2020,
and UIDP/04131/2020.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Restrictions apply to the availability of these data.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.