S. Wan, Z. Gu and Q. Ni Computer Communications 149 (2020) 99–106
Feature extraction is a key step in scene recognition. In this step,
we do not use the traditional method of applying local features through
human intervention, but apply the convolutional neural network model
in deep learning to the scene recognition of the robot so that it can au-
tomatically capture the hidden in the original image. Number of feature
information according to. In the process of object recognition and large-
scale natural scene image processing, the convolutional neural network
and superpixels can be combined with the depth Boltzmann machine
respectively, wherein the large-scale scene image is preprocessed by
the convolutional neural network to obtain a volume. After the product
feature, the result is used as the depth visual layer input of the Boltz-
mann machine, feature extraction, and then use the softmax classifier
implements the classification of the scene. In the indoor scene, it is
necessary to realize the correlation between the three-dimensional map
and the semantic information in the room, and use the decentralized
modular technology to enable the robot to simultaneously perform
scene object recognition and map reconstruction, thereby realizing its
indoor recognition function.
3.3. Navigation
Navigation is a user-specific function and directly determines the be-
havior of the robot. Consequently, navigation is an edge functionality.
However, this functionality may need support from the cloud.
Some mobile healthcare robots need to autonomously move, espe-
cially when they perform tasks like touring the care-receiver’s activity
area or tumble prevention [32,33]. Such robots usually need to find
an optimal routine linking the destination and avoid obstacles in a
crowded environment like a living room. Therefore, many research
topics still need further investigation to achieve efficient navigations.
Among these topics, one vital problem is endowing a robot with
the ability to move through narrow spaces between two barriers and
effectively avoid collision with them. Among numerous existing anti-
collision methods, the artificial potential field method (PFM) enjoys the
following promising characteristics: being comparatively simple to im-
plement, high efficiency, high speed and accuracy in most application
scenarios.
Despite the advantages, traditional PFM suffers from local minima
in the potential field, which leads to a couple of restrictions: failing to
pass a narrow space between obstacles and oscillations in narrow pas-
sages. An improved PFM in [34] is shown to ease the aforementioned
burden and validated on a mobile-robot-developing platform (Turtlebot
2). This robot captures visual information via a RGB-D Kinect sensor
and converts to 3D images using Point Cloud Library (PCL). Then, the
barrier detection is completed based on the 3D images.
Traditional supporting techniques of robot navigation cannot han-
dle dynamic environments, i.e., the obstacles or people are moving
stochastically. Furthermore, a perfect navigation system not only finds
the right routine but also enhances comfort of care-receivers. Such
high-level demand base support of novel path planning methods.
3.4. Innovation
Similar to navigation, innovation is also tightly tied to user require-
ments. This functionality furnishes an upgrading interface for the whole
system. In the literature, several work aimed to design an integrated
information architecture that effectively facilitates a remotely teleoper-
ated mobile health robot at home [35–41]. This kind of work interprets
the robot developing task from the perspective of software engineering.
Systematic technology renovation like teleoperated healthcare robot
should consistently fit into the requirements of healthcare delivery.
The development of integrated information architecture, which may
link with health professionals or technical personnel, is necessary for
healthcare robots. The main challenge is prioritizing various possible
functionalities of a robot and handling the complexity of home physical
environments. The main constraints include limits on the structural,perceptual and processing technologies of the robot. A teleoperated
robot is a realistic choice that leverages currently mature technologies
and depends on human operations to overpass existing limitations.
A mobile healthcare robot is a data-centric system. A usable and
extensible system supports all information flows and their integration
fitting into a consistently integrated, unitary and secure information
system. In this manner, this architecture enables all stakeholders to
felicitously access the system at any proper moment.
4. Data-center-orientated communications
Core functionalities rely on the support of artificial intelligence
techniques, including machine learning, semantic model, sentiment
analysis and so on. These techniques put forwards high demands on
hardware platform as well as artificial intelligence abilities. To meet
the extreme requirements for user experience, efficiency, performance
in wireless robot networking environments, novel designs, configura-
tions and optimizations for wireless communications and networking
are in great need to satisfying the service requirements. As a result,
the core functionalities run on the cloud and provide support to the
edge functionalities. Fig. 3 summarizes the core functionalities and
representative supporting technologies.
4.1. Uncertainty handling
Uncertainty handling is a critical issue especially when we refer
to healthcare tasks, in which an unexpected operation may cause
disastrous consequences. As an example, Fig. 4 demonstrates sensor
uncertainty in a mobile healthcare robot system. Edge computing can
solve the inefficiency of moving all data to a centralized point by
creating a network of smaller datacenters with dedicated purposes and
features that are tailored to meet specific demands. Digital projects
that create or require data can be processed much faster when the
computing power is close to the device or person generating it. By
spreading out the network, organizations can enhance productivity by
concentrating resources on certain tasks and making health IT systems
more efficient by decentralizing IT infrastructure.
Inevitability of sensor uncertainty : Sensors suggest a promising solu-
tion to convey human’s physical, physiological or even psychological
activities to a robot. Internet of Things (IoT) integrates heterogeneous
wearable or mobile sensors and creates a huge amount of opportunities
to recognize human activities and collect human life logging data.
With the support of IoT, physical activities can be remotely logged.
Consequently, care-receivers are able to obtain more opportunities to
enjoy a personalized healthcare.
Nevertheless, leveraging IoT in healthcare systems is challenging
due to the fact that various sensors (wearable devices) of IoT are
generating massive high-dimensional heterogeneous data all the time.
Effectively validating such data becomes an essential task. Owing to
advances in accelerometer technologies and GPS, physical activities
are generally well-observed. Life-logging physical activity data (LPD)
exhibits remarkable uncertainty due to various reasons such as diver-
sity and alterations of personal living habits, sensor errors (battery
depletion, inaccurate outputs, etc.) and communication malfunction.
Consequently, a mobile healthcare robot is required to make right
decisions based on uncertain inputs, i.e., incomplete and inaccurate
sensor data. The next generation of communication networks, such as
the global centralized Software Defined Network (SDN) [42,43], pro-
vide robust link for IoT connections. Other cutting-edge technologies,
such as cognitive radio sensor networks [44], may also improve the
robustness and efficiency of a public network.
Knowledge-based and Data-driven solutions : In order to recognize
human activities and handle sensor uncertainty, popular solutions al-
ways adopt data-driven or knowledge-based methods. The primary
superiority of data-driven methods is their capability to deal with
102