S. Wan, Z. Gu and Q. Ni Computer Communications 149 (2020) 99–106
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 105
References....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 105
1. Introduction
Edge computing is expected to be a key enabler of processes where
a rapid response to sensor input is necessary, such as wireless health
monitoring, virtual reality, and robotics. Providing such healthcare gets
expensive on a daily basis, especially for the elder population around
the world. This is important in particular when dealing with chronic
and psychological diseases. Nursing and carereceiving often require
long-term intensive human labor. Robotics, as a promoting solution,
has open a way to explore a constantly-accompanying and automatic
caregivers to help provide ‘‘a mobile healthcare robot’’.
A mobile healthcare robot enjoys enormous superiorities over
human-labor in healthcare, including but not limited to the following.
Under the support of artificial intelligence, a robot can learn massive
intelligence and experience from human medical experts, or sometimes
even outperforms their human counterparts. Such intelligent robots
can provide more efficient diagnosis and treatment than a human
caregiver. Subsequently, a healthcare robot either autonomously moves
or is incorporated into a mobile digital device. Mobility of the robot
means superior adherence anywhere at any time. For example, a
psychological therapy robot can be a table-top device connected with a
smart phone [1]. Afterwards, a robot is equipped with various sensors
and enabled to capture excessively more details of the care-receiver and
the environment than a human care-giver. The captured information
is vital for improving the health condition of a care-receiver [2].
Finally, a robot is more adept at repetitive work and less error-prone
than humans. For instance, a robot can remind a care-receiver of the
medication schedule at any given time [3].
Efficient communications between robots and data centers are es-
sential for improving customer services. However, the risk of potential
high response latency at the data center end is critical for healthcare
robot, especially in the case of emergency aid. In addition, many time-
consuming tasks, such as human understanding. Such tasks can be
completed by the robot and only summarized messages. Such messages
as the category of behaviors, are communicated with the centers with
very limited communication burden. A careful design of the framework
in balancing edge computing and centralized computing is important
for researchers from both robotics and communication communities [4–
7].
The rapid development of Internet of Things (IoT) [8–10] is getting
a wide acceptance and a growing adoption in many aspects of our daily
life. By applying IoT technologies to healthcare, it is expected to witness
dramatic improvement of healthcare and thus increase the service qual-
ity to humans [11–13]. To release the heavy communication burden of
healthcare robots, in particular from their various equipment. It is pre-
ferred to pre-process the huge amount of data by the robots, or the edge
computing [14–20]. In this paper, we aim to introduce applications of
edge computing scenarios of mobile healthcare robots and give details
on edge/centralized computing analysis in a task-driven fashion. The
main contribution of this paper are as follows:
•Investigate on the application and key technologies of mobile
healthcare robots.
•Discuss and analyze several peripheral and core functionalities
that the robot development will require.
•Embracing edge computing and healthcare robots in image un-
derstanding, sensor and path planning technologies will speedup
the progress toward practice.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes
typical needs and functionalities of the robot. Section 3 points out the
task-driven demands of healthcare robots in edge computing. Section 4
analyzes the centralized case. Section 5 gives the conclusion and future
work.
Fig. 1. Needs on mobile healthcare robots.
2. Typical applications of a mobile healthcare robots
The result of edge computing can be rapid machine-to-machine
communication or machine-to-human interaction. This paradigm takes
localized processing farther away from the network right down to the
sensor by pushing the computing processes even closer to the data
sources. The sensor can act as a dispatcher that can send information to
another edge device or to the cloud if need be. This allows each edge
device to do its part in processing information instead of sending all
its data to a centralized server. Edge computing help improve patient
care as well as increase efficiency from a business perspective. By
spreading out the network, organizations can enhance productivity by
concentrating resources on certain tasks and making health IT systems
more efficient by decentralizing IT infrastructure. Fig. 1 illustrates
representative application scenarios and functionalities of a mobile
healthcare robot. We have listed several applications that a mobile
healthcare robot may fit in.
2.1. Elder and chronic patient nursing
Seventy percent of U.S. citizens take at least one prescription med-
ication and over fifty percent take at least two, according to FDA and
CDC. Among these patients, forty percent arises from elders. Failing
to maintain medication adherence is a dramatic barrier to pursue
health for patients, in particular those of elder people or chronic
patients. A typical task consists of detection, communication with
cloud, processing and returning message. A healthcare robot in this
case is expected to be able to detect any abnormal actions, such as
falling down, faint or asking for help. The robot then processes the
raw detections and uploads compressed information to the cloud by
reliable wireless connections. Messages are sent back to the robot to
act properly. Frequently missing of medication doses, consequently and
unfortunately, will likely lead to diseases aggravation.
2.2. Unhealthy habit recognition
Healthy lifestyle plays an important role in health maintenance.
Harmful habits may lead a person towards unhealthy conditions even if
he/she is temporarily healthy. However, a habit is an unconscious be-
havior. One usually fails to realize that a negative habit is doing harm.
Professional suggestions, in this case, are essential for early-preventing.
100