S. Wan, Z. Gu and Q. Ni Computer Communications 149 (2020) 99–106
Fig. 2. Key technologies of mobile healthcare robots in edge/centralized computing.
2.3. Mental healthcare
Although psychological issues like depression are increasingly
prevalent, many people still face high barriers to access mental health-
care facilities. Some suffers do not realize the necessity of mental
healthcare for fear of the social stigma associated with receiving
psychotherapy. Other suffers desire healthcare but are impeded by high
financial costs of mental health services.
3. Edge-computing-friendly functionalities
According to the tasks a healthcare robot may meet, many func-
tionalities of a robot are edge-computing-friendly in nature. In this
section, we list and analyze this kind of tasks and discuss the corre-
sponding edge computing techniques. In general, many user-orientated
applications, such as user-friendly interfaces, intelligent perceptions,
automatic navigations and innovations, as shown in Fig. 2, can be
computed and processed on the robot rather than uploading to the
center.
3.1. Interactivities
Typical interactivities between a robot and its users are commonly
accomplished by the robot although several intelligent interfaces are
more data-center-orientated. Traditional reaction of a robot to a hu-
man behavior is often defined off line and fixed in operation. Very
limited communications, always a pre-defined message in describing
user activities is sent to the center for services’ improvement. However,
as the rapid growth of customized services with support from the
cutting-edge AI techniques, robot–human interactivity demands more
communications than before [21]. For example, Google Siri, a popular
virtual assistant, employs the state-of-the-art AI and machine learning
technologies to recognize speech and answer questions and prefer
to link to the data center for an accurate reaction. It is a common
choice in using the combination of an on-line and off-line interactive
algorithms [22], in which in common scenes, the well-trained off-line
model is adapted for the purpose of efficiency and on-line is selected
in some special applications. Human–robot interactivities are also the
main source of data stream in an edge computing environment, where
the state-of-the-art resource allocation [23] or computation offloading
strategy [24] can be applied.
3.2. Perception
Perception is capable of capturing passive inputs and enhances
the ability of data collection. This edge function should preliminarily
understand the perceived data, which is the basis of further analysis on
the cloud.
Mobile-phone-based method : A virtual agent installed in a smart
phone can directly collect incoming and outgoing text messages of allonline-chatting APPs [1]. Thus, the virtual agent can simply perceive
the user’s activities through text messages. Obviously, this method is
limited to text information and inevitably omits a lot of user behaviors,
which may be important, sometimes even fatal, to healthcare-receivers.
The virtual agent extends its perception capability by capturing the
user’s facial expressions using the front camera of a smart phone.
Facial recognition : Under the support of facial recognition technol-
ogy, a tabletop healthcare robot can monitor each family member and
his or her medications [3]. The robot reminds patients in pursuing
their medication schedule, recognizes a patient’s health crisis and
contacts a healthcare provider if necessary. Moreover, such robot is
enabled to connect to wireless networks and serves as interchanging
communication medium between patients and healthcare providers.
State-of-the-art facial recognition technologies can further improve
recognition accuracy [25].
Special sensors : Human activity recognition is an essence to enable
a robot to identify the behavior of a specific care-receiver [26]. Rather
than facial expressions, an activity recognition can perceive behaviors
of a care-receiver, who may be an elder adult, a children or a chronic
patient. By activity recognition, a robot tacks the care-receiver’s action
and recognize human behaviors such as anomalous activities and un-
healthy habits. To ensure a robust and accurate recognition, sensors
like accelerometers and gyroscopes are important in autonomously
detecting human behaviors under certain scenarios.
Although the equipment of special sensors may improve human ac-
tivity recognition performance, those sensors are still not user-friendly
and, as a result, not welcome in industry [27]. Special sensors are typ-
ically not pressure-free to the wearer, which means low comfort level
or restriction of the care-receiver mobility. In addition, deployment and
maintenance of such sensors commonly induce heavy financial burden.
Consequently, a more feasible approach is camera surveillance and
image-classification-based human behavior recognition. Nevertheless,
recognizing human activities solely from images is an extremely chal-
lenging task. Many challenges, such as background disarray, diversity
of viewpoint, resemblance of distinct human behavior, may dramati-
cally depress classification performance. Thanks to the rapid develop-
ment of cutting edge machine learning schemes, promising solutions
may arise from several state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms, includ-
ing Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [28], Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [29].
CNN and GAN models enable robots make informed decisions based
on the tasks they’re presented with. CNN-based framework is able of
navigate an endovascular surgery robot based on surgeons’ skill learn-
ing. CNN-based method shows its capability of adapting to different
situations and achieves similar success rate and average operating time.
Robotic operation performs similar operating trajectory and maintains
similar level of operating force with manual operation. The CNN-based
method can be easily extended to many other surgical robots. A semi-
supervised learning approach with generative adversarial networks
GANs that enables a robot to learn from unlabeled tactile sensory data
from interactions with everyday objects. By leveraging unlabeled sensor
data that are more abundant in unstructured environments, we mitigate
the need for massive labeled training sets [30,31].
The application of deep learning in robotics has also greatly im-
proved the accuracy of the robot’s work. The robot’s understanding
of complex environments is the first step in intelligence. Vision-based
scene recognition and understanding is important to the robot’s under-
standing of the surrounding environment and improving its intelligence
level. Obtaining real-time data in the current environment is of great
importance for the robot to construct the current working environ-
ment map. It is also necessary to consider the situation of the robot
in the room. It is necessary to realize the correlation between the
indoor three-dimensional map and the semantic information, not only
the aforementioned ring needs to be considered. The map of the en-
vironment also needs to be classified to identify the scene in the
scene.
101