S. Wan, Z. Gu and Q. Ni Computer Communications 149 (2020) 99–106
such methods fail to work efficiently with limited size of training data
because they require large volume of training data to guarantee the
classification accuracy. Moreover, it is difficult to acquire adequate
training data because users may implement activities in various ways.
In addition, gathering and manually labeling large volume of sensor
data are known for their tremendous time-consumption. Furthermore,
data-driven methods are difficult to process high-dimensional data.
In view of disadvantages of data-driven and knowledge-based meth-
ods, a combination of both methods enjoys broad prospects. Some
recent works design hybrid models to recognize human activities. How-
ever, existing hybrid models lack specialized solutions to uncertainty
handling. A hybrid model named AGACY Monitoring can cope with
the inherent uncertainty of sensor data. This model handles long-
enduring activities and their uncertainty values by adopting a new
feature extraction method. Along with this model, a novel algorithm
called AGACY infers activities by probing the collected uncertainty
values [48]. Currently, the primary drawback of this method is that it
lacks the ability to reuse existing upper ontology like DOLCE ontology.
A validation-rule based method can eliminate irregular uncertainty
as well as relieve the negative influence of regular uncertainty [2]. This
kind of methods still faces some challenges despite its success in exper-
iments. First, extensibility should be enhanced to flexibly incorporate
new validation rules. Second, a formal rule of human-in-loop valida-
tion needs to be investigated so that the method can more efficiently
leverage user feedbacks to update validation rules. Third, the flexibility
of the method needs to be validated by more users.
4.2. Social-aware path planning
A mobile healthcare robot may work in a crowd environment. The
issue of path planning thus extends far beyond a collision-free and
shortest path if a care-receiver requires high-quality user experiences. A
robot needs to obey social conventions and avert collision with human,
in particular in walking. Path planning in dynamic environment aims
at human–robot mutual understanding, i.e., social-aware path planning,
with highlights such as comfort, naturalness and sociability.
A social-aware path planning framework typically contains the fol-
lowing components [49–52]. First, a global planner provides to an
robot the optimal path linking to the destination. Similar to traditional
path planning like PFM, a global planner demands that a static map
of the environment is at least partially prior known. Second, a local
planner takes in charge collision avoidance with regards to moving
obstacle. A typical method adopted by a local planner is the dynamic
window approach (DWA). DWA prunes non-reachable velocity values
and thus shrinks the searching space. Afterwards, DWA minimizes
an objective function by choosing possible velocity values from the
shrunk searching space. Third, prediction model will forecast human
movements and further raise efficiency of path planning in a crowded
dynamic environment. A simple way to predict human movement is
leveraging the linear model where human motion trajectories mostly
constitute of straight lines. An efficient social-aware path planning
framework is required to properly unify all these components.
In terms of the three-component social-aware path planning frame-
work, there still exist open questions. First, response should be as fast
as possible. For example, the local planner should swiftly adjust the
routine of a fast-moving robot when an obstacle abruptly blocks the
way. Second, new patterns of human motion may keep arising in the
dynamic environment. Therefore, the local planner should be capable
of updating collision avoidance models accordingly. This capability
means a lifelong ability that can update a learning model using data
collected. Third, it is a challenge to move in a crowded dynamic
environment. In addition, it is even more complicated to plan the
optimal paths for a swarm of robots, a trend in robotics with promising
performance. The primary topic, in the case of swarm robotics, is
fusing the latest refreshed collision avoidance models of all robots into
one. Subsequently, all robots abide the fused model and achieve their
globally optimal paths.
Fig. 5. State-of-the-art supporting technologies of mobile healthcare robots.
4.3. Psychotherapy
Although psychological issues like depression are increasingly
prevalent, many people still face high barrier to access mental health-
care. Mobile phone based socially assistant robot provides a promising
solution to depress the accessibility barrier due to the ubiquity of
mobile phone. A mobile mental therapeutic system consists of an active
mobile phone and a tabletop robot connected by specific APP(s). This
kind of APP records all incoming and outgoing text messages and
capture the care-receiver’s facial expression through the front camera
of a mobile phone, and further analyzes messages and facial images
for automatic psychological analysis [1]. Thus, the system selects
therapeutic interventions in pursuant to the analysis results. The system
adopts State–Action–Reward–State-Action (SARSA) algorithm to learn
a customized intervention strategy regarding a care-receiver. A robot
can make the care-receiver more engaged than a virtual agent thanks
to physical presence of the robot.
Currently, the psychological status of users are usually inferred from
text message or facial expressions, which restricts the effect of ther-
apy. Improving existing therapies demands novel perception interfaces
as well as supporting psychology analysis methods. Possible future
works include leveraging various devices to collect human data, such
as heartbeat, blood pressure, and constructing more powerful mental
health intervention technologies. In summary, we list state-of-the-art
supporting technologies in Fig. 5.
5. Conclusion and open research issues
In this article, we investigated on the application and key technolo-
gies of mobile healthcare robots. We also pointed out several peripheral
and core functionalities that the robot development will require. Fun-
damental development in communication, IoT, image understanding,
sensor and path planning technologies will speedup the progress toward
practical robots.
Open research issues include intelligent communications, ground-
breaking biosensors, cutting-edge AI and state-of-the-art deep learning
algorithms. However, each of the open issues still lacks advanced
development, requiring further research and implementations. To this
end, both academic and industrial research and development activities
are highly recommended to overcome the limitations of the existing
systems.
104