Although we will be explicit about this in the next subsection, we
will consider a shadowing procedure to be successful, if, with highprobability, the resulting shadow model agrees with the original modelon all inputs, i.e.,
max
x2X∣fθðxÞ/C0efθðxÞ∣≤ε, ð10Þ
for a speci ﬁedε≥0. We want the shadowing procedure to be suc-
cessful independently of the data distribution under which the modelshould be trained, which justi ﬁes this de ﬁnition. We discuss this point
further in Supplementary Section 4.
We show that the Fourier shadowing approach can suffer from an
exponential sample complexity in the dimension of the input data x,
making it intractable for high-dimensional input spaces. To see this,consider the linear model:
f
yðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðyÞ/C138
ρðxÞ=On
i=1RYðxiÞ∣0i0h∣Ry
YðxiÞ&OðyÞ=∣y/C11
y/C10
∣:ð11Þ
forx2Rnandy∈{0, 1}⊗n.L e tu s ﬁrst restrict our attention to the
domain x∈{0,π}n. It is quite clear that on this domain, fy(x)=δx/π,y
plays the role of a database search oracle, where the database has 2n
elements and a unique marked element y. From lower bounds on
database search, we know that Ω(2n) calls to this oracle are needed to
ﬁndy37. This implies that a Fourier shadowing approach would require
Ω(2n) calls to fy(x)=δx/π,yin order to guarantee maxx2X∣efθðxÞ/C0
fθðxÞ∣≤1=4. In Supplementary Section 4, we explain how this result can
be generalized to the full domain x2Rn, and we relate this bound on
the sample complexity to the Fourier decomposition of the model.
On the other hand, note that the ﬂipped model associated to fy(x)
allows for a straightforward shadowing procedure. Indeed, by pre-paring O(y) and measuring it in the computational basis, one
straightforwardly obtains yand can therefore classically compute the
expectation value of any tensor product observable ρ(x)a ss p e c i ﬁed
by Eq. ( 11). Therefore, we have shown that there exist shadow ﬁable
models that are not ef ﬁciently Fourier-shadow ﬁable, i.e., for which a
shadowing procedure based solely on the knowledge of their Fourierspectrum and on black-box queries has query complexity that isexponential in the input dimension.
All shadow models are shadows of ﬂipped models
We give a general de ﬁnition of shadow models that can encompass all
methods that have been proposed to generate them. In contrast to thedeﬁnition of classical surrogates proposed by Schreiber et al.
19, we give
explicit de ﬁnitions for the shadowing and evaluation phases of shadow
models which makes explicit the need for a quantum computer in theshadowing phase. Indeed, as mentioned in the introduction, the term“classical surrogate ”has been used to describe both a classically eva-
luatable model obtained from a quantum shadowing procedure and afully classical model trained directly on the data. We want to avoid thisconfusion in the de ﬁnition of shadow models. We view a general sha-
dowing phase as the generation of advice that can be used to classically
evaluate a quantum model. This advice is generated by the executionof quantum circuits that may or may not depend on the (trained)quantum circuit from the training phase. For instance, when we sha-dowfy a ﬂipped model, we simply prepare the parametrized states ρ(θ)
and use (randomized) measurements to generate an operationallymeaningful classical description. In the case of Fourier shadowing, thisadvice is instead generated by evaluations of the quantum model f
θ(x)
for different inputs x2Rdthat are rich enough to learn the Fourier
coefﬁcients of this model. We propose the following de ﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2 .(General shadow model) .L e t W1(θ) ,..., WM(θ)b ea
sequence of Oðpoly ðmÞÞ-time quantum circuits applied on all-zerostates ∣0i/C10m, and that can potentially be chosen adaptively. Call
ω(θ)=(ω1(θ),…,ωM(θ)) the outcomes of measuring the output states
of these circuits in the computational basis. A general shadow model isdeﬁned as:
f
θðxÞ=Aðx,ωðθÞÞ ð 12Þ
where Ais a classical Oðpoly ðM,m,dÞÞtime algorithm that processes
the outcomes ω(θ) along with an input x2Rdto return the (real-
valued) label fθ(x).
From this de ﬁnition, a shadow model is a classically evaluatable
model that uses quantum-generated advice. Crucially, this advice mustbe independent of the data points xwe wish to evaluate the model on
in the future. We distinguish the notion of a shadow model from that ofas h a d o w ﬁable quantum model, that is a quantum model that admits a
shadow model:
Deﬁnition 3 .(Shadow ﬁable model) .Am o d e l f
θacting on nqubits is
said to be shadow ﬁable if, for ε,δ> 0, there exists a shadow modelefθ
such that, with probability 1 −δover the quantum generation of the
advice ω(θ) (i.e., the shadowing phase), the shadow model satis ﬁes?
maxx2XjfθðxÞj /C0efθðxÞ≤ε, ð13Þ
and uses m,M2Oðpoly ðn,1=ε,1=δÞÞqubits and circuits to generate its
advice ω(θ).
While we have seen that there exist shadow ﬁable models that
cannot be shadow ﬁed ef ﬁciently using a Fourier approach, we show
that all shadow ﬁable models as de ﬁned above can be approximated by
shadow ﬁableﬂipped models.
Lemma 4 .(Flipped models are shadow-universal) . All shadow ﬁable
models as de ﬁned in Defs. 2 and 3 can be approximated by ﬂipped
models fθðxÞ=T r ½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138with the guarantee that computational
b a s i sm e a s u r e m e n t so f ρ(θ)a n de f ﬁcient classical post-processing can
be used to evaluate fθ(x)t og o o dp r e c i s i o nw i t hh i g hp r o b a b i l i t y .
This result is essentially based on the observation that the eva-
luation of a general shadow model as de ﬁn e di nD e f .2c a nb ed o n e
entirely coherently. Instead of classically running the algorithm A
using the random advice ω(θ), one can quantumly simulate this algo-
rithm (using a reversible execution) and execute it on the coherent
advice ρðθÞ=∣ωðθÞ/C11
ωðθÞ/C10
∣generated by { W1(θ) ,..., WM(θ)} before the
computational basis measurements. We refer to Supplementary Sec-tion 4 for a more detailed statement and proof.
Not all quantum models are shadow ﬁable
From the discrete cube root learning task, we already understand that
a learning separation can be established between classical and sha-dowﬁable models. We would also like to understand whether a learn-
ing separation exists between shadow ﬁable models and general
quantum models, or equivalently, whether all quantum models areshadow ﬁable. We show that this also is not the case, under widely
believed assumptions (see Fig. 2).
Theorem 5 .(Not all shadow ﬁable) . Under the assumption that
BQP⊄P/poly, there exist quantum models, i.e., models in BQP, that are
not shadow ﬁable, i.e., that are not in BPP/qgenpoly.
We start by noting that shadow models can be characterized by a
complexity class we de ﬁne as BPP/qgenpoly, which stands for “Boun-
ded-error Probabilistic Polynomial-time with quantumly generated(polynomial-time) advice of polynomial size ”. This class contains all
functions that can be computed ef ﬁciently classically with the help of
polynomially-sized advice generated ef ﬁciently by a quantum com-
puter. This class is trivially contained in the standard class BPP/poly,
which doesn ’t have any constraint on how the advice is generated andArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 5