Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Shadows of quantum machine learning
Soﬁene Jerbi1,2, Casper Gyurik3, Simon C. Marshall3, Riccardo Molteni3&
Vedran Dunjko3
Quantum machine learning is often high lighted as one of the most promising
practical applications fo r which quantum compute rs could provide a com-
putational advantage. However, a maj or obstacle to the widespread use of
quantum machine learning models in practice is that these models, even oncetrained, still require access to a quantu m computer in order to be evaluated on
new data. To solve this issue, we intro duce a class of quantum models where
quantum resources are only required during training, while the deployment ofthe trained model is classical. Speci ﬁcally, the training phase of our models
ends with the generation of a ‘shadow model ’from which the classical
deployment becomes possible. We prov e that: (i) this class of models is uni-
versal for classically-deployed quantum machine learning; (ii) it does haverestricted learning capacities compared to ‘fully quantum ’models, but none-
theless (iii) it achieves a provable learning advantage over fully classical lear-ners, contingent on widely believed assu mptions in complexity theory. These
results provide compelling eviden ce that quantum machine learning can
confer learning advantages across a subs tantially broader range of scenarios,
where quantum computers are exclusively employed during the trainingphase. By enabling classi cal deployment, our appro ach facilitates the imple-
mentation of quantum machine learning m odels in various practical contexts.
Quantum machine learning is a rapidly growing ﬁeld1–3driven by its
potential to achieve quantum advantages in practical applications. Aparticularly interesting approach to make quantum machine learningapplicable in the near term is to develop learning models based on
parametrized quantum circuits
4–6. Indeed, such quantum models have
already been shown to achieve good learning performance in bench-marking tasks, both in numerical simulations
7–11and on actual quantum
hardware12–15. Moreover, based on widely believed cryptography
assumptions, these models also hold the promise to solve certainlearning tasks that are intractable for classical algorithms
16,17, including
predicting ground state properties of highly-interacting quantumsystems
18.
Despite these advances, quantum machine learning is facing a
major obstacle for its use in practice. A typical work ﬂow of a machine
learning model involved, e.g., in driving autonomous vehicles, is divi-ded into: (i) a training phase, where the model is trained, typically using
training data or by reinforcement; followed by (ii) a deployment phase,where the trained model is evaluated on new input data. For quantum
machine learning models, both of these phases require access to aquantum computer. But given that in many practical machine learningapplications, the trained model is meant for a widespread deployment,
the current scarcity of quantum computing access dramatically redu-
ces the applicability of quantum machine learning. One way ofaddressing this problem is by generating shadow models out ofquantum machine learning models. That is, we propose inserting ashadowing phase between the training and deployment, where aquantum computer is used to collect information on the quantummodel. Then a classical computer can use this information to evaluatethe model on new data during the deployment phase.
The conceptual idea of generating shadows of quantum models
was already proposed by Schreiber et al.
19, albeit under the terminol-
ogy of classical surrogates. In that work, as well as in that of Landmanet al.
20, the authors make use of the general expression of quantum
models as trigonometric polynomials21to learn the FourierReceived: 9 May 2024
Accepted: 21 June 2024
Check for updates
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.2Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems, Freie Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.3applied Quantum algorithms (aQa), Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. e-mail: soﬁene.jerbi@fu-berlin.de
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;