ρ(x)a n d O(θ). That is, we consider
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138 ð 4Þ
where ρ(θ) is a parametrized quantum state and O(x) is an observable
that encodes the data and can take more general forms than Eq. ( 3)a s
we will see next. This model also corresponds to a straightforward
quantum computation as ρ(θ) can be physically prepared before being
measured with respect to O(x).
As i m p l ee x a m p l eo f ﬂipped model is for instance de ﬁned by:
ρðθÞ=VðθÞρ0VyðθÞ&OðxÞ=Xm
j=1wjðxÞPj ð5Þ
for an initial state ρ0, a variational circuit V(θ), and a collection of Pauli
observables fPjgm
j=1weighted by data-dependent weights wjðxÞ2R.
One can evaluate this model by repeatedly preparing ρ(θ)o na
quantum computer, measuring it in a Pauli basis speci ﬁed by a Pj,a n d
weighting the outcome by wj(x). For other examples of ﬂipped models,
see Supplementary Section 1.
As opposed to conventional quantum linear models, ﬂipped mod-
els are well-suited to construct shadow models. Since the variationaloperators ρ(θ) are quantum states, one can st raightforwardly use tech-
niques from shadow tomography
23to construct classical shadows ^ρðθÞ
of these states. What we call classical shadows ^ρðθÞhere are collections
of measurement outcomes obtained from copies of ρ(θ)t h a tc a nb e
used to classically approximate expectation values of certain obser-vables O(for a certain restricted family). If we take these observables to
be our data- dependent O(x), then we end up with a classical modelef
θðxÞ
that approximates our ﬂipped model. Note here that one has total
freedom on the classical shadow techniques they may use to de ﬁne their
shadow models, and a plethora of protocols have already been pro-posed in the literature
23–26. But it is important to keep in mind that each
of these protocols comes with its limitations, as it may restrict the classof states ρ(θ) or the class of observables O(x)f o rw h i c ha ne f ﬁcient and
faithful shadow model can be constructed. By “efﬁcient ”we refer here to
the number of measurements performed on ρ(θ)a n dt h et i m ec o m -
plexity of estimating the expectation values of observables O(x)f r o m
these measurements. And by “faithful ”we refer to the approximation
error between the shadow modelef
θðxÞresulting from the shadow
protocol and the original ﬂipped model fθ(x). For instance, in the
example of Eq. ( 5), we know that if all Pauli operators fPjgm
j=1arek-local,
theneOð3kB2ε/C02Þmeasurements of ρ(θ), where B=m a xxPm
j=1jwiðxÞj,
are suf ﬁcient to guarantee maxx∣efθðxÞ/C0fθðxÞ∣≤εwith high probability.
But for non-local Pauli operators (i.e., large k), this protocol becomes
highly inef ﬁcient if we want to guarantee a low error ε.
Importantly, shadow ﬁedﬂipped models are not limited to con-
structions based on classical shadow protocols. Given that the statesρ(θ) are not given to us a black-box (as is generally assumed in shadow
tomography), one can use prior knowledge on these states to con-
struct ef ﬁcient shadowing procedure. For instance, if ρ(θ)i sk n o w nt o
be a superposition of a tractable number of computational basis states,or well-approximated by a matrix product state (MPS) with low bonddimension, then ef ﬁcient tomography protocols may be used
28.
Properties of ﬂipped models
Flipped models are a stepping stone toward the claims of quantum
advantage and “shadow ﬁability ”that are the focus of this paper.
Nonetheless, they constitute a new ly introduced model, which is why it
is useful to understand ﬁrst how they relate to previous quantum
models and what learning guarantees they can have.
Since conventional linear models of the form of Eq. ( 1)p l a ya
central role in quantum machine learning, we start by asking thequestion: when can these models be represented by (ef ﬁciently eva-
luatable) ﬂipped models? That is, given a conventional model
fθðxÞ=T r ½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138,c a nw ec o n s t r u c ta ﬂipped model
efθðxÞ=T r ½ρ0ðθÞO0ðxÞ/C138such thatefθðxÞ≈fθðxÞ,8x,θ,a n defθðxÞis as ef ﬁ-
cient to evaluate as fθ(x). Clearly, a conventional model fθ(x)f o rw h i c h
the parametrized operator O(θ) is also a quantum state (i.e., a positive
semi-de ﬁnite trace-1 operator) is by de ﬁnition also a ﬂipped model.
Therefore, a natural strategy to ﬂip a conventional model is to trans-
form its observable O(θ) into a quantum state ρ0ðθÞ. This transforma-
tion involves dealing with the negative eigenvalues of O(θ), which can
be taken into account using an auxiliary qubit, without overheads inthe ef ﬁciency of evaluation (see Supplementary Section 2 for more
details). More importantly, the transformation involves normalizing
these eigenvalues, which affects the ef ﬁciency of evaluating the
resulting ﬂipped model. Indeed, the normalization factor αthat results
from normalizing O(θ) corresponds to its trace norm kOk
1=T rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
O2phi
and needs to be absorbed into the observable O0ðxÞ=αρðxÞof the
ﬂipped modelefθðxÞto guaranteeefθðxÞ=fθðxÞ. This directly impacts
the spectral norm kO0k1=m a x∣ψihO0iψ=αof the ﬂipped model, and
therefore the ef ﬁciency of its evaluation, as OðkO0k2
1=ε2Þmeasure-
ments of ρ0ðθÞare needed in order to estimateefθðxÞto additive error ε
(see Supplementary Section 2 for a derivation). Therefore, we end up
showing that, for a conventional model fθ(x) acting on nqubits and
with a bounded observable trace norm ∥O∥1≤α, we can construct a
ﬂipped model acting on m=n+ 1 qubits and with observable spectral
norm kO0k1=α.
Interestingly, in the relevant regime where the number of
qubits n,mused by the linear models involved in this ﬂipping is
logarithmic in ∥O∥1(e.g., where Ois a Pauli observable and hence
∥O∥1=2n), we ﬁnd that this requirement on the spectral norm kO0k1
of the resulting ﬂipped model is unavoidable in the worst case, up to
a logarithmic factor in ∥O∥1. We refer to Appendix Supplementary
Section 2 for proofs of these statements and a more in-depthdiscussion.
Another property of interest in machine learning is the general-
ization performance of a learning model. That is, we want to bound the
gap between the performance of the model on its training set (so-called training error) and its performance on the rest of the data space(or expected error). Such bounds have for instance been derived interms of the number of encodi ng gates in the quantum model
29,o rt h e
rank of its observable30.I nt h ec a s eo f ﬂipped model, we ﬁnd instead a
bound in terms of the number of qubits nand the spectral norm ∥O∥∞
of the observable. Since these quantities are operationally meaningful,
this gives us a natural way of controlling the generalization perfor-mance of our ﬂipped models. Stated informally, we ﬁnd that if a ﬂipped
model achieves a small error ∣f
θ(x)−f(x)∣≤ηfor all xin a training set of
sizeM, then we only need Mto scale as eΩnkOk2
1
εη2/C16/C17
in order to guarantee
a small expected error ∣fθ(x)−f(x)∣≤2ηwith probability 1 −εover the
entire data distribution.
Note that the dependence on nand ∥O∥∞is linear and quadratic,
respectively, which means that we can afford a large number of qubitsand a large spectral norm and still guarantee a good generalizationperformance. This is particularly relevant as the spectral norm is acontrollable quantity, meaning we can easily ﬁne-tune our models to
perform well in training and generalize well. E.g., in the case of themodel in Eq. ( 5), this spectral norm is bounded by max
xPm
j=1jwiðxÞj,
which scales favourably with the number of qubits nifm2Oðpoly ðnÞÞ
or if the vector w(x)i ss p a r s e .
Quantum advantage of a shadow model
We recall that we (informally) de ﬁne shadow models as models that
are trained on a quantum computer, but, after a shadowingArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 3