procedure that collects information on the trained model, are eval-
uated classically on new input data. In this section, we consider thequestion of achieving a quantum advantage using such shadowmodels. It may seem at ﬁrst sight that this question has a straight-
forward answer, which is “no": if the function learned by a model is
classically computable, then there should be no room for a quantumadvantage. However, as demonstrated in refs. 17,31, one can also
achieve a quantum advantage based on so-called trap-door func-tions. These are functions that are believed to be hard to computeclassically, unless given a key (or advice) that allows for an ef ﬁcient
classical computation. Notably, there exist trap-door functionswhere this key can be ef ﬁciently computed using a quantum com-
puter, but not classically. This allows us to construct shadow modelsthat make use of this quantum-generated key to compute an other-wise classically untractable function.
Similarly to related results showing a quantum advantage in
machine learning with classical data
16,32, we consider a learning task
where the target function (i.e., the function generating the trainingdata) is derived from cryptographic functions that are widely believedto be hard to compute classically. More precisely, we introduce avariant of the discrete cube root learning task
17, which is hard to solve
classically under a hardness assumption related to that of the RSAcryptosystem
33. In this task, we consider target functions de ﬁned on
ZN=f0,...,N/C01gas
gsðxÞ=1, ifﬃﬃﬃx3pmod N2½s,s+N/C01
2/C138,
0, otherwise(
ð6Þ
where N=pqis an n-bit integer, product of two primes p,qof the
form 3 k+2 ,3 k0+ 2, such that the discrete cube root is properly
deﬁned as the inverse of the function y3mod N. These target func-
tions are particularly appealing because of a number of interestingproperties:
i. It is believed that given only xand Nas input, computing
gðxÞ=ﬃﬃﬃx
3pmod Nwith high probability of success over
random draws of xand Nis classically intractable. This
assumption is known as the discrete cube root (DCR)assumption.
ii. On the other hand, computing x
amod Nis classically ef ﬁcient for
anya2ZN.F o r a=3 ,t h i si m p l i e st h a t g−1(y)=y3mod Nis a one-
way function, under the DCR assumption.
iii. The function gðxÞ=ﬃﬃﬃx3pmod Nhas a “trap-door ”,i nt h a tt h e r e
exists another way of computing it ef ﬁciently. For every N(as
speci ﬁed above), there exists a key d2ZNsuch that g(x)=xdmod
N.F i n d i n g dis efﬁcient quantumly by using Shor ’s factoring
algorithm34, but hard classically under the DCR assumption.
Observations (i) and (ii) can be leveraged to show that learning the
functions gsfrom examples is also intractable. Indeed, Alexi et al.35
showed that a classical algorithm that could faithfully capture a single
bitgs(x) of the discrete cube root of x, for even a 1/2 + 1/poly( n) fraction
of all x2ZN, could also be used to reconstruct gðxÞ,8x2ZN,w i t h
high probability of success. Since, from observation (ii), the trainingdata for the learning algorithm can also be generated ef ﬁciently clas-
sically from N, a classical learner that learns g
s(x) correctly for a 1/2 + 1/
poly( n)f r a c t i o no fa l l x2ZNwould then contradict the DCR
assumption.
Observation (iii) allows us to de ﬁne the following ﬂipped model:
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138
ρðθÞ=∣d0,s0/C11
d0,s0/C10
∣&OðxÞ=X
d0,s0bgd0,s0ðxÞ∣d0,s0/C11
d0,s0/C10
∣:ð7ÞThat is, ρ(θ)( f o rθ=ðN,s0Þ)s p e c i ﬁes candidates for the key d0and the
parameter s0of interest, while O(x) uses that information to compute
bgd0,s0ðxÞ=1, if xd0mod N2½s0,s0+N/C01
2/C138,
0, otherwise.(
ð8Þ
The state ρðθÞ=∣d,s0/C11
d,s0/C10
∣for the right key dcan be prepared ef ﬁ-
ciently using Shor ’s algorithm applied on N(provided with the training
data). As for O(x), it simply processes classically a bit-string to compute
bgd0,s0ðxÞefﬁciently, which corresponds to gs(x)w h e n ðd0,s0Þ=ðd,sÞ.
Finding an s0close to sis an easy task given training data and d0=d.
Since ρ(θ) is a computational basis state, this ﬂipped model admits a
trivial shadow model where a single computational basis measurementofρ(θ) allows to evaluate f
θ(x) classically for all x. Therefore, we end up
showing the following theorem:
Theorem 1 .(Quantum advantage (informal)) . There exists a learning
task where a shadow model ﬁrst trained using a quantum computer
then evaluated classically on new input data, can achieve an arbitrarilygood learning performance, while any fully classical model cannot dosigniﬁcantly better than random guessing, under the hardness of
classically computing the discrete cube root.
In Supplementary Section 3, we formalize the statement of this
result using the PAC framework and provide more details on the set-ting and the proofs.
General shadow models
As mentioned at the start of this paper, shadow models are notlimited to shadow ﬁedﬂipped models, and the main alternative pro-
posals are based on the Fourier representation of quantummodels
19,20. It is clear that Fourier models are de ﬁned very differently
from ﬂipped models, but one may wonder whether they nonetheless
include shadow ﬁedﬂipped models as a special case, or the other way
around.
In this section, we ﬁrst start by showing that there exist quantum
models that admit shadow models (i.e., are shadow ﬁable) but cannot
be shadow ﬁed ef ﬁciently using a Fourier approach. This then moti-
vates our proposal for a general de ﬁnition of shadow models, and we
show that, under this de ﬁnition, all shadow models can be expressed as
shadow ﬁedﬂipped models. Finally, we show the existence of quantum
models that are not shadow ﬁable at all under likely complexity theory
assumptions.
Shadow models beyond Fourier
An interesting approach to construct shadows of quantum models isbased on their natural Fourier representation. It has been shown
21,36
that quantum models can be expressed as generalized Fourier series of
the form
fθðxÞ=X
ω2ΩcωðθÞe/C0iω/C1x
ð9Þ
where the accessible frequencies Ωonly depend on properties of the
encoding gates used by the model (notably the number of encodinggates and their eigenvalues). Since these frequencies can easily be readout from the circuit, one can proceed to form a shadow model byestimating their associated coef ﬁcients c
ω(θ) using queries of the
quantum model fθ(x) at different values xand, e.g., a Fourier
transform19. Given a good approximation of these coef ﬁcients, one can
then compute estimates of fθ(x) for arbitrary new inputs x. We will
refer to such a shadowing approach that considers the quantum model
as a black-box, aside from the knowledge of its Fourier spectrum, asthe Fourier shadowing approach.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 4