representation of trained models and evaluate them classically on new
data. However, these works also suggest that a classical model couldpotentially be trained directly on the training data and achieve thesame performance as the shadow model, thus circumventing the needfor a quantum model in the ﬁrst place. This raises the concern that all
quantum models that are compatible with a classical deploymentwould also lose all quantum advantage, hence severely limiting theprospects for a widespread use of quantum machine learning.
Therefore, two natural open questions are raised:
1. Can shadow models achieve a quantum advantage over entirely
classical (classically trained and classically evaluated) models?
2. Do there exist quantum models that do not admit ef ﬁciently
evaluatable shadow models?
In this work, we resolve both of these key open questions. We
propose a general de ﬁnition for shadow models, rooted in the fun-
damental idea that quantum machine learning models can be uni-versally expressed as linear models
22. This formulation of shadow
models allows us to leverage various results and techniques from
quantum information theory for the analysis of this model class. From
a practical perspective, employing shadow tomographytechniques
23–26allows to easily construct diverse shadow models that
will resonate with the practitioners of quantum machine learning.Furthermore, in our exploration of the computational capabilities ofshadow models, we ﬁnd them to capture a distinct computational
class. Speci ﬁcally, we demonstrate that, under widely believed cryp-
tography assumptions, there exist learning tasks where shadow mod-els exhibit a provable quantum advantage over fully classical models.However, contrary to this advantage, we also establish that there existquantum models that are strictly more powerful than the class of
shadow models, based on common assumptions in complexity theory.
For ease of exposition, we will ﬁrst adhere to a working de ﬁnition
of a shadow model as a model that is trained on a quantum computer,but can be evaluated classically on new input data with the help ofinformation generated by a quantum computer (i.e., quantum-generated advice) that is independent of the new data. We will(informally) call a model “shadow ﬁable" if there exists a method of
turning it into a shadow model. In the Section “General shadow mod-
els”,w ew i l lm a k eo u rd e ﬁnitions more precise.
Results
Theﬂipped model
The construction of our shadow models starts from a simple yet key
observation: all standard quantum machine learning models forsupervised learning can be expressed as linear models
22.T od e l v ei n t o
this claim, we ﬁrst draw upon early works that utilized parametrized
quantum circuits in machine learning7,12. These works proposedquantum models that are naturally expressed as linear functions of the
form
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138 ð 1Þ
where ρ(x) are quantum states that encode classical data x2Xand
O(θ) are parametrized observables whose inner product with ρ(x)
deﬁnesfθ(x) (see Fig. 1). In a regression task, one would use such a
model to assign a real-valued label to an input x, while in classi ﬁcation
tasks, one would additionally apply, e.g., a sign function, to discretize
its output into a class. From a circuit picture, such models can beevaluated on a quantum computer by: (i) preparing an initial state ρ
0,
e.g., ∣0i0h∣/C10n, (ii) evolving it under a data-dependent circuit U(x),
(iii) followed by a variational circuit V(θ), (iv) before ﬁnally measuring
the expectation value of a Hermitian observable O.T o g e t h e r ,s t e p s( i )
and (ii) de ﬁne
ρðxÞ=UðxÞρ0UyðxÞ, ð2Þ
while steps (iii) and (iv) de ﬁne
OðθÞ=VyðθÞOVðθÞ: ð3Þ
Since the early works, it is known that quantum linear models also
capture quantum kernel models as a special case27, simply by making
O(θ) directly dependent on the training data of the learning task.
Perhaps more surprisingly, quantum linear models can also encom-pass more general data re-uploading models, composed of severallayers of data encoding and variational processing U
1(x)V1(θ)U2(x)…
Indeed, data re-uploading models can be mapped to linear modelsthrough circuit transformations (e.g., gate teleportation) that relocateall data-encoding gates to the ﬁrst layer of the circuit
22.
Flipped model de ﬁnition
The de ﬁnition of a quantum linear model in Eq. ( 1) can in general
accommodate any pair of Hermitian operators in place of ρ(x),O(θ).
However, due to how these models are evaluated on a quantumcomputer, one commonly works under the constraint that ρ(x)d eﬁnes
a quantum state (i.e., a positive semi-de ﬁnite operator with unit trace).
Indeed, from an operational perspective, ρ(x) must be physically pre-
pared on a quantum device before being measured with respect to theobservable O(θ) (which only needs to be Hermitian in order to be a
valid observable).
For reasons that will become clearer from the shadowing per-
spective, we de ﬁne a so-called ﬂipped model, where we ﬂi pt h er o l eo f
Fig. 1 | Quantum and shadow models. (left) Conventional quantum models can be
expressed as inner products between a data-encoding quantum state ρ(x)a n da
parametrized observable O(θ). The resulting linear model fθðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138
naturally corresponds to a quantum computation, depicted here. (middle) Wedeﬁneﬂipped models f
θðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138as quantum linear models where the role
of the quantum state ρ(θ) and the observable O(x)i sﬂipped compared to con-
ventional models. (right) Flipped models are associated to natural shadow models:one can use techniques from shadow tomography to construct a classical repre-sentation ^ρðθÞof the parametrized state ρ(θ) (during the shadowing phase), suchthat, for encoding observables O(x) that are classically representable (e.g., linear
combinations of Pauli observables), ^ρðθÞcan be used by a classical algorithm to
evaluate the model f
θ(x) on new input data (during the evaluation phase). More
generally, a shadow model is de ﬁned by (i) a shadowing phase where a (bit-string)
advice ω(θ) is generated by the evaluation of multiple quantum circuits
W1(θ),…,WM(θ), and (ii) an evaluation phase where this advice is used by a classical
algorithm A,a l o n gw i t hn e wi n p u td a t a xto evaluate their labelsefθðxÞ. In the Sec-
tion “General shadow models ”, we show that under this general de ﬁnition, all
shadow models are shadows of ﬂipped models.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 2