Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 3057 2 of 16
control of multiple motors in a single robot arm, reinforcement learning of the multiple robots for
solving one task or multiple tasks is relatively inactive.
This paper deals with information and strategy around reinforcement learning for multi-robot
navigation algorithm [ 30–33] where each robot can be considered as a dynamic obstacle [ 34,35] or
cooperative robot depending on the situation. That is, each robot in the system can perform independent
actions and simultaneously collaborate with each other depending on the given mission. After the
selected action, the relationship with the target is evaluated, and rewards or penalty is given to each
robot to learn.
The robot learns the next action based on the learned data when it selects the next action, and after
several learning, it moves to the closest target. By interacting with the environment, robots exhibit new
and complex behaviors rather than existing behaviors. The existing analytical methods su er from
adaptation to complex and dynamic systems and environments. By using Deep q learning [ 36–38] and
CNN [ 39–41], reinforcement learning is performed on the basis of image, and the same data as the
actual multi-robot is used to compare it with the existing algorithms.
In the proposed algorithm, the global image information in the multi-robot provides the robots
with higher autonomy comparing with conventional robots. In this paper, we propose a noble method
for a robot to move quickly to the target point by using reinforcement learning for path planning of a
multi-robot system. In this case, reinforcement learning is a Deep q learning that can be used in a real
mobile robot environment by sharing q parameters for each robot. In various 2D environments such as
static and dynamic environment, the proposed algorithm spends less searching time than other path
planning algorithms.
2. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is the training of machine learning models to make a sequence of decisions
through trial and error in a dynamic environment. The robots learn to achieve a goal in an uncertain,
potentially complex environment through programming the object by reward or penalty.
Figure 1 shows a general reinforcement learning, a robot which selects the action a as output
recognizes the environment and receives the state, s, of the environment. The state of the behavior
is changed, and the state transition is delivered to the individual as a reinforcement signal called a
reinforcement signal. The behavior of the individual robot is selected in such a way as to increase the
sum of the enhancement signal values over a long period of time.
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 16 
reinforcement learning of the multiple robots for solving one task or multiple tasks is relatively 
inactive. 
This paper deals with information and strategy around reinforcement learning for multi-robot 
navigation algorithm [30–33] where each robot can be considered as a dynamic obstacle [34,35] or cooperative robot depending on the situation. Th at is, each robot in the system can perform 
independent actions and simultaneous ly collaborate with each other depending on the given mission. 
After the selected action, the relationship with the ta rget is evaluated, and rewards or penalty is given 
to each robot to learn. 
The robot learns the next action based on the learned data when it selects the next action, and 
after several learning, it moves to the closest targ et. By interacting with the environment, robots 
exhibit new and complex behaviors rather than exis ting behaviors. The existing analytical methods 
suffer from adaptation to complex and dynamic sy stems and environments. By using Deep q learning 
[36–38] and CNN [39–41], reinforcement learning is performed on the basis of image, and the same 
data as the actual multi-robot is used to compare it with the existing algorithms. 
In the proposed algorithm, the global image info rmation in the multi-robot provides the robots 
with higher autonomy comparing with conventional robots. In this paper, we propose a noble 
method for a robot to move quickly to the target  point by using reinforcement learning for path 
planning of a multi-robot system. In this case, reinfo rcement learning is a Deep q learning that can be 
used in a real mobile robot environment by sharing q parameters for each robot. In various 2D environments such as static and dynamic environmen t, the proposed algorithm spends less searching 
time than other path planning algorithms. 
2. Reinforcement Learning 
Reinforcement learning is the training of machine learning models to make a sequence of 
decisions through trial and error in a dynamic enviro nment. The robots learn to achieve a goal in an 
uncertain, potentially complex environment through programming the object by reward or penalty. 
 
Figure 1. Q Learning concept. 
Figure 1 shows a general reinforcement learning, a robot which selects the action a as output 
recognizes the environment and receiv es the state, s, of the environmen t. The state of the behavior is 
changed, and the state transition is delivered to the individual as a reinforcement signal called a 
reinforcement signal. The behavior of the individual robot is selected in such a way as to increase the sum of the enhancement signal values over a long period of time. 
One of the most distinguishable differences of reinforcement learning from supervised learning 
is that it does not use the representation of th e link between input and output. After choosing an 
action, it is rewarded and knows the following situation. Another difference is that the online features of reinforcement learning are important since the co mputation of the system takes place at the same 
time as learning. One of the reinforcement learning features, Deep q learning, is characterized by the 
Figure 1. Q Learning concept.
One of the most distinguishable di erences of reinforcement learning from supervised learning
is that it does not use the representation of the link between input and output. After choosing an
action, it is rewarded and knows the following situation. Another di erence is that the online features