Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 3057 14 of 16
5. Conclusions
The problem of multi-robot path planning is motivated by many practical tasks because of its
eciency for performing given missions. However, since each robot in the group operates individually
or cooperatively depending on the situation, the search area of each robot is increased. Reinforcement
learning in the robot’s path planning algorithm is mainly focused on moving in a ﬁxed space where
each part is interactive.
The proposed algorithm combines the reinforcement learning algorithm with the path planning
algorithm of the mobile robot to compensate for the demerits of conventional methods by learning the
situation where each robot has mutual inﬂuence. In most cases, existing path planning algorithms are
highly depends on the environment. Although the proposed algorithm used an A* algorithm that
could not be used in a dynamic environment as a comparison algorithm, it also showed that path
generation is possible even in a dynamic environment. The proposed algorithm is available for use in
both a static environment and in a dynamic environment. Since robots share the memory used for
learning, they learn the situation by using one system. Because learning is slow and the result includes
errors of each robot at the beginning of learning, each robot has the same result as using each parameter
after learning progress to a certain extent. The proposed algorithm including A* for learning can be
applied in real robots by minimizing the memory to store the operations and values.
A* algorithm always ﬁnds the shortest distance rather than the search time. Under the proposed
algorithm, which shows diverse results, the search area of each robot is similar to A*-based learning.
However, in the environment where the generated path is simple or without obstacles, an unnecessary
movement occurs. To enhance the proposed algorithm, research on the potential ﬁeld algorithm is
undergoing. In addition, the proposed algorithm did not take into account the dynamics of robots and
obstacles [ 44–46] and performed simulations in situations in which robots and obstacles always made
ideal movements without taking into account the dynamics of them. Based on the simulation result,
the research considering the actual environment and physical engine is on the way.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.B.; software, H.B. and G.K; validation, J.K., D.Q., and G.K.; data
curation, J.K.; writing—original draft preparation, H.B.; writing—review and editing, D.Q.; visualization, G.K.;
supervision, S.L.; project administration, S.L.
Funding: This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program, through the National Research
Foundation of Korea, Ministry of Science, under Grant 2017R1D1A3B04031864.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Nasser, M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. J. Electron. Imaging 2007 ,16, 4.
2. Yu, D.; Li, D. Deep learning and its applications to signal and information processing [exploratory dsp].
IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2010 ,28, 145–154. [CrossRef]
3. Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.E.; Mohamed, A.R.; Jaitly, N.; Kingsbury, B. Deep neural Networks for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2012 ,29, 82–97. [CrossRef]
4. Graves, A.; Abdel-rahman, M.; Geo rey, H. Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 6645–6649.
5. Kumar, A. Ask me anything: Dynamic memory networks for natural language processing. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning, New York, NY, USA, 19–24 June 2016; pp. 1378–1387.
6. Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing. Available online: http: //l2r.cs.uiuc.edu /~{}danr /
Teaching /CS546-13 /Papers /marquez-LNLP00.pdf (accessed on 11 July 2010).
7. Manning, C. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, Baltimore, MD, USA,
22–27 June 2014; pp. 55–60.