MED3D: T RANSFER LEARNING FOR 3D M EDICAL IMAGE
ANALYSIS
Sihong Chen1, Kai Ma1and Yefeng Zheng1
1Tencent YouTu X-Lab, Shenzhen, China
ABSTRACT
The performance on deep learning is signiﬁcantly affected by volume of training data. Models pre-
trained from massive dataset such as ImageNet become a powerful weapon for speeding up training
convergence and improving accuracy. Similarly, models based on large dataset are important for the
development of deep learning in 3D medical images. However, it is extremely challenging to build a
sufﬁciently large dataset due to difﬁculty of data acquisition and annotation in 3D medical imaging.
We aggregate the dataset from several medical challenges to build 3DSeg-8 dataset with diverse
modalities, target organs, and pathologies. To extract general medical three-dimension (3D) features,
we design a heterogeneous 3D network called Med3D to co-train multi-domain 3DSeg-8 so as to make
a series of pre-trained models. We transfer Med3D pre-trained models to lung segmentation in LIDC
dataset, pulmonary nodule classiﬁcation in LIDC dataset and liver segmentation on LiTS challenge.
Experiments show that the Med3D can accelerate the training convergence speed of target 3D medical
tasks 2 times compared with model pre-trained on Kinetics dataset, and 10 times compared with
training from scratch as well as improve accuracy ranging from 3% to 20%. Transferring our Med3D
model on state-the-of-art DenseASPP segmentation network, in case of single model, we achieve
94.6% Dice coefﬁcient which approaches the result of top-ranged algorithms on the LiTS challenge.
1 Introduction
Data driven approaches, e.g. deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN), recently have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on different vision tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation, object detection, etc. It
is known that one of the fundamental facts contributing to such success is the massive amount of training data with
detailed annotations. Suppose taking natural image domain for example, the ImageNet dataset [ 1] consists more than
14 million images with over 20 thousand categories and MS COCO dataset [ 2] collects more than a million images with
rich instance segmentation annotations.
In the medical imaging domain, however, it is extremely challenging to build a sufﬁciently large 3D dataset due to the
intrusive nature of some medical imaging modalities (e.g. CT), the prolonged imaging duration as well as the laborious
annotation in 3D. As a consequence, there has not been a large-scale 3D medical dataset that is publicly available
to train baseline 3D DCNNs. To avoid the inferior performance caused by training networks from scratch using a
small set of data, some studies [ 3,4] converted 3D volume data to 2D and leveraged the pre-trained 2D models from
ImageNet [ 1]. Although this solution gains better performance than training from scratch, there still a big gap due to the
abandoned 3D spatial information. Some other methods tried to utilize the 3D spatial information by initializing with
networks trained from the Kinetics dataset [5]. However, the 3D information captured by the temporal video data and
the medical volume is so different that there exists a strong bias for learning a 3D medical image network transferred
from natural scene videos.
In this work, we try to solve the aforementioned problems from two aspects, building a large 3D medical dataset, and
training a baseline network with such data that can be transferred to solve other medical problems. In the ﬁrst step, we
collect many small-scale datasets from different medical domains with various imaging modalities, target organs and
pathological manifestations, to build a relatively large 3D medical image dataset. In the second step, we establish an
whalechen@tencent.comarXiv:1904.00625v4  [cs.CV]  17 Jul 2019