Input
Crop
Med3D Backbone
Med3D BackboneDecoder
3DASPP DecoderConcatInterpolationCoarse Segmentation Coarse Segmentation Result
Refine Segmentation Refine Segmentation ResultFigure 3: Framework of the liver segmentation.
original image size. Such simple decoder design allows the network to focus on training a universal encoder. At the test
stage, the decoder part is removed and the remained encoder can be transferred to other tasks.
3.3 Transfer Learning
Our goal is to establish a general 3D backbone network that can be transferred to other medical tasks to gain better
performance than training from scratch. To validate the effectiveness and versatility of the established Med3D network,
we conduct three different and thorough experiments in segmentation and classiﬁcation domains.
Lung Segmentation . Med3D only sees different tissues in the local receptive ﬁelds and is never surpervised by lung
annotation. In order to verify whether the features generated by the Med3D are universal in the lung segmentation task
on large receptive ﬁelds (whole human body), we transfer encoder part from Med3D as the feature extraction part and
then segmented lung in whole body followed by three groups of 3D decoder layers. The ﬁrst set of decoder layers
is composed of a transposed convolution layer with a kernel size of (3;3;3)and a channel number of 256 (which is
used to amplify twice the feature map), and the convolutional layer with (3;3;3)kernel size and 128 channels. The
remaining two groups of decoder layers are similar to the ﬁrst group excep doubling the number of channels per layer
of network progressively. Finally, the convolution layer in the (1;1;1)kernel is employed to generate the ﬁnal output
and the number of channels corresponds to the number of categories.
Pulmonary Nodule Classiﬁcation . To further verify the versatility of Med3D on non-segmentation tasks, as shown in
Fig. 2, we transfer the encoder part of Med3D to the nodule classiﬁer as a feature extractor, and the average pooling
operation and fully-connected layer with (1;1;1)kernel size is added to classify the results. Different to human organs
(e.g., spleen and pancreas), a pulmonary nodule is a micro-structure with a much smaller size. Furthermore, pulmonary
nodules are in character with blurred boundaries, large deformation of shape and rich texture information which are
quite different compared with normal human organs. Transferring the Med3D model to the pulmonary nodule task can
help to examine whether the features produced by Med3D are also versatile for microscopic tissue or not.
LiTS Challenge . To evaluate the performance of Med3D pre-trained model in practical applications, we apply the
Med3D model to the liver segmentation in the LiTS competition [ 6]. The liver is a common site of primary tumor
development. Low intensity contrast to liver tumor and adjacent tissues presents a big obstacle to accurately segment
the liver. The liver is a single connected area the same as left atrium. Inspired by the method from ﬁrst place winner of
the 2018 3D Atrial Segmentation Competition [ 34], we employ the two-stage segmentation network to segmenting liver.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, ﬁrstly, we roughly segment liver in the whole image to obtain the region of interest (ROI) of the
target. In this stage, we transfer the backbone pre-trained from Med3D as the encoder part, followed by a convolution
layer with (1;1;1)kernel and the number of channels is two (liver vs. background). After resizing image, we input the
image to coarse-segmentation network for extracting features with 32 times downsampling. Then, we upsample the
feature map to the original image size by a bi-linear interpolation method.
Secondly, we crop the liver target area according to the result from ﬁrst stage and sub-segment the target again so
as to obtain the ﬁnal liver segmentation result. This stage is mainly focused on careful liver contour segmentation.
In order to obtain more dense scale information in the feature map and obtain a larger receptive ﬁeld, we embed the
5