Ground 
TruthMed3D Kinetics Train from Scratch
Sagittal
Plane
Transvers
Plane
Coronal
Plane
Figure 1: Visualization of the segmentation results of our approach vs. the comparison ones after the same training
epochs.
encode-decode segmentation network called Med3D that is heterogeneously trained with the aforementioned large-scale
3D medical dataset. A multi-branch decoder is also proposed to tackle the incomplete annotation problem. We also
transfer the extracted universal encoder of Med3D to lung segmentation, nodule classiﬁcation and LiTS challenge [ 6],
compared to 3D models based on the Kinetics video dataset and models trained from scratch. Experiments have
demonstrated that the efﬁciency for training convergence and accuracy based on our proposed pre-trained models (see
Fig. 1).
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows: (1) We propose a heterogeneous Med3D network aiming
for 3D multi-domain medical data, which can extract general 3D features even in the case of large differences of data
domain distribution. (2) We transfer backbone of the Med3D model to three new 3D medical image tasks. And, we
conﬁrmed the effectiveness and efﬁciency of Med3D with extensive experiments. (3) To facilitate the community to
reproduce our experimental results and apply Med3D to other applications, we will release our Med3D pre-trained
models and relative source code1.
2 Related Work
Sun et al. [ 7] have shown that the greater the amount of data, the better the performance of deep learning networks. In
natural images, people have been building lots of large-amount datasets for decades, such as ImageNet [ 1], PASCAL
VOC [ 8], MS COCO [ 2], etc., which include abundant annotations on millions of images. Pre-trained models based
on these large-scale datasets can extract useful general features which are widely used in classiﬁcation, detection,
and segmentation tasks. Studies [ 9,10,11,12,13] have repeatedly proved that pre-trained models can accelerate the
training convergence speed and increase the accuracy of the target model.
Similarly, large-scale dataset and corresponding pre-trained models are important in medical imaging applications.
Over the past decade, over 100 challenges [14] have been organized within the area of biomedical image analysis [15,
16,17,18,19]. Most of these challenges are 3D semantic segmentation tasks, and the data magnitude is limited which
are generally in the tens or hundreds, much fewer than natural images. Therefore, each dataset is too small to stably
pre-train a 3D model for transfer learning. In this work, we aggregate many small 3D datasets to build a large 3DSeg-8
dataset for pre-training. In view of the limited dataset and the absence of 3D medical image pre-trained model, Han et
al. [3] sliced 3D data from three axes for the purpose of using a model pre-trained from natural image; Yu et al. [ 4] tried
to analyze the third dimension with a temporal approach in recurrent neural network [ 20] and transfer models based on
1Pre-trained models and relative source code has been made publicly available at https://github.com/Tencent/MedicalNet.
2