3DSeg -8
TransferSegmentation Results
Lung Nodule Dataset
Classification: MalignancyBackbone
Med3D
Convolution Layers
Fully-connected LayerUp-sampleFigure 2: Framework of the proposed method.
natural scene video [ 21] to 3D network. However, such methods still cannot fully leverage the structural information
of the third dimension. Most of the studies on 3D medical imaging such as [ 22,23,24] prefer to train a small 3D
convolution neural network from scratch.
Pan and Yang [ 25] have indicated that the more similar the data distribution between source domain and target domain,
the better the transferring effect. According to the above observation the above defects, we believe that the pre-trained
model based on 3D medical dataset should be superior to natural scene video in 3D medical target tasks. Due to the
lack of large-scale 3D medical images, co-trained models based on multi-domain 3D medical image dataset may be a
solution. Training network cross different domains simultaneously is a challenging task. Duan et al. [ 26] proposed a
data-dependent regularizer based on support vector machine for video concept detection. Hoffman et al. [ 27] introduced
a mixture-transform model for object classiﬁcation and Nam et al. [ 28] presented a domain adaptation network for
video tracking. Since the pixel presentation and range of pixel value of medical imaging on different domains are
completely different, the above methods for natural images cannot be directly applied onto the medical imaging.
3 Method
The motivation of our work is to train a high performance DCNN model with a relatively large 3D medical dataset,
that can be used as the backbone pre-trained model to boost other tasks with insufﬁcient training data. To reach this
target, we design a processing workﬂow with three major steps, as shown in Fig. 2. In the ﬁrst step, we collect several
publicly available 3D segmentation datasets called 3DSeg-8 from different medical imaging modalities, e.g. magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT), with various scan regions, target organs and pathologies.
We then normalize all the data with the same spatial and intensity distributions. In the second step, we train a DCNN
model, namely Med3D, to learn the features. The network has a shared encoder and eight simple decoder branches for
each speciﬁc dataset. In the last step, the extracted features from the pre-trained Med3D model are transferred to other
medical tasks to boost the network performance. Details of each step are explained in the following sections.
3.1 Data Selection and Normalization
Our data is collected from eight different 3D medical segmentation datasets and we refer the composed dataset as
3DSeg-8 for later convenience. The reason why we select data from segmentation datasets rather than classiﬁcation
ones are mainly two folds: ﬁrstly, unlike the natural image analysis that can learn general feature representations from
thousands of object categories, the medical imaging analysis operates on a conﬁned body region that has much less
object classes. Learning from a small set of classes in a classiﬁcation task may lead to a poor generalization. Secondly,
the classiﬁcation label turns to be much weaker supervision information for 3D medical data compared to natural image
labels, as the label may only correspond to a tissue/organ existing in a small portion of the volume data, which may
hamper the learning process of the neural network. Therefore, we select data from those eight segmentation datasets
and believe that learning the tissue/organ differences from the segmentation task could result in better representative
features.
The original volume data of 3DSeg-8 is from different modalities (MRI and CT), distinctive scan regions (e.g. brain,
heart, prostate, spleen, etc.) as well as multi-centers, which create a large variety of data characteristics, such as the
3