In that case,  for a  conflict resolution approach  labeled as 
C1, for those instances in  the realm of class D , the M will  
always  prevail , regardless of being either  D° or D*.  
 
This doe s not obviate the need for the  use of an  Artific ial 
Legal Reasoner  since there is still the class of L ʹ to be deal t 
with.  It does though significantly  reduce the run -time effort 
since anything other than L ʹ is transferred  over to the Artifi-
cial Moral Agent to render a final decision.  
3.2 Approach C2: Law Prevails Over Morality  
In approach C2, the law is co nsidered to prevail over the 
side of morality, and th erefore any instances in class D are 
to be dec ided by the Artifi cial Legal Reasoner.  This might 
be liken ed as a variant of the  Rule of Law as exemplified  by 
Albert Dicey ’s [1885] quote: “With us no man i s above the 
law and every man, whatever be his rank or condition, is 
subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the 
jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals. ” Thus, even if the Ar-
tificial Moral Agent has deemed that t he instance is not 
morall y aligned, nonetheless , the law shall  prevail.  
3.3 Approach  C3: Determining Which  Prevail s 
In approach C 3, it is presumed that both the Artifi cial Moral 
Agent and the Artificial Legal Reasoner have a bona fide 
basis for why their respective rendered decisio ns are in con-
flict with each other  and that the rules of C1 and C2 are not 
applicable.  
 
Therefore, if a choice is to be made between the two, 
there must be some means to make such a choice.  
 
Quite a number of algorithmic  avenues could be utilized.  
Some are  mentioned herein, each of which has tradeoffs and 
the particular class  of AI for Social Good s ystem will be a 
determiner in which such aven ue is warranted. Also, this is 
by no means an exh austive list and m erely indicative of rep-
resentative ways that conflicts might be resolved.   
 
For example, there could be a weighting scheme that pro-
vides weights associated with  rendered choices. This poten-
tially introduces the use of uncertainty and probabilities int o 
the Artificial  Moral Agent and the Arti ficial Legal Reason-
er, which is an advanced variant that some believe is needed  
in any case,  regardless of this  specific  use for conflict reso-
lution [Bench -Capon, 2020; Brand ao et al, 2020]. 
 
Another approach would be to utilize  an Arguing Ma-
chines methodology  [Eliot, 2018; Fridman, 2017] , consist-
ing of the two compo nents engaging in a dialogue or argu-
ment with each other, trying to convince the other that the ir 
choice ought to prevail on their own side of the matter.   
 
Whichever avenue  is used, t here are key considera tions to 
be attende d to. If the run -time execution of attempting to 
settle the open  conflict is onerous, the impact of the conflict 
resolution ca n undermine the overarching actions of the AI 
for Social Good system. A delay in respon siveness might be more t han sim ply aggravating  or inconvenient  since the AI 
system might be imm ersed in a rea l-time activity that entails 
life-or-death de cisions of a n extremely timely nature (such 
as in the case of autonomous  systems , including self -drivi ng 
cars [ Eliot, 201 6; Huang, 2019]).  
 
 A sense  of AI self -awareness  [Parasuraman et al, 2000]  is 
required as part of the conflict re solution process, namely 
that the AI must be keeping tabs on the conflict resolution 
and have some means of ascertaining that either the process 
is taking too long for  the matter at hand or that the process 
has potentially become ind eterminate  or intractable,  and 
needs to be interrupted  or halted  [Eliot, 2017]. . 
3.4 Approach C4: Neither Prevails  
In approach C 4, the question arises as to what the AI should 
do if the confl ict between the  Artificial Moral Agent and the 
Artificial Legal Reasoner cannot be otherwise resolved. 
Assume that C1 is not applicable, nor C2, and nor has C3 
reached a res olution . 
 
A final catchall that perh aps randomly pick s betwe en the 
two is conc eivable, though likely unsatis fying in many re-
spects , or apply a  method that  tries to assess whether the 
choice of one is somehow preferred over the other. Re-
search ers such as Bench -Capon [2020]  have id entified op-
tions such as  conse quentialism might be use d (the impa cts 
of the act ivities  chosen), or deontologi cally chosen (a worth 
associated with the act, irr espective of the consequences), or 
even a  means abiding by Maslow ’s [Maslow, 1943] hierar-
chy of needs ( a selection based on the option fulfilling  the 
highest basi c human need ). 
 
Another possibility is to seek a res olution from th e end -
user of the AI for Social Good system, including possibly 
offer ing an ex planation associated with the impasse  (using 
XAI, as described by  Waltl and  Vogl [2018]). Seeking su ch 
input from the end -user could be pro blematic in many ways, 
including allowing a selection prefer ence with unintend ed 
consequences or other untoward possibilities and should 
carefully be assessed as to its utility [Freed man et al, 2020].   
4 Discussion   
This paper prov ides insights into the neglected dualism of 
Artificial Moral Agents and Artificial Legal Reasoners  and 
provides  an indication as to the value of  the moral -and-law 
dualism , along with offering  ways to encompass th at dual-
ism. It is hoped that this study  will spur additio nal research 
into an  emer ging area that is only yet being explored  and 
will likely become increasingly crucial for the expanding  
and widespr ead adoption of AI for Social Good.  
About The Author  
Prior to his present position , Dr. E liot served as a  professor 
at the Univ ersity of Southern California (USC)  and headed  a 
pioneering AI lab, his AI textbooks  consistently rank in the 
Top 10 , his AI  and Law  writings  are globally recognized .