Abstract  
A ne glected dualism is occurring in AI for Social 
Good involving the lack of encompassing both the 
role of  artificial moral agency and artificial legal 
reasoning in advanced AI systems. Efforts  by AI 
researchers and AI developers have tended to f ocus 
on how to craft and embed artificial moral ag ents 
to guide moral decision making  when an AI system 
is operating in the field  but ha ve not also focuse d 
on and  coupled the use of artific ial legal reasoning 
capabilities, which is equally necessary for robust 
moral and legal  outcomes. This paper  addresses  
this problematic neglect and offers insights to 
overc ome a substantive  prevailing weakness and 
vulnerability.  
1 Introduc tion 
A key question  in AI for Social Good is how to ensure that 
AI systems operating  in the field are able to make  needed 
and appropriate mo ral choices . As society becomes inc reas-
ingly depe ndent on AI, there is a widening  concern that AI 
systems might at times  not conform to applicable moral 
norms . By crafting and embedding Artificial Mor al Agents,  
specialized  compo nents within an AI  system, it is anticipat-
ed that a real -time capacity will enable  the enactment and  
abidance  of moral conventions  [Cane, 201 2; Huang, 2019; 
Misselhorn, 2019] . 
 
Even if Artificial Moral Agents can be suitably dev ised, 
there is a missing and crucial  element that is currently being 
neglected, namely the  dual role of moralit y and law. As 
pointed out  by Shiell [1987] , since at least the days of Plato 
there has been a struggle over the relationship between mo-
rality and  law, and even still today debates about  the nature 
and extent of how  moral decision s intertwin e with the law 
are persistent  and contenti ous.  
 
Overall , morality and law  are generally viewed as  inextri-
cably bound to each other in some fashion and must be c on-
sidered in concert , tho ugh the ir mutual  interaction and de-
pendencies are still an open -ended matter  
 As such, additional  attention to Artificial Legal Reason ers 
(ALR)  is needed, providing the other  missing or under-
played  element for  achieving the requisi te morality a nd law 
dualism. The inclusion of artificial legal reasoning provides 
the possibility  of including a cooperating  specialized  ALR  
component  within an AI system that offer s a real -time capa-
bility for rendering legal -based decisi ons or awareness  about 
the law [Eliot, 2019; Genesereth, 2009; Surden, 2019] . 
 
By considering the simultaneous  use and deployment  of 
components for both Artificial Moral Agen t capabilities and 
Artificial Legal Reason er capabilities , working in a coordi-
nated and communicativ e manner, the moral agency of AI 
systems is likely to be  more well -rounded and  balanced by 
prevailing laws. This aspiration though is not as readily ful-
filled as might seem at fir st glance  since there are inherent 
tensions between  morality and law , which w ill be  further  
exempl ified and revealed  in a collaborative  effor t to have 
such automated agents  work in conjunction  with each other.  
 
The remainder of this paper describes the possibilities and 
problems that will be encount ered in seeking to achieve  the 
proffered  dualism. In addition, insights about way s to cope 
with the consequent  hurdles and difficulties are laid  out as a 
research agenda  for those purs uing the devel opment of AI 
for Social Good.  
2 Dualism Tensions  
As stated by Bickenbach [ 1989 ], “the relationship  be-
tween  morality and law is one of the more enduring prob-
lematic s of jurispr udence. ” Those legal scholars in the do-
main of  natural law argue that morality  is the source of laws 
and serves as  the binding power of laws . In contrast, schol-
ars consider ed in the legal positivism  domain are likely to 
contend that morality is categorically  separate and distinct 
from law.  
 
In a legal rea lism context, Kagan  [1998 ] points out that  
morals and laws ultimately exhibit tensions between each 
other, and emp hasizes that “the law may permit some par-
ticular act, even though that act is immoral ; and the law may  
forbid an act, even though that act is morally permissible, or 
even morally required. ” 
 The Neglected D ualism Of Artif icial Moral Agency  
And Artificial Legal Reaso ning In AI For Social Good  
 
 
Dr. Lance B. Eliot  
Chief AI  Scientist , Techbruim; Fellow, CodeX: Stanfo rd Center for Le gal Informatics  
Stanford, California, USA