Morality is sometimes viewed as existing within the 
shadow of law  [Mnooki n and Kornhauser, 1979]. In that 
sense,  a moral facet would be considered outside of the law 
and yet within reach of  the law. Some view that morality is  
actually the halo of law , such as Regan [1987] indicating 
that law is imbued  with moral sust enance, eve n if at times 
there might not be a moral obligation to abide by the law.  
 
Consider a given body of moral tenets as represented by a 
designation M  and a body of laws as rep resented by the  use 
of a designation L. Envision these as circles  or ovals  for 
which there is a Venn dia gram depicting them as overlap-
ping, whereby  the de signator O represents the ir overlap: 
 
O  = M∩L             (1) 
 
Define M ’ and L ’ as follows:  
 
Mʹ = M – (M∩L)           (2) 
 
Lʹ =  L – (M∩L)           (3) 
 
If and only if M ʹ is fully outsi de of the legal realm and 
not subj ect to the law, it will be assumed that any instance 
of an Artificial Moral Agent renderin g such a moral choi ce 
within the scope of M ʹ could ergo proceed unabated without 
any needed consultation with an Artificial  Legal Re asoner.  
 
Likewise, if and only if L ʹ is fully outside of the moral  
realm and not subject to a moral underpinning, it will be 
assumed that any instance of an Artificial  Legal Reason er 
rendering such a legal indication could ergo proceed  una-
bated  without any  needed consultation with an Artificial 
Moral Agent.  
 
The O presents the key challenge  for the dualistic nature 
of the two.  
 
Divide O into those instances for which  there is an 
agreement between the given M and L, which will be desig-
nated as A, and thos e instances for which there is disagree-
ment  which is to  be designated as D.  
 
O =  A + D              (4) 
 
In the case of A, the presumption is that since the M and 
L are in concordance on such instances, the Artificial Moral 
Agent and the Artificial Legal Reas oner have no conflict 
and thus either one can prev ail in such a use case.  
 
We are then left with the class D of instances, providing 
the essence of conflict that needs to be  resolved or otherwise 
conveyed. Some form of automated confli ct resolu tion will  
be required to contend with  body D.  In the study of law, 
there are considered “hard” cases that are less amenable to 
everyda y legal reasoning  [Hage et al, 1993].  
 Class D can be characteri zed as being  composed of some 
combination of hard case instances , designated a s D* and 
those that are non -hard, depicted as D°  (do not conflate the 
notion of non -hard with  a meaning of being easy or simple, 
since the non -hard cases can also pose quite arduous and 
complicated challenges).  
 
For D then:  
 
D =  D* + D°               (5) 
 
Algorithm ically , an AI for Social Good system that 
makes use of a n Artificial Moral Agent should correspond-
ingly include  an Artificial Legal Reasoner , and for which  at 
any invoking  of either one, the other should also be invoked, 
and the AI then would make  a comparison  of the re sults so 
rendered by each respectively.  
 
For Mʹ, the AI proceeds with the result of the  Artificial 
Moral Agent, and for the L ʹ the AI proceeds with the res ult 
of the Artific ial Legal Reasoner.  
 
In the O, the AI can  choose  from either  one in the in-
stance of A, while for those that are D the AI would under-
take a conflict r esolution process (as discussed next ). It is 
likely that the D* will require a n elaborate  effort by the con-
flict resolution process, while the D° will be predominantly 
less protracted.  
3 Conflict  Resolution  
In th is effort of the  prescribed  dualism, an a  prior i approach 
will need to be established for resolving the potential con-
flicts between the  results tendered  by the Artificial Moral 
Agent and th ose of  the Artificial Le gal Reasoner . 
 
Undertaking a satisfactory conflict resolution  of this sort  
is not straightforward, a s this salient remark in The Law  by 
Frederic Bastiat [1 850] illuminates: “When law and moral i-
ty contradict each other, the citizen has the  cruel alternative  
of either losing his moral sense or losing his respect for the 
law.” 
 
An outline of the potential approaches to the morality and 
law conflicts in an AI for Social Good system is indicated 
next, numbering each approach as Cn , and for whic h the n is 
merely for reference purposes and not to suggest priority or 
sequence of which approach is valued over another.  
3.1 Approach C1: Morality Prevails Over Law  
In Hart [1961 ], morality is depicted as the ultimate  standard 
for assessing human behavio r and thus the law is considered 
second -best, namely that moral reasoning eclipses  any legal 
reasoning.  
 
As per Goparaju Ramachandra Rao [1 980] in I Learn: 
“Whenever legality clashes with morality, legality should be 
opposed,  and morality should be upheld .”