10 Roberto Cahuantzi et al.
Fig. 6. Studying the dependency on the number of RNN layers, always using the same
loss-based stopping criterion and a learning rate of 0.01. Note the logarithmic y-axes
on the top. The addition of layers slightly increases accuracy in both DL and JW
text similarities (here only DL is shown for simplicity) but the signicant increase in
training time makes it hard to justify the depth increase.
sequences of a minimum length of 1,100 characters. Again, the trailing 100 char-
acters are used as validation strings, with the remaining leading-strings used for
the training and testing. The seed strings have LZW complexities ranging be-
tween 2 and 12 and are composed of numerous distinct symbols ranging between
2 and 6. A single hidden layer is used for both the LSTM and GRU networks.
The number of units within the hidden layer is varied between 25 and 250, in ten
geometrically-spaced steps. The Adam optimizer is used with learning rates of
0.001 and 0.01 and the aforementioned loss-based stopping criterion. As before,
all congurations are run 5 times and averaged.
A visual summary of the results is given in Figure 7. The median training
time for all tests with LSTM networks is 37.19 seconds with an interquartile
range (IQR) between 15.64 to 75.79 seconds, and for GRU 19.72 seconds with
an IQR between 8.48 to 31.70 seconds. We generally nd that GRUs are trained
faster than LSTM networks to achieve the same loss function value with the same
optimizer overall considered learning rates and network complexities, not only
in median values but also with less dispersion in general. The forecast accuracy
with LSTMs and GRUs is comparable. The median distance of both JW and
DL metrics for both types of RNNs was 1.0, this is the same value for the third
quartile (Q3) however some dierences are appreciated in the rst quartile ( Q1).
The values for LSTM are 0.93 and 0.97 for DL and JW distance respectively,
whereas, for GRU, they are 0.88 for DL and 0.96 for JW. This tells us that despite
longer training times LSTM seems to have a small advantage on accuracy. This
information is presented visually in Figure 8. One must remember that these text
similarities are not Euclidean and small dierences for JW usually correspond
to more contrasting strings than DL.