A comparison of LSTM and GRU networks for learning symbolic sequences 9
Fig. 5. Total time needed for training LSTM and GRU networks on strings of dierent
LZW complexities and with dierent stopping criteria and learning rates. The dotted
line shows the median, the box represents the interquartile range (IQR, the middle
50%), the whiskers have a length of 1.5 IQR. All points outside the whiskers are con-
sidered outliers and are plotted individually. Note the logarithmic scale of the y-axis.
A learning rate of 0.01 appears most suitable irrespective of the stopping criterion.
We next explore the string memorization capability of the networks de-
pendent on the number of layers. We train LSTM and GRU networks with
`2f1;2;3glayers and each layer having uunits, where uis chosen such that
`uis closest tof50;100;200g(i.e., the total number of units is approximately
constant as `varies). The quality of the forecasts measured using DL distances
is averaged over all networks with the same number of layers and the whole 12
seed strings. In all cases, the loss-based stopping criterion is used, and the learn-
ing rate is 0.01. The results are shown in Figure 6. The most successful network
conguration, in terms of small DL distance and training time, is a single hid-
den layer network (the results look similar for the JW distance). Although there
is a slight improvement in forecast accuracy with each added hidden layer, the
observed increase in training time does not seem to justify their addition.
In summary, this initial parameter test trained 3,239 RNNs for the 12 dif-
ferent seed strings, over 5 runs to prevent outlier bias, and with the variety of
parameters discussed above. The main nding is that the learning rate and the
number of hidden units are among the most in
uential hyper-parameters for the
eectiveness of the considered RNNs. This is consistent with ndings in [6]. In
what follows, we will use single-layer RNNs with a reduced range of considered
learning rates and perform larger studies with strings of lower and higher LZW
complexities, respectively.
3.2 Test with seed strings of low complexity
In this low LZW complexity exploration, nearly 3,600 RNNs are trained for a
total of 37 dierent seed strings. These seed strings are now repeated to produce