8 Roberto Cahuantzi et al.
Our metrics for the string forecast accuracy are the normalized versions of
the DL and JW distances computed using the Python library textdistance2.
The text similarity in this version gives a value of 1.0 for identical strings and a
value of 0.0 for \completely dierent" strings.
3 Results
The following computational tests are performed on a Dell PowerEdge R740
Server with 1.5 TB RAM and two Intel Xeon Silver 4114 processors running at
2.2 GHz. The scripts were written and run in Python 3.7.3 using the libraries
Pandas 1.2.3, NumPy 1.19.2, TensorFlow 2.4.1, and TextDistance 4.2.0. In or-
der to reduce the number of parameter congurations to be studied, we have
divided our tests into three parts. The rst initial parameter study on medium-
complexity seed strings will be used to x the number of layers, decide on the
stopping criterion for the training, and reduce the number of learning rates con-
sidered. The other two tests explore the remaining parameters with seed strings
of low and high complexity, respectively.
3.1 Initial parameter test with medium complexity seed strings
We start with an initial parameter study to set the basis for the following in-
depth tests. For this test, 12 seed strings were generated using 2, 5, 10, and 20
symbols; with LZW complexities of 20, 35, and 50. Each of these seed strings
was repeated to produce strings of at least 500 characters long. The trailing 100
characters of each of these strings are used as the validation data, while the other
leading characters are used for the training. For each training string, an RNN is
trained with various stopping criteria, learning rates, the number of layers, and
units per layer. Each conguration is trained ve times to reduce the eect of
the random weight initialization.
The Adam optimizer [12] is used, motivated by the results of [22] who showed
that adaptive learning-rate methods, and in particular Adam, yields the best
results for sparse data such as one-hot encoded sequences. The learning rates
are varied between f0:001;0:01;0:1g. The maximal number of training epochs
is set to 999. Two stopping criteria are evaluated: (i) stop the training when
the accuracy reaches a value larger or equal to 0.99, and (ii) stop when the loss
function, in this case, categorical cross-entropy, reaches a value less or equal
to 0.1. While the loss function is well known, it is worth mentioning that the
aforementioned accuracy is calculated by computing the frequency in which the
predicted values match the real yvalues and dividing it by the total predictions,
in this case, the total elements of y.
After the training is completed, a forecast of 100 characters is produced and
its text similarity to the validation string is measured. For both stopping criteria,
we found that a learning rate of 0.01 led to the smallest training times for all
string complexities considered. This is summarized visually in Figure 5.
2textdistance 4.2.0, https://pypi.org/project/textdistance