sending real-time data to the control room. Robots are used in oshore elds for drilling,
inspection and damage control to enhance eciency and personal safety [49]. Micro- and
nanotechnologies have contributed signicantly to several areas of the OGI to give detailed
and more accurate information [25]. The OGI is considered as one of the pioneering sensor-
based industries. For example, wireless sensor networks are used to wirelessly control and
oversee oil assets, including pipeline leakage, rust, equipment and reservoir status in real-time
[46]. The radio frequency identication (RFID) technology is used for asset management,
oil rig site management, pipeline inspection, safety and security [15]. The data generated
from various sensors can potentially provide insights to assist the OGI to improve operations
ans safety, prevent problems and reduce operational costs. This data is usually massive and
dicult to make sense of, especially by human operators. Intelligent systems are the only
currently available solution capable of bringing real-time analysis and decision-making [33].
3. Machine Learning in Oil and Gas Industry Applications
Just as humans learn by doing tasks repeatedly and making mistakes, machines too are
able to learn and improve their performance with the aid of ML [41]. The main goals of
ML are making predictions, performing clustering, extracting association rules and making
decisions from a given information or data [34]. ML has a great potential in OGI applica-
tions, especially when it comes to analysing and interpreting data. It oers better ways of
developing drilling plans, diagnosing, monitoring, predicting and performing real-time opti-
misation at a minimal cost. ML algorithms that have been eectively applied to OGI tasks
include Support Vector Machine (SVM), Articial Neural Networks (ANN), Deep Learning
(DL) and Genetic Algorithms (GA). Applications using these algorithms are reviewed below
in turn.
3.1. Production
ML can help to improve the oil and gas production rate and minimise the cost of lifting.
It has been eectively used for enhancing reservoir modelling and preventive maintenance.
In particular, ML models have been proposed for determining optimal times for outlined
maintenance so as to avoid failures and optimise the regular maintenance operation schedule.
Below, we review the studies applying ML to various problems associated with oil and gas
production.
Qiao et al. [44] introduced an oil and gas production forecasting model, which combined
the Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) and Least Squares Support Vector Machine (LS-
SVM) methods. Using historical data of an oil and gas company and simulations run in
MATLAB, the authors were able to analyse the factors impacting the production and build
an accurate prediction model that was trained at a high speed.
Panja et al. [40] developed and compared an LS-SVM model, an Articial Neural Net-
works (ANN) model and a Response Surface model (RSM) to predict the oil production
and gas-to-oil ratio considering reservoirs that are subjected to time and rate related con-
straints. Some fundamental factors were considered as input parameters. The same datasets
5