a pipeline. According to this MAS architecture, the Intelligent Agent detects abnormal
pressure and alerts another agent, called the Mobile Agent, with the details and location
of the found abnormality. At the same time, the Sensor Agent detects metallic objects
in the pipeline and alerts the Master Agent, which represents the control centre, through
the Mobile Agent. The Protective Agent provides the rst-hand protection to the pipeline
whenever the presence of any metallic object is discovered before the arrival of security
guards. The proposed approach has not been implemented, but the authors believe that the
collaboration expressed by the agents is a good sign that the proposed framework is suited
for supporting the case of pipeline vandalism.
Ramirez et al. [45] proposed an intelligent supervisory MAS-based system with multiple
feedback controls for industrial processes. The authors combined some fuzzy logic rules,
an internal model control architecture and a MAS to accomplish two petroleum industrial
operations: gas-oil separation and oil heating. Standard local interconnected supervising
schemes were joined to form an overall supervisor so as to meet local goals in each of the
processes. The design of the local supervising agent consisted of two levels: the regulatory
level with an internal model control architecture and supervisory level. The latter includes
an event detector developed using fuzzy logic [36] and a decision system that uses informa-
tion received from the event detector to make appropriate decisions. The global supervising
agent was designed based on a predened mechanism to guarantee the accomplishment of
the global objective of the entire process. Computational simulations for the emulation of
the local and global supervising agents were carried out, and the results demonstrated a
possibility of reaching the entire process global objective owing to the cooperation between
local supervising agents. The authors highlight that the security of all processes is more
ecient when applying the proposed distributed supervision compared to that of a cen-
tralised system. For future development, the authors suggest to include another process for
identifying an agent able to manage con
icts to improve the collaboration between the local
supervising agents.
Oliveira et al. [11] proposed the SGCP (a Portuguese acronym referring to a MAS for oil
eld management). The SGCP was used to simulate an oil eld, situated in Bahia, Brazil.
The oil eld components were monitored by agents through interaction with a database
containing real data from the eld. The gathered data included sensor readings for every
eld and procient knowledge about costs. The agents applied the information to estimate
the present state of every single oil eld component and the entire eld. They all acted
according to their assigned functions, e.g. operation, supply and intervention. The agents
also interacted with each other to achieve an improved global prot. Problems were identied
through a statistical calculus approach, which included analysing the level of oil production.
The authors integrated the SSCP into a tool that had prior understanding of the oil eld
conditions and aided decision making in an intelligent way to make inferences based on
rules and fuzzy logic. The agents were implemented using the Java Agent Development
Environment (JADE) framework [5], while SGCP ontology was developed using the Protege
4.2 software and the Java class Ontology.java supported by the JADE framework. The
methodology for storing and integrating expert knowledge (MAICE) [37] was used to dene
the action rules for the agents. During each simulation, environment information was stored
9