processing plant. An agent was assigned to represent the operator of the control room, and
another to represent all agents in the eld. The authors developed an application to test
their agent system, where they simulated a simple oil eld comprising of a few wells and a
processing plant. The JACK intelligent agents environment [7] was used in this study to
build, run and integrate the MAS, while the Eclipse software development kit was employed
for the system implementation. For the test run, the authors generated values of three
relatively random variables aecting the production, which included the permeability, water
and sand ratios. They operated the simulator with a control system to compare a human
operator and the agent system. They also did the same without the control system to enable
standard comparison. While both the human operator and agent system reduced the amount
of time used in critical circumstances and increased the quantity of oil produced, the agent
system achieved a higher production level compared to that of the human operator system.
The authors concluded that their agent system can be relied upon to manage some tasks in
the industry and can perform better than human operators.
To resolve con
icting control concerns and comply with the dynamic nature of oil elds,
Mikkelsen et al. [32] developed an extensible multi-objective control model for oshore oil
and gas production. They implemented a stratied MAS, in which control objectives were
assigned and managed by various agents through a uniform negotiation context at three
layers, namely, the strategic, tactical and operational decision layers. Each agent accessed
historical production data from the DONG Energy EP-operated Siri oil and gas eld in
the North Sea and online data feeds to achieve a goal. A negotiation process was used to
coordinate the agents' actions, while a self-re
ecting implementation approach was employed
to prevent agents from becoming dominant. Two experiments were conducted, from which
the authors observed that their approach improved the system performance compared to
a manually operated system. They concluded that their proposed system can meet the
dynamic operating conditions of oil and gas elds to conform to the present and future
requirements with a reduced environmental impact and greater economic pay-os.
Dobrescu et al. [12] presented a MAS framework for shared control of petroleum services
for onshore oilelds. The authors proposed a distributed control strategy for a basic pro-
duction system based on the IEC 61499 standard. They used an existing design architecture
for distributed control and assigned requirements for the MAS to carry out control tasks as
a service. The traditional production units were transformed to production unit agents to
ensure system dynamics and a better load distribution. The authors adapted the remote
execution process for the MAS so as to identify a possible need for modication at the su-
pervisory level. In the future, they plan to implement the approach for a real situation and
evaluate its performance in the presence of operational unpredictability.
4.2. Safety and Maintenance
A growing demand for proactive measures to protect oil pipelines from vandals and
leakages, which are popular mostly during crude oil conveyance, has attracted attention of
several researchers. Ahmed et al. [1] proposed a multi-agent-based approach for preventing
and controlling oil pipeline vandalism. The authors used MAS engineering to design a system
comprising reactive and proactive agents working together to monitor and avert dangers in
8