various production operators are involved being responsible for organising and supervising
all operations in searching for and extracting oil [10].
Crude oil production platforms, whether oshore or onshore, are full of huge risks. As
such, eective control and maintenance are required to ensure ecient and reliable pro-
duction processes, higher productivity, longer equipment life, safety of people and the en-
vironment, and staying within budget. Control involves applying planning and sustenance
abilities to ensure improved performance and reduce the risk of failure at every stage of
the oil and gas supply chain. Maintenance includes regular inspection and examination of
operating conditions for taking preventive, predictive and corrective measures, as well as
making strategic, tactical and operational decisions [38].
Supply chain management (SCM) ensures making plans, coordinating activities and ex-
ploring improvements. In the OGI, SCM faces several challenges, mostly in terms of logistics
and attitude in respect to teamwork and information sharing within the supply chain part-
ners. The improved supply chain in the OGI requires new principles for collaboration [19].
Another important but underdeveloped area of study among the multiple accomplish-
ments in the OGI is the monitoring, processing and management of information. This
encompasses data collected from the elds, amount of oil and gas produced and exported.
Traditional methods such as centralised databases often fail since storing, analysing and
sharing collected data require decentralisation and continuous verication for consistences
across various stages of the supply chain. Some traditional methods may be adequate for
reporting the state of the environment around the eld or the quantity of produced and
distributed oil; however, they cannot provide the required real-time and future support such
as preventing data being wrongly reported or tampered at dierent stages of its processing.
2.3. Technology
The use of computer-aided techniques to assist businesses is becoming standard in in-
dustries, including the OGI. To maintain a sustainable and protable business, the OGI
has to explore new technologies that can drive its eciency. It is thus crucial to nd out
what advantages a technology can oer over others for a certain task [51]. The demand for
safety in the OGI, along with a keen interest in intelligent elds, smart wells and real-time
analysis, brought about a hype in the exploration of dierent kinds of technology that are
powerful, intelligent and robust in nature [33].
Autonomy becomes very signicant in environments, where risks are high or humans are
not capable of certain actions, or when trying to be cost-eective. With the increase of the
industry size, things like collecting data, assessing it and making decisions in fractions of
seconds are impossible to human operators. Setting overall goals and delegating decision-
making to autonomous systems is the best humans can do in such situations.
Among many recent technologies, the Internet of things (IoT) has a big impact on the
OGI development. For example, [43] outlined some of the IoT applications in the OGI, which
included the use of wearable watches, smart helmets and smart glasses by oil eld engineers
in oshore elds for real-time assistance, safety and communication with the control room
for navigation and enhanced collaboration. Drones are used for inspection of leakages in
pipelines and 
are emissions, while smart pipelines are employed for detecting damages and
4