overview of the OGI, the tasks involved and technology adopted in the industry. Sections 3
and 4 introduce ML and MAS and review their applications to the OGI tasks, respectively.
Section 5 compares ML and MAS approaches to OGI tasks and discusses possible ways and
advantages of combining the two approaches for their greater adoption in the OGI. Section
6 highlights challenges and future directions in this respect, while Section 7 concludes the
survey.
2. The Oil and Gas Industry
2.1. Overview
The OGI is an extremely large industry involving upstream, midstream and downstream
sectors. It is a complex but essential industry worldwide. It directly or indirectly impacts
our daily lives enabling services such as transportation, heating and electricity, as well as
many petrochemical products from things we use to those we wear [20]. No wonder that
petroleum is often called "black gold" by virtue of its worth and value in human life and
global economy [27].
Presently, OGI organisations are considering new ways of cutting operations cost, en-
hancing eciency and increasing out-turn. Challenges and risks associated with activities
and operations throughout the supply chain require to be addressed profoundly, which com-
pels the advancement of technology within the OGI, especially for data processing and
management. Some examples of such technologies include digitisation of oil elds, real-time
optimisation of drilling operations, the use of nanotechnology, wireless sensor networks to aid
gauging, reservoir modelling and diagnostics [16]. Research in the industry predicts ample
resources left to sustain current oil production levels for at least 50 more years [56]. Thus,
the main challenges facing the OGI are ensuring an increase in productivity and convey-
ing the products to end users at the least possible cost [10]. Considering its global nature
and complications of engaging in contract relationships with governments, joint ventures
and other stakeholders, the OGI also requires technical resolutions for a more eective data
management.
2.2. Tasks
Supply chain in the OGI is subdivided into three closely related phases, each involving
a series of operations. These phases include the upstream ,midstream and downstream .
The upstream mainly involves exploration and production of crude. The midstream extends
both upstream and downstream and involves storage and transportation; however, it is often
ignored when listing out the OGI supply chain phases. The downstream is responsible for oil
and gas rening, as well as distributing the end products. Each level of the supply chain is
associated with complexities that require strategic, tactical and operational decision making
[54].
Following the exploration, production is the rst step in the OGI supply chain; it in-
volves drilling, extraction and recovery of oil from beneath the earth. During production,
crude oil is produced both on land (onshore) and in shallow waters (oshore). To accom-
plish successful production of crude oil and natural gas, dierent equipment is utilised and
3