1. Introduction
Oil is the world's leading fuel accounting for approximately one-third of the total global
energy consumption [56]. It is one of the most valuable traded assets in the world, directly
or indirectly impacting our daily lives, from necessities such as transportation, heating and
electricity, to many other petrochemical products ranging from the things we use to the
things we wear [20]. The increase in demand for fossil fuels is on a continuous rise, making
it crucial for the oil and gas industry (OGI) to come up with new approaches for improving
operations.
The OGI is among the largest, complex and crucial industries in the world, with series
of upstream, midstream and downstream activities taking place, including exploration, pro-
duction, rening, transportation and consumption. The industry is further characterised
by working and contractual relationships with governments, joint ventures and other stake-
holders. It is highly dynamic in nature, making it dicult for the traditional centralised
approach to work, especially with the rise in global demand [20]. Attempts to identify
innovative approaches to process and manage information for the purposes of enhancing op-
erational potency, reducing operating costs and boosting prots necessitate advancements
in technologies within the industry. For example, real-time data streams continuously gen-
erated by sensors are utilised to ensure better control and optimisation of crude production
[25]. Robotics is used in oshore elds for drilling, inspection and damage control to en-
hance eciency and personal safety [49]. Wireless sensor networks are used to monitor and
enhance production, as well as detect and prevent issues with regards to health and safety
[46]. The radio-frequency identication (RFID) technology is used for asset management,
oil rig site management, pipeline inspection, safety and security [15].
As the number of technologies for data processing and management increases, their con-
trol requires decentralisation with such features as autonomy, intelligence and logic to ensure
their smooth and coordinated functioning across multiple tasks, including scheduling, manu-
facturing, control, diagnosis and logistics. To achieve such intelligent and decentralised con-
trol, many researchers are inclined towards machine learning (ML) and multi-agent systems
(MAS). A typical MAS is made of several interacting agents, where an agent is a computer
system procient in autonomous activities to achieve certain tasks in an environment [58].
The ability of agents to interact with each other through negotiation, collaboration and
coordination, while adapting to changes and disruptions, makes them suited for distributed
control. Due to its conformity with the complex and distributed nature of the OGI, the MAS
approach has gained attention of researchers as a means to solve a number of tasks in the
OGI. To facilitate the development of resilient agents, especially in unpredictable, diversied
environments, ML algorithms are essential when it comes to providing reputable strategies.
While there are not many examples of combining ML with MAS in OGI applications to
date, this is what may be required in the future for the industry to maintain its eciency
at the time of rapid technological development and a wider adoption of alternative energy.
This paper provides an overview of the existing ML and MAS solutions for the OGI,
identies the challenges preventing their real-life deployment and summarises their benets
to encourage a wider adoption. The survey is arranged as follows. Section 2 presents an
2