the OGI is scarce. The majority of the existing studies focus only on one of the supply chain
aspects such as logistics planning or process optimisation.
Sinha et al. [50] proposed a combination of MAS and co-evolutionary PSO based on the
Cauchy distribution to manage a petroleum supply chain. In the system, supply agents are
guided by supporting agents who coordinate themselves to optimise the cost of a specied
subsystem, thereby reducing the entire cost of the supply chain. A mathematical formula
was used to optimise the resource allocation to each agent. The simulation outcome showed
that applying the MAS favoured the maintenance of optimal crude oil quantities in the
inventories of the considered reneries. The authors observed that the Cauchy distribution
approach had a fair impact on the MAS resource requirement optimisation.
Julka et al. [23] proposed a petroleum renery integrated supply chain modeller and
simulator (PRISMS) to assist in tendering decision support during crude oil procurement
operations. The authors used a unied agent-based modelling framework in an object ori-
ented way to build the PRISMS for the entire supply chain network. According to this
framework, information and resources are modelled as objects, supply chain entities { as
agents, and the internal departments of the entities { as sub-agents. Information 
ow is
represented by the transfer of objects among the agents. Based on the framework, the pro-
posed decision support system can work in two dierent modes, namely, the simulation and
analysis modes, with one complementing the other. Using the agent-based approach, the
PRISMS simulates certain renery departments such as procurement, logistic, storage and
sale operations. During a set up, a certain operation in the renery is simulated for a given
number of days. The entire data, which includes messages, events and results, are stored as
features of a particular agent during the simulation. To illustrate the eectiveness and prac-
ticality of the PRISMS for SCM, the authors considered policy changes, external changes
and modication of plant conguration as case studies. In the future, the authors plan to
embed detailed solution approaches used by respective departments and study their capa-
bility in the entire renery; experiment on more case studies such as those covering oil sales
and long-term contract checks; extend the approach, by making it capable of monitoring
and handling exceptions in the supply chain.
5. Analysis and Discussion
5.1. Comparison of Machine Learning and Multi-Agent System Approaches to Oil and Gas
Industry Tasks
Both ML and MAS approaches can be applied interchangeably to some OGI tasks. For
example, while LS-SVM was used to detect leak levels on a gas pipeline based on the acoustic
wave method [22], a MAS-based approach was used to monitor and avert dangers, which
included leakages in pipelines [1]. Another example is where GA [55] and MAS [53] were
applied to control and optimise the oil production. At a closer look, it can be gathered that
while both ML and MAS approaches facilitate decision-making, they do this in dierent
ways and at dierent scales. In particular, ML is often applied to make predictions such
as predicting production volumes and oil prices, detecting anomalies, as well as optimising
and scheduling production. On the other hand, MAS are typically used to automate and
11