were used to train the three models for predicting the production under dierent scenar-
ios. According to the test results, the LS-SVM model demonstrated the highest accuracy
with respect to the gas-to-oil ratio prediction. It was concluded by the authors that the
application of LS-SVM to various production and reservoir engineering tasks is promising.
Chaki et al. [9] applied the Modular ANN (MANN) approach to determine the fraction of
sand in a reservoir. Three seismic properties, namely, the seismic impedance, instantaneous
amplitude and frequency, were used. The reservoir and seismic data for this study were
gathered from a hydrocarbon eld in the western onshore of India. Three networks were
designed for three separate zones. The sand fraction and three seismic attributes from seven
wells were used to train and test the ANNs. The sequence correlating to the remaining well
was used for blind prediction. The proposed framework gave good predictions with a short
program completion time and enhanced visualisation through post-processing of the forecast
sand fraction.
Most recently, DL has demonstrated the potential to reform the stakes of oil and gas
companies facing prot-making pressure [8]. DL algorithms can reveal patterns and in-
formation not easily seen by humans; they can automatically detect risks in oil pipelines,
thus minimising infrastructure risks. They can spot anomalies, which traditional rule-based
electronic condition monitoring systems miss, and alert rig operation command centres in
a timely manner. To improve subsurface characterisation, two DL models were developed
to predict the nuclear magnetic resonance for T2 time distribution from conventional well
logs [29]. The authors implemented a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) in combination with
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to eectively extract features from the T2 distri-
bution, and a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to extract short- and long-term
dependencies from the T2 distribution. The data were collected from the Bakken Shale For-
mation, and the models were trained using the same training and testing datasets. Results
demonstrated that the prediction accuracy for the two models was good overall and both
models were robust to noise.
Finally, GA has been successfully applied to the development of oil elds, scheduling
production, characterisation of reservoirs and seismic inversion [55].
3.2. Anomaly detection
Another signicant application of ML to the OGI is anomaly detection; ML can help to
identify patterns and predict failures based on relationships between valid readings.
Jinet al. [22] used LS-SVM to detect leak levels on a gas pipeline based on the acoustic
wave method. The authors experimented on a test bed comprising a gas pipeline, some
compressors, valves for regulation, acoustic data retrieval and leakage simulation systems to
simulate dierent leakage levels. Acoustic signals were gathered under each of the normal,
small, medium and large leakage conditions. Results from the experiment demonstrated
that the LS-SVM model can identify distinct leakage levels based on the collected signals
within a short time and with a high accuracy.
6