in a MySQL 5.0 database connected to SGCP. Information was channelled from one agent
to another using FIPA's agent communication language. The outcome indicated that using
MAS in the oil eld operation encouraged the agents to act together in analysing problems,
thus cutting down the unnecessary expense of digging into raw data in various systems in
search of solutions.
A MAS for network management (NM-MAS) comprising agents with dierent capacities
for resolving network fail-over was presented by Ionit  a and Ionit  a [21]. For the experiment,
a gas-oil separation plant (GOSP) was mapped to some implemented industrial wireless
network components. The GOSP operator made use of high-level attainment information
of network elements to identify faults that may occur. NM-MAS and GOSP communicate
in phases with the help of agents, whose assigned activities include; symptom detection,
failure recognition, diagnosis and repair planning. Two evaluation metrics, namely, the
success rate of plan repair and fault-tolerance network indicator, are used to measure the
NM-MAS performance.The authors plan to implement the agents as part of a future work.
They also highlight the drawbacks of using wireless network, the outcome of which can aect
the accuracy of data, thus making real-time control dicult or impossible.
Based on an established research towards a feasibility study of an intelligent asset man-
agement system for the oshore OGI in Atlantic Canada, Sayda and Taylor [47] proposed
a MAS called ICAM to control and manage assets in the petroleum industry. Having pre-
viously dened a conceptual model, architecture and implementation plan for the proposed
system in an existing work, the authors came up with a general structure of the ICAM sys-
tem with an intelligent supervising agent and discussed the knowledge representation and
processing requirements. They dened the agent structure, communication protocols and AI
requirements for the component agents. The authors conducted a real-time simulation ex-
periment on the ICAM system model to assess and validate its performance, which indicated
positive improvements in the design and development of the MAS. These authors further
presented three dierent papers fully addressing the ICAM system design and development
[48]. To analyse the behaviour of reactive agents, plant data was gathered and examined
for every reactive agent during simulations. The outcome from the simulation showed that
the ICAM system prototype behaviour conferred to its design conditions. To analyse the
ICAM performance, the authors conducted a real-time simulation experiment based on the
system's logical behaviour and its reaction to the dynamics of the outside environment. An
impressive logical behaviour was observed; the system reacted to simple faulty sensors and
actuators. The overall ICAM performance analysis outcome was good. Finally, the authors
further tested the system in two dierent simulation scenarios to investigate the MAS be-
haviour during unforeseen plant disruptions and conditions, which resulted in discovering
some limitations in the ICAM system prototype design. Suggestions on how to overcome
these limitations and enhance the ICAM system performance were outlined in the paper.
4.3. Supply Chain Management
The increase in global demand along with the in
exible and dynamic nature of the OGI
has made its SCM more complex and challenging compared to that of many other industries
[19]. Unfortunately, research work on the MAS approach to the complete supply chain in
10