Machine Learning and Multi-Agent Systems
in Oil and Gas Industry Applications: A Survey
Khadijah M. Hangaa,1,, Yevgeniya Kovalchuk1
aFaculty of Computing, Engineering and the Built Environment, Birmingham City University, UK
Abstract
The oil and gas industry (OGI) has always been associated with challenges and com-
plexities. It involves many processes and stakeholders, each generating a huge amount of
data. Due to the global and distributed nature of the business, processing and managing this
information is an arduous task. Many issues such as orchestrating dierent data sources,
owners and formats; verifying, validating and securing data streams as they move along
the complex business process pipeline; and getting insights from data for improving busi-
ness eciency, scheduling maintenance and preventing theft and fraud are to be addressed.
Articial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) in particular, have gained huge ac-
ceptance in many areas recently, including the OGI, to help humans tackle such complex
tasks. Furthermore, multi-agent systems (MAS) as a sub-eld of distributed AI meet the
requirement of distributed systems and have been utilised successfully in a vast variety of
disciplines. Several studies have explored the use of ML and MAS to increase operational ef-
ciency, manage supply chain and solve various production- and maintenance-related tasks
in the OGI. However, ML has only been applied to isolated tasks, and while MAS have
yielded good performance in simulated environments, they have not gained the expected
popularity among oil and gas companies yet. Further research in the elds is necessary to
realise the potential of ML and MAS and encourage their wider acceptance in the OGI. In
particular, embedding ML into MAS can bring many benets for the future development of
the industry. This paper aims to summarise the eorts to date of applying ML and MAS
to OGI tasks, identify possible reasons for their low and slow uptake and suggest ways to
ensure a greater adoption of these technologies in the OGI.
Keywords:
Machine Learning, Multi-Agent Systems, Articial Intelligence, Supply Chain
Management, Oil and Gas Industry
Corresponding authors
Email addresses: khadijah.hanga@mail.bcu.ac.uk (Khadijah M. Hanga),
yevgeniya.kovalchuk@bcu.ac.uk (Yevgeniya Kovalchuk)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 6, 2019