3.3. Price prediction
In countries where economy strongly depends on oil production and export, predicting
oil prices is impractical using traditional forecasting models. Kristjanpoller and Minutolo
[26] proposed the ANN{Generalised Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity (ANN-
GARCH) method to predict the volatility of fuel prices. In this method, the ANN model
takes an input from estimates of the GARCH forecast and nancial time-series data, and
uses it to determine the instability of oil prices. The authors made use of the exchange
rate and stock market index dierences to enhance the prediction of crude oil prices. Three
dierent forecasting scopes were applied to analyse and amplify the forecasting capacity
of the model. In addition, a loss function evaluation criterion was used to determine the
progress of the volatility prediction. The datasets analysed in this study came from the Oil
Spot Price and Oil Futures Price by Bloomberg for the period from July 2002 to May 2014.
The results indicated that the proposed method improved the GARCH model predictions
of the oil spot and futures price volatility using the 21-days window.
4. Multi-Agent Systems in Oil and Gas Industry Applications
Multi-agent systems (MAS) have been dened using several terms by various authors due
to their extended features. Going by one of the most common denitions, MAS is made up of
various interacting agents, where an agent is a computer system with the ability to perform
autonomous actions in order to accomplish certain goals in some environments [58]. An
intelligent agent achieves its goals by perceiving its environment and utilising observations
to decide on which action(s) to perform.
MAS oers a chance to amplify production systems that are decentralised, emergent
and concurrent. It is an inspiring and promising way of managing and using distributed
computing and information systems [57]. MAS are especially suited for organisations with
dierent or con
icting goals, which can be broken down into several independent tasks and
assigned to agents. They can also benet systems whose capacity and specications are
likely to change over time. MAS are successfully applied to a vast range of disciplines such
as electronic commerce and information management in graphics and transportation [6];
logistics, controlling processes (e.g air trac control), manufacturing, tele-communication,
smart grids and robotics [31]; electric power systems [30]; patient monitoring and rescue
team management [57], [28]. MAS have also been utilised in the OGI to improve operational
eciency and solve impending issues. Some of such applications are reviewed below, grouped
into three categories based on the core OGI tasks reviewed in Section 2.2: production ,
maintenance andSCM .
4.1. Production
To maximise the amount of oil produced and limit the volume of water and sand used
in oil production, Engmo and Hallen [13] proposed a MAS for the control and optimisation
of oil production. The authors made use of the Prometheus design tool [53] to build their
agent system with several agents overseeing the production based on some tasks allocated
to them. Particularly, the agents monitored and analysed sensor values for the wells and the
7