did not consider some precautionary maintenance tasks that ought to be implemented on
time. As a future work, the authors proposed widening the time horizon of experimentation
while considering more complex maintenance tasks and applying the prototype to other oil
production units. They also highlighted that using distributed systems with a powerful
calculation approach could be benecial.
As an example of incorporating supervised ML models into MAS, Eze et al. [14] proposed
an integrated oil and gas pipeline monitoring and incident mitigation system (IOPMIMS),
which uses the distributed systems and case-based reasoning approach to oer proactive
protection to pipelines. The authors proposed a wireless sensor network node architecture
that has the capacity to gather signals from all sensors. A MAS embedded into Antronix
Fiber Nodes (AFN) fuses the data based on the signals at the allotted sub-station and base
station to conrm if certain events pose threat to a pipeline. At the base station, the MAS
collates data from dierent wireless devices, which facilitates decision making by the system.
Upon a risk or leak detection in the pipeline, alerts are being forwarded to the security
personnel or pipeline operators. Data from the Concawe group's website was collected and
simulated to investigate the performance of the proposed system. Three machine learning
algorithms (ANN, SVM and Decision Tree) were used for data fusion and decision support.
Out of the three algorithms, SVM achieved the best performance. While demonstrating
the potential of the proposed system, the paper highlighted some challenges that should be
addressed in the future such as low battery life and low bandwidth.
6. Current Challenges and Future Directions
While the research community regains interest in MAS due to the recent advancements
in AI and deep reinforcement learning [17], there are not many examples of MAS-based
applications deployed in industries including the OGI. M uller and Fischer [35] attribute the
poor uptake of MAS beyond simulation environments to lack of funding as funding bodies are
focused on other approaches such as service-oriented, grid, autonomic and cloud computing.
Leitao [28] suggest that the major limiting factors are inevitable early investments, the need
to embrace a distributed reasoning, missing standardisation, various real-time constraints
and lack of maturity in the technology. Alhosani and Zabri [3] mention that the OGI lacks
the structure to bring together, promote, reuse and manage knowledge due to the scattered
nature of information. Other reasons for the weak industrial adoption of MAS as outlined
by P echou cek and Ma r k [42] include the following:
lack of awareness of the accomplished MAS in industries, wrong impressions about
their technical capacity and high expectations by pioneer researchers, which often lead
to frustration and loss of interest;
lack of adequate knowledge on the potential of the agent technology in the industry;
shortage of development tools t for ecient industrial implementation;
risks associated with the acceptance of new technologies not conrmed as working or
benecial in big industries.
13