coordinate complex and distributed tasks across the entire supply chain. They make good
supervisory systems, while the agent communication and collaboration is well-suited for
oil-eld, network and asset management. From the acceptance point of view of the two
approaches, it is clear that ML is a more extensively studied area and is gaining acceptance
in the OGI due to its popularity in many other elds. On the other hand, as promising
as MAS is, it still has not attained the deserved attention in the OGI; it is yet to be fully
explored and experimented in reality.
5.2. Combining Machine Learning and Multi-Agent System Approaches
Considering the potential of both ML and MAS, level of maturity and acceptability of
ML and suitability of MAS for solving complex, unpredictable problems, merging the two
approaches can produce a desirable solution for OGI applications. In particular, when mod-
elling agent systems, it is impossible to forecast the entire circumstances an agent may expe-
rience, especially in dynamic environments. It is thus impractical to dene an agent's ideal
behaviour beforehand. Therefore, in a multi-agent setting, agents would benet from hav-
ing the ability to learn from and adjust to their environment [4]. Furthermore, complexities
can arise in the interaction between agents as their number and behavioural sophistication
increase. ML can assist agents to automatically adjust their co-behaviour as the complexity
of a MAS environment becomes challenging [39]. Out of the three main ML approaches,
namely, supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning, the latter is the most utilised
in agent learning because it matches the agent paradigm explicitly [24]. However, only a
few OGI applications employ reinforcement learning. Instead, the majority of the existing
MAS-based applications in the OGI use supervised or unsupervised ML algorithms for pre-
dictive or descriptive analytics to inform articial and human agents about a certain aspect
of the complex system (e.g. predict production or pipe leakage). In other words, ML models
are embedded in MAS as stand-alone entities that parse incoming data rather than facilitate
agent learning.
As an example of a MAS based on reinforcement learning, Aissani et al. [2] proposed
a multi-agent model for dynamic planning of maintenance tasks for a petroleum industry
production set up. As a case study, the authors used the Arzew RA1Z renery in Algeria.
Considering the dynamic nature of the petroleum renery, the uncertainty and unforeseen
nature of the environment, the modular Markov decision process (MDP) architecture was
employed in the system. The authors modelled multiple agents organised in a hierarchy
capable of learning from experience using the state{action{reward{state{action (SARSA)
algorithm [52] to ensure ecient maintenance planning and continued development of the
solution standard. The SARSA algorithm allows evaluation during learning by considering
changes in the feedstream as a performance indicator. The Contract Net Protocol was used
for the agent interaction. The system was developed using the multi-agent development
kit (MaDKit) platform [18] and implemented in Borland JBuilder. Experimental results
proved that the method can provide online scheduling solutions for predictive and corrective
maintenance tasks and improve their nature by minimising out 
ow alterations from the
tanks. At the same time, scheduling maintenance tasks was not always achieved for the
o-peak pump times, especially in the case of unexpected failures, because the authors
12