On the other hand, problems such as depletion of oil and gas reserves, price increase,
theft and vandalism, lack of transparency and accountability, force the OGI decision makers
to look into the advantages that AI can oer in handling the ever increasing amount of data
for prediction, prevention and optimisation. To spread the investments and minimise the
risks, a staged approach can be adopted. In particular, separate predictive and descriptive
ML models for specic tasks developed at dierent times can be assigned to individual
agents, eventually resulting in a scalable MAS overseeing the entire OGI operation through
agent co-operation.
7. Summary
This paper reviewed the existing studies employing machine learning (ML) and multi-
agent systems (MAS) to solve various tasks in the oil and gas industry (OGI). The OGI
is very complex consisting of upstream, midstream and downstream sectors and involves
many stakeholders ranging from government and regulatory bodies, to joint ventures and
consumers. In addition, the industry generates and relies on a huge amount of data. ML
can be an important tool for mining patterns and information from the data and generating
predictions to assist decision-making, while MAS have the potential to help manage the
dynamic, distributed and uncertain relationships in the industry. Several studies have pro-
posed ML- and MAS-based solutions for the OGI. However, the majority of them are focused
on a specic task such as production, control or maintenance rather than automating the
entire supply chain and information governance. Furthermore, virtually all of the proposed
MAS-based solutions are limited to simulated environments only, without being deployed or
used in real life. Things like high investments and risks associated with implementation and
deployment, as well as lack of standards and appropriate developmental tools, prevent the
uptake of the technologies in the industry. As a way forward, the OGI leaders and manage-
ment can consider adopting a staged approach for embedding ML and MAS into the existing
business processes to spread the costs and risks. In particular, separate ML predictive and
descriptive models developed over time for various OGI data processing and management
tasks can eventually be combined within a MAS that would orchestrate the dierent models.
After that, the intelligent ability of the agents constituting the MAS and their co-operation
can be improved by incorporating state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning techniques.
Finally, opening up data and sharing practices can speed-up the development and adoption
of ML- and MAS-based solutions for the OGI, which ultimately would bring benets for
everyone involved in the industry.
References
[1] Ahmed, M., Umar, A., Bute, M., 2017. Multi-agent based architectural framework for the preven-
tion and control of oil pipeline vandalism. In: Computing Networking and Informatics (ICCNI), 2017
International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1{8.
[2] Aissani, N., Beldjilali, B., Trentesaux, D., 2009. Dynamic scheduling of maintenance tasks in the
petroleum industry: A reinforcement approach. Engineering Applications of Articial Intelligence
22 (7), 1089{1103.
14