S512 J. Müller, G. Montúfar
Fig. 3 State-action trajectories for different PG methods, which are vanilla PG, Kakade’s NPG and σ-NPG,
where Morimura’s NPG corresponds to σ=1; the state-action polytope is shown in gray inside a three
dimensional projection of the the simplex /Delta1S×A; shown are trajectories with the same random 30 initial
values for every method; the maximizer η∗is located at the upper left corner of the state-action polytope
σ∈(1,2)we expect a decay at rate O(t−1)[18] and O(t−1/(σ−1))by Theorem 27.
Therefore we use a logarithmic (on both scales) plot for vanilla PG and σ> 1 and
also indicate the predicted rate using a dashed gray line. For Kakade’s and Morimuras
NPG we expect linear convergence by Theorem 26and 27respectively and hence use
a semi-logarithmic plot.
First, we note that for σ∈{ − 0.5,0,0.5}the trajectories of σ-NPG ﬂow hit the
boundary of the state-action polytope N, which is depicted in gray inside the simplex
/Delta1S×A. This is consistent with our analysis, since the functions φσare Legendre type
functions only for σ∈[1,∞)and hence only in this case is the NPG ﬂow is guaranteed
to exhibit long time solutions. However, we observe ﬁnite-time convergence of the
trajectories towards the global optimum (see Fig. 5), which we suspect to be due to
the error of temporal discretization.
For the other methods, namely vanilla PG, Kakade’s NPG and σ-NPG with
σ∈[1,∞), Theorems 22and 23show the global convergence of the gradient ﬂow
trajectories, which we also observe both in state-action space and in policy space (see
Figs. 3and 4respectively). When considering the convergence in objective value we
observe that both Kakade’s and Morimura’s NPG exhibit a linear rate of convergence
as asserted by Theorems 26and 27, whereby Kakade’s NPG appears to have more
severe plateaus in some examples. For vanilla PG and σ> 1 we observe a sublin-
ear convergence rate of O(t−1)and O(t−1/(σ−1))respectively, which are shown via
dashed gray lines in each case. This conﬁrms the convergence rate O(t−1)for vanilla
PG [ 18] and indicates that the rate O(t−1/(σ−1))shown for σ∈(1,2)is also valid in
the regime σ> 2. Finally, we observe that larger σappears to lead to more severe
plateaus, which is apparent in the convergence in objective and also from the evolution
in policy space and in state-action space.
123