S486 J. Müller, G. Montúfar
1 Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are an important model for sequential decision
making in interaction with an environment and constitute a theoretical framework for
modern reinforcement learning (RL). This framework has been successfully applied
in recent years to solve increasingly complex tasks from robotics to board and videogames [ 1–5]. In MDPs the goal is to identify a policy π, i.e., a procedure to select
actions at every time step, which maximizes an expected time-aggregated reward
R(π). We will assume that the set of possible states Sand the set of possible actions
Aare ﬁnite, and model the policy π
θas a differentiably parametrized element in
the polytope /Delta1S
Aof conditional probability distributions of actions given states, with
πθ(a|s)specifying the probability of selecting action a∈Awhen currently in state
s∈S, for the parameter value θ. We will study gradient-based policy optimization
methods and more speciﬁcally natural policy gradient (NPG) methods. Inspired by
the seminal works of Amari [ 6,7], various NPG methods have been proposed [ 8–10].
In general, they take the form
θk+1=θk+/Delta1t·G(θk)+∇R(θk),
where /Delta1t>0 denotes the step size, G(θ)+denotes the Moore–Penrose pseudo
inverse and G(θ)ij=g(dPθei,dPθej)is a Gram matrix deﬁned with respect to some
Riemannian metric gand some representation P(θ) of the parameter. Most of our
analysis does not actually depend on the speciﬁc choice of the pseudo inverse, but in
Sect. 6we will use the Moore–Penrose pseudo inverse. The most traditional natural
gradient method is the special case where P(θ)is a probability distribution and gis the
Fisher information in the corresponding space of probability distributions. However,
the terminology may be used more generally to refer to a Riemannian gradient methodwhere the metric is in some sense natural. Kakade [ 8] proposed using P(θ)=π
θand
taking for ga product of Fisher metrics weighted by the state probabilities resulting
from running the Markov process with policy πθ. Although this is a natural choice
forP, the choice of a Riemannian metric on /Delta1S
Ais a non trivial problem. Peters et al.
as well as Bagnell and Schneider [ 3,11] offered an interpretation of Kakade’s metric
as the limit of Fisher metrics deﬁned on the ﬁnite horizon path measures, but other
choices of the weights can be motivated by axiomatic approaches to deﬁne a Fisher
metric of conditional probabilities [ 12,13]. From our perspective, a main difﬁculty
is that it is not clear how to choose a Riemannian metric on /Delta1S
Athat interacts nicely
with the objective function R(π), which is a non-convex rational function of π∈/Delta1S
A.
An alternative choice for P(θ) is the vector of state-action frequencies ηθ, whose
components ηθ(s,a)are the probabilities of state-action pairs (s,a)∈S×Aresulting
from running the Markov process with policy πθ. Morimura et al. [ 9] proposed using
P(θ)=ηθand the Fisher information on the state-action probability simplex /Delta1S×Aas
a Riemannian metric. We will study both approaches and variants from the perspective
of Hessian geometry.
123