S516 J. Müller, G. Montúfar
Fig. 6 Shown are the estimated
exponents c>0 when ﬁtting an
exponential decay O(e−ct)to
the suboptimality gap
R∗−R(θ(t))for different NPG
methods—Kakade, Morimura
andσ=1.5—and for different
regularization strengths λ
Proof Again, we use Remark 30it is straight forward to see that for the Legendre type
functions φσthe unique maximizer η∗
λofRλlies in the interior of N. Hence, it remains
to compute the condition number, for which we note that ∇2φσ(η∗
λ)=diag(η∗
λ)−σ,
which yields the result.
Remark 33 (Regularization error ) Introducing a regularizer changes the optimization
problem and usually also the optimizer. The difference can be estimated in terms of the
regularization strength λ. For logarithmic barriers in state-action space, this follows
from standard estimates for interior point methods [ 21,75]. For entropic regularization
in state-action space, this is elaborated in [ 76], and for the conditional entropy this is
done in [ 14,18].
The results above do not cover arbitrary combinations of Hessian geometries and
regularizers. However, the proof of Theorem 28can be adapted to this case, where the
only part that requires adjustments is ( 26) that couples the regularized reward to the
Bregman divergence. In principle, this can be extended to the case of regularizers that
are different from the function inducing the Hessian geometry.
Numerical examples: The λ→0 regime. Theorem 28and its corollaries yield a
linear convergence rate of order O(e−λt), where the bound deteriorates when the reg-
ularization strength λis sent to zero, λ→0. The bound R∗
λ−Rk=O((1−λ/Delta1t)k)
for entropy regularized NPG descent [ 14] exhibits a similar degradation for λ→0.
It is natural to expect that the convergence behavior for λ→0 is similar to the con-
vergence behavior for λ=0, i.e., the unregularized case. Recall that Theorem 26and
Theorem 27establish linear rates without regularization for Kakade’s and Morimura’s
NPG and a sublinear rate O(t−1/(σ−1))forσ∈(1,2).
To evaluate the convergence behavior for λ→0 for a speciﬁc NPG method we
apply it to a collection of small regularization strengths with 10 different randominitializations. Here, we revisit Kakade’s example that was already used in Sect. 5.1
for unregularized problems. For every individual run we estimate the exponent c
in the linear convergence rate R
∗−R(θ(t))=O(e−ct)via linear regression after
a logarithmic transformation. Here, we take the iterates where the optimality gap
R∗−R(θ)lies between 10−10and 10−5.I nF i g . 6we present the mean of the estimated
convergence rates for Kakade’s and Morimura’s NPG as well as for σNPG for σ=1.5.
123