S492 J. Müller, G. Montúfar
the biases that particular parametrizations can introduce into the optimization can be
favorable in some cases. This is an active topic of investigation particularly in deep
learning, where Pis often a highly non-linear function of θ. At any rate, there is a good
motivation to study of the effects of the parametrization and the possible advantages
from incorporating the geometry of model space into the optimization procedure in
parameter space.
The natural gradient as introduced in [ 6] is a way to incorporate the geometry
of the model space into the optimization procedure and to formulate iterative update
directions that are invariant under reparametrizations. Although it has been most com-monly applied in the context of parameter estimation under the maximum likelihood
criterion, the concept of natural gradient has been formulated for general parametric
optimization problems and in combination with arbitrary geometries. In particular,natural gradients have been applied to neural network training [ 43–46], policy opti-
mization [ 3,8,9] and inverse problems [ 47]. Especially in the latter case, different
notions of natural gradients have been introduced. A version that incorporates thegeometry of the sample space are natural gradients based on an optimal transport
geometry in model space [ 48–50]. We shall discuss natural gradients in a way that
emphasizes that even for a speciﬁc problem there may not be a unique natural gradient.
This is because both the factorization L(θ)=/lscript(P(θ)) of the objective as well as what
should be considered a natural geometry in model space may not be unique.
But what is it that makes a gradient or update direction natural ? The general consen-
sus is that it should be invariant under reparametrization to prevent artiﬁcial plateaus
and provide consistent stopping criteria, and it should (approximately) correspond toa gradient update with respect to the geometry in the model space. We now give the
formal deﬁnition of the natural gradient with respect to a given factorization and a
geometry in model space that we adopt in this work, which can be shown to satisfythe desired properties.
Deﬁnition 4 (General natural gradient ) Consider the problem of optimizing an objec-
tive L:/Theta1→ R, where the parameter space /Theta1⊆ R
pis an open subset. Further,
assume that the objective factorizes as L=/lscript◦P, where P:/Theta1→ Mis a model
parametrization with M a Riemannian manifold with Riemannian metric g, and
/lscript:M→ Ris a loss in model space , as shown in Fig. 1.F o rθ∈/Theta1we deﬁne
the Gram matrix G(θ)ij:=gP(θ)(dPθei,dPθej)and call ∇NL(θ):=G(θ)+∇L(θ)
thenatural gradient (NG) of L at θwith respect to the factorization L =/lscript◦P and
the metric g .
Fig. 1 Schematic drawing of
parametric models with an
objective function /lscriptand
resulting parameter objective
function L; note that neither the
choice of geometry in the model
space nor the factorization or the
model space itself is uniquelydetermined by the objective
function LParameter
space Θ ⊆RpModel
space MP
RealsR/lscript
L
123