Geometry and convergence of natural policy ... S487
1.1 Contributions
We study the natural policy gradient dynamics inside the polytope Nof state-action
frequencies, which provides a uniﬁed treatment of several existing NPG methods. We
focus on ﬁnite state and action spaces and the expected inﬁnite-horizon discounted
reward optimized over the set of memoryless stochastic policies. Our main contri-butions can be summarized as follows. For an overview of the convergence rates
established in this work see Table 1in Sect. 7.
•We show that the dynamics of Kakade’s NPG and Morimura’s NPG solve a gradient
ﬂow in Nwith respect to the Hessian geometries of conditional entropic and
entropic regularization of the reward (Sects. 4.2and 4.3and Proposition 17).
•Leveraging results on gradient ﬂows in Hessian geometries, we derive linear con-
vergence rates for Kakade’s and Morimura’s NPG ﬂow for the unregularizedreward, which is a linear and hence not strictly concave function in state-action
space, and also for the regularized reward (Theorems 26and 27and Corollaries
31and 32).
•Further, for a class of NPG methods which correspond to β-divergences and which
generalize Morimura’s NPG, we show sub-linear convergence in the unregularized
case and linear convergence in the regularized case (Theorem 27and Corollary 32,
respectively).
•We complement our theoretical analysis with experimental evaluation, which indi-
cates that the established linear and sub-linear rates for unregularized problemsare essentially tight.
•For discrete-time gradient optimization, our ansatz in state-action space yields an
interpretation of the regularized NPG method as an inexact Newton iteration ifthe step size is equal to the inverse regularization strength. This yields a relatively
short proof for the local quadratic convergence of regularized NPG methods with
Newton step sizes (Theorem 34). This recovers as a special case the local quadratic
convergence of Kakade’s NPG under state-wise entropy regularization previously
shown in [ 14].
1.2 Related work
The application of natural gradients to optimization in MDPs was ﬁrst proposed by
Kakade [ 8], taking as a metric on /Delta1
S
A=/producttext
s∈S/Delta1Athe product of Fisher metrics on the
individual components /Delta1s
A∼=/Delta1A,s∈S, weighted by the stationary state distribution.
The relation of this metric to ﬁnite-horizon Fisher information matrices was studied
by Bagnell and Schneider [ 11] as well as by Peters et al. [ 3]. Later, Morimura et al. [ 9]
proposed a natural gradient using the Fisher metric on the state-action frequencies,which are probability distributions over states and actions.
There has been a growing number of works studying the convergence properties
of policy gradient methods. It is well known that reward optimization in MDPs isa challenging problem, where both the non-convexity of the objective function with
respect to the policy and the particular parametrization of the policies can lead to the
existence of suboptimal critical points [ 15]. Global convergence guarantees of gradient
123