Geometry and convergence of natural policy ... S517
For both Kakade’s and Morimura’s NPG method we observe that the estimated
convergence rates converge to the linear convergence rate of the corresponding unreg-
ularized cases. This indicates that the guarantees in Corollary 31and Corollary 32for
these NPG methods are not tight. In contrast for the σ-NPG with σ=1.5 we observe
that the convergence rates deteriorate for λ→0 which conforms with the sublinear
convergence O(t−2)of the unregularized problem. Theorem 28shows linear conver-
gence based on the strong convexity of the regularizer. The convergence rate of the
unregularized NPG methods however is determined by the behavior of the regularizer
and hence the metric at the boundary rather than the convexity of the loss. We believethat a theoretical analysis combining these two effects could improve the linear rate
in Theorem 28for small regularization strength.
6 Locally quadratic convergence for regularized problems
It is known that Kakade’s NPG method and more generally quasi-Newton policy
gradient methods with suitable regularization and step sizes converge at a locallyquadratic rate [ 14,28]. Whereas these results regard the NPG method as an inexact
Newton method in the parameter space, we regard it as an inexact Newton method in
state-action space, which allows us to directly leverage results from the optimizationliterature and thus formulate relatively short proofs. Our result extends the locally
quadratic convergence rate to general Hessian-NPG methods, which include in partic-
ular Kakade’s and Morimura’s NPG. Note that the result holds when the step size isequal to the inverse penalization strength, which is reminiscent of Newton’s method
converging for step size 1.
Theorem 34 (Locally quadratic convergence of regularized NPG methods) Consider
a real-valued function φ:R
S×A→ R∪{ + ∞ } , which we assume to be ﬁnite and
twice continuously differentiable on RS×A
>0and such that ∇2φ(η) is positive deﬁnite
on TηN=TL⊆ RS×Afor every η∈int(N). Further, consider a regular policy
parametrization and the regularized reward R λ(θ):=R(θ)−λφ(η θ)and assume
thatη∗∈int(N), i.e., the maximizer lies in the interior of the state-action polytope.
Consider the NPG induced by the Hessian geometry of φwith step size /Delta1t=λ−1,
i.e.,
θk+1=θk+/Delta1t·G(θk)+∇Rλ(θk),
where G (θk)+denotes the Moore–Penrose inverse. Assume that R λ(θk)→R∗
λfor
k→∞ . Then θk→θ∗at a (locally) quadratic rate and hence R λ(θk)→R∗
λat a
(locally) quadratic rate.
The proof of this result relies on the following convergence result for inexact Newton
methods.
Theorem 35 (Theorem 3.3 in [ 77])Consider an objective function f ∈C2(Rd)with
∇2f(x)∈Ssym
>0for any x ∈Rdand assume that f admits a minimizer x∗. Let(xk)
123