15
D
T2 (x)
TK (x)Real/Fake
DK Real/FakeT2x
G(z)TKD2 Real/Fake
TK (G(z))T2 (G(z))
...
z GC R kR k (x)
R k (G(z))C1
C2
C3
C4
Fig. 8. Applying our DAG for SSGAN model. R k; k= 1: : :4are the
rotation techniques (0, 90, 180, 270) and the classiﬁer Cused in the self-
supervised task of the original SSGAN. Refer to [50] for details of SSGAN.
We apply T k; k= 1: : : K as the augmentation techniques for our DAG.
Note that the DAG paths (bottom-right) are in fact the same as that for the
vanilla GAN as shown in Figure 3 of our main paper: DAG involves a stack
of real/fake discriminators for transformed samples. This shows that the same
DAG design is generally applicable to other GAN models.
D
T 2 (x)
T K (x)Real/Fake
D K Real/FakeT 2
T KD 2 Real/Fake
T K (G(z))T 2 (G(z))
...z GE G z xx G(z x )
RAE
G(z)
Fig. 9. Our DAG applied for DistGAN model (Refer to [39] for the details).
Here, we emphasize the difference is the DAG with T kbranches. T kare
the augmentation techniques used in our DAG. Furthermore, we note that the
DAG paths (bottom-right) are in fact the same as that for the vanilla GAN
as shown in Figure 3 of our main paper: DAG involves a stack of real/fake
discriminators for transformed samples. This shows that the same DAG design
is generally applicable to other GAN models.
that the same DAG design is generally applicable to other
GAN models.
B. Generated examples on MNIST dataset
Figure 10 shows more generated samples for the toy ex-
ample with DA methods (ﬂipping and cropping) on MNIST
dataset (please refer to Section IV of our main paper). In
the ﬁrst column is with the real samples and the generated
samples of the Baseline. The second column is with ﬂipped
real samples and the generated samples of DA with ﬂipping.
The last column is with the cropped real samples and the
generated samples of DA with cropping.
C. Augmented examples on CIFAR-10 and STL-10 datasets
Examples of transformed real samples. Figure 11 illustrates
examples of transformed real samples we used to augment
Fig. 10. The generated examples of toy experiment on the full dataset
(100%). First rows: the real samples and real augmented samples. Second
rows: generated samples. First column: the real samples, the generated samples
of the GAN baseline. Second column: ﬂipped real samples, and the generated
samples of DA with ﬂipping. Third column: the cropped real samples and the
generated samples of DA with cropping.
Fig. 11. Examples of real and transformed real samples of CIFAR-10 used
to train DA and DAG. Figures from left to right and top to bottom: the real
samples, the rotated real samples, the ﬂipped real samples, the translated real
samples, the cropped real samples, and the ﬂipped+rotated real samples.
our training CIFAR-10 dataset. From left to right and top to
bottom are with the original real samples, the rotated real
samples, the ﬂipped real samples, the translated real samples,
the cropped real samples, and the ﬂipped+rotated real samples.
APPENDIX C
A. DCGAN Networks
We use the small DCGAN backbone for the study of
data augmentation on CIFAR-10. Our DCGAN networks are
presented in Table. XIV for the encoder, the generator, and
the discriminator.
B. Residual Networks
Our Residual Networks (ResNet) backbones of the en-
coders, the generators and the discriminators for CIFAR-10
and STL-10 datasets are presented in Table. XV and Table.
XVI respectively (the same as in [30]).