Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1670 2 of 18
tracking algorithm is to ﬁnd the object to track it within the acquired scene. The second
stage consists of continuing to ﬁnd the same object in the subsequent frames.
Usually, tracking is performed in a video surveillance context, thus using static or
Pan-Tilt-Zoom (PTZ) cameras that have no or limited camera movements. Moving towards
UAVs, this assumption does not hold. With respect to PTZ cameras which have a ﬁxed
mounting point, UAVs can move around a target and can change their ﬂight height. In a
real use case scenario, e.g., a chase, usually only the change of ﬂight height occurs and the
chased object is captured by the same point of view over time (e.g., from behind). In this
paper, we propose a novel DL model, namely, the Multi-Stream Faster R-CNN, to provide
reliable features at different ﬂight heights for improving tracking by UAVs. A standard
Faster R-CNN [ 34] has, as a backbone, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) which
extracts features that will be used in both region proposal and classiﬁcation stages. In the
proposed model, the CNN, which is usually based on a visual geometry group (VGG) [ 35]
architecture or a residual neural network (ResNet) [ 36], is replaced with a multi-stream
CNN network. The several streams work, i.e., train and evaluate, in parallel, and they differ
on the size of the used kernels, starting from 33up to 77. By using this pyramidal
approach for the feature extraction process, it is possible to detect objects at different scales.
This last aspect creates UAV object detection and tracking the perfect application for the
proposed model. Once the object to track has been identiﬁed within the scene, the Deep
SORT [ 37] algorithm is used to track it across the frames. Extensive experiments were
performed on three state-of-the-art UAV tracking datasets, i.e., UAVDT [ 38], UAV123 [ 39],
and UAV20L [ 39]. In addition, to prove the effectiveness of the pyramidal approach, object
detection tests were performed on the UMCD dataset [ 40]. In both tracking and object
detection, results line with the state-of-the-art were achieved.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the current literature
regarding tracking is discussed. In Section 3, our novel MS Faster R-CNN model is
presented. In Section 4, the results obtained in the performed experiments are discussed.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
The widespread use of machine learning and the always better-performing deep
networks let the tracking accuracy increase year after year. Nowadays, the majority of
novel proposals are based on variations and different combinations of deep architectures. In
general, tracking consists of two important macro phases: the detection of the target(s) and
the tracking itself. This section shows some recent approaches dealing with object(s) and/or
person(s) detection for tracking purposes. Interested readers can ﬁnd a recent survey in [ 41]
that explores the problem of tracking and segmentation of objects in video sequences in
general, subdividing the proposals by the level of supervision during the learning.
The work in [ 42] presents a strategy for improving the detection of targets, in this case
persons, considering the possible presence of occlusions. The proposal uses an automatic
detector to get all the possible targets with a conﬁdence score. After this preliminary phase,
a deep alignment network aims at deleting the erroneous bounding boxes. Moreover, the
network also extracts appearance features. The results of the network are then combined
with a prediction model that, exploiting the previous frames, estimates the more probable
target location. All this information is used to create an association cost matrix and the data
association is done by the real-time Hungarian algorithm. To handle the occlusions, the
strategy relies on the updating of the appearance and motion information frame by frame.
If a target in the previous frames cannot be associated with a target in the current frame,
then it is taken into account for the next frames considering that an occlusion occurs.
The proposal in [ 43] estimates the locations of the previously detected targets, in
this case persons, by using the Kalman ﬁlter combined with temporal information. The
temporal information, in the form of tracklets, avoids the decrease of the Kalman ﬁlter
accuracy in the longterm. Any time a target is detected in the scene, its tracklet is updated
and the Kalman ﬁlter is reinitialized. In addition, only the conﬁdence score of the last