Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1670 6 of 18
feature maps…RPN
ROI poolingconvolutiondense layerclassdetectionbox regressionfeature map sliding
proposed regions𝑘anchor boxes…
Figure 4. Faster R-CNN RPN and ROI pooling scheme.
Concerning the RPN component, it creates bounding boxes proposals by sliding a
small nnwindow on the extracted features, and mapping them into a lower-dimensional
feature vector (i.e., 256). This vector is subsequently fed to two parallel fully-connected
layers acting as a box-regressor layer (i.e., reg), to encode the bounding boxes center
coordinates, width and height, and a box-classiﬁcation layer (i.e., cls), to indicate that a box
contains a relevant object. Furthermore, the sliding window generates proposals, called
anchors, accounting for several scales and ratios, totalling k=9proposals for each spatial
location. Therefore, the regand clslayers contain 4kand 2kelements, respectively, while,
for each feature map, there will be WHkproposals, where WHcorrespond to the
map size. Notice that, as the original implementation, the sliding window has a size of
n=3, while regandclslayers are shared across all spatial locations analyzed by the sliding
window to retain the improved performances.
Regarding the ROI pooling and ﬁnal object detection, starting from the feature maps
extracted by the backbone CNN (i.e., the proposed multi-stream network), and the pro-
posals computed by the RPN, an adaptive pooling layer is applied to correctly merge the
two inputs into a single vector. Subsequently, the pooled inputs are analyzed through two
fully-connected layers, whose output is fed to two siblings classiﬁers to obtain the ﬁnal
bounding box and object class prediction for the input frame, respectively.
3.3. Multi-Stream Faster R-CNN Loss Functions
In accordance with [ 34], the presented methodology can be trained in an end-to-end
fashion since, in this work, relevant modiﬁcations were only applied to the backbone CNN
used to extract features from an input image. More accurately, the Faster R-CNN pipeline
employs a multi-task loss function associated with the bounding box regression and object
classiﬁcation tasks. Formally, as per the deﬁnition by [ 34], for a given mini-batch, the
function to be minimized is computed according to the following equation:
L(fpig,ftig) =1
Nclså
iLcls(pi,p
i) +ll1
Nregå
ip
iLreg(ti,t
i), (2)
where iindicates the i-th anchor of a mini-batch; piand p
irepresent the predicted and
ground truth probability of the anchor being associated with a relevant object; tiandt
iare
the generated and ground truth vectors containing the parameterized bounding box coor-
dinates (i.e., center xandy, width and height); Nclsand Nregcorrespond to normalization
terms based on the batch size and the number of proposed anchors, respectively, while ll
is a balancing parameter to ensure both losses have similar weights. Moreover, Lclsis a