Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1670 11 of 18
Table 1. Summary table of the exploited datasets.
Dataset Task (s) # Sequences #Frames (Approx)
UAVDT [38]Object Detection
Single Object Tracking
Multiple Object Tracking100 80,000
UAV123 [39]
UAV20L [39]Short-Term Tracking
Long-Term Tracking123 110,000
UMCD [40]Object Detection
(Very Low Altitudes)50
(challenging)48,765
Used
in this workObject Detection
Object Tracking273 more than 190,000
4.2. Evaluation Metrics
Concerning the object detection task, the standard mean Average Precision (mAP) is
used, and only the frames in which an object is fully visible are considered.
Regarding the tracking task, we use Precision and Success Rate as metrics for quanti-
tative analysis of the performance based on the one-pass evaluation (OPE) process. This
evaluation method consists of running trackers throughout a test sequence with initializa-
tion from the manually annotated ground-truth position in the ﬁrst frame and reporting
the precision plot or the success rate plot. The tracking precision is calculated in each frame
by the center location error (CLE), which is deﬁned as the Euclidean distance between the
center location of the tracked target and the manually labeled ground truth. The precision
plot measures the overall performance of the tracker by showing the percentage of frames
whose estimated CLE is within a given maximum threshold. Success rate for trackers
is measured by the bounding box overlap. Given the tracked bounding box RTand the
manually annotated bounding box RG, the success rate is calculated as the intersection
over union of RTand RTas follows:
IoU =jRT\RGj
jRT[RGj(8)
To measure the overall performance on a sequence of frames, the number of successful
frames where IoU is higher than a given maximum threshold is counted and the success
rate plot is used to show the percentage or the ratio of successful frames. The ﬁnal score is
calculated as the AUC to represent the overall tracking performance based on success rate.
4.3. Implementation Details
Considering the used framework and hardware, the proposed method is implemented
in Pytorch [ 51], and the machine used for the experiments consisted of a AMD Ryzen 1700
processor, 16 GB DDR4 RAM, a 500 GB solid state disk, and an Nvidia RTX 2080 GPU. As
hyper-parameters, a learning rate of 0.001, together with AdamW optimizer, were used.
4.4. Object Detection Performance Evaluation
For the object detection task, the proposed model was compared with the standard Faster
R-CNN. Both of the models were fine-tuned on the object classes contained inside the UMCD
dataset. This step was necessary since some classes, such as tires, bags, suitcases, and so on,
are not present within the datasets on which well-known models are usually pre-trained (e.g.,
VOC, ImageNet, etc.). Even in the case that the class is present, it is not acquired from a UA V
perspective, hence an object may be easily misclassified. In Figure 7, some examples of object
detection on the UMCD dataset are shown. While in Figure 7a,b the two models perform very
similarly , it is noticeable that, in Figure 7c, MS overcomes the standard Faster R-CNN. As it is
possible to see, the latter detects the shadow of the person as the person itself. Concerning the
overall performance, we obtained a mAP of 97.3% with MS and a mAP of 95.6% with Faster
R-CNN on the used dataset. Since the objects present within the videos are acquired by using