Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1670 3 of 18
tracklet is taken into account for the ﬁnal prediction decision. The data association relies
on uniﬁed scores based on non-maximal suppression. For candidates that have not been
associated, they are assigned to the unassigned tracks by using Intersection over Union
with a ﬁxed threshold. The other remaining candidates are then discarded.
The detection strategy presented in [ 44], instead, is applied to vehicle tracking. In this
case, the authors rely on the state-of-the-art YOLOv2 detector (presented in [ 45]), trained
on human-annotated frames. The proposed approach exploits the characteristics of the
calibrated camera, which allows the backprojection into a 3D space to construct better
models. The reﬁnement of detection is based on a bottom-up clustering that fuses together
features during the loss computation and relies on histogram-based appearance models to
avoid misassignments between nearby targets. At the same time, the network also extracts
other useful visual semantic information, such as license plates, type of car, and other deep
convolutional features that are then exploited during the tracking.
Moving on to the ﬁeld of UAV-based tracking, this is increasing its popularity thanks
to the decreasing costs of UAVs and the increasing quality of their built-in equipment.
However, working with UAV raises different challenges because the perspective of the
target in the frames can change even drastically, and also the distance is generally higher,
so that the target can occupy only a few pixels of the frame. For this reason, different kinds
of approaches have been proposed in literature.
The work in [ 46] presents a strategy devised for vehicle tracking. The detection
step relies on the R-CNN schema, trained on UAV videos. The ﬁrst part of the strategy
consists of the extraction of the feature maps from all the UAV frames by using sharable
convolutional layers. The second part deals with the generation of a large number of
region proposals on the feature maps created before. This is done by exploiting the region
proposal network (RPN) module of the Faster R-CNN network by using a sliding window
mechanism. The ﬁnal part is the training of the RPN and the detector modules with the
shared features. Considering that the region proposals are generated by the sliding window
mechanism, each of them can be considered as a possible candidate and can also be marked
for comparing them during training with labeled data.
The proposal in [ 47] exploits a multi-level prediction Siamese Network for tracking.
The multi-level prediction module aims at identifying the bounding boxes of the targets
in the frame. In this module, each prediction level is made up of three parallel branches.
The ﬁrst branch is used to estimate the position of the target, also taking into account
the possible motion, while the second branch aims at predicting the target bounding box,
and the last one is devised to distinguish between different possible targets in the case of
cluttered scenes.
The work in [ 48] presents a strategy for multi-object tracking based on a novel Hi-
erarchical Deep High-Resolution network. This new network combines the Hierarchical
Deep Aggregation network and the High-Resolution Representation network, taking the
best properties from them and increasing the computational speed. The network aims
at obtaining a multi-scale high-resolution feature representation, which is used to train
a prediction network. The quality of the extracted features has been tested feeding three
different state-of-the-art networks, namely a CNN, a Cascade R-CNN, and a Hybrid task
Cascade. This last one, even if slower with respect to the ordinary CNN, demonstrates the
best detection accuracy.
3. Materials and Methods
To correctly track an object across multiple frames of a video sequence, a pipeline
composed of three steps is presented in this work. The proposed object tracking approach
is summarized in Figure 1. First, a novel Multi-Stream CNN extracts multi-scale features
from an object in a given frame, by leveraging its intrinsic architectural design. Second, the
extracted feature maps are used to obtain bounding boxes around the objects, according to
the Faster R-CNN methodology, where a backbone CNN generates features so that a region
proposal network and a region of interest pooling layer can enable a classiﬁer to output the