Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1670 14 of 18
of why our model has low FPS when running on CPU is the used CPU itself. In fact,
authors in [ 64] employed an Intel i7-8700k processor. The latter has a base clock frequency
of3.70 GHz , while the processor used in our experiments has a base clock frequency of
3.0 GHz . In addition, the ﬁrst generation of AMD Ryzen processors has lower performance
in single threading with respect to Intel ones, thus resulting in the reported results.
Figure 9. FPS obtained with each tracker on UAVDT dataset. On top of each bar, the FPS for the corresponding tracker is
reported. To provide a visually correct data, the latter has been log-scaled before plotting.
4.6. Ablation Study
In this section, an ablation study is conducted to highlight the signiﬁcance and the
effectiveness of the several streams composing the proposed model. As a baseline, we can
consider the MS model composed by only the ﬁrst stream, i.e., stream 1. As described in
Section 3.1, this stream is composed by 10 33convolutional layers and four max pooling
in between each pair of convolutions. Since streams 2 and 3 are removed, the feature
concatenation layer is also removed from the model. It is possible to notice that, in this way,
the proposed model resembles a standard CNN. Due to the small number of levels, we
have a signiﬁcant drop in performance. Regarding the object detection task, this baseline
model obtains a mAP of 58.7% on the UMCD dataset, while, for the tracking task, it places
last in all the precision and success plots.
By using the same approach but using only stream 2 or stream 3, the obtained results
are even worse. For the model using only the stream 2, i.e., the stream with 55con-
volution ﬁlters, we obtained an mAP of 53.5% on the UMCD dataset and, again, the last
placement on both precision and success plots. For the model using only the stream 3, i.e.,
the stream having 77convolution ﬁlters, a mAP of 52.8% was obtained on the UMCD
and, like the other two reduced models, the last placement on both precision and success
plots. This is amenable to the size of the ﬁlters, since ﬁlters with a higher size than 33
allow the extraction of less ﬁne-grained features, thus leading to the above-mentioned
results. Moreover, without adding a padding layer, the number of extracted features will