are pushed apart. Here we propose Cntr-GAN , where contrastive loss is applied to regularizing the
discriminator on two random augmented copies of both real and fake images. CntrLoss encourages
the discriminator to push different image representations apart, while drawing augmentations of the
same image closer. Due to space limit, we detail the CntrLoss in Appendix D and illustrate how our
Cntr-GAN is trained with augmenting both real and fake images (Algorithm 2) in the appendix.
For augmentation techniques, we adopt and sample the augmentation as described in Chen et al. [7],
referring it as simclr . Details of simclr augmentation can be found in the appendix (Section B). Due
to the preference of large batch size for CntrLoss, we mainly experiment on BigGAN which has
higher model capacity. As shown in Table 1, Cntr-GAN outperforms baseline BigGAN without any
augmentation, but is inferior to BCR-GAN.
Table 1: BigGAN and regularizations.
Regularization FID InceptionScore
Vanilla 14.73 9.22 [4]
Cntr 12.27 9.23
BCR 9.21 9.29
Cntr+BCR 8.30 9.41Since both BCR and CntrLoss utilize augmentations
but are complementary in how they draw positive image
pairs closer and push negative pairs apart, we further ex-
periment on regularizing BigGAN with both CntrLoss
and BCR. We are able to achieve new state-of-the-art
FID = 8:30withCntr= 0:1;BCR= 5. Table 1
compares the performance of vanilla BigGAN against
BigGAN with different regularizations on augmenta-
tions, and Figure 12 in the appendix shows how the
strengths affect the results. While BCR enforces the
consistency loss directly on the discriminator logits, with Cntr together, it further helps to learn better
representations which can be reﬂected in generation performance eventually.
Cntr-GAN Beneﬁts From Stronger Augmentations In Table 1, we adopt default augmenations
in the literature for BCR [ 46] and CntrLoss [ 7]. Now we further study which image transform used by
simclr affects Cntr-GAN the most, and also the effectiveness of the other augmentations we consider
in this paper. We conducted extensive experiment on Cntr-GAN with different augmentations and
report the most representative ones in Figure 6.
Overall, we ﬁnd Cntr-GAN prefers stronger augmentation transforms compared to BCR-GAN.
Spatial augmentations still work better than visual augmentations, which is consistent with our
observation that changing the color jittering strength of simclr cannot help improve performance. In
Figure 6, we present the results of changing the cropping/resizing strength in ‘simclr’, along with the
other representative augmentation methods that are helpful to Cntr-GAN. For most augmentations,
CntrGAN reaches the best performance with higher augmentation strength around 0.5. For CntrGAN,
we achieve the best FID of 11.87 applying adjusted simclr augmentations with the cropping/resizing
strength of 0.3.
6 Discussion
Here we provide additional analysis and discussion for several different aspects. Due to space limit,
we summarize our ﬁndings below and include visualization of the results in the appendix.
Figure 6: BigGAN regularized by CntrLoss with different image augmentations. The blue dashed
horizontal line shows the baseline FID=14.73 of BigGAN trained without augmentation. Here we
adjust the strength of cropping-resizing in the default simclr . Cntr-GAN consistently outperforms
vanilla GAN with preferance on spatial augmentations.
7