Figure 4: Distances between real and fake distributions with different augmentations. Note that we
report FID(Ireal;Ifake)normally throughout the paper. While here to show the changes of real and
fake image distributions with augmentations, we also calculate FID(t(Ireal);t(Ifake))and present its
fraction over normal FID as y-axis. The Frechet Inception Distance between real and fake images
gets smaller with augmentations, while stronger augmentations result in more distribution overlaps.
we ﬁnd the best FID 18.94 achieved by translation of strength 0.1 is comparable to the FID 18.72
reported in Zhang et al. [42] with consistency regularization only on augmented real images. This
observation holds for BigGAN as well, where we get FID 11.03 and the FID of CRGAN [ 42] is 11.48.
These results suggest that image augmentations for both real and fake images considerably improve
the training of vanilla GANs, which has not been studied by previous work, to our best knowledge.
We compare the effectiveness of augmentation operations in Figures 3 and 5. The operations in the
top row such as translation ,zoomin , and zoomout , are much more effective than the operations in the
bottom rows, such as brightness ,colorness , and mixup . We conclude that augmentations that result in
spatial changes improve the GAN performance more than those that induce mostly visual changes.
3.3 Augmentations Increase the Support Overlap between Real and Fake Distributions
In this section, we investigate the reasons why augmenting both real and fake images improves GAN
performance considerably. Roughly, GANs’ objective corresponds to making the generated image
distribution close to real image distribution. However, as mentioned by previous work [ 35,1], the
difﬁculty of training GANs stems from these two being concentrated distributions whose support
do not overlap: the real image distribution is often assumed to concentrate on or around a low-
dimensional manifold, and similarly, generated image distribution is degenerate by construction.
Therefore, Sønderby et al. [35] propose to add instance noise (i.e., Gaussian Noise) as augmentation
for both real images and fakes image to increase the overlap of support between these two distributions.
We argue that other semantic-preserving image augmentations have a similar effect to increase the
overlap, and are much more effective for image generation.
In Figure 4, we show that augmentations tT can lower FID between augmented t(Ireal)and
t(Ifake), which indicates that the support of image distribution and the support of model distribution
have more overlaps with augmentations. However, not all augmentations or strengths can improve
the quality of generated images, which suggests naively pulling distribution together may not always
improve the generation quality. We hypothesize certain types of augmentations and augmentations of
high strengths can result in images that are far away from the natural image distribution; we leave the
theoretical justiﬁcation for future work.
4 Effect of Image Augmentations for Consistency Regularized GANs
We now turn to more advanced regularized GANs that built on their usage of augmentations. Con-
sistency Regularized GAN (CR-GAN) [ 42] has demonstrated that consistency regularization can
signiﬁcantly improve GAN training stability and generation performance. Zhao et al. [46] improves
this method by introducing Balanced Consistency Regularization (BCR), which applying BCR to
both real and fake images. Both methods requires images to be augmented for processing, and we
brieﬂy summarize BCR-GAN with Algorithm 1 in the appendix.
5