Original Image
 ZoomOut
 ZoomIn
 Translation
 TranslationX
 TranslationY
Brightness
 Redness
 InstanceNoise
 CutOut[10]
 CutMix[39]
 MixUp[43]
Figure 1: Different augmentation techniques applied to the original image.
outputs to be unchanged when applying several perturbations to the real images. Zhao et al. [46]
have further improved the generation quality by adding augmentations on both the generated samples
and real images. However, it remains unclear about the best strategy to use augmented data in
GANs: Which image augmentation operation is more effective in GANs? Is it necessary to add
augmentations in generated images as in Zhao et al. [46]? Should we always couple augmentation
with consistency loss like by Zhang et al. [42]? Can we apply augmentations together with other loss
constraints besides consistency?
In this paper, we comprehensively evaluate a broad set of common image transformations as aug-
mentations in GANs. We ﬁrst apply them in the conventional way—only to the real images fed
into the discriminator. We vary the strength for each augmentation and compare the generated
samples in FID [ 17] to demonstrate the efﬁcacy and robustness for each augmentation. We then
evaluation the quality of generation when we add each augmentation to both real images andsamples
generated during GAN training. Through extensive experiments, we conclude that only augmenting
real images is ineffective for GAN training, whereas augmenting both real and generated images
consistently improve GAN generation performance signiﬁcantly. We further improve the results by
adding consistency regularization [ 42,46] on top of augmentation strategies and demonstrate such
regularization is necessary to achieve superior results. Finally, we apply consistency loss together
with contrastive loss, and show that combining regularization constraints with the best augmentation
strategy achieves the new state-of-the-art results.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
We conduct extensive experiments to assess the efﬁcacy and robustness for different aug-
mentations in GANs to guide researchers and practitioners for future exploration.
We provide a thorough empirical analysis to demonstrate augmentations should be added to
both real and fake images, with the help of which we improve the FID of vanilla BigGAN to
11.03, outperforming BigGAN with consistency regularization in Zhang et al. [42].
We demonstrate that adding regularization on top of augmentation furthers boost the quality.
Consistency loss compares favorably against contrastive loss as the regularization approach.
We achieve new state-of-the-art for image generation by applying contrastive loss and
consistency loss on top of the best augmentation we ﬁnd. We improve the state-of-the-art
FID of conditional image generation for CIFAR-10 from 9.21 to 8.30.
2 Augmentations and Experiment Settings
We ﬁrst introduce the image augmentation techniques we study in this paper, and then elaborate on
the datasets, GAN architectures, hyperparameters, and evaluation metric used in the experiments.
Image Augmentations . Our goal is to investigate how each image operation performs in the GAN
setting. Therefore, instead of chaining augmentations [ 8,9], we have selected 10 basic image
2