augmentation operations and 3 advanced image augmentation techniques as the candidates T, which
are illustrated in Figure 1. The original image I0of size (H;W )is normalized with the pixel range
in[0;1]. For each augmentation tT, the strength augis chosen uniformly in the space ranging
from the weakest to the strongest one. We note that t(I0)is the augmented image and we detail each
augmentation in Section B in the appendix.
Data . We validate all the augmentation strategies on the CIFAR-10 dataset [ 21], which consists of
60K of 32x32 images in 10 classes. The size of this dataset is suitable for a large scale study in
GANs [27, 23]. Following previous work, we use 50K images for training and 10K for evaluation.
Evaluation metric . We adopt Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [ 17] as the metric for quantitative
evaluation. We admit that better (i.e., lower) FID does not always imply better image quality, but
FID is proved to be more consistent with human evaluation and widely used for GAN evaluation.
Following Kurach et al. [23], we carry out experiments with different random seeds, and aggregate
all runs and report FID of the top 15% trained models. FID is calculated on the test dataset with 10K
generated samples and 10K test images.
GAN architectures and training hyperparameters . The search space for GANs is prohibitively
large. As our main purpose is to evaluate different augmentation strategies, we select two commonly
used settings and GANs architectures for evaluation, namely SNDCGAN [ 29] for unconditional
image generation and BigGAN [ 4] for conditional image generation. As in previous work [ 23,42], we
train SNDCGAN with batch size 64 and the total training step is 200k. For conditional BigGAN, we
set batch size as 256 and train for 100k steps. We choose hinge loss [ 26,36] for all the experiments.
More details of hyperparameter settings can be found in appendix.
We ﬁrst study augmentations on vanilla SNDCGAN and BigGAN without additional regularizations
in Section 3, then move onto these GANs with additional regularizations that utilize augmentations,
namely consistency regularization (detailed in Section 4) and contrastive loss (detailed in Section 5).
3 Effect of Image Augmentations for Vanilla GAN
In this section, we ﬁrst study the effect of image augmentations when used conventionally—only aug-
menting real images. Then we propose and study a novel way where both real and generated images
are augmented before fed into the discriminator, which substantially improves GANs’ performance.
3.1 Augmenting Only Real Images Does Not Help with GAN Training
Figure 2: FID comparisons of SNDCGAN trained on augmented real images only. It shows only
augmenting real images is not helpful with vanilla GAN training, which is consistent with the result
in Section 4.1 of Zhang et al. [42]. Corresponding plots of BigGAN results are in the appendix.
3