Artifacts . Zhao et al. [46] show that imbalanced (only applied to real images) augmentations and
regularizations can result in corresponding generation artifacts for GAN models. Therefore, we
present qualitative images sampled randomly for different augmentations and settings of GAN training
in the appendix (Section E). For vanilla GAN, augmenting both real and fake images can reduce
generation artifacts substantially than only augmenting real images. With additional contrastive loss
and consistency regularization, the generation quality can be improved further.
Annealing Augmentation Strength . We have extensively experimented with ﬁrst setting aug, which
constrains the augmentation strength, then sampling augmentations randomly. But how would GANs’
performance change if we anneal augduring training? Our experiments show that annealing the
strength of augmentations during training would reduce the effect of the augmentation, without
changing the relative efﬁcacy of different augmentations. Augmentations that improve GAN training
would alleviate their improvements with annealing; and vice versa.
Composition of Transforms . Besides a single augmentation transform, the composition of multiple
transforms are also used [ 8,9,16]. Though the dimension of random composition of transforms is
out of this paper’s scope, we experiment with applying both translation andbrightness , as spatial
and visual transforms respectively, to BCR-GAN training. Preliminary results show that this chained
augmentation can achieve the best FID=8.42, while with the single augmentation translation the best
FID achieved is 8.58, which suggests this combination is dominant by the more effective translation .
We leave it to future work to search for the best strategy of augmentation composition automatically.
7 Related Work
Data augmentation has shown to be critical to improve the robustness and generalization of deep
learning models, and thus it is becoming an essential component of visual recognition systems
[22,13,7,31,47,5,45]. More recently, it also becomes one of the most impetus on semi-supervised
learning and unsupervised learning [ 37,2,34,38,3,7]. The augmentation operations also evolve from
the basic random cropping and image mirroring to more complicated strategies including geometric
distortions (e.g., changes in scale, translation and rotation), color jittering (e.g, perturbations in
brightness, contrast and saturation) [ 8,9,44,16] and combination of multiple image statistics [ 39,43].
Nevertheless, these augmentations are still mainly studied in image classiﬁcation tasks. As for image
augmentations in GANs [ 11], the progress is very limited: from DCGAN [ 30] to BigGAN [ 4] and
StyleGAN2 [ 20], the mainstream work is only using random cropping and horizontal ﬂipping as
the exclusive augmentation strategy. It remains unclear to the research community whether other
augmentations can improve quality of generated samples. Recently, Zhang et al. [43] stabilized
GAN training by mixing both the input and the label for real samples and generated ones. Sønderby
et al. [35] added Gaussian noise to the input images and annealed its strength linearly during the
training to achieve better convergence of GAN models. Arjovsky and Bottou [1]derived the same
idea independently from a theoretical perspective. They have shown adding Gaussian noise to both
real and fake images can alleviate training instability when the support of data distribution and model
distribution do not overlap. Salimans et al. [33] further extended the idea by adding Gaussian noise to
the output of each layer of the discriminator. Jahanian et al. [18] found data augmentation improves
steerability of GAN models, but they failed to generate realistic samples on CIFAR-10 when jointly
optimizing the model and linear walk parameters. Besides simply adding augmentation to the data,
some recent work [ 6,42,46] further added the regularization on top of augmentations to improve the
model performance. For example, Self-Supervised GANs [ 6,28] make the discriminator to predict
the angle of rotated images and CRGAN [42] enforce consistency for different image perturbations.
8 Conclusion
In this work, we have conducted a thorough analysis on the performance of different augmentations for
improving generation quality of GANs. We have empirically shown adding the augmentation to both
real images and generated samples is critical for producing realistic samples. Moreover, we observe
that applying consistency regularization onto augmentations can further boost the performance and
it is superior to applying contrastive loss. Finally, we achieve state-of-the-art image generation
performance by combining constrastive loss and consistency loss. We hope our ﬁndings can lay a
solid foundation and help ease the research in applying augmentations to wider applications of GANs.
8