Figure 3: FID comparisons of SNDCGAN on CIFAR-10. The red dashed horizontal line shows the
baseline FID=24.73 of SNDCGAN trained without data augmentation. ‘vanilla_rf’ (Section 3.2)
represents training vanilla SNDCGAN and augmenting both real images as well as generated fake
images concurrently before fed into the discriminator. And ‘bcr’ (Section 4) corresponds to training
SNDCGAN with Balanced Consistency Regularization on augmented real and fake images. This
ﬁgure can be utilized as general guidelines for training GAN with augmentations. The main impli-
cations are: (1) Simply augmenting real and fake images can make the vanilla GAN’s performance
on par with recent proposed CR-GAN [ 42]. (2) With the help of BCR on augmented real and fake
images, the generation ﬁdelity can be improved by even larger margins. (3) Spatial augmentations
outperform visual augmentations. (4) Augmentations that result in images out of the natural data
manifold, e.g. InstanceNoise, cannot help with improving GAN performance.
We ﬁrst compare the effect of image augmentations when only applied to the real images, the de-facto
way of image augmentations in GANs [ 30,4,20]. Figure 2 illustrates the FID of the generated images
with different strengths of each augmentation. We ﬁnd augmenting only real images in GANs worsens
the FID regardless of the augmentation strengths or strategies . For example, the baseline SNDCGAN
trained without any image augmentation achieves 24.73 in FID [ 42], while translation , even with its
smallest strength, gets 31.03. Moreover, FID increases monotonically as we increase the strength of
the augmentation. This conclusion is surprising given the wide adoption of this conventional image
augmentations in GANs. We note that the discriminator is likely to view the augmented data as part
of the data distribution in such case. As shown by Figures 7 to 10 in the appendix, the generated
images are prone to contain augmentation artifacts. Since FID is calculating the feature distance
between generated samples and unaugmented real images, we believe the augmented artifacts in the
synthesized samples are the underlying reason for the inferior FID.
3.2 Augmenting Both Real and Fake Images Improves GANs Consistently
Based on the above observation, it is natural to wonder whether augmenting generated images in
the same way before feeding them into the discriminator can alleviate the problem. In this way,
augmentation artifacts cannot be used to distinguish real and fake images by the discriminator.
To evaluate the augmentation of synthetic images, we train SNDCGAN and BigGAN by augmenting
both real images as well as generated images concurrently before feeding them into the discriminator
during training. Different from augmenting real images, we keep the gradients for augmented
generated images to train the generator. The discriminator is now trained to differentiate between the
augmented real image t(Ireal)and the augmented fake image t(G(z)). We present the generation FID
of SNDCGAN and BigGAN in Figures 3 and 5 (denoted as ‘vanilla_rf’), where the horizontal lines
show the baseline FIDs without any augmentations. As illustrated by Figure 3, this new augmentation
strategy considerably improves the FID for different augmentations with varying strengths. By
comparing the results in Figure 3 and Figure 2, we conclude that augmenting both real and fake
images can substantially improves the generation performance of GAN . Moreover, for SNDCGAN,
4