Image Augmentations for GAN Training
Zhengli Zhao
UC Irvine
zhengliz@uci.eduZizhao Zhang, Ting Chen
Google ResearchSameer Singh
UC IrvineHan Zhang
Google Research
Abstract
Data augmentations have been widely studied to improve the accuracy and robust-
ness of classiﬁers. However, the potential of image augmentation in improving
GAN models for image synthesis has not been thoroughly investigated in previous
studies. In this work, we systematically study the effectiveness of various existing
augmentation techniques for GAN training in a variety of settings. We provide
insights and guidelines on how to augment images for both vanilla GANs and
GANs with regularizations, improving the ﬁdelity of the generated images substan-
tially. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that vanilla GANs attain generation quality on par with
recent state-of-the-art results if we use augmentations on both real and generated
images. When this GAN training is combined with other augmentation-based
regularization techniques, such as contrastive loss and consistency regularization,
the augmentations further improve the quality of generated images. We provide
new state-of-the-art results for conditional generation on CIFAR-10 with both
consistency loss and contrastive loss as additional regularizations.
1 Introduction
Data Augmentation has played an important role in deep representation learning. It increases the
amount of training data in a way that is natural/useful for the domain, and thus reduces over-ﬁtting
when training deep neural networks with millions of parameters. In the image domain, a variety
of augmentation techniques have been proposed to improve the performance of different visual
recognition tasks such as image classiﬁcation [ 22,13,7], object detection [ 31,47], and semantic
segmentation [ 5,15]. The augmentation strategies also range from the basic operations like random
crop and horizontal ﬂip to more sophisticated handcrafted operations [ 10,39,43,16], or even the
strategies directly learned by the neural network [ 8,44]. However, previous studies have not provided
a systematic study of the impact of the data augmentation strategies for deep generative models,
especially for image generation using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [ 11], making it
unclear how to select the augmentation techniques, which images to apply them to, how to incorporate
them in the loss, and therefore, how useful they actually are.
Compared with visual recognition tasks, making the right choices for the augmentation strategies for
image generation is substantially more challenging. Since most of the GAN models only augment real
images as they are fed into the discriminator, the discriminator mistakenly learns that the augmented
images are part of the image distribution. The generator thus learns to produce images with undesired
augmentation artifacts, such as cutout regions and jittered color if advanced image augmentation
operations are used [ 42,46]. Therefore, the state-of-the-art GAN models [ 30,40,41,4,19]
prefer to use random crop and ﬂip as the only augmentation strategies. In unsupervised and self-
supervised learning communities, image augmentation becomes a critical component of consistency
regularization [ 25,32,37]. Recently, Zhang et al. [42] studied the effect of several augmentation
strategies when applying consistency regularization in GANs, where they enforced the discriminator
Work done as an intern on Google Brain team.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2006.02595v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jun 2020