Figure 5: FID mean and std of BigGAN on CIFAR-10. The blue dashed horizontal line shows the
baseline FID=14.73 of BigGAN trained without augmentation. ‘vanilla_rf’ (Section 3.2) represents
training vanilla BigGAN with both real and fake images augmented. ‘bcr’ (Section 4) corresponds
to training BigGAN with BCR on augmented real and fake images. This ﬁgure can be utilized as
general guidelines for training GAN with augmentations, sharing similar implications as in Figure 3.
However, neither of the works studies the impact and importance of individual augmentation and only
very basic geometric transformations are used as augmentation. We believe an in-depth analysis of
augmentation techniques can strengthen the down-stream applications of consistency regularization
in GANs. Here we mainly focus on analyzing the efﬁcacy of different augmentations on BCR-GAN.
We set the BCR strength BCR= 10 in Algorithm 1 according to the best practice. We present
the generation FID of SNDCGAN and BigGAN with BCR on augmented real and fake images in
Figures 3 and 5 (denoted as ‘bcr’), where the horizontal lines show the baseline FIDs without any
augmentation. Experimental results suggest that consistency regularization on augmentations for
real and fake images can further boost the generation performance.
More importantly, we can also signiﬁcantly outperform the state of the art by carefully selecting the
augmentation type and strength. For SNDCGAN, the best FID 14.72 is with zoomout of strength
0.4, while the corresponding FID reported in Zhao et al. [46] is 15.87 where basic translation of
4 pixels and ﬂipping are applied. The best BigGAN FID 8.65 is with translation of strength 0.4,
outperforming the corresponding FID 9.21 reported in Zhao et al. [46].
Similarly as in Section 3.2, augmentation techniques can be roughly categorized into two groups, in
the descending order of effectiveness: spatial transforms, zoomout ,zoomin ,translation ,translationx ,
translationy ,cutout ,cutmix ; and visual transforms, brightness ,redness ,greenness ,blueness ,mixup .
Spatial transforms, which retain the major content while introducing spatial variances, can substan-
tially improve GAN performance together with BCR. On the other hand, instance noise [35], which
may be able to help stabilize GAN training, cannot improve generation performance.
5 Effect of Images Augmentations for GANs with Contrastive Loss
Image augmentation is also an essential component of contrastive learning, which has recently led
to substantially improved performance on self-supervised learning [ 7,14]. Given the success of
contrastive loss for representation learning and the success of consistency regularization in GANs, it
naturally raises the question of whether adding such a regularization term helps in training GANs?
In this section, we ﬁrst demonstrate how we apply contrastive loss (CntrLoss) to regularizing
GAN training. Then we analyze on how the performance of Cntr-GAN is affected by different
augmentations, including variations of an augmentation set in existing work [7].
Contrastive Loss for GAN Training The contrastive loss was originally introduced by Hadsell
et al. [12] in such a way that corresponding positive pairs are pulled together while negative pairs
6