71:28 A.Hogan etal.
Fig. 20. Illustrationof informationflowing between neighbours inaRecGNN.
knowledge graph or may be added manually. The GNN can then learn parameters wandw/primethat
givetheexpectedoutputforthelabelledexamples,whichcansubsequentlyappliedtolabelother
nodes.
4.3.2 Convolutional Graph Neural Networks. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
gainedalotofattention,inparticular,formachinelearningtasksinvolvingimages[ 73].Thecore
idea in the image setting is to apply small kernels (a.k.a. filters) over localised regions of an im-
age using a convolution operator to extract features from that local region. When applied to all
local regions, the convolution outputs a feature map of the image. Multiple kernels are typically
applied, forming multiple convolutional layers. These kernels can be learned, given sufficient la-
belledexamples.
Both GNNs and CNNs work over local regions of the input data: GNNs operate over a node
and its neighbours in the graph, while (in the case of images) CNNs operate over a pixel and its
neighboursintheimage.Followingthisintuition,anumberof convolutionalgraphneuralnet-
works(ConvGNNs )[145]—a.k.a.graph convolutional networks (GCNs)[71]—have been pro-
posed,wherethetransitionfunctionisimplementedbymeansofconvolutions.AbenefitofCNNs
isthatthesamekernelcanbeappliedoveralltheregionsofanimage,butthiscreatesachallenge
for ConvGNNs, since—unlike in the case of images, where pixels have a predictable number of
neighbours—the neighbourhoods of different nodes in a graph can be diverse. Approaches to ad-
dressthesechallengesinvolveworkingwithspectral(e.g.References[ 19,71])orspatial(e.g.,Ref-
erence [86]) representations of graphs that induce a more regular structure from the graph. An
alternative is to use an attention mechanism [ 136]t olearnthe nodes whose features are most
importantto thecurrentnode.
Asidefromarchitecturalconsiderations,therearetwomaindifferencesbetweenRecGNNsand
ConvGNNs. First, RecGNNs aggregate information from neighbours recursively up to a fixpoint,
whereas ConvGNNs typically apply a fixed number of convolutional layers. Second, RecGNNs
typicallyuse thesame function/parametersin uniformsteps,while different convolutionallayers
ofa ConvGNN canapplydifferent kernels/weightsat eachdistinctstep.
4.4 SymbolicLearning
The supervised techniques discussed thus far learn numerical models that are hard to interpret;
for example, taking the graph of Figure 21, knowledge graph embeddings might predict the edge
SCL ARI flight asbeinghighlyplausible,butthereasonliesimplicitinacomplexmatrixoflearned
parameters. Embeddings further suffer from the out-of-vocabulary problem, where they are often
unabletoprovideresultsforinputsinvolvingpreviouslyunseennodesoredge-labels.Analterna-
tive is to use symbolic learning to learnhypotheses in a logical (symbolic) language that “explain”
setsofpositiveandnegativeedges.Suchhypothesesareinterpretable;furthermore,theyarequan-
tified (e.g., “ all airports are domestic or international ”), partially addressing the out-of-vocabulary
issue.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June2021.