71:26 A.Hogan etal.
The presented approaches strike different balances in terms of expressivity and the number of
parameters that need to be trained. While more expressive models, such as NTN, may better fit
more complex plausibility functions over lower dimensional embeddings by using more hidden
parameters, simpler models, such as that proposed by Dong et al. [ 31], and convolutional net-
works [8,29] that enable parameter sharing by applying the same (typically small) kernels over
differentregions ofa matrix, requirehandlingfewer parametersoverall and aremore scalable.
4.2.4 LanguageModels. Embeddingtechniqueswerefirstexploredasawaytorepresentnatu-
rallanguagewithinmachinelearningframeworks,withword2vec[ 83]andGloVe[ 102]beingtwo
seminal approaches. Both approaches compute embeddings for words based on large corpora of
textsuchthatwordsusedin similar contexts(e.g.,“ frog,” “toad”) have similarvectors.
Approachesforlanguageembeddingscanbeappliedforgraphs.However,whilegraphsconsist
ofanunorderedsetofsequencesofthreeterms(i.e.,asetofedges),textinnaturallanguageconsists
ofarbitrary-lengthsequencesofterms(i.e.,sentencesofwords).Alongtheselines,RDF2Vec[ 109]
performs biased random walks on the graph and records the paths traversed as “sentences,”
which are then fed as input into the word2vec [ 83] model. An example of such a path extracted
from Figure 15might be, for example, SanPedro Calamabus Iquiqueflight Santiagoflight ;t h ep a p e r
experiments with 500 paths of length 8 per entity. RDF2Vec also proposes a second mode where
sequences are generated for nodes from canonically-labelled sub-trees of which they are a root
node, where the paper experiments with sub-trees of depth 1 and 2. Conversely, KGloVe [ 22]i s
based on the GloVe model. Much like how the original GloVe model [ 102] considers words that
co-occurfrequentlyinwindowsoftexttobemorerelated,KGloVeusespersonalisedPageRankto
determinethemostrelatednodestoagivennode,whoseresultsarethenfedintotheGloVemodel.
4.2.5 Entailment-aware Models. The embeddings thus far consider the data graph alone. But
what if an ontology or set of rules is provided? One may first consider using constraint rules to
refinethepredictionsmadebyembeddings.Wangetal.[ 141]usefunctionalandinverse-functional
definitions as constraints (under UNA); for example, if we define that an event can have at most
one value for venue, then the plausibility of edges that would assign multiple venues to an event
islowered.
Morerecentapproachesratherproposejointembeddingsthatconsiderboththedatagraphand
rules.KALE[ 43]computesentityandrelationembeddingsusingatranslationalmodel(specifically
TransE) that is adapted to further consider rules using t-norm fuzzy logics . With reference to Fig-
ure15, consider a simple rule ?x ?ybus⇒?x ?y connects to .W ec a nu s ee m b e d d i n g st oa s s i g n
plausibility scores to new edges, such as e1:Piedras Rojas Moon Valleybus . We can further apply the
previous rule to generate a new edge e2:Piedras Rojas Moon Valley connects to from the predicted edge
e1.Butwhatplausibilityshouldweassignto e2?Lettingp1andp2bethecurrentplausibilityscores
ofe1ande2(initialisedusingthestandardembedding),thent-normfuzzylogicssuggeststhatthe
plausibilitybeupdatedas p1p2−p1+1.Embeddingsarethentrainedtojointlyassignlargerplausi-
bilityscorestopositiveexamplesofbothedgesand groundrules ,i.e.,ruleswithvariablesreplaced
byconstantsfrom thegraph,suchas Arica SanPedrobus ⇒Arica SanPedro connects to .
Generating ground rules can be costly. An alternative approach, adopted by FSL [ 28], observes
that in the case of a simple rule, such as ?x ?ybus⇒?x ?y connects to , the relation embedding
busshould always return a lower plausibility than connects to . Thus, for all such rules, FSL pro-
posestotrainrelationembeddingswhileavoidingviolationsofsuchinequalities.Whilerelatively
straightforward,FSLonly supportssimple rules,while KALE alsosupportsmorecomplex rules.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June2021.