Knowledge Graphs 71:13
Fig.12. Graph pattern querying fornames of festivals in Santiago.
Machines do not have inherent deductive faculties, but rather need entailment regimes to for-
malisethelogicalconsequenceofagivensetofpremises.Onceinstructedinthismanner,machines
can (often) apply deductions with a precision, efficiency, and scale beyond human performance.
These deductions may serve a range of applications, such as improving query answering (deduc-
tive) classification, finding inconsistencies, and so on. As an example, take the query in Figure 12
asking for the festivals located in Santiago . The query returns no results for the graph in Figure 1:
Thereisnonodewithtype Festival,andnothinghasthe location Santiago.However ,ananswer( Ñam)
couldbeentailedifwestatedthat xbeingaFoodFestival entailsthatxisaFestival,orthat xhaving
venueyin cityzentailsthatxhaslocation z.Entailmentregimes automatesuchdeductions.
In this section, we discuss ways in which potentially complex entailments can be expressed
and automated. Though we could leverage a number of logical frameworks for these purposes—
such as First-order Logic, Datalog, Prolog, Answer Set Programming, and so on—we focus on
ontologies ,whichconstituteaformalrepresentationofknowledgethat,importantlyforus,canbe
represented as a graph; in other words, ontologies can be seen as knowledge graphs with well-
defined meaning[ 32].
3.1 Ontologies
To enable entailment, we must be precise about what the terms we use mean. For example, we
have referred to the nodes EID15andEID16in Figure 1as “events.” But what if, for example, we
wish to define two pairs of start and end dates for EID16corresponding to the different venues?
Should we rather consider what takes place in each venue as a different event? What if an event
hasvariousstartandenddatesinasinglevenue:Wouldthesebeconsideredone(recurring)event
or many events? These questions are facets of a more general question: What do we mean by an
“event”? The term “event” may be interpreted in many ways, where the answers are a matter of
convention .
In computing, an ontology is then a concrete, formal representation—a convention —on what
terms mean within the scope in which they are used (e.g., a given domain). Like all conventions,
the usefulness of an ontology depends on how broadly and consistently it is adopted and how
detaileditis.Knowledgegraphsthatuseasharedontologywillbemoreinteroperable.Giventhat
ontologies areformalrepresentations,theycan furtherbeusedto automateentailment.
Amongthemostpopularontologylanguagesusedinpracticearethe WebOntologyLanguage
(OWL)[52],recommendedbytheW3CandcompatiblewithRDFgraphs;andthe OpenBiomed-
ical Ontologies Format (OBOF)[89], used mostly in the biomedical domain. Since OWL is the
morewidelyadopted,wefocusonitsfeatures,thoughmanysimilarfeaturesarefoundinboth[ 89].
Before introducingsuchfeatures,however,we mustdiscusshowgraphsareto be interpreted .
3.1.1 Interpretations. Weashumansmay interpretthenode SantiagointhedatagraphofFigure 1
as referring to the real-world city that is the capital of Chile. We may further interpret an edge
Arica Santiago flight as stating that there are flights from the city of Arica to this city. We thus
interpret the data graph as another graph—what we here call the domain graph —composed of
real-worldentitiesconnectedbyreal-worldrelations.Theprocessofinterpretation,here,involves
mapping thenodesand edgesin thedatagraphtonodesand edges ofthedomain graph.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol.54,No. 4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June 2021.