Knowledge Graphs 71:29
Fig.21. Anincomplete del graph describingflightsbetween airports.
In this section, we discuss two forms of symbolic learning for knowledge graphs: rule mining
for learningrulesand axiommining for learningotherforms of logical axioms.
4.4.1 Rule Mining. Rule mining, in the general sense, refers to discovering meaningful pat-
terns in the form of rules from large collections of background knowledge. In the context of
knowledge graphs, we assume a set of positive and negative edges as given. The goal of rule
miningistoidentifynewrulesthatentailahighratioofpositiveedgesfromotherpositiveedges,
but entail a low ratio of negative edges from positive edges. The types of rules considered may
vary from more simple cases, such as ?x ?yflight⇒?y ?xflight, to more complex rules, such
as?x ?y capital ?z nearby Airporttype ⇒?z International Airporttype , indicating that airports near
capitals tend to be international airports; or ?x ?y flight ?z
countrycountry ⇒?x ?y domesticflight , in-
dicatingthatflightswithinthesamecountrydenotedomesticflights(asseenin Section 3.3.1).
Per the international airport example, rules are not assumed to hold in all cases, but rather are
associated with measures of how well they conform to the positive and negative edges. In more
detail,wecalltheedgesentailedbyaruleandthesetofpositiveedges(notincludingtheentailed
edge itself) the positive entailments of that rule. The number of entailments that are positive is
calledthe supportfortherule,whiletheratioofarule’sentailmentsthatarepositiveiscalledthe
confidence for therule[ 127]. Thegoalisto find ruleswithbothhigh supportand confidence.
While similar tasks have been explored for relational settings with Inductive Logic Program-
ming(ILP)[27],whendealingwithanincompleteknowledgegraph(underOWA),itisnotimme-
diatelyclearhowtodefinenegativeedges.Acommonheuristicistoadopta PartialCompleteness
Assumption (PCA)[36],whichconsidersthesetofpositiveedgestobethosecontainedinthedata
graph,andthesetofnegativeexamplestobethesetofalledges xy/primepnotinthegraphbutwhere
thereexistsanode ysuchthat xypisinthegraph.TakingFigure 21,SCL ARI flight isaneg-
ative edge under PCA (given the presence of SCL LIM flight ); conversely, SCL ARI domestic flight
is neither positive nor negative. Under PCA, the support for the rule ?x ?y domesticflight ⇒
?y ?x domestic flight isthen2(sinceitentails IQQ ARI domesticflight andARI IQQ domesticflight inthe
graph),whiletheconfidenceis2
2=1(notingthat SCL ARI domesticflight ,thoughentailed,isneither
positive nor negative, and is thus ignored by the measure). The support for the rule ?x ?yflight
⇒?y ?xflightis analogously 4, while the confidence is4
5=0.8 (noting that SCL ARI flight is
negative).
An influential rule-mining system for graphs is AMIE [ 36,37], which adopts the PCA mea-
sure of confidence and builds rules in a top-down fashion [ 127] starting with rule heads of the
form⇒?x ?y country foreachedgelabel.Foreachsuchrulehead,threetypesof refinements are
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol.54,No. 4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June 2021.