Knowledge Graphs 71:31
associatedwithagivenclass—belowafixedthreshold.Rizzoetal.[ 110]proposeanapproachthat
canfurthercapturedisjointnessconstraintsbetweenclass descriptions (e.g.,citywithoutanairport
nearbyis disjoint from city that is the capital of a country ) using a terminological cluster tree that
first extracts class descriptions from clusters of similar nodes, and then identifies disjoint pairs of
classdescriptions.
Other systems propose methods to learn more general axioms. A prominent such system is
DL-Learner[ 20],whichisbasedonalgorithmsfor classlearning (a.k.a.conceptlearning ),whereby
givenasetofpositivenodesandnegativenodes,thegoalistofindalogicalclassdescriptionthat
divides the positive and negative sets. For example, given {Iquique ,Arica}as the positive set and
{Santiago}asthenegativeset,wemaylearna(DL)classdescription ∃nearby .Airport/intersectionsq¬(∃capital−./latticetop),
denotingentitiesneartoanairportthatarenotcapitals,ofwhichallpositivenodesareinstances
and no negative nodes are instances. Like AMIE, such class descriptions are discovered using a
refinement operator used to move from more general classes to more specific classes (and vice
versa),aconfidencescoringfunction,andasearchstrategy.Thesystemfurthersupportslearning
more general axioms through a scoring function that determines what ratio of edges that would
be entailed were the axiom true are indeed found in the graph; for example, to score the axiom
∃flight−.DomesticAirport /subsetsqequalInternationalAirport over Figure 21, we can use a graph query to count
how many nodes have incoming flights from a domestic airport (there are three), and how many
nodes have incoming flights from a domestic airport andare international airports (there is one),
wherethegreaterthedifferencebetweenbothcounts,theweakertheevidence fortheaxiom.
5 SUMMARYANDCONCLUSION
Wehavegivenacomprehensiveintroductiontoknowledgegraphs.Definingaknowledgegraphas
agraphofdataintendedtoaccumulateandconveyknowledgeoftherealworld,whosenodesrepresent
entitiesofinterestandwhoseedgesrepresentpotentiallydifferentrelationsbetweentheseentities ,we
havediscussedmodelsbywhichdatacanbestructured,queried,andvalidatedasgraphs;wealso
discussedtechniquesfor leveragingdeductiveand inductiveknowledge over graphs.
Knowledge graphs serve as a common substrate of knowledge within an organisation or com-
munity, enabling the representation, accumulation, curation, and dissemination of knowledge
over time [ 95]. In this role, knowledge graphs have been applied for diverse use-cases, ranging
fromcommercialapplications—involvingsemanticsearch,userrecommendations,conversational
agents, targeted advertising, transport automation, and so on—to open knowledge graphs made
availableforthepublicgood[ 57].Generaltrendsinclude:(1)theuseofknowledgegraphstointe-
grate and leverage data from diverse sources at large scale; and (2) the combination of deductive
(rules, ontologies, etc.) and inductive techniques (machine learning, analytics, etc.) to represent
and accumulateknowledge.
Future directions. Research on knowledge graphs can become a confluence of techniques from
different areas with the common objective of maximising the knowledge—and thus value—that
can bedistilled fromdiversesourcesat large scaleusingagraph-baseddata abstraction[ 56].
Particularly interesting topics for knowledge graphs arise from the intersections of areas. In
the intersection of data graphs and deductive knowledge, we emphasise emerging topics such as
formalsemanticsforpropertygraphs ,withlanguagesthatcantakeintoaccountthemeaningofla-
belsandproperty–valuepairsonnodesandedges[ 74];andreasoningandqueryingovercontextual
data, to derive conclusions and results valid in a particular setting [ 58,120,156]. In the intersec-
tion of data graphs and inductive knowledge, we highlight topics such as similarity-based query
relaxation , allowing to find approximate answers to exact queries based on numerical representa-
tions (e.g., embeddings) [ 139];shape induction , to extract and formalise inherent patterns in the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol.54,No. 4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June 2021.