71:14 A.Hogan etal.
Wecanthusabstractlydefinean interpretation [7]ofadatagraphasthecombinationofadomain
graph and a mapping from the terms(nodes and edge-labels) of the data graph to those of the
domaingraph.Thedomaingraphfollowsthesamemodelasthedatagraph.Werefertothenodes
ofthedomaingraphas entitiesandtheedgesofthedomaingraphas relations.Givenanode Santiago
inthedatagraph,wedenotetheentityitreferstointhedomaingraph(peragiveninterpretation)
bySantiago. Likewise, for an edge Arica Santiago flight , we will denote the relation it refers to by
Arica Santiago flight . In this abstract notion of an interpretation, we do not require that Santiagoor
Aricabethereal-world cities:An interpretationcanhaveany domain graphand mapping.
3.1.2 Assumptions. Why is this abstract notion of interpretation useful? The distinction be-
tweennodes/edgesandentities/relationsbecomesclearwhenwedefinethemeaningofontology
features and entailment. To illustrate, if we ask whether there is an edge labelled flightbetween
AricaandViña delMar for the data graph in Figure 1, then the answer is no.H o w e v e r ,i fw ea s ki f
the entities AricaandViñadelMar are connected by the relation flight, then the answer depends on
whatassumptions we make when interpreting the graph. Under the Closed World Assumption
(CWA)—which asserts that what is not known is assumed false—without further knowledge the
answer is no. Conversely, under the Open World Assumption (OWA),i ti spossiblefor the re-
lation to exist without being described by the graph [ 7]. Under the Unique Name Assumption
(UNA),whichstatesthatnotwonodescanmaptothesameentity,wecansaythatthedatagraph
describes at least two flights to Santiago(since ViñadelMar andAricamust be different entities). Con-
versely,underthe NoUniqueNameAssumption (NUNA),wecanonlysaythatthereis atleast
onesuchflightsince Viña delMar andAricamaybethesameentitywithtwo“names”(i.e.,twonodes
referringto thesame entity).
These assumptions define which interpretations are valid and which interpretations satisfy
whichdatagraphs.TheUNAforbidsinterpretationsthatmaptwonodestothesameentity,while
the NUNA does not. Under CWA, an interpretation that contains an edge x ypin its domain
graph can only satisfy a data graph from which we can entail x yp. Under OWA, an interpre-
tationcontainingtheedge x ypcansatisfyadatagraphnotentailing x ypsolongitdoes
not contradict that edge. Ontologies typically adopt the NUNA and OWA, i.e., the most general
case,whichconsidersthatdatamay be incomplete,and twonodesmay refertothesame entity.
3.1.3 SemanticConditions. Beyondourbaseassumptions,wecanassociatecertainpatternsin
thedatagraphwith semanticconditions thatdefinewhichinterpretationssatisfyit[ 7];forexample,
we can add a semantic condition on a special edge label subp. of(subproperty of) to enforce that
ifourdatagraphcontainstheedge venue location subp.of ,thenanyedge x y venue inthedomain
graph of the interpretation must also have a corresponding edge x y location to satisfy the data
graph.Thesesemanticconditionsthenformthefeaturesof an ontology language.
3.1.4 Individuals. In Table2, we list the main features supported by ontologies for describing
individuals [52] (a.k.a. entities). First, we can assert(binary) relations between individuals using
edgessuchas Santa Lucía Santiagocity .Intheconditioncolumn,whenwewrite x zy,forexam-
ple, we refer to the condition that the given relation holds in the interpretation; if so, then the
interpretation satisfiestheassertion.Wemayfurtherassertthattwotermsrefertothe sameentity,
where, e.g., Región V Región de Valparaíso sameas states that both refer to the same region; or that two
termsreferto differententities,where,e.g., Valparaíso Región deValparaíso diff. from distinguishesthecity
fromtheregionofthesamename.Wemayalsostatethatarelationdoesnotholdusing negation.
3.1.5 Properties. Properties denote terms that can be used as edge-labels [ 52]. We may use a
varietyoffeaturesfordefiningthesemanticsofproperties,aslistedinTable 3.First,wemaydefine
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.4,Article 71.Publicationdate:June2021.