9
of human players. AlphaZero taught itself from scratch how
to master the games of chess, shogi, and Go game, beating a
world-champion program in each case. In [66] it is shown that
given the initial demonstration, no explicit exploration is nec-
essary, and we can attain near-optimal performance. Measuring
the divergence between the current policy and the expert policy
for optimization is proposed in [67]. DQfD [68] pre-trains the
agent and uses expert demonstrations by adding them into
the replay buffer with additional priority. Moreover, a training
framework that combines learning from both demonstrations
and reinforcement learning is proposed in [69] for fast learning
agents. Two policies close to maximizing the reward function
can still have large differences in behaviour. To avoid degener-
ating a solution which would ﬁt the reward but not the original
behaviour, authors [70] proposed a method for enforcing that
the optimal policy learnt over the rewards should still match
the observed policy in behavior. Behavior Cloning (BC) is
applied as a supervised learning that maps states to actions
based on demonstrations provided by an expert. On the other
hand, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is about inferring
the reward function that justiﬁes demonstrations of the expert.
IRL is the problem of extracting a reward function given
observed, optimal behavior [71]. A key motivation is that the
reward function provides a succinct and robust deﬁnition of
a task. Generally, IRL algorithms can be expensive to run,
requiring reinforcement learning in an inner loop between
cost estimation to policy training and evaluation. Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) [72] introduces a way
to avoid this expensive inner loop. In practice, GAIL trains a
policy close enough to the expert policy to fool a discriminator.
This process is similar to GANs [73], [74]. The resulting
policy must travel the same MDP states as the expert, or the
discriminator would pick up the differences. The theory behind
GAIL is an equation simpliﬁcation: qualitatively, if IRL is
going from demonstrations to a cost function and RL from a
cost function to a policy, then we should altogether be able
to go from demonstration to policy in a single equation while
avoiding the cost function estimation.
V. R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR AUTONOMOUS
DRIVING TASKS
Autonomous driving tasks where RL could be applied
include: controller optimization, path planning and trajectory
optimization, motion planning and dynamic path planning,
development of high-level driving policies for complex nav-
igation tasks, scenario-based policy learning for highways,
intersections, merges and splits, reward learning with inverse
reinforcement learning from expert data for intent prediction
for trafﬁc actors such as pedestrian, vehicles and ﬁnally
learning of policies that ensures safety and perform risk
estimation. Before discussing the applications of DRL to AD
tasks we brieﬂy review the state space, action space and
rewards schemes in autonomous driving setting.
A. State Spaces, Action Spaces and Rewards
To successfully apply DRL to autonomous driving tasks,
designing appropriate state spaces, action spaces, and rewardfunctions is important. Leurent et al. [75] provided a compre-
hensive review of the different state and action representations
which are used in autonomous driving research. Commonly
used state space features for an autonomous vehicle include:
position, heading and velocity of ego-vehicle, as well as other
obstacles in the sensor view extent of the ego-vehicle. To avoid
variations in the dimension of the state space, a Cartesian or
Polar occupancy grid around the ego vehicle is frequently
employed. This is further augmented with lane information
such as lane number (ego-lane or others), path curvature,
past and future trajectory of the ego-vehicle, longitudinal
information such as Time-to-collision (TTC), and ﬁnally scene
information such as trafﬁc laws and signal locations.
Using raw sensor data such as camera images, LiDAR,
radar, etc. provides the beneﬁt of ﬁner contextual information,
while using condensed abstracted data reduces the complexity
of the state space. In between, a mid-level representation such
as 2D bird eye view (BEV) is sensor agnostic but still close to
the spatial organization of the scene. Fig. 4 is an illustration
of a top down view showing an occupancy grid, past and
projected trajectories, and semantic information about the
scene such as the position of trafﬁc lights. This intermediary
format retains the spatial layout of roads when graph-based
representations would not. Some simulators offer this view
such as Carla or Flow (see Table V-C).
A vehicle policy must control a number of different actu-
ators. Continuous-valued actuators for vehicle control include
steering angle, throttle and brake. Other actuators such as
gear changes are discrete. To reduce complexity and allow
the application of DRL algorithms which work with discrete
action spaces only ( e.g. DQN), an action space may be
discretised uniformly by dividing the range of continuous
actuators such as steering angle, throttle and brake into equal-
sized bins (see Section VI-C). Discretisation in log-space
has also been suggested, as many steering angles which are
selected in practice are close to the centre [76]. Discretisation
does have disadvantages however; it can lead to jerky or
unstable trajectories if the step values between actions are too
large. Furthermore, when selecting the number of bins for an
actuator there is a trade-off between having enough discrete
steps to allow for smooth control, and not having so many
steps that action selections become prohibitively expensive to
evaluate. As an alternative to discretisation, continuous values
for actuators may also be handled by DRL algorithms which
learn a policy directly, ( e.g. DDPG). Temporal abstractions
options framework [77]) may also be employed to simplify
the process of selecting actions, where agents select options
instead of low-level actions. These options represent a sub-
policy that could extend a primitive action over multiple time
steps.
Designing reward functions for DRL agents for autonomous
driving is still very much an open question. Examples of
criteria for AD tasks include: distance travelled towards a
destination [78], speed of the ego vehicle [78]–[80], keeping
the ego vehicle at a standstill [81], collisions with other road
users or scene objects [78], [79], infractions on sidewalks [78],
keeping in lane, and maintaining comfort and stability while
avoiding extreme acceleration, braking or steering [80], [81],