4
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are considered the de
facto standard when formalising sequential decision making
problems involving a single RL agent [21]. An MDP consists
of a set Sof states, a set Aof actions, a transition function
Tand a reward function R[22], i.e. a tuple ÇS,A,T,RÈ.
When in any state s2S, selecting an action a2Awill result
in the environment entering a new state s02Swith a transition
probability T(s,a,s0)2(0,1), and give a reward R(s,a). This
process is illustrated in Fig. 3. The stochastic policy ¼:S!D
is a mapping from the state space to a probability over the set
of actions, and ¼(ajs)represents the probability of choosing
action aat state s. The goal is to ﬁnd the optimal policy
¼¤, which results in the highest expected sum of discounted
rewards [21]:
¼¤Æargmax
¼E¼½H¡1X
kÆ0°krkÅ1js0Æs¾
| {z }
:ÆV¼(s), (1)
for all states s2S, where rkÆR(sk,ak)is the reward at time
kandV¼(s), the ‘value function’ at state sfollowing a policy
¼, is the expected ‘return’ (or ‘utility’) when starting at sand
following the policy ¼thereafter [1]. An important, related
concept is the action-value function, a.k.a.‘Q-function’ deﬁned
as:
Q¼(s,a)ÆE¼½H¡1X
kÆ0°krkÅ1js0Æs,a0Æa¾
. (2)
The discount factor °2[0,1]controls how an agent regards
future rewards. Low values of °encourage myopic behaviour
where an agent will aim to maximise short term rewards,
whereas high values of °cause agents to be more forward-
looking and to maximise rewards over a longer time frame.
The horizon Hrefers to the number of time steps in the
MDP. In inﬁnite-horizon problems HÆ 1, whereas in episodic
domains Hhas a ﬁnite value. Episodic domains may terminate
after a ﬁxed number of time steps, or when an agent reaches
a speciﬁed goal state. The last state reached in an episodic
domain is referred to as the terminal state. In ﬁnite-horizon
or goal-oriented domains discount factors of (close to) 1 may
be used to encourage agents to focus on achieving the goal,
whereas in inﬁnite-horizon domains lower discount factors
may be used to strike a balance between short- and long-
term rewards. If the optimal policy for a MDP is known,
then V¼¤may be used to determine the maximum expected
discounted sum of rewards available from any arbitrary initial
state. A rollout is a trajectory produced in the state space
by sequentially applying a policy to an initial state. A MDP
satisﬁes the Markov property, i.e. system state transitions are
dependent only on the most recent state and action, not on
the full history of states and actions in the decision process.
Moreover, in many real-world application domains, it is not
possible for an agent to observe all features of the environment
state; in such cases the decision-making problem is formulated
as a partially-observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
Solving a reinforcement learning task means ﬁnding a policy
¼that maximises the expected discounted sum of rewards
over trajectories in the state space. RL agents may learn
value function estimates, policies and/or environment modelsdirectly. Dynamic programming (DP) refers to a collection of
algorithms that can be used to compute optimal policies given
a perfect model of the environment in terms of reward and
transition functions. Unlike DP, in Monte Carlo methods there
is no assumption of complete environment knowledge. Monte
Carlo methods are incremental in an episode-by-episode sense.
Upon the completion of an episode, the value estimates and
policies are updated. Temporal Difference (TD) methods, on
the other hand, are incremental in a step-by-step sense, making
them applicable to non-episodic scenarios. Like Monte Carlo
methods, TD methods can learn directly from raw experience
without a model of the environment’s dynamics. Like DP, TD
methods learn their estimates based on other estimates.
A. Value-based methods
Q-learning is one of the most commonly used RL algo-
rithms. It is a model-free TD algorithm that learns estimates of
the utility of individual state-action pairs (Q-functions deﬁned
in Eqn. 2). Q-learning has been shown to converge to the
optimum state-action values for a MDP with probability 1,
so long as all actions in all states are sampled inﬁnitely
often and the state-action values are represented discretely
[23]. In practice, Q-learning will learn (near) optimal state-
action values provided a sufﬁcient number of samples are
obtained for each state-action pair. If a Q-learning agent has
converged to the optimal Q values for a MDP and selects
actions greedily thereafter, it will receive the same expected
sum of discounted rewards as calculated by the value function
with ¼¤(assuming that the same arbitrary initial starting state
is used for both). Agents implementing Q-learning update their
Q values according to the following update rule:
Q(s,a)ÃQ(s,a)Å®[rÅ°max
a02AQ(s0,a0)¡Q(s,a)],(3)
where Q(s,a)is an estimate of the utility of selecting action
ain state s,®2[0,1]is the learning rate which controls the
degree to which Q values are updated at each time step, and
°2[0,1]is the same discount factor used in Eqn. 1. The
theoretical guarantees of Q-learning hold with any arbitrary
initial Q values [23]; therefore the optimal Q values for a MDP
can be learned by starting with any initial action value function
estimate. The initialisation can be optimistic (each Q(s,a)
returns the maximum possible reward), pessimistic (minimum)
or even using knowledge of the problem to ensure faster
convergence. Deep Q-Networks (DQN) [24] incorporates a
variant of the Q-learning algorithm [25], by using deep neural
networks (DNNs) as a non-linear Q function approximator
over high-dimensional state spaces (e.g. the pixels in a frame
of an Atari game). Practically, the neural network predicts the
value of all actions without the use of any explicit domain-
speciﬁc information or hand-designed features. DQN applies
experience replay technique to break the correlation between
successive experience samples and also for better sample
efﬁciency. For increased stability, two networks are used where
the parameters of the target network for DQN are ﬁxed for
a number of iterations while updating the parameters of the
online network. Readers are directed to sub-section III-E for
a more detailed introduction to the use of DNNs in Deep RL.