8
rewards ( D) [50] and potential-based reward shaping ( PBRS )
[51] are two commonly used shaping approaches. Both D
andPBRS have been successfully applied to a wide range of
application domains and have the added beneﬁt of convenient
theoretical guarantees, meaning that they do not suffer from
the same issues as the unprincipled reward shaping approaches
described above (see e.g.[51]–[55]).
B. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
In multi-agent reinforcement learning, multiple RL agents
are deployed into a common environment. The single-agent
MDP framework becomes inadequate when multiple au-
tonomous agents act simultaneously in the same domain.
Instead, the more general stochastic game (SG) may be used in
the case of a Multi-Agent System (MAS) [56]. A SG is deﬁned
as a tuple ÇS,A1...N,T,R1...NÈ, where Nis the number of
agents, Sis the set of system states, Aiis the set of actions
for agent i(and Ais the joint action set), Tis the transition
function, and Riis the reward function for agent i. The SG
looks very similar to the MDP framework, apart from the
addition of multiple agents. In fact, for the case of NÆ1a SG
then becomes a MDP. The next system state and the rewards
received by each agent depend on the joint action aof all of the
agents in a SG, where ais derived from the combination of the
individual actions aifor each agent in the system. Each agent
may have its own local state perception si, which is different
to the system state s(i.e. individual agents are not assumed to
have full observability of the system). Note also that each
agent may receive a different reward for the same system
state transition, as each agent has its own separate reward
function Ri. In a SG, the agents may all have the same goal
(collaborative SG), totally opposing goals (competitive SG),
or there may be elements of collaboration and competition
between agents (mixed SG). Whether RL agents in a MAS
will learn to act together or at cross-purposes depends on the
reward scheme used for a speciﬁc application.
C. Multi-objective reinforcement learning
In multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) the re-
ward signal is a vector, where each component represents the
performance on a different objective. The MORL framework
was developed to handle sequential decision making problems
where tradeoffs between conﬂicting objective functions must
be considered. Examples of real-world problems with multiple
objectives include selecting energy sources (tradeoffs between
fuel cost and emissions) [57] and watershed management
(tradeoffs between generating electricity, preserving reservoir
levels and supplying drinking water) [58]. Solutions to MORL
problems are often evaluated using the concept of Pareto
dominance [59] and MORL algorithms typically seek to learn
or approximate the set of non-dominated solutions. MORL
problems may be deﬁned using the MDP or SG framework as
appropriate, in a similar manner to single-objective problems.
The main difference lies in the deﬁnition of the reward
function: instead of returning a single scalar value r, the
reward function Rin multi-objective domains returns a vector
rconsisting of the rewards for each individual objectivec2C. Therefore, a regular MDP or SG can be extended to
a Multi-Objective MDP (MOMDP) or Multi-Objective SG
(MOSG) by modifying the return of the reward function. For a
more complete overview of MORL beyond the brief summary
presented in this section, the interested reader is referred to
recent surveys [60], [61].
D. State Representation Learning (SRL)
State Representation Learning refers to feature extraction
& dimensionality reduction to represent the state space with
its history conditioned by the actions and environment of the
agent. A complete review of SRL for control is discussed
in [62]. In the simplest form SRL maps a high dimensional
vector otinto a small dimensional latent space st. The inverse
operation decodes the state back into an estimate of the
original observation ˆot. The agent then learns to map from
the latent space to the action. Training the SRL chain is
unsupervised in the sense that no labels are required. Reducing
the dimension of the input effectively simpliﬁes the task as
it removes noise and decreases the domain’s size as shown
in [63]. SRL could be a simple auto-encoder (AE), though
various methods exist for observation reconstruction such as
Variational Auto-Encoders (V AE) or Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs), as well as forward models for predicting
the next state or inverse models for predicting the action given
a transition. A good learned state representation should be
Markovian; i.e. it should encode all necessary information to
be able to select an action based on the current state only, and
not any previous states or actions [62], [64].
E. Learning from Demonstrations
Learning from Demonstrations (LfD) is used by humans
to acquire new skills in an expert to learner knowledge
transmission process. LfD is important for initial exploration
where reward signals are too sparse or the input domain is
too large to cover. In LfD, an agent learns to perform a
task from demonstrations, usually in the form of state-action
pairs, provided by an expert without any feedback rewards.
However, high quality and diverse demonstrations are hard to
collect, leading to learning sub-optimal policies. Accordingly,
learning merely from demonstrations can be used to initialize
the learning agent with a good or safe policy, and then
reinforcement learning can be conducted to enable the dis-
covery of a better policy by interacting with the environment.
Combining demonstrations and reinforcement learning has
been conducted in recent research. AlphaGo [41], combines
search tree with deep neural networks, initializes the policy
network by supervised learning on state-action pairs provided
by recorded games played by human experts. Additionally, a
value network is trained to tell how desirable a board state is.
By conducting self-play and reinforcement learning, AlphaGo
is able to discover new stronger actions and learn from its
mistakes, achieving super human performance. More recently,
AlphaZero [65], developed by the same team, proposed a
general framework for self-play models. AlphaZero is trained
entirely using reinforcement learning and self play, starting
from completely random play, and requires no prior knowledge