3
Fig. 2. Trend of publications for keywords 1. "reinforcement learning", 2."deep reinforcement", and 3."reinforcement learning" AND ("autonomous cars" OR
"autonomous vehicles" OR "self driving") for academic publication trends from this [13].
over a ﬁnite time horizon and restricted on a feasible state
space x2Xfree[14]. The velocity control are based on classical
methods of closed loop control such as PID (proportional-
integral-derivative) controllers, MPC (Model predictive con-
trol). PIDs aim to minimise a cost function constituting of
three terms current error with proportional term, effect of
past errors with integral term, and effect of future errors with
the derivative term. While the family of MPC methods aim
to stabilize the behavior of the vehicle while tracking the
speciﬁed path [15]. A review on controllers, motion planning
and learning based approaches for the same are provided in
this review [16] for interested readers. Optimal control and
reinforcement learning are intimately related, where optimal
control can be viewed as a model based reinforcement learning
problem where the dynamics of the vehicle/environment are
modeled by well deﬁned differential equations. Reinforcement
learning methods were developed to handle stochastic control
problems as well ill-posed problems with unknown rewards
and state transition probabilities. Autonomous vehicle stochas-
tic control is large domain, and we advise readers to read the
survey on this subject by authors in [17].
III. R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Machine learning (ML) is a process whereby a computer
program learns from experience to improve its performance at
a speciﬁed task [18]. ML algorithms are often classiﬁed under
one of three broad categories: supervised learning, unsuper-
vised learning and reinforcement learning (RL). Supervised
learning algorithms are based on inductive inference where
the model is typically trained using labelled data to perform
classiﬁcation or regression, whereas unsupervised learning en-
compasses techniques such as density estimation or clustering
applied to unlabelled data. By contrast, in the RL paradigm
an autonomous agent learns to improve its performance at
an assigned task by interacting with its environment. Russel
and Norvig deﬁne an agent as “anything that can be viewed
as perceiving its environment through sensors and acting
upon that environment through actuators” [19]. RL agents
are not told explicitly how to act by an expert; rather an
agent’s performance is evaluated by a reward function R.
For each state experienced, the agent chooses an action and
receives an occasional reward from its environment based on
the usefulness of its decision. The goal for the agent is to
maximize the cumulative rewards received over its lifetime.
Gradually, the agent can increase its long-term reward byVehicle/RL Agent
State st2S
Seither continuous
or discreteChallenges
Sample Complexity, Validation,
Safe-exploration, Credit assignment,
Simulator-Real Gap, LearningFunction Approximators
ot!st(SRL)
CNNs
RL methods
Value/Policy-based
Actor-Critic
On/Off policy
Model-based/Model-free ¼:S!A
Driving Policy
stochastic/deterministic
EnvironmentReal-world Simulator
simulator-to-real gapaction at
discrete/continuousreward rt
observation ot
Fig. 3. A graphical decomposition of the different components of an RL
algorithm. It also demonstrates the different challenges encountered while
training a D(RL) algorithm.
exploiting knowledge learned about the expected utility (i.e.
discounted sum of expected future rewards) of different state-
action pairs. One of the main challenges in reinforcement
learning is managing the trade-off between exploration and
exploitation. To maximize the rewards it receives, an agent
must exploit its knowledge by selecting actions which are
known to result in high rewards. On the other hand, to
discover such beneﬁcial actions, it has to take the risk of
trying new actions which may lead to higher rewards than
the current best-valued actions for each system state. In other
words, the learning agent has to exploit what it already knows
in order to obtain rewards, but it also has to explore the
unknown in order to make better action selections in the future.
Examples of strategies which have been proposed to manage
this trade-off include ²-greedy and softmax. When adopting
the ubiquitous ²-greedy strategy, an agent either selects an
action at random with probability 0Ç²Ç1, or greedily
selects the highest valued action for the current state with
the remaining probability 1¡². Intuitively, the agent should
explore more at the beginning of the training process when
little is known about the problem environment. As training
progresses, the agent may gradually conduct more exploitation
than exploration. The design of exploration strategies for RL
agents is an area of active research (see e.g.[20]).