11
Fig. 4. Bird Eye View (BEV) 2D representation of a driving scene. Left demonstrates an occupancy grid. Right shows the combination of semantic information
(trafﬁc lights) with past (red) and projected (green) trajectories. The ego car is represented by a green rectangle in both images.
AD Task (D)RL method & description Improvements & Tradeoffs
Lane Keep 1. Authors [82] propose a DRL system for discrete actions
(DQN) and continuous actions (DDAC) using the TORCS
simulator (see Table V-C) 2. Authors [83] learn discretised
and continuous policies using DQNs and Deep Deterministic
Actor Critic (DDAC) to follow the lane and maximize average
velocity.1. This study concludes that using continuous actions provide
smoother trajectories, though on the negative side lead to
more restricted termination conditions & slower convergence
time to learn. 2. Removing memory replay in DQNs help
for faster convergence & better performance. The one hot
encoding of action space resulted in abrupt steering control.
While DDAC’s continuous policy helps smooth the actions
and provides better performance.
Lane Change Authors [84] use Q-learning to learn a policy for ego-
vehicle to perform no operation, lane change to left/right,
accelerate/decelerate.This approach is more robust compared to traditional ap-
proaches which consist in deﬁning ﬁxed way points, velocity
proﬁles and curvature of path to be followed by the ego
vehicle.
Ramp Merging Authors [85] propose recurrent architectures namely LSTMs
to model longterm dependencies for ego vehicles ramp merg-
ing into a highway.Past history of the state information is used to perform the
merge more robustly.
Overtaking Authors [86] propose Multi-goal RL policy that is learnt by
Q-Learning or Double action Q-Learning(DAQL) is employed
to determine individual action decisions based on whether the
other vehicle interacts with the agent for that particular goal.Improved speed for lane keeping and overtaking with collision
avoidance.
Intersections Authors use DQN to evalute the Q-value for state-action pairs
to negotiate intersection [87],Creep-Go actions deﬁned by authors enables the vehicle to
maneuver intersections with restricted spaces and visibility
more safely
Motion Planning Authors [88] propose an improved A¤algorithm to learn a
heuristic function using deep neural netowrks over image-
based input obstacle mapSmooth control behavior of vehicle and better peformance
compared to multi-step DQN
TABLE I
LIST OF AD TASKS THAT REQUIRE D(RL) TO LEARN A POLICY OR BEHAVIOR .
B. Bridging the simulation-reality gap
Simulation-to-real-world transfer learning is an active do-
main, since simulations are a source large & cheap data with
perfect annotations. Authors [117] train a robot arm to grasp
objects in the real world by performing domain adaption
from simulation-to-reality, at both feature-level and pixel-
level. The vision-based grasping system achieved comparable
performance with 50 times fewer real-world samples. Authors
in [118], randomized the dynamics of the simulator during
training. The resulting policies were capable of generalising to
different dynamics without requiring retraining on real system.
In the domain of autonomous driving, authors [119] train
an A3C agent using simulation-real translated images of the
driving environment. Following which, the trained policy was
evaluated on a real world driving dataset.
Authors in [120] addressed the issue of performing imitation
learning in simulation that transfers well to images from real
world. They achieved this by unsupervised domain translation
between simulated and real world images, that enables learningthe prediction of steering in the real world domain with only
ground truth from the simulated domain. Authors remark that
there were no pairwise correspondences between images in the
simulated training set and the unlabelled real-world image set.
Similarly, [121] performs domain adaptation to map real world
images to simulated images. In contrast to sim-to-real methods
they handle the reality gap during deployment of agents in real
scenarios, by adapting the real camera streams to the synthetic
modality, so as to map the unfamiliar or unseen features of
real images back into the simulated environment and states.
The agents have already learnt a policy in simulation.
C. Sample efﬁciency
Animals are usually able to learn new tasks in just a few
trials, beneﬁting from their prior knowledge about the environ-
ment. However, one of the key challenges for reinforcement
learning is sample efﬁciency. The learning process requires too
many samples to learn a reasonable policy. This issue becomes
more noticeable when collection of valuable experience is