2
Fig. 1. Standard components in a modern autonomous driving systems pipeline listing the various tasks. The key problems addressed by these modules are
Scene Understanding, Decision and Planning.
radars and LIDARs as well as a GPS-GNSS system for
absolute localisation and inertial measurement Units (IMUs)
that provide 3D pose of the vehicle in space.
The goal of the perception module is the creation of an
intermediate level representation of the environment state (for
example bird-eye view map of all obstacles and agents) that is
to be later utilised by a decision making system that ultimately
produces the driving policy. This state would include lane
position, drivable zone, location of agents such as cars &
pedestrians, state of trafﬁc lights and others. Uncertainties
in the perception propagate to the rest of the information
chain. Robust sensing is critical for safety thus using redundant
sources increases conﬁdence in detection. This is achieved
by a combination of several perception tasks like semantic
segmentation [3], [4], motion estimation [5], depth estimation
[6], soiling detection [7], etc which can be efﬁciently uniﬁed
into a multi-task model [8], [9].
A. Scene Understanding
This key module maps the abstract mid-level representation
of the perception state obtained from the perception module to
the high level action or decision making module. Conceptually,
three tasks are grouped by this module: Scene understanding,
Decision and Planning as seen in ﬁgure 1 module aims to
provide a higher level understanding of the scene, it is built
on top of the algorithmic tasks of detection or localisation.
By fusing heterogeneous sensor sources, it aims to robustly
generalise to situations as the content becomes more abstract.
This information fusion provides a general and simpliﬁed
context for the Decision making components.
Fusion provides a sensor agnostic representation of the envi-
ronment and models the sensor noise and detection uncertain-
ties across multiple modalities such as LIDAR, camera, radar,
ultra-sound. This basically requires weighting the predictions
in a principled way.
B. Localization and Mapping
Mapping is one of the key pillars of automated driving [10].
Once an area is mapped, current position of the vehicle canbe localized within the map. The ﬁrst reliable demonstrations
of automated driving by Google were primarily reliant on
localisation to pre-mapped areas. Because of the scale of
the problem, traditional mapping techniques are augmented
by semantic object detection for reliable disambiguation. In
addition, localised high deﬁnition maps (HD maps) can be
used as a prior for object detection.
C. Planning and Driving policy
Trajectory planning is a crucial module in the autonomous
driving pipeline. Given a route-level plan from HD maps or
GPS based maps, this module is required to generate motion-
level commands that steer the agent.
Classical motion planning ignores dynamics and differential
constraints while using translations and rotations required to
move an agent from source to destination poses [11]. A robotic
agent capable of controlling 6-degrees of freedom (DOF) is
said to be holonomic, while an agent with fewer controllable
DOFs than its total DOF is said to be non-holonomic. Classical
algorithms such as A¤algorithm based on Djisktra’s algorithm
do not work in the non-holonomic case for autonomous
driving. Rapidly-exploring random trees (RRT) [12] are non-
holonomic algorithms that explore the conﬁguration space by
random sampling and obstacle free path generation. There are
various versions of RRT currently used in for motion planning
in autonomous driving pipelines.
D. Control
A controller deﬁnes the speed, steering angle and braking
actions necessary over every point in the path obtained from
a pre-determined map such as Google maps, or expert driving
recording of the same values at every waypoint. Trajectory
tracking in contrast involves a temporal model of the dynamics
of the vehicle viewing the waypoints sequentially over time.
Current vehicle control methods are founded in classical op-
timal control theory which can be stated as a minimisation of
a cost function ˙xÆf(x(t),u(t))deﬁned over a set of states x(t)
and control actions u(t). The control input is usually deﬁned