18
[150] P. Dhariwal, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, A. Nichol, M. Plappert, A. Radford,
J. Schulman, S. Sidor, Y . Wu, and P. Zhokhov, “Openai baselines,”
https://github.com/openai/baselines, 2017. 14
[151] A. Juliani, V .-P. Berges, E. Vckay, Y . Gao, H. Henry, M. Mattar, and
D. Lange, “Unity: A general platform for intelligent agents,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.02627 , 2018. 14
[152] I. Caspi, G. Leibovich, G. Novik, and S. Endrawis, “Reinforcement
learning coach,” Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.1134899 14
[153] Sergio Guadarrama, Anoop Korattikara, Oscar Ramirez, Pablo
Castro, Ethan Holly, Sam Fishman, Ke Wang, Ekaterina Gonina,
Neal Wu, Chris Harris, Vincent Vanhoucke, Eugene Brevdo,
“TF-Agents: A library for reinforcement learning in tensorﬂow,”
https://github.com/tensorﬂow/agents, 2018, [Online; accessed 25-June-
2019]. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/tensorﬂow/agents 14
[154] A. Stooke and P. Abbeel, “rlpyt: A research code base for deep
reinforcement learning in pytorch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01500 ,
2019. 14
[155] I. Osband, Y . Doron, M. Hessel, J. Aslanides, E. Sezener, A. Saraiva,
K. McKinney, T. Lattimore, C. Szepezvari, S. Singh et al. , “Behaviour
suite for reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03568 ,
2019. 14
B Ravi Kiran is the technical lead of machine
learning team at Navya, designing and deploying
realtime deep learning architectures for perception
tasks on autonomous shuttles. During his 6 years
in academic research, he has worked on DNNs for
video anomaly detection, online time series anomaly
detection, hyperspectral image processing for tumor
detection. He ﬁnished his PhD at Paris-Est in 2014
entitled Energetic lattice based optimization which
was awarded the MSTIC prize. He has worked in
academic research for over 4 years in embedded
programming and in autonomous driving. During his career he has published
over 40 articles and journals.
Ibrahim Sobh Ibrahim has more than 20 years of
experience in the area of Machine Learning and
Software Development. Dr. Sobh received his PhD
in Deep Reinforcement Learning for fast learning
agents acting in 3D environments. He received his
B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Computer Engineering
from Cairo University Faculty of Engineering. His
M.Sc. Thesis is in the ﬁeld of Machine Learn-
ing applied on automatic documents summarization.
Ibrahim has participated in several related national
and international mega projects, conferences and
summits. He delivers training and lectures for academic and industrial entities.
Ibrahim’s publications including international journals and conference papers
are mainly in the machine and deep learning ﬁelds. His area of research
is mainly in Computer vision, Natural language processing and Speech
processing. Currently, Dr. Sobh is a Senior Expert of AI, Valeo.
Victor Talpaert is a PhD student at U2IS, EN-
STA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 91120
Palaiseau, France. His PhD is directed by Bruno
Monsuez since 2017, the lab speciality is in robotics
and complex systems. His PhD is co-sponsored by
AKKA Technologies in Gyuancourt, France, through
the guidance of AKKA’s Autonomous Systems
Team. This team has a large focus on Autonomous
Driving (AD) and the automotive industry in general.
His PhD subject is learning decision making for AD,
with assumptions such as a modular AD pipeline,
learned features compatible with classic robotic approaches and ontology
based hierarchical abstractions.
Patrick Mannion is a permanent member of aca-
demic staff at National University of Ireland Gal-
way, where he lectures in Computer Science. He is
also Deputy Editor of The Knowledge Engineering
Review journal. He received a BEng in Civil En-
gineering, a HDip in Software Development and a
PhD in Machine Learning from National University
of Ireland Galway, a PgCert in Teaching & Learning
from Galway-Mayo IT and a PgCert in Sensors
for Autonomous Vehicles from IT Sligo. He is a
former Irish Research Council Scholar and a former
Fulbright Scholar. His main research interests include machine learning, multi-
agent systems, multi-objective optimisation, game theory and metaheuristic
algorithms, with applications to domains such as transportation, autonomous
vehicles, energy systems and smart grids.
Ahmad El Sallab Ahmad El Sallab is the Senior
Chief Engineer of Deep Learning at Valeo Egypt,
and Senior Expert at Valeo Group. Ahmad has 15
years of experience in Machine Learning and Deep
Learning, where he acquired his M.Sc. and Ph.D.
on 2009 and 2013 in the ﬁeld. He has worked for
reputable multi-national organizations in the industry
since 2005 like Intel and Valeo. He has over 35
publications and book chapters in Deep Learning
in top IEEE and ACM journals and conferences, in
addition to 30 patents, with applications in Speech,
NLP, Computer Vision and Robotics.
Senthil Yogamani is an Artiﬁcial Intelligence ar-
chitect and technical leader at Valeo Ireland. He
leads the research and design of AI algorithms for
various modules of autonomous driving systems.
He has over 14 years of experience in computer
vision and machine learning including 12 years of
experience in industrial automotive systems. He is
an author of over 90 publications and 60 patents
with 1300+ citations. He serves in the editorial board
of various leading IEEE automotive conferences
including ITSC, IV and ICVES and advisory board
of various industry consortia including Khronos, Cognitive Vehicles and IS
Auto. He is a recipient of best associate editor award at ITSC 2015 and best
paper award at ITST 2012.
Patrick Pérez is Scientiﬁc Director of Valeo.ai,
a Valeo research lab on artiﬁcial intelligence for
automotive applications. He is currently on the Edi-
torial Board of the International Journal of Computer
Vision. Before joining Valeo, Patrick Pérez has been
Distinguished Scientist at Technicolor (2009-2918),
researcher at Inria (1993-2000, 2004-2009) and at
Microsoft Research Cambridge (2000-2004). His
research interests include multimodal scene under-
standing and computational imaging.