12
Simulator Description
CARLA [78] Urban simulator, Camera & LIDAR streams, with depth & semantic segmentation, Location information
TORCS [96] Racing Simulator, Camera stream, agent positions, testing control policies for vehicles
AIRSIM [97] Camera stream with depth and semantic segmentation, support for drones
GAZEBO (ROS) [98] Multi-robot physics simulator employed for path planning & vehicle control in complex 2D & 3D maps
SUMO [99] Macro-scale modelling of trafﬁc in cities motion planning simulators are used
DeepDrive [100] Driving simulator based on unreal, providing multi-camera (eight) stream with depth
Constellation [101] NVIDIA DRIVE ConstellationTMsimulates camera, LIDAR & radar for AD (Proprietary)
MADRaS [102] Multi-Agent Autonomous Driving Simulator built on top of TORCS
Flow [103] Multi-Agent Trafﬁc Control Simulator built on top of SUMO
Highway-env [104] A gym-based environment that provides a simulator for highway based road topologies
Carcraft Waymo’s simulation environment (Proprietary)
TABLE II
SIMULATORS FOR RL APPLICATIONS IN ADVANCED DRIVING ASSISTANCE SYSTEMS (ADAS) AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING .
expensive or even risky to acquire. In the case of robot control
and autonomous driving, sample efﬁciency is a difﬁcult issue
due to the delayed and sparse rewards found in typical settings,
along with an unbalanced distribution of observations in a
large state space.
Reward shaping enables the agent to learn intermediate
goals by designing a more frequent reward function to en-
courage the agent to learn faster from fewer samples. Authors
in [122] design a second "trauma" replay memory that contains
only collision situations in order to pool positive and negative
experiences at each training step.
IL boostrapped RL : Further efﬁciency can be achieved
where the agent ﬁrst learns an initial policy ofﬂine perform-
ing imitation learning from roll-outs provided by an expert.
Following which, the agent can self-improve by applying RL
while interacting with the environment.
Actor Critic with Experience Replay (ACER) [123], is a
sample-efﬁcient policy gradient algorithm that makes use of a
replay buffer, enabling it to perform more than one gradient
update using each piece of sampled experience, as well as a
trust region policy optimization method.
Transfer learning is another approach for sample efﬁ-
ciency, which enables the reuse of previously trained policy for
a source task to initialize the learning of a target task. Policy
composition presented in [124] propose composing previously
learned basis policies to be able to reuse them for a novel task,
which leads to faster learning of new policies. A survey on
transfer learning in RL is presented in [125]. Multi-ﬁdelity
reinforcement learning (MFRL) framework [106] showed to
transfer heuristics to guide exploration in high ﬁdelity simu-
lators and ﬁnd near optimal policies for the real world with
fewer real world samples. Authors in [126] transferred policies
learnt to handle simulated intersections to real world examples
between DQN agents.
Meta-learning algorithms enable agents adapt to new tasks
and learn new skills rapidly from small amounts of ex-
periences, beneﬁting from their prior knowledge about the
world. Authors of [127] addressed this issue through training
a recurrent neural network on a training set of interrelated
tasks, where the network input includes the action selected
in addition to the reward received in the previous time step.
Accordingly, the agent is trained to learn to exploit the
structure of the problem dynamically and solve new problems
by adjusting its hidden state. A similar approach for designingRL algorithms is presented in [128]. Rather than designing a
“fast” reinforcement learning algorithm, it is represented as a
recurrent neural network, and learned from data. In Model-
Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) proposed in [129], the
meta-learner seeks to ﬁnd an initialisation for the parameters
of a neural network, that can be adapted quickly for a new
task using only few examples. Reptile [130] includes a similar
model. Authors [131] present simple gradient-based meta-
learning algorithm.
Efﬁcient state representations : World models proposed in
[132] learn a compressed spatial and temporal representation
of the environment using V AEs. Further on a compact and
simple policy directly from the compressed state representa-
tion.
D. Exploration issues with Imitation
In imitation learning, the agent makes use of trajectories
provided by an expert. However, the distribution of states
the expert encounters usually does not cover all the states
the trained agent may encounter during testing. Furthermore
imitation assumes that the actions are independent and iden-
tically distributed (i.i.d.). One solution consists in using the
Data Aggregation (DAgger) methods [133] where the end-
to-end learned policy is executed, and extracted observation-
action pairs are again labelled by the expert, and aggregated
to the original expert observation-action dataset. Thus, iter-
atively collecting training examples from both reference and
trained policies explores more valuable states and solves this
lack of exploration. Following work on Search-based Struc-
tured Prediction (SEARN) [133], Stochastic Mixing Iterative
Learning (SMILE) trains a stochastic stationary policy over
several iterations and then makes use of a geometric stochastic
mixing of the policies trained. In a standard imitation learning
scenario, the demonstrator is required to cover sufﬁcient states
so as to avoid unseen states during test. This constraint is
costly and requires frequent human intervention. More re-
cently, Chauffeurnet [134] demonstrated the limits of imitation
learning where even 30 million state-action samples were
insufﬁcient to learn an optimal policy that mapped bird-eye
view images (states) to control (action). The authors propose
the use of simulated examples which introduced perturbations,
higher diversity of scenarios such as collisions and/or going
off the road. The featurenet includes an agent RNN that