13
outputs the way point, agent box position and heading at each
iteration. Authors [135] identify limits of imitation learning,
and train a DNN end-to-end using the ego vehicles on input
raw image, and 2d and 3d locations of neighboring vehicles
to simultaneously predict the ego-vehicle action as well as
neighbouring vehicle trajectories.
E. Intrinsic Reward functions
In controlled simulated environments such as games, an
explicit reward signal is given to the agent along with its sensor
stream. However, in real-world robotics and autonomous driv-
ing deriving, designing a good reward functions is essential
so that the desired behaviour may be learned. The most
common solution has been reward shaping [136] and consists
in supplying additional well designed rewards to the agent to
encourage the optimization into the direction of the optimal
policy. Rewards as already pointed earlier in the paper, could
be estimated by inverse RL (IRL) [137], which depends on
expert demonstrations. In the absence of an explicit reward
shaping and expert demonstrations, agents can use intrinsic
rewards or intrinsic motivation [138] to evaluate if their actions
were good or not. Authors of [139] deﬁne curiosity as the error
in an agent’s ability to predict the consequence of its own
actions in a visual feature space learned by a self-supervised
inverse dynamics model. In [140] the agent learns a next state
predictor model from its experience, and uses the error of
the prediction as an intrinsic reward. This enables that agent
to determine what could be a useful behavior even without
extrinsic rewards.
F . Incorporating safety in DRL
Deploying an autonomous vehicle in real environments after
training directly could be dangerous. Different approaches to
incorporate safety into DRL algorithms are presented here.
For imitation learning based systems, Safe DAgger [141]
introduces a safety policy that learns to predict the error
made by a primary policy trained initially with the supervised
learning approach, without querying a reference policy. An
additional safe policy takes both the partial observation of
a state and a primary policy as inputs, and returns a binary
label indicating whether the primary policy is likely to deviate
from a reference policy without querying it. Authors of [142]
addressed safety in multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for
Autonomous Driving, where a balance is maintained between
unexpected behavior of other drivers or pedestrians and not
to be too defensive, so that normal trafﬁc ﬂow is achieved.
While hard constraints are maintained to guarantee the safety
of driving, the problem is decomposed into a composition of
a policy for desires to enable comfort driving and trajectory
planning. The deep reinforcement learning algorithms for con-
trol such as DDPG and safety based control are combined in
[143], including artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method that is widely
used for robot path planning. Using TORCS environment,
the DDPG is applied ﬁrst for learning a driving policy in
a stable and familiar environment, then policy network and
safety-based control are combined to avoid collisions. It was
found that combination of DRL and safety-based controlperforms well in most scenarios. In order to enable DRL to
escape local optima, speed up the training process and avoid
danger conditions or accidents, Survival-Oriented Reinforce-
ment Learning (SORL) model is proposed in [144], where
survival is favored over maximizing total reward through
modeling the autonomous driving problem as a constrained
MDP and introducing Negative-Avoidance Function to learn
from previous failure. The SORL model was found to be
not sensitive to reward function and can use different DRL
algorithms like DDPG. Furthermore, a comprehensive survey
on safe reinforcement learning can be found in [145] for
interested readers.
G. Multi-agent reinforcement learning
Autonomous driving is a fundamentally multi-agent task;
as well as the ego vehicle being controlled by an agent,
there will also be many other actors present in simulated
and real world autonomous driving settings, such as pedes-
trians, cyclists and other vehicles. Therefore, the continued
development of explicitly multi-agent approaches to learning
to drive autonomous vehicles is an important future research
direction. Several prior methods have already approached the
autonomous driving problem using a MARL perspective, e.g.
[142], [146]–[149].
One important area where MARL techniques could be very
beneﬁcial is in high-level decision making and coordination
between groups of autonomous vehicles, in scenarios such
as overtaking in highway scenarios [149], or negotiating
intersections without signalised control. Another area where
MARL approaches could be of beneﬁt is in the development
of adversarial agents for testing autonomous driving policies
before deployment [148], i.e. agents controlling other vehicles
in a simulation that learn to expose weaknesses in the be-
haviour of autonomous driving policies by acting erratically or
against the rules of the road. Finally, MARL approaches could
potentially have an important role to play in developing safe
policies for autonomous driving [142], as discussed earlier.
VII. C ONCLUSION
Reinforcement learning is still an active and emerging area
in real-world autonomous driving applications. Although there
are a few successful commercial applications, there is very
little literature or large-scale public datasets available. Thus we
were motivated to formalize and organize RL applications for
autonomous driving. Autonomous driving scenarios involve in-
teracting agents and require negotiation and dynamic decision
making which suits RL. However, there are many challenges to
be resolved in order to have mature solutions which we discuss
in detail. In this work, a detailed theoretical reinforcement
learning is presented, along with a comprehensive literature
survey about applying RL for autonomous driving tasks.
Challenges, future research directions and opportunities
are discussed in section VI. This includes : validating the
performance of RL based systems, the simulation-reality gap,
sample efﬁciency, designing good reward functions, incorpo-
rating safety into decision making RL systems for autonomous
agents.