10
and following trafﬁc rules [79].
B. Motion Planning & Trajectory optimization
Motion planning is the task of ensuring the existence of a
path between target and destination points. This is necessary
to plan trajectories for vehicles over prior maps usually aug-
mented with semantic information. Path planning in dynamic
environments and varying vehicle dynamics is a key prob-
lem in autonomous driving, for example negotiating right to
pass through in an intersection [87], merging into highways.
Recent work by authors [89] contains real world motions by
various trafﬁc actors, observed in diverse interactive driving
scenarios. Recently, authors demonstrated an application of
DRL (DDPG) for AD using a full-sized autonomous vehicle
[90]. The system was ﬁrst trained in simulation, before being
trained in real time using on board computers, and was able
to learn to follow a lane, successfully completing a real-
world trial on a 250 metre section of road. Model-based deep
RL algorithms have been proposed for learning models and
policies directly from raw pixel inputs [91], [92]. In [93],
deep neural networks have been used to generate predictions in
simulated environments over hundreds of time steps. RL is also
suitable for Control. Classical optimal control methods like
LQR/iLQR are compared with RL methods in [94]. Classical
RL methods are used to perform optimal control in stochastic
settings, for example the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR)
in linear regimes and iterative LQR (iLQR) for non-linear
regimes are utilized. A recent study in [95] demonstrates that
random search over the parameters for a policy network can
perform as well as LQR.
C. Simulator & Scenario generation tools
Autonomous driving datasets address supervised learning
setup with training sets containing image, label pairs for
various modalities. Reinforcement learning requires an en-
vironment where state-action pairs can be recovered while
modelling dynamics of the vehicle state, environment as well
as the stochasticity in the movement and actions of the
environment and agent respectively. Various simulators are
actively used for training and validating reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms. Table V-C summarises various high ﬁdelity
perception simulators capable of simulating cameras, LiDARs
and radar. Some simulators are also capable of providing the
vehicle state and dynamics. A complete review of sensors and
simulators utilised within the autonomous driving community
is available in [105] for readers. Learned driving policies are
stress tested in simulated environments before moving on to
costly evaluations in the real world. Multi-ﬁdelity reinforce-
ment learning (MFRL) framework is proposed in [106] where
multiple simulators are available. In MFRL, a cascade of
simulators with increasing ﬁdelity are used in representing
state dynamics (and thus computational cost) that enables
the training and validation of RL algorithms, while ﬁnding
near optimal policies for the real world with fewer expensive
real world samples using a remote controlled car. CARLA
Challenge [107] is a Carla simulator based AD competition
with pre-crash scenarios characterized in a National HighwayTrafﬁc Safety Administration report [108]. The systems are
evaluated in critical scenarios such as: Ego-vehicle loses
control, ego-vehicle reacts to unseen obstacle, lane change
to evade slow leading vehicle among others. The scores of
agents are evaluated as a function of the aggregated distance
travelled in different circuits, and total points discounted due
to infractions.
D. LfD and IRL for AD applications
Early work on Behavior Cloning (BC) for driving cars in
[109], [110] presented agents that learn form demonstrations
(LfD) that tries to mimic the behavior of an expert. BC is
typically implemented as a supervised learning, and accord-
ingly, it is hard for BC to adapt to new, unseen situations.
An architecture for learning a convolutional neural network,
end to end, in self-driving cars domain was proposed in
[111], [112]. The CNN is trained to map raw pixels from
a single front facing camera directly to steering commands.
Using a relatively small training dataset from humans/experts,
the system learns to drive in trafﬁc on local roads with or
without lane markings and on highways. The network learns
image representations that detect the road successfully, without
being explicitly trained to do so. Authors of [113] proposed
to learn comfortable driving trajectories optimization using
expert demonstration from human drivers using Maximum
Entropy Inverse RL. Authors of [114] used DQN as the
reﬁnement step in IRL to extract the rewards, in an effort
learn human-like lane change behavior.
VI. R EAL WORLD CHALLENGES AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
In this section, challenges for conducting reinforcement
learning for real-world autonomous driving are presented
and discussed along with the related research approaches for
solving them.
A. Validating RL systems
Henderson et al. [115] described challenges in validating
reinforcement learning methods focusing on policy gradient
methods for continuous control algorithms such as PPO,
DDPG and TRPO as well as in reproducing benchmarks. They
demonstrate with real examples that implementations often
have varying code-bases and different hyper-parameter values,
and that unprincipled ways to estimate the top-k rollouts
could lead to incoherent interpretations on the performance
of the reinforcement learning algorithms, and further more on
how well they generalize. Authors concluded that evaluation
could be performed either on a well deﬁned common setup
or on real-world tasks. Authors in [116] proposed automated
generation of challenging and rare driving scenarios in high-
ﬁdelity photo-realistic simulators. These adversarial scenarios
are automatically discovered by parameterising the behavior
of pedestrians and other vehicles on the road. Moreover, it is
shown that by adding these scenarios to the training data of
imitation learning, the safety is increased.