7
network consists of a 84£84£4tensor of 4 consecutive stacked
frames used to capture the temporal information. Through
consecutive layers, the network learns how to combine features
in order to identify the action most likely to bring the best
outcome. One layer consists of several convolutional ﬁlters.
For instance, the ﬁrst layer uses 32 ﬁlters with 8£8kernels
with stride 4 and applies a rectiﬁer non linearity. The second
layer is 64 ﬁlters of 4£4with stride 2, followed by a rectiﬁer
non-linearity. Next comes a third convolutional layer of 64
ﬁlters of 3£3with stride 1 followed by a rectiﬁer. The last
intermediate layer is composed of 512 rectiﬁer units fully
connected. The output layer is a fully-connected linear layer
with a single output for each valid action. For DQN training
stability, two networks are used while the parameters of the
target network are ﬁxed for a number of iterations while
updating the online network parameters. For practical reasons,
theQ(s,a)function is modeled as a deep neural network
that predicts the value of all actions given the input state.
Accordingly, deciding what action to take requires performing
a single forward pass of the network. Moreover, in order
to increase sample efﬁciency, experiences of the agent are
stored in a replay memory (experience replay), where the Q-
learning updates are conducted on randomly selected samples
from the replay memory. This random selection breaks the
correlation between successive samples. Experience replay
enables reinforcement learning agents to remember and reuse
experiences from the past where observed transitions are stored
for some time, usually in a queue, and sampled uniformly from
this memory to update the network. However, this approach
simply replays transitions at the same frequency that they were
originally experienced, regardless of their signiﬁcance. An
alternative method is to use two separate experience buckets,
one for positive and one for negative rewards [42]. Then a ﬁxed
fraction from each bucket is selected to replay. This method
is only applicable in domains that have a natural notion of
binary experience. Experience replay has also been extended
with a framework for prioritising experience [43], where
important transitions, based on the TD error, are replayed
more frequently, leading to improved performance and faster
training when compared to the standard experience replay
approach.
The max operator in standard Q-learning and DQN uses the
same values both to select and to evaluate an action resulting
in over optimistic value estimates. In Double DQN (D-DQN)
[44] the over estimation problem in DQN is tackled where the
greedy policy is evaluated according to the online network and
uses the target network to estimate its value. It was shown that
this algorithm not only yields more accurate value estimates,
but leads to much higher scores on several games.
In Dueling network architecture [45] the state value function
and associated advantage function are estimated, and then
combined together to estimate action value function. The
advantage of the dueling architecture lies partly in its ability
to learn the state-value function efﬁciently. In a single-stream
architecture only the value for one of the actions is updated.
However in dueling architecture, the value stream is updated
with every update, allowing for better approximation of the
state values, which in turn need to be accurate for temporaldifference methods like Q-learning.
DRQN [46] applied a modiﬁcation to the DQN by com-
bining a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) with a Deep Q-
Network. Accordingly, the DRQN is capable of integrating in-
formation across frames to detect information such as velocity
of objects. DRQN showed to generalize its policies in case of
complete observations and when trained on Atari games and
evaluated against ﬂickering games, it was shown that DRQN
generalizes better than DQN.
IV. E XTENSIONS TO REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
This section introduces and discusses some of the main
extensions to the basic single-agent RL paradigms which
have been introduced over the years. As well as broadening
the applicability of RL algorithms, many of the extensions
discussed here have been demonstrated to improve scalability,
learning speed and/or converged performance in complex
problem domains.
A. Reward shaping
As noted in Section III, the design of the reward function
is crucial: RL agents seek to maximise the return from the
reward function, therefore the optimal policy for a domain
is deﬁned with respect to the reward function. In many real-
world application domains, learning may be difﬁcult due to
sparse and/or delayed rewards. RL agents typically learn how
to act in their environment guided merely by the reward signal.
Additional knowledge can be provided to a learner by the
addition of a shaping reward to the reward naturally received
from the environment, with the goal of improving learning
speed and converged performance. This principle is referred
to as reward shaping. The term shaping has its origins in the
ﬁeld of experimental psychology, and describes the idea of
rewarding all behaviour that leads to the desired behaviour.
Skinner [47] discovered while training a rat to push a lever that
any movement in the direction of the lever had to be rewarded
to encourage the rat to complete the task. Analogously to
the rat, a RL agent may take an unacceptably long time to
discover its goal when learning from delayed rewards, and
shaping offers an opportunity to speed up the learning process.
Reward shaping allows a reward function to be engineered in a
way to provide more frequent feedback signal on appropriate
behaviours [48], which is especially useful in domains with
sparse rewards. Generally, the return from the reward function
is modiﬁed as follows: r0ÆrÅfwhere ris the return from the
original reward function R,fis the additional reward from a
shaping function F, and r0is the signal given to the agent
by the augmented reward function R0. Empirical evidence
has shown that reward shaping can be a powerful tool to
improve the learning speed of RL agents [49]. However, it
can have unintended consequences. The implication of adding
a shaping reward is that a policy which is optimal for the
augmented reward function R0may not in fact also be optimal
for the original reward function R. A classic example of
reward shaping gone wrong for this exact reason is reported
by [49] where the experimented bicycle agent would turn in
circle to stay upright rather than reach its goal. Difference