6
the time on a single multi-core CPU instead of a GPU by
combining several ideas. It also demonstrates how using an
estimate of the value function as the previously explained
baseline breduces variance and improves convergence time.
By deﬁning the advantage asA¼(a,s)ÆQ¼(s,a)¡V¼(s), the
expression of the policy gradient from Eqn. 5 is rewritten
asrµLÆ ¡E¼µ{A¼(a,s)log¼µ(ajs)}. The critic is trained to
minimize1
2°°A¼µ(a,s)°°2. The intuition of using advantage
estimates rather than just discounted returns is to allow the
agent to determine not just how good its actions were, but also
how much better they turned out to be than expected, leading
to reduced variance and more stable training. The A3C model
also demonstrated good performance in 3D environments such
as labyrinth exploration. Advantage Actor Critic (A2C) is
a synchronous version of the asynchronous advantage actor
critic model, that waits for each agent to ﬁnish its experience
before conducting an update. The performance of both A2C
and A3C is comparable. Most greedy policies must alternate
between exploration and exploitation, and good exploration
visits the states where the value estimate is uncertain. This
way, exploration focuses on trying to ﬁnd the most uncertain
state paths as they bring valuable information. In addition to
advantage, explained earlier, some methods use the entropy as
the uncertainty quantity. Most A3C implementations include
this as well. Two methods with common authors are energy-
based policies [32] and more recent and with widespread use,
the Soft Actor Critic (SAC) algorithm [33], both rely on adding
an entropy term to the reward function, so we update the policy
objective from Eqn. 1 to Eqn. 7. We refer readers to [33] for
an in depth explanation of the expression
¼¤
MaxEntÆargmax
¼E¼©X
t[r(st,at)Å®H(¼(.jst))]ª
,(7)
shown here for illustration of how the entropy His added.
D. Model-based (vs. Model-free) & On/Off Policy methods
In practical situations, interacting with the real environment
could be limited due to many reasons including safety and
cost. Learning a model for environment dynamics may reduce
the amount of interactions required with the real environ-
ment. Moreover, exploration can be performed on the learned
models. In the case of model-based approaches ( e.g.Dyna-
Q [34], R-max [35]), agents attempt to learn the transition
function Tand reward function R, which can be used when
making action selections. Keeping a model approximation of
the environment means storing knowledge of its dynamics, and
allows for fewer, and sometimes, costly environment interac-
tions. By contrast, in model-free approaches such knowledge
is not a requirement. Instead, model-free learners sample the
underlying MDP directly in order to gain knowledge about
the unknown model, in the form of value function estimates
for example. In Dyna-2 [36], the learning agent stores long-
term and short-term memories, where a memory is deﬁned
as the set of features and corresponding parameters used by
an agent to estimate the value function. Long-term memory
is for general domain knowledge which is updated from real
experience, while short-term memory is for speciﬁc localknowledge about the current situation, and the value function
is a linear combination of long and short term memories.
Learning algorithms can be on-policy or off-policy depend-
ing on whether the updates are conducted on fresh trajectories
generated by the policy or by another policy, that could be
generated by an older version of the policy or provided by an
expert. On-policy methods such as SARSA [37], estimate the
value of a policy while using the same policy for control.
However, off-policy methods such as Q-learning [25], use
two policies: the behavior policy, the policy used to generate
behavior; and the target policy, the one being improved on. An
advantage of this separation is that the target policy may be
deterministic (greedy), while the behavior policy can continue
to sample all possible actions, [1].
E. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
Tabular representations are the simplest way to store learned
estimates (of e.g.values, policies or models), where each state-
action pair has a discrete estimate associated with it. When
estimates are represented discretely, each additional feature
tracked in the state leads to an exponential growth in the
number of state-action pair values that must be stored [38].
This problem is commonly referred to in the literature as the
“curse of dimensionality”, a term originally coined by Bellman
[39]. In simple environments this is rarely an issue, but it
may lead to an intractable problem in real-world applications,
due to memory and/or computational constraints. Learning
over a large state-action space is possible, but may take an
unacceptably long time to learn useful policies. Many real-
world domains feature continuous state and/or action spaces;
these can be discretised in many cases. However, large discreti-
sation steps may limit the achievable performance in a domain,
whereas small discretisation steps may result in a large state-
action space where obtaining a sufﬁcient number of samples
for each state-action pair is impractical. Alternatively, function
approximation may be used to generalise across states and/or
actions, whereby a function approximator is used to store and
retrieve estimates. Function approximation is an active area
of research in RL, offering a way to handle continuous state
and/or action spaces, mitigate against the state-action space
explosion and generalise prior experience to previously unseen
state-action pairs. Tile coding is one of the simplest forms
of function approximation, where one tile represents multiple
states or state-action pairs [38]. Neural networks are also
commonly used to implement function approximation, one of
the most famous examples being Tesuaro’s application of RL
to backgammon [40]. Recent work has applied deep neural
networks as a function approximation method; this emerging
paradigm is known as deep reinforcement learning (DRL).
DRL algorithms have achieved human level performance (or
above) on complex tasks such as playing Atari games [24] and
playing the board game Go [41].
In DQN [24] it is demonstrated how a convolutional neural
network can learn successful control policies from just raw
video data for different Atari environments. The network
was trained end-to-end and was not provided with any game
speciﬁc information. The input to the convolutional neural