Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 5 of 17
2.4. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Models for Credit Risk Evaluation
An AI algorithm simulates the decision-making process of the human brain with high accuracy
and ﬂexibility through data processing and complex computing. In view of the current complexity and
diversity of credit risk measurement methods, AI algorithms have been widely used in the ﬁeld of
credit risk evaluation.
Logistic regression (LR) is a widely used algorithm because it is e cient and easy to understand
with high prediction accuracy. The 1980s witnessed the ﬁrst applications of logistic regression in
the ﬁelds of credit scoring. Wiginton [ 28], Bensic and Zekic [ 29] propounded that among many
methods, logistic regression would be the most accurate and e ective method for establishing a credit
scoring model. Koh et al. [ 30] proposed that LR could be applied instead of discriminant analysis.
A few researchers have focused on analyzing the default probability of SMEs by the LR method and
applying the logistic scoring model to predict default probability [ 31,32]. However, some researchers
have shown that the credit risk prediction accuracy ratio of LR is lower than that of the neural network
method [6,33].
An artiﬁcial neural network simulates the thinking process of the human brain by constructing a
large number of nodes, connecting them by di erent connection modes and processing the input data
to simulate the neuron conduction mechanism of the human brain. Rong-Zhou et al. [ 34] evaluated
120 credit applicants by neural network and classiﬁed the lenders based on the evaluation results.
It is suggested that the accuracy of credit risk evaluation with a neural network is higher than
traditional methods. Khashman [ 35] evaluated and validated 24 numerical attributes of an enterprise
by using a German credit dataset. The results suggested that the credit risk evaluation neural network
model performed best under LS4 learning scheme, and the method could be used to process credit
applications e ciently and automatically. Xiao-Bin et al. [ 36] applied several neural network models to
evaluate Chinese SME credit risk, and the probabilistic neural network achieved the best performance.
Zhao-Quan et al. [ 37] proposed a hedge fund downside risk evaluation model based on multi-objective
neural network. Madjid et al. [ 38] applied an artiﬁcial neural network and Bayesian network model to
assess bank liquidity risks. The results demonstrated the e ciency, accuracy and ﬂexibility of data
mining methods in bank liquidity risk measurement.
A Bayesian network that has been developed to be time-speciﬁc is known as a dynamic Bayesian
network. It carries forward the advantage of a Bayesian network to establish causality under uncertain
conditions and links multiple such networks adjacent to each other, so that credit risk can be analyzed
and measured according to the time characteristics of the data. Based on the powerful capability
of dealing with uncertainties, a Bayesian network can be applied for decision-making and credit
risk evaluation. A Bayesian network is applied to construct the causal relationship between credit
indicators, so as to evaluate the subject’s credit risks based on series indicators. Banachewicz et al. [ 39]
introduced the model of a Markov chain into the measurement of portfolio credit risk and extended it
to the corporate risk measure, which is analyzed and veriﬁed with data of US enterprises. Murphy [ 40]
compared the Markov model with the dynamic Bayesian model and argued that the Markov model
lacks expressiveness in describing variables, while the dynamic Bayesian model could decompose
variables into factors and describe the process in detail.
A decision tree is a tree diagram used in determining the optimum course of action. It illustrates
the choices available to decision makers, including associated risks, costs, outcomes, or probabilities.
The ﬁrst generation of decision tree dates back to 1963, Morgan and Soquis [ 41] proposed Automatic
Interaction Detection (AID), which is the ﬁrst regression tree algorithm. In the 1970s, Dichtomiser3
(ID3) algorithm was proposed as the second-generation decision tree, and contributed to the research
in the following years. These include the widely used C4.5 and C5.0 [ 42]. Quinlan [ 43] published the
C4.5 algorithm in 1993. C4.5 is one of the most popular and widely used algorithms in data mining
and machine learning nowadays. Sheng-Gang et al. [ 44] applied a decision tree to screen evaluation
indicators. In the paper, a double evaluation model is built with the combination of a decision tree and
neutral network, which improves the credit risk prediction accuracy ratio.