Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 3 of 17
SMEs on the platform are proved to have a higher credit rating, they can have more development
opportunities. With the credit sharing information, buyers, as well as business partners, can choose
more professional and qualiﬁed SMEs. The use of dynamic and e ective credit risk evaluation system
may help small ﬁrms sustain their business. It is of great signiﬁcance to create an optimum e-commerce
transaction environment and achieve sustainable development within the e-commerce industry.
Our paper studies the process of credit risk evaluation and how advances in technology are
changing this process. Speciﬁcally, we use data from Taobao to assess several approaches to evaluate
seller credit and aim to explore an improved credit risk evaluation model to encourage honest
transactions on the e-commerce platform. Our paper ﬁnds a dynamic and e ective credit risk evaluation
model which allows us to build an advanced and user-friendly system for credit risk evaluation. The
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (1) We propose a hybrid AI model for credit risk
evaluation of e-commerce sellers. The combination model would improve the credit risk prediction
accuracy ratio, and meanwhile, overcome the shortcoming of a single AI model’s lack of interpretability.
It can serve as a reference for e-commerce platform promoting optimum credit risk evaluation model
to improve e-commerce transaction environment and for buyers and investors making decisions. (2)
we demonstrate that the credit risk prediction performance of decision tree— artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) model is better than that of decision tree—logistic regression (LR), decision tree—dynamic
Bayesian network (DBN) and single ANN, LR, DB models in evaluating the credit risk of sellers on
Taobao platform.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a literature review, including
the development of credit risk evaluation, credit risk evaluation index system, dynamic credit risk
evaluation and AI models for credit risk evaluation. Section 3 builds a credit risk evaluation portfolio
model for e-commerce sellers based on hybrid AI methods. The empirical analysis is evaluated in
Section 4, and some concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.
2. Literature Review
2.1. The Development of Credit Risk Evaluation
The term ‘credit’ originated from the development of the bank credit business, with the concept of
credit risk evaluation being introduced to reduce credit risk. In the middle of the nineteenth century,
credit risk evaluation gradually became an independent research ﬁeld. The research continued to
ﬂourish in the next decades, giving rise to novel and dynamic models.
After various ﬁnancial crises, European and American scholars started to focus on credit risk
analysis, and corporate ﬁnancial indicators began to be included in the early credit risk evaluation
method. For example, Beaver [ 1] used univariate analysis to provide a reference system to prevent
bankruptcy risks through indicators, such as ﬁnancial ratio, rate of return, return on assets and current
ratio. Horrigan [ 2] introduced the logit model to prove that ﬁnancial ratios can be used for long-term
credit decisions. Altman [ 3] proposed multivariate discriminant analysis (MDA), which established
a Z-score model based on liquidity, proﬁtability, leverage ratio, solvency and operational ratio as
discriminative indicators. Edmister [ 4] studied the ﬁnancial indicators used to assess the default risk
of small businesses. In this interpretation, after multivariate discriminant analysis, it is necessary
to comprehensively take account of factors, such as operational capacity, proﬁtability, industry
environment, development trends, etc. Martin [ 5] used a few ﬁnancial ratio variables to predict
corporate bankruptcy and default rates and established the logit regression model.
In the late twentieth century, researchers have shown that ﬁnancial institutions rely on soft
information to evaluate the credibility of small enterprises [ 6–8]. This soft information is gathered
through a contract with SMEs and observing the performance of borrowers. It also includes
an assessment of future prospects based on past communication with suppliers, customers and
neighboring business [ 7,9]. Dennis [ 10] examined cognitive constraints and behavioral biases that
might a ect the use of soft information, and explored three constraints and biases, including limited