Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 4 of 17
attention, task-speciﬁc human capital and common identity that would a ect the lending decision.
Berger and Udell [ 11] proposed a more detailed conceptual framework for the analysis of SME credit
availability issues. This work suggested that the elements, including information environment, the
legal, judicial and bankruptcy environments, the social environment, and the tax and regulatory
environments would a ect SME credit availability. Standard and Poor catagories suggest that credit
risk evaluation should focus on assessing the dynamic solvency of enterprises, including the economic
cycle, competitive position, industry and development situation, legal proceedings, policy environment
and emergencies and other dynamic factors.
2.2. Credit Risk Evaluation Index System
In the ﬁeld of structuring the credit risk evaluation index system, numerous studies have focused
on application and improvement of the models of regression, stochastic probability and machine
learning and testing the evaluation performance of these models based on small and micro-enterprise
data. Beginning in the 1960s, Altman [ 3], Martin [ 5], and other scholars, have used the statistical analysis
method for corporate credit risk evaluation. In the 1980s, systematic analysis methods were gradually
applied, and a few scholars suggested the expert system, neutral network, vector machine and other
methods to e ectively explore credit rating issues. Messier and Hansen [ 12] introduced an expert system
into credit risk evaluation and compared it with the discriminant model. These researchers concluded
that an expert system based on inductive inference could better analyze users’ credit risks. Odom and
Shard [ 13] built a neural network model to investigate the bankruptcy of banks. Their model initiated
the application of neural networks in credit risk management. Later, Desai et al. [ 14] introduced the
model neural network (MNN) to analyze credit risk. Huang [ 15] applied the support vector machine
(SVM) to process the data of ﬁnancial institutions in the United States and Taiwan with a test accuracy
of 80%, which is an ideal credit risk evaluation result. Fantazzini et al. [ 16] suggested that the accuracy
of sample prediction of random survival forests was higher, while the accuracy of out-of-sample
prediction of the regression model was higher. Sohn and Jeon [ 17] proposed the Weilbull competition
risk model and analyzed the inﬂuencing factors, while Ono et al. [ 18] used propensity score matching
(PSM) to determine the index weights and evaluate the credit score. Meanwhile, hybrid methods have
gradually applied to credit risk evaluation [19–21].
2.3. Dynamic Credit Risk Evaluation
Abdul-Rahman [ 22] introduced the concept of dynamic credit and built a simple credit risk
evaluation model to describe the weighting and changing process of credit. The current methods
of dynamic credit risk evaluation consist mainly of a dynamic credit risk evaluation index, discrete
time model, continuous time model and other features. Tomasz R. et al. [ 23] proposed dynamic
limit growth indices (DLGI) to measure the long-term performance of a ﬁnancial portfolio under the
premise of discrete time series. They suggested that a su cient and necessary condition should be
provided for a DLGI to be dynamic assessment index. The paper used dynamic risk measures to
build examples of DLGI. Zhen et al. [ 24] developed the METrust model in P2P networks based on
the dynamic recommendation, and introduced two trust parameters, including updating range and
updating strength for updating the credibility of recommendation. Bin-Wen [ 25] divided the credit
risk evaluation index into three dimensions, including time, space and intensity, and dynamically
evaluated credit risks with dynamic index data of di erent time and space.
Credit risk evaluation in continuous time is mostly combined with AI. The model simulates
the thinking process of the human brain, and the data are processed instantly and dynamically by
an optimized algorithm. Lim and Sohn [ 26] presented a dynamic neural network-based behavioral
scoring model to replace the current static model. This minimizes the loss of bad debt as it dynamically
accommodates the changes in borrowers’ characteristics after the loans are made. Jiang et al. [ 27]
simulated the cognitive processes of the human brain by optimizing the case-based reasoning model
(CBR) and dynamically constructing a consumer evaluation system.