Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 2 of 17
e-commerce platforms play a pivotal role in increasing employment and spurring the economy. In 2018,
Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba created 40.82 million jobs, directly and indirectly, via its expansive
retail ecosystem; and there are 10 million SMEs and start-ups on Taobao (Alibaba’s C2C e-commerce
platform) alone. However, with the rapid development of e-commerce in China, there come all kinds
of product quality problems. For example, although “the 2018 Double Eleven Shopping Festival”
once again broke the record in sales, the major e-commerce websites, such as Taobao, Tmall.com,
and JD.com, all su ered from a large number of complaints regarding the quality after the sales
event. The inability of guarantee product quality and the proliferation of fake goods make consumers
question the trustworthiness of the online shopping platforms and the demand for goods quality has
become a bottleneck issue for the health and sustainability of e-commerce. Under such circumstances,
a comprehensive credit risk evaluation system is highly necessary.
However, the current e-commerce platform’s seller credit is simply evaluated by summing up
or averaging the consumer scores, which easily results in the phenomenon of manual intervention,
such as click farming(a form of click fraud, where a large group of low-paid workers are hired to click
on website elements to boost the status of the website or a product). Moreover, there is a time lag
in consumer scores that do not dynamically respond to the changes in seller credit. We argue that
the current credit risk evaluation method is oversimpliﬁed, neglect the key elements of the seller’s
information that a ect SMEs credibility. The factors, such as operating years, operating margin, etc.,
are not incorporated into current e-commerce platform credit risk evaluation. According to a survey
of prevailing e-commerce platforms, the majority of platforms o er 0–5 scoring methods (such as
Tmall, etc.) and use the weighted average consumer’s evaluation scores as the seller’s credit risk
evaluation index. The method is simple and static, which hinders buyers from making correct decisions
and improving the transaction environment of e-commerce platforms. Hence, a comprehensive and
dynamic credit risk evaluation system is needed to accurately and dynamically evaluate the seller’s
credit risks on an e-commerce platform.
Enabled by technological advances, such as the Internet, big data and artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), the models of preference prediction, intelligent recommendation, pattern recognition and other
technologies have been gradually applied in many ﬁelds, providing consumers with optimized choices
and more convenient and precise service. So far, many e-commerce platforms have applied big data
technology to analyze and predict consumers’ purchasing behaviors and preferences and o er product
recommendations based on analysis results, in the process transitioning from traditional transactions
to intelligent development, and, to a certain extent, enhancing users’ purchasing enthusiasm and
customer experience. However, the technology is much more user-oriented in e-commerce; that is,
intelligent recommendation is based on users’ transaction data without systematic analysis of sellers.
There is neither application of big data or AI technology to accurately and systematically evaluate the
seller’s credit, nor two-way matching between sellers and customers. However, the quality of products
recommended by AI is patchy and is unlikely to improve customer service.
Overall, an e-commerce platform does not apply AI algorithms and big data technology to
dynamically and accurately evaluate the seller’s credit risks. The simple and static credit risk evaluation
models have a bearing on consumers’ judgments to make correct decisions and sacriﬁce transaction
experience. As millions of transactions take place on e-commerce platform everyday, these leave
a trail of data, which is not only big, but also powerful. The data can be integrated into a platform
to promote credibility and transparency for SMEs. However, the data from SMEs operations are
scattered and hard to get, putting them in an unfavorable position in the competition. Moreover, the
buyers lack resources, ability, willingness and economic incentives to build their own credit models,
considering the relatively small transaction sizes. Recent studies have shown that the existing artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) technology, such as artiﬁcial neural network, decision tree, support vector machine,
etc., in the problem of credit risk assessment, shows a better performance than the statistical model
and optimization method. The e-commerce platform can build and operate the credit risk evaluation
system that will make AI tools cost-e ective and accessible for small business to adopt. Once the