Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 7 of 17
platform sellers. Among them, frequently used decision tree algorithms include CHAID, CART, Quest
and C5.0. By comparing several decision tree models, the model with the highest accuracy is selected to
streamline the index system, followed by using simpliﬁed indexes for analysis. The data set selected by
the decision tree is combined with an AI algorithm to form a combined model. Through comparison and
screening of di erent models, the adopted combinatorial algorithms consist of the decision tree—ANN,
decision tree—DBN and decision tree—LR. The speciﬁc process is shown in Figure 1.
Sustainability 2019 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 17 
3. Modeling  
Our paper applies the tool of a decision tree to initially screen the indexes and evaluates the 
credit through the composition algorithms based on the characteristics of AI credit models and e-
commerce platform sellers. Among them, frequently used decision tree algorithms include CHAID, 
CART, Quest and C5.0. By comparing several deci sion tree models, the model with the highest 
accuracy is selected to streamline the index system, followed by usin g simplified indexes for analysis. 
The data set selected by the decision tree is comb ined with an AI algorithm to form a combined 
model. Through comparison and screening of different models, the adopted combinatorial 
algorithms consist of the decision tree—ANN, decision tree—DBN and decision tree—LR. The specific process is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Flow chart of credit risk evaluation hybrid model.  
Meanwhile, after allowing for the characteristics and requirements of intelligent transactions, 
the selection of the optimal credit risk evaluation model takes the following factors into consideration: 
(1) Fitting degree 
The fitting degree of the model is the most in tuitive and effective index for evaluating the 
performance of the model, as well as being the most important factor regarding the choice of credit 
risk evaluation models. Based on the complexity of the machine learning model and the subject information appraisal, a more stereoscopic and diverse judgment method is presented, as follows: 
① Total accuracy rate (TT + FF) / (TT + TF + FF + FT) × 100% 
② Various error rate matrices 
The class A error rate and the cl ass B error rate are included, wherein the class A error is a 
misjudgment of good credit users as bad credit us ers, and the class B error is a misjudgment of bad 
credit users as good credit users:  
Class A error rate = TF / (TT + TF + FF + FT) Class B error rate = FT / (TT + TF + FF + FT) 
Figure 1. Flow chart of credit risk evaluation hybrid model.
Meanwhile, after allowing for the characteristics and requirements of intelligent transactions,
the selection of the optimal credit risk evaluation model takes the following factors into consideration:
(1) Fitting degree
The ﬁtting degree of the model is the most intuitive and e ective index for evaluating the
performance of the model, as well as being the most important factor regarding the choice of credit risk
evaluation models. Based on the complexity of the machine learning model and the subject information
appraisal, a more stereoscopic and diverse judgment method is presented, as follows:
1OTotal accuracy rate (TT +FF)/(TT+TF+FF+FT)100%
2OVarious error rate matrices
The class A error rate and the class B error rate are included, wherein the class A error is
a misjudgment of good credit users as bad credit users, and the class B error is a misjudgment of bad
credit users as good credit users:
Class A error rate =TF/(TT+TF+FF+FT)
Class B error rate =FT/(TT+TF+FF+FT)
3OArea under the curve (AUC) value
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is an important indicator to characterize the
accuracy of the prediction model with the false positive rate (1-speciﬁcity) as abscissa and the true