Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 14 of 17
situations. There are also other issues concerning AI, such as legitimacy of big data behind AI,
‘over-ﬁt’ (over-coupling of machine learning and learning data) problem in the process of artiﬁcial
intelligent system, etc. Therefore, relying too much on AI technology is not appropriate. There is no
denying that in the ﬁeld of credit risk evaluation, artiﬁcial intelligence technology can improve the
credit risk prediction accuracy ratio, and achieve high e ciency and intelligence. However, we should
pay attention to the foundation of credit risk evaluation theory and the rationality and logic of credit
risk evaluation instead of blindly pursuing e ciency and technological innovation.
5. Conclusions
In the mode of C2C or B2C e-commerce, because of the increased degree of information asymmetry
and frequent occurrence of internet fraud, the credit problem has ever been the biggest obstacle in
e-commerce development. Our paper studies the process of credit risk evaluation and how advances in
technology are changing this process. Speciﬁcally, we use data from Taobao to assess several approaches
to evaluate seller credit and aims to explore an improved credit risk evaluation model. A hybrid AI
algorithm was applied to evaluate the seller credit risks of e-commerce platforms. We learn from the
empirical result that a single learning model can be improved when combined with other models.
Three hybrid models, including decision tree—ANN, decision tree—LR and decision tree—DBN,
have been investigated, and comparison among their implementation results have been provided.
It is concluded that the prediction performance of decision tree—ANN model is better than that of
decision tree—LR, decision tree—DBN and single ANN, LR, DBN models in evaluating the credit
risk of sellers on the Taobao platform. The decision tree—ANN model is regarded as an e ective and
powerful tool which allows us to build an advanced and user-friendly system for credit risk evaluation.
The improvement of dynamic seller credit risk evaluation can promote healthy and fast transactions
between buyers and sellers on the platforms, improve consumer satisfaction and create a healthy
e-commerce environment.
This paper provides insights for practitioners. First of all, technology and consumption upgrade is
creating demand for high quality goods and creditworthy sellers. The advanced credit risk evaluation
model can dynamically and accurately assess the credibility of SMEs on the e-commerce platform.
Once SMEs are proved to have a higher credit rating, they can have more capital and development
opportunities. Secondly, the emergence of internet provides great convenience for information exchange
and transmission, however, the virtual nature and openness of the Internet also make e-commerce lack
of trust. Information asymmetry and lack of trust between sellers and buyers are factors that result in
many problems like low quality goods and fake goods. Establishing a reliable credit risk evaluation
system is necessary to reduce information asymmetry and increase trust between sellers and buyers.
With the sharing information of the credit status of SMEs, the buyers, as well as business partners, can
choose more professional and qualiﬁed SMEs. Lastly, credit risk evaluation is the key ingredient for
the healthy development of the e-commerce ecosystem, and a necessary part of building e-commerce
platform competitive advantages. The improved credit risk evaluation model can serve as a reference
for policy makers to enhance the health and sustainability of the entire e-commerce ecosystem.
There are limitations to this paper, as follows. According to the evaluation results, it shows
that there are many factors inﬂuencing the seller’s credit level, including the seller’s service level,
operating level and ﬁnancial status. Therefore, an e-commerce platform should take full account of
the seller’s comprehensive indices when evaluating the seller’s credit risks. A comprehensive and
dynamic evaluation of the seller’s credit risks, and a detailed assessment of the seller’s qualiﬁcations
should be taken in order to reduce credit risk and create a good e-commerce transaction environment.
However, as sellers of e-commerce platforms did not make ﬁnancial information available to the public,
the selected indicators may not be comprehensive and su cient. Moreover, the credit dataset in our
work contains 609 ﬁrms. As the sample is a bit small, we used cross-validation approach on three
models to test for overﬁtting. However, human biases need to be controlled, or else cross validation
will not be fruitful.