Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 13 of 17
enhance the reliability of our study, instead of using a 70 /30 split of the sample for training and testing,
we used cross-validation approach on each model to test for overﬁtting.
We split the sample into 10 subsamples and ran the train /test process 10 times. For example, in
the ﬁrst iteration, the 10th subsample would be the testing fold, while the ﬁrst nine are training folds;
in the second iteration, the 9th subsample would be the testing fold, while the other nine (1st–8th,
and 10th) are training folds;, etc. The average of the 10 results is used as the ﬁnal result. The average
prediction accuracy ratio of decision tree—ANN, decision tree—DBN and decision tree—LR are 0.85,
0.80 and 0.72, respectively. It is concluded that the decision tree—ANN presents the best performance
with the highest prediction accuracy ratio among the three models. The results are consistent with
previous results.
4.3. Discussion
From the experimental results of the three models, we ﬁnd that the combination model of
a decision tree—ANN has the highest accuracy in credit risk evaluation, followed by the decision
tree—LR model. The accuracy of the decision tree—DBN is lowest. Also, it has to be noted that after
the preliminary index screening from the decision tree, we ﬁnally got 12 indicators. The indicators
selected by the decision tree are closely correlated with seller credit, and have certain interpretability
which conforms to the logic of the e-commerce seller credit risk index system and plays a guiding
role in the construction of the seller credit risk index system. Not only ﬁnancial information, but also
soft information was included in the selected indicators, as researchers have shown that ﬁnancial
institutions rely on soft information to evaluate the credibility of small enterprises [ 6–8]. Meanwhile,
through the comparison of the accuracy before and after index screening, we conclude that applying
a decision tree to select indicators can improve the accuracy of a neural network to a certain extent and
signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of logistic regression. The reason for improving the accuracy is that
through the preliminary index screening, weakly correlated indicators have been deleted for logistic
regression and the neural network. Hence, unnecessary calculation redundancy is reduced, which
boosts model learning and reduces the probability of excessive learning, thus, improving the accuracy
of the model. Although the di erence between ‘before’ and ‘after’ for the neural network might seem
small, it has to be noted that small improvement in accuracy may be large enough to have commercial
implication. However, the accuracy of dynamic Bayesian network is lowered after index screening.
As the principle of a dynamic Bayesian network model is to construct the relationship network of
indicators, the streamlining of indicators may breakdown the network architecture, which reduces the
accuracy of the model.
Based on the comparison of total accuracy rate, error rate matrix and AUC value, it can be
concluded that the combination model of a decision tree—ANN has higher credit risk prediction
accuracy rate, lower error rate and higher AUC value. The model can automatically learn from the
seller’s historical data and current data to form a mental model similar to the human brain, and achieve
the results accurately. We conclude by saying that a decision tree—ANN model is an e ective and
powerful tool which allows us to build an advanced and user-friendly system for credit risk evaluation
on the Taobao platform.
While the proposed decision tree—ANN model is a user-friendly model with high credit risk
prediction accuracy ratio, it is not necessary for the optimal model to evaluate credit risks. In our work,
the combination of two models has been investigated, while other more complex models have not
been tried to compare the performance. However, more complex models make it di cult to explain
how and why a decision is made (and more di cult in making decisions in real life). This is one of the
reasons why some artiﬁcial intelligence tools are still not applied in real life where interpretation is
important or really needed.
Furthermore, AI technology is regarded as a ‘black box’. Users sometimes need to know the
“reasons” behind the technology, such as why algorithms can provide recommendations for business
decision making (such as loans), and why certain factors (rather than others) are important in particular