Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 8 of 17
positive rate as ordinate (sensitivity). The closer the image is to the upper left, the higher the accuracy
of the model. In order to more accurately characterize the ROC curve, the AUC value for the ROC
curve is used to describe the accuracy of the model.
(2) Embodying the characteristics of platform transactions
Based on the characteristics of platform transactions, the selected credit risk evaluation model
needs to meet the dynamic, intelligent and security requirements, that is, to be able to process data at
dierent times, automatically identify the change of seller credit according to the change of data set,
and carry out a certain judgement on the sellers’ credit level regarding the learning model.
(3) Explicable indicators
The indicators selected by the decision tree should have certain interpretability, which conforms
to the logic of the e-commerce seller credit risk evaluation index system and plays a guiding role in
the construction of the e-commerce seller credit risk evaluation system. Meanwhile, the excluded
indicators have less inﬂuence on the seller’s credit risk evaluation. In principle, the indicators that
closely correlated with seller credit, such as seller’s sales, review data and other indicators, should not
be excluded.
(4) Rationality
The model needs to conform to the logic of credit risk evaluation process, so that the indicators
that closely correlated with the seller’s credit will be selected, while the ones with less inﬂuential e ect
will be eliminated. Moreover, credit risks should be accurately judged through certain evaluation
methods with intuitive and distinguishable results. Meanwhile, it is necessary to comply with the logic
of the combined algorithms, while the accuracy is improved by combining the models, which shows
that an AI algorithm could be improved and optimized through the combined model.
Based on the above evaluation criteria, we choose the model presenting the best performance after
a few combination methods selected for comparative analysis. Meanwhile, it can be applied to the
complex credit system of e-commerce platform sellers. Through the operation process of the model, the
e-commerce platform and consumers will accurately identify the seller’s credit risks, and the indicators
can provide a reference for the seller to improve service quality.
4. Empirical Analysis
4.1. Data Sets and Experimental Setup
Our paper uses the credit data of Taobao sellers. Taobao is the largest consumer-to-consumer
(C2C) e-commerce platform in China. The credit dataset contains 609 ﬁrms, and the original data
has a mix of 23 numerical and categorical attributes, including platform entry indicators, such as
business license, regional information, consumer security deposit and Alipay personal certiﬁcation,
etc.; operation level indicators, such as the number of goods, main business share, buyer credit
score, number of evaluators, operating years, etc.; commodity quality indicators, such as goods and
description compatibility, after sales rate within 30 days, evaluation rate within 30 days and evaluation
rate within half a year; and service level indicators, such as seller’s service attitude, logistics service
quality, dispute rate within 30 days, etc. The categorical attributes are transformed into numerical
ones, for example, business license and regional information integrity are coded as 0 or 1; while other
numerical attributes, such as buyer credit score and number of evaluators retain the original data value.
The last attribute classiﬁes the sellers as good or bad credit. It consists of 259 sellers with good credit
and 350 sellers with bad credit.
We will apply IBM SPSS Modeler 18.0 to conduct the experiment. The software automatic classiﬁer
model will be used to select the decision tree algorithm. We will include CHAID, C5.0, C&R and Quest
to compare the results of the decision tree algorithms. All algorithms will be evaluated as measured by