Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5521 6 of 17
Our paper selects four AI models, consisting of the decision tree, artiﬁcial neural network,
Bayesian network and logistic regression, after allowing for the characteristics of the seller credit risks
of e-commerce platforms. The comparison of the models is displayed in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of credit risk evaluation models.
Model Decision Tree Artiﬁcial Neural Network Dynamic Bayesian Logistic Regression
Theory Classiﬁcation and regressionError back propagation
algorithmTotal probability
and inverse
probabilityBinary probability
prediction
ApplicationRisk decision with uncertain
probabilityRecommendation system, image
recognition and regression
analysisUncertainty test,
decision risk and
reliability analysisSeparable discriminant
analysis
AdvantagesEasy to understand and
interpret, insensitive to missing
value and complex data,
preprocessing of data is
not required.With self-learning function, it
can learn based on current data
and predict the future, the
operation is fast, and the optimal
solution is quickly obtained.It can well describe
and interpret the
relationship
between data, as
well as variables.High e ciency and
accuracy, easy to interpret,
no pre-processing
required.
DisadvantagesIt is di cult to predict
continuous ﬁelds. The
prediction accuracy would
decrease with too many data
types, so it could not well
analyze characteristics of seller
credit on e-commerce platforms.Black-box operation results in
poor interpretability. When data
are insu cient, they cannot be
manipulated.Data smoothing is
required, and the
accuracy might be
questionable.It cannot solve the
non-linear problem and
has a high dependence
on data.
Current research mostly focuses on the credit rating e ect of a single AI model. However, in the case
of quite a few di erent seller data types and complex credit risks on an e-commerce platforms, a single
credit risk evaluation method might have a low credit risk prediction accuracy ratio. The predictive
performance of a single model can be improved when combined with other models. In our study,
we will build a hybrid AI model that combines decision tree and other models. A decision tree can
decompose data regarding data characteristics, construct a relationship tree structure and remove data
with lower inﬂuencing factors by pruning, which is usually used for the ﬁrst stage of data processing.
In this case, it is also applicable for combining with other algorithms, such as a decision tree—dynamic
Bayesian network combination, etc. Moreover, as the behavior of an e-commerce transaction subject is
complex, and characterization of credit status by a single ﬁnancial or operational indicator is di cult,
it is necessary to collect a variety of comprehensive indicators. However, too many indicators would
interfere with any machine learning algorithms and lead to excessive learning, which would reduce the
accuracy of the evaluation. Therefore, a hybrid model that combines decision tree and other models
will be applicable to seller credit risk evaluation on e-commerce platforms.
Overall, this literature review suggests that a hybrid AI model can be applied to credit risk
prediction of sellers on e-commerce platforms. However, there are few articles in the literature
comparing and analyzing the evaluation e ects of di erent credit risk evaluation models and hybrid
models. Meanwhile, the current research of credit risk evaluation based on AI model mainly focuses
on individuals, such as peer-to-peer (P2P), family loan borrowers, etc. [ 24,45]. Few studies apply
the dynamic credit risk evaluation model for e-commerce sellers. Based on the intelligent analysis,
automatic learning and accurate recommendation, credit risk evaluation of e-commerce sellers needs
to have the function of identifying the dynamic credit risk indicators and automatically updating the
credit risk evaluation status. A hybrid AI model can provide a new perspective for improving credit
risk prediction accuracy ratio of e-commerce sellers, and is advantageous to learn based on current data
with self-learning program. Furthermore, it improves interpretability and overcomes the shortcoming
of current models’ lack of dynamics.
3. Modeling
Our paper applies the tool of a decision tree to initially screen the indexes and evaluates the credit
through the composition algorithms based on the characteristics of AI credit models and e-commerce