split + RBF(·)
Point Cloud Scaled V oxel RBF voxels
(D x W x H)
Subvoxels
(k x k x k, k = 4)
FC32
FC16
FC16
FC8 FC8(0,I)Nε∈
FC16
FC16
FC32FC8
Encoder Decoderlatent layer
l YVA ELatent space representation
(D x W x H x l)
CombineRepresent
Reconstriction
(k x k x k, k = 4)
Figure 1. Radial Basis Function interpolated Variational Auto-
Encoder module. For a given point cloud, we divide it into
equally spaced D×H×Wvoxels, and for each voxel we fur-
ther divide it into k×k×ksubvoxels, where each subvoxel value
is deﬁned by the radial basis function in Equation 3 rather than
Dirac delta function sampled by sinc . The kernel of RBF is set to
φ(|| · ||2
2)according to V AE latent distribution. For a voxel with
k×k×ksubvoxels, we infer the latent space representation using
a pre-trained variational auto-encoder. Finally, the point cloud can
be presented as a D×H×W×lvoxel data, where ldenotes the
dimension of the latent space.
Convolutions deﬁned on groups, equivariance and
transformations. It is known that the power of CNNs
lies in the translation equivariant property, and they ex-
ploit translational symmetries by CNN kernel weight shar-
ing [4]. Recently, Cohen and Wellin [5] introduced equiv-
ariance to the combinations of 90◦-rotations and dihedral
ﬂips in CNNs. They extend the theory to a steerable rep-
resentation which is the composition of elementary fea-
ture types although it requires special treatment for anti-
aliasing [6]. Cohen et al. [4] further introduce the spheri-
cal cross-correlation which satisﬁes the generalized Fourier
transformation although the resulting spherical CNN re-
quires a closed genus-0 manifold as input so that it can be
projected as a spherical signal. Similarly, Weiler et al. [25]
and Worrall et al. [27] design SO(2) steerable networks, al-
though they are limited by discrete groups and are computa-
tionally expensive. All of these methods are either designed
for the 2D image domain or the spherical surface domain,
and none of them work directly for 3D point data.
3. Voxel V AE Net with Group Convolutions
In this section we describe the overall algorithm and
highlight the various stages of the pipeline. First, we illus-
trate the interpolation of multidimensional scattered sam-
ples, and show the intuitive motivation of V AE equipped
with RBF kernel, which enjoys several advantages: sym-
metric and positive deﬁnite for any choice of data loca-
tions. Our formulation computes a better representation
with an encoder-decoder scheme, instead of using the stan-
nx3
n x 64
n x r
shared 
mlp
nxm
F
FFFFFF
Group ConvolutionF
Stacked Feature Map
Serialized Feature
Conv3D
1x1x1x16
Conv3D
3x3x3x8
Conv3D
3x3x3x8
Conv3D
3x3x3x4
Conv3D
3x3x3x2
MaxPool3D
2x2x2pointnet  per 
point featuregroup convoluton 
serialized featureoutput scores
Latent space representation
(D x W x H x l)
Figure 2. Segmentation Network Architecture. We highlight the
various components of our approach. The input of the network is
a point cloud containing npoints and the latent space representa-
tion is illustrated in Figure 1. The output is the per-class score of
each point in the point cloud (for mclasses). We use the group
convolutional module to detect the co-occurrence in the feature
space (see Equation 5). We highlight the group p4mfor functions
g(mx,my,mz,rx,ry,rz,tx,ty,tz)in Equation 5 in the bottom
left ﬁgure (where m∗,r∗andt∗refer to mirroring, rotation and
translation). A p4mfunction has 128 planar patches in our for-
mulation, where each is associated with a rotation rx,ry,rzand
mirroring mx,my,mz. In this ﬁgure, we only illustrate 8planar
patches. Each patch follows the arrow and undergoes a 90◦rota-
tion. The patches on the outer square are mirror reﬂection of the
patches on the inner square, and vice-versa.
dard{0, 1}voxels (occupancy). Empirically, the distribu-
tion of{0,1}voxels is discrete and insufﬁcient to fully cap-
ture point distributions. Moreover, its discontinuous nature
makes it difﬁcult to be learned by a deep neural network.
Second, we describe our mathematical framework based on
group convolutions deﬁned on Z3and their isomorphic sets
to detect the co-occurrence of features in the latent space.
This increases the expressive capacity of the CNN without
increasing the number of parameters and the number of lay-
ers. Third, we concatenate the n×64per-point features
extracted by the mlp function [3] with the serialized fea-
tures extracted by our network, where nis the number of
points, and 64is the dimension of features extracted using
PointNet. Finally, after mlp layers, we output the score map
which indicates the probability of a point belonging to the
mclasses as in the upper right of Figure 2, where mis the
number of classes in the segmentation task (e.g. 40in the
ShapeNet part segmentation task and 13in the S3DIS se-
mantic segmentation task).
3.1. Symbols and Notation
IfGis a group acting on set X, andf,g:X→Care
actions on group G, then the convolution is deﬁned as:
(f∗g)(u) =/integraldisplay
Gf(uv−1)g(v)dµ(v) (1)
whereµis Haar-measure. In this paper, we have X=Z3,
andGis the group of integer transformation, which is iso-
morphic to Z3. Note that this is a special case, and Gand
8502