space, namely the latent space of our pre-trained RBF-V AE
network of voxels, and thereby improve the learning capa-
bility of our approach.
Overall, we present VV-Net, a novel V oxel V AE net-
work with group convolutions, and apply this to point cloud
segmentation. Our approach is useful for segmenting ob-
jects into parts and 3D scenes into individual semantic ob-
jects. We have evaluated and compared its performance on
standard point-cloud datasets including ShapeNet [29] and
S3DIS [1]. In practice, our method outperforms the state-
of-the-art methods on these datasets by 2.7%and16.12% in
terms of mean IoU (intersection over union), respectively.
Even when some of the ground truth data from the point
cloud is labeled incorrectly, our approach is also able to
compute a meaningful segmentation, as shown in Figure 4.
The novel contributions of our work include:
•We develop a novel information-rich voxel-based rep-
resentation for point cloud data. Point distribution
within each voxel is captured using a variational auto-
encoder taking RBF at the subvoxel level as input. This
provides both the beneﬁts of regular structure and cap-
turing the detailed distribution for learning algorithms.
•We introduce group convolutions deﬁned on the 3-
dimensional data, which encode the symmetry and in-
crease the expressive capacity of the network without
increasing the number of parameters.
2. Related Work
There have been growing interests in 3D data processing
algorithms. In this section, we give a brief overview of prior
work on point cloud processing and semantic segmentation.
Deep learning on 3D data. The point cloud is a very gen-
eral representation for 3D data. A lot of pioneering research
works with deep learning technologies are proposed. Point-
Net [3] applies multi-layer perceptrons to each point in the
input point cloud and symmetric operations to eliminate the
permutation problem. Furthermore, PointNet is robust to
rotations on the input point cloud by explicitly adding a
transform net to align the input point cloud. In the 3D object
classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation tasks, PointNet is
regarded as a state-of-the-art approach. Yi et al. [28] clus-
ter 3D shapes by their labels in the dataset and then train
a model for hierarchical segmentation. Wang et al. [23]
present a similarity matrix that measures the similarity be-
tween each pair of points in the embedded space to produce
the semantic segmentation map. To capture information at
different scales, a commonly used approach is to capture
the hierarchical information by recursive sampling or recur-
sively applying neural network structures [17]. In particu-
lar, the work [9] applies recurrent neural networks to com-
bine slice pooling layers, and the work [20] uses sparse bi-lateral convolutional layers as building blocks. Some meth-
ods work on 3D meshes, and strive to extract information
from graph structures generated from a mesh representa-
tion. Yu et al. [30] use a spectral CNN method that en-
ables weight sharing by parameterizing kernels in the spec-
tral domain spanned by graph Laplacian eigenbases. Verma
et al. [22] use graph convolutions proposed in [2] to de-
sign a graph-convolution operator, which aims to establish
correspondences between ﬁlter weights and graph neigh-
borhoods with arbitrary connectivity. Deep learning based
on variational autoencoders is also employed in [21, 8] for
mesh generation.
Point cloud processing using neighborhood mining. To
address lack of connectivity, some methods use K-nearest
neighbors in the Euclidean space and exploit information
within local regions [24, 14, 13, 19]. In particular, Li
et al. [13] model the spatial distribution of point clouds
by building a self-organizing map and applying Point-
Net [3] to multiple smaller point clouds. Moreover, the
works [24, 12, 13, 14] use graph structures and graph Lapla-
cian to capture the local information in the selected neigh-
borhoods and leverage the spatial information [14]. Remil
et al. [18] utilize the shape priors which are deﬁned as point-
set neighborhoods sampled from shape surfaces. However,
there are many issues that make it challenging to mine the
neighborhood information: First, topology information is
not easy to capture with LiDAR scans, which makes it more
challenging to estimate vertex normals. Second, encod-
ing K-nearest neighborhoods in the Euclidean space may
in some cases simultaneously encode two points that do not
belong to the same object (especially for the circumstance
that two objects are close to each other). In our work, we
do not explicitly encode the K-nearest neighborhoods in our
architecture. Instead, we aim to encode the symmetry infor-
mation rather than encoding the neighborhood information.
Point cloud processing using voxels. Some works use
voxels for processing point data (e.g. [23, 31, 15, 16]).
These methods apply neural networks on voxelized data,
and cannot be applied to raw point clouds directly due to
their irregular and unordered data format. However, the res-
olution is limited by data sparsity and computational costs.
For the purpose of 3D detection, Zhou and Tuzel [31] sam-
ple a LiDAR point cloud to reduce the computation over-
head and irregularity of point distribution using farthest
point sampling. In order to further reduce the imbalance
of points between voxels, their method only takes into con-
sideration densely populated voxels. It applies the point-
wise feature learning function mlp on each point and ag-
gregates the features by a symmetric function. In contrast,
our method does not perform sampling to eliminate the un-
balanced distribution. Instead we use regular voxels along
with RBF to improve the learning capabilities.
8501