whereLis the number of labels, gis the probability of
ground truth label and pis the probability of each label. The
evaluation metric is mIoU (mean IoU) on points, following
the formula in [3]: if the union of groundtruth and predic-
tion points is empty, then we count the corresponding label
IoU as 1, since we have 50parts and 16shape categories,
we compute the category IoU as the average instance IoU
on the category.
In our experiment, (D,H,W) = (16,16,16),k= 4 ,
σ= min(vW,vH,vD)andl= 8, where we capture the
4×4×4subvoxels with 8latent variables inferred from
the variational auto-encoder. We highlight the performance
of various combinations of different modules. The results
corresponding to group-conv + RBF-VAE highlights VV-
Net’s performance based on combining RBF kernel with
V AE scheme and the group convolutional neural network
module. This version of our algorithm outperforms state-of-
the-art RSN [9] by 2.5%(mIoU) and it is better than RSN
in12out of16categories.
In order to demonstrate the beneﬁts of individual compo-
nents, we perform an ablation study. For fair comparison,
the same 64×64×64resolution of subvoxels (for V AE-
based) or voxels (for non-V AE based) is used. The imple-
mentation of group-conv+RBF-VAE (our method) outper-
forms only using RBF-VAE by1.3%(mIoU) and is better
in11out of16categories. Our method also outperforms
only using group-conv by1.4%(mIoU) and is better in 13
out of16categories. We also compare RBF-V AE with V AE
on the{0, 1}occupancy grid. Since the point data is sparse,
training on the {0, 1}V AE does not converge. This shows
the necessity and beneﬁts of RBF-V AE.
4.2. Semantic segmentation of scenes
We also evaluate the performance on Stanford 3D se-
mantic parsing dataset [1], which consists of 6types of
benchmarks. Each point in the data scan is annotated
with one of the semantic labels from 13categories. In
our experiment, (D,H,W) = (16,16,32),k= 4,σ=
5·min(vW,vH,vD)andl= 8. Table 3 highlights the
results (category IoU, overall accuracy and mean IoU) of
semantic segmentation on the S3DIS dataset. Furthermore,
Table 4 indicates the results of AP (average precision) met-
ric with IoU threshold 0.5. Our implementation of group-
conv + RBF-VAE outperforms state-of-the-art SPG [12] by
16.12% ofMean IoU metric. Our method ( group-conv
+ RBF-VAE ) also achieves better performance than either
only using group-conv or only using RBF-VAE , as reported
in the bottom rows of Tables 3 and 4. Table 5 compares our
method with methods reporting mean IoU and also shows
the superior performance of our method.Mean IoU
PointCNN [14] 62.74
PointSIFT [10] 70.23
Ours 78.22
Table 5. Results on Semantic Segmentation in S3DIS Dataset.
We compare the results with [14] and [10] using the mean IoU
metric.
Figure 3. Part Segmentation Results on ShapeNet. Note that
CarandMotor have lower performance than most other categories
in Table 2. This is partly because there are more parts in these
categories: 4labels for Carand5labels for Motor .
Cap Car Chair Rocket
A
B
Figure 4. Failure Cases of Our Algorithm on ShapeNet Part
Segmentation. The top row shows the ground truth and the bot-
tom row is our segmentation results. Our network predicts the Cap
to be a Table , where dark blue indicates the table top and the light
blue indicates the table legs. In the second column, the dark blue
indicates the top of the car. In the third column, our network seg-
ments the chair armrest while the ground truth does not. In the last
column, our network predicts the Rocket to be an Airplane . No-
tice that in the last column, even a person would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
distinguish the Rocket from the Airplane .
4.3. Robustness test
We have also evaluated the performance and robustness
of our method by removing some of the points in the orig-
inal data. In particular, we sample the ShapeNet by far-
8506