VV-NET: Voxel V AE Net with Group Convolutions for Point Cloud Segmentation
Hsien-Yu Meng1,4, Lin Gao2∗, Yu-Kun Lai3, Dinesh Manocha1
1University of Maryland, College Park
2Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University
4Tsinghua University
mengxy19@umd.edu, gaolin@ict.ac.cn, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk, dm@cs.umd.edu
Abstract
We present a novel algorithm for point cloud segmenta-
tion. Our approach transforms unstructured point clouds
into regular voxel grids, and further uses a kernel-based
interpolated variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture to
encode the local geometry within each voxel. Traditionally,
the voxel representation only comprises Boolean occupancy
information which fails to capture the sparsely distributed
points within voxels in a compact manner. In order to han-
dle sparse distributions of points, we further employ radial
basis functions (RBF) to compute a local, continuous rep-
resentation within each voxel. Our approach results in a
good volumetric representation that effectively tackles noisy
point cloud datasets and is more robust for learning. More-
over, we further introduce group equivariant CNN to 3D,
by deﬁning the convolution operator on a symmetry group
acting on Z3and its isomorphic sets. This improves the
expressive capacity without increasing parameters, lead-
ing to more robust segmentation results. We highlight the
performance on standard benchmarks and show that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art segmentation algo-
rithms on the ShapeNet and S3DIS datasets.
1. Introduction
3D data processing including classiﬁcation and segmenta-
tion ﬂourishes these days as 3D data can be easily captured
using 3D scanners or depth cameras. It is eminent to deal
with irregular and unordered data formats such as the point
cloud. The processing pipeline must also be robust towards
rotation, scaling, translation and permutation on input data
as mentioned in [3]. However, previous work fails to cap-
ture the internal symmetry within point clouds. We address
these issues in this paper by proposing a novel represen-
∗Corresponding Authortation that considers both spatial distribution of points and
group symmetry in a uniﬁed framework.
In this paper, we address the problem of developing
more effective learning methods using regular data struc-
tures such as voxel-based representations, to retain and ex-
ploit spatial distributions. Typically, each voxel only con-
tains the Boolean occupancy status (i.e. occupied or unoc-
cupied), rather than other detailed point distributions and
therefore can only capture limited details. We address this
problem by investigating alternative representations, which
can effectively encode the distribution of points in a voxel.
Main Results: We present a novel learning method for
point cloud segmentation. The key idea is to effectively en-
code point distributions within each voxel. Directly treating
the point distribution as a 0-1 signal is highly non-smooth,
and cannot be compactly represented as per Mairhuber-
Curtis theorem [26]. We instead transform an unstructured
point cloud to a voxel grid. Moreover, each voxel is fur-
ther subdivided into subvoxels that interpolate sparse point
samples within the voxel by smooth Radial Basis Functions,
which are symmetric around point samples as centers and
positive deﬁnite. This smooth signal can then be effectively
compacted, and to achieve this we train a variational auto-
encoder (V AE) [11] to map the point distribution within
each voxel to a compact latent space. Our combination of
RBF and V AE provides an effective approach to represent-
ing point distributions within voxels for deep learning.
A key issue with 3D representations is to ensure that the
result of point cloud segmentation does not change due to
any rotations, scaling or translation with respect to an ex-
ternal coordinate system. In order to capture the intrinsic
symmetry of a point cloud, we use group equivariant con-
volutions [5] and combine the per point feature extracted by
anmlp function similar to [3]. These group convolutions
were originally proposed for 2D images and we generalize
them onZ3and its isomorphic sets for 3D point cloud pro-
cessing. They help detect the co-occurrence in the feature
8500