Figure 2: Average ROUGE-L improvement on CNN/Daily mail test
set samples with different golden summary length.
to extractive baseline: Lead-3 [Seeet al. , 2017 ], the advan-
tage of our model will fall when golden summary length is
greater than 80. This probably because that we truncate the
long documents and golden summaries and cannot get full in-
formation, it could also because that the training data in these
intervals is too few to train an abstractive model, so simple
extractive method will not fall too far behind.
Model R-1 R-2
First sentences 28.6 17.3
Firstkwords 35.7 21.6
Full[Durrett et al. , 2016 ] 42.2 24.9
ML+RL+intra-attn [Paulus et al. , 2018 ]42.94 26.02
Two-Stage + RL (Ours) 45.33 26.53
Table 2: Limited length ROUGE recall results on the NYT50 test
set.
4.3 Additional Results on NYT50
Table 2 reports experiment results on the NYT50 corpus.
Since the short summary samples are ﬁltered, NYT50 has av-
erage longer summaries than CNN/Daily Mail. So the model
needs to catch long-term dependency of the sequences to gen-
erate good summaries.
The ﬁrst two lines of Table 2 show results of the two
baselines introduced by [Durrett et al. , 2016 ]: these base-
lines select ﬁrst n sentences, or select the ﬁrst k words from
the original document. Also we compare performance of
our model with two recent models, we see 2.39 ROUGE-1
improvements compared to the ML+RL with intra-attn ap-
proach(previous SOTA) carries over to this dataset, which is
a large margin. On ROUGE-2, our model also get an im-
provement of 0.51. The experiment proves that our approach
can outperform competitive methods on different data distri-
butions.5 Related work
5.1 Text Summarization
Text summarization models are usually classiﬁed to ab-
stractive and extractive ones. Recently, extractive models
like DeepChannel [Shiet al. , 2018 ], rnn-ext+RL [Chen and
Bansal, 2018 ]and NeuSUM [Zhou et al. , 2018 ]achieve
higher performances using well-designed structures. For ex-
ample, DeepChannel propose a salience estimation network
and iteratively extract salient sentences. [Zhang et al. , 2018 ]
train a sentence compression model to teach another latent
variable extractive model.
Also, several recent works focus on improving abstractive
methods. [Gehrmann et al. , 2018 ]design a content selector to
over-determine phrases in a source document that should be
part of the summary. [Hsu et al. , 2018 ]introduce inconsis-
tency loss to force words in less attended sentences(which de-
termined by extractive model) to have lower generation prob-
abilities. [Liet al. , 2018 ]extend seq2seq model with an
information selection network to generate more informative
summaries.
5.2 Pre-trained language models
Pre-trained word vectors [Mikolov et al. , 2013; Pennington et
al., 2014; Bojanowski et al. , 2017 ]have been widely used in
many NLP tasks. More recently, pre-trained language models
(ELMo, GPT and BERT), have also achieved great success on
several NLP problems such as textual entailment, semantic
similarity, reading comprehension, and question answering
[Peters et al. , 2018; Radford et al. , 2018; Devlin et al. , 2018 ].
Some recent works also focus on leveraging pre-trained
language models in summarization. [Radford et al. , 2017 ]
pretrain a language model and use it as the sentiment anal-
yser when generating reviews of goods. [Kry´sci´nski et al. ,
2018 ]train a language model on golden summaries, and then
use it on the decoder side to incorporate prior knowledge.
In this work, we use BERT(which is a pre-trained language
model using large scale unlabeled data) on the encoder and
decoder of a seq2seq model, and by designing a two stage de-
coding structure we build a competitive model for abstractive
text summarization.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose a two-stage model based on
sequence-to-sequence paradigm. Our model utilize BERT on
both encoder and decoder sides, and introduce reinforce ob-
jective in learning process. We evaluate our model on two
benchmark datasets CNN/Daily Mail and New York Times,
the experimental results show that compared to previous sys-
tems our approach effectively improves performance.
Although our experiments are conducted on summariza-
tion task, our model can be used in most natural language
generation tasks, such as machine translation, question gener-
ation and paraphrasing. The reﬁne decoder and mixed objec-
tive can also be applied on other sequence generation tasks,
and we will investigate on them in future work.