Pretraining-Based Natural Language Generation for Text Summarization
Haoyu Zhang1,Jianjun Xu1,Ji Wang1
1College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
fzhanghaoyu10, jjxu, wj g@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel pretraining-based
encoder-decoder framework, which can generate
the output sequence based on the input sequence
in a two-stage manner. For the encoder of our
model, we encode the input sequence into con-
text representations using BERT. For the decoder,
there are two stages in our model, in the ﬁrst stage,
we use a Transformer-based decoder to generate
a draft output sequence. In the second stage, we
mask each word of the draft sequence and feed it to
BERT, then by combining the input sequence and
the draft representation generated by BERT, we use
a Transformer-based decoder to predict the reﬁned
word for each masked position. To the best of our
knowledge, our approach is the ﬁrst method which
applies the BERT into text generation tasks. As the
ﬁrst step in this direction, we evaluate our proposed
method on the text summarization task. Experi-
mental results show that our model achieves new
state-of-the-art on both CNN/Daily Mail and New
York Times datasets.
1 Introduction
Text summarization generates summaries from input docu-
ments while keeping salient information. It is an important
task and can be applied to several real-world applications.
Many methods have been proposed to solve the text sum-
marization problem [Seeet al. , 2017; Nallapati et al. , 2017;
Zhou et al. , 2018; Gehrmann et al. , 2018 ]. There are two
main text summarization techniques: extractive and abstrac-
tive. Extractive summarization generates summary by select-
ing salient sentences or phrases from the source text, while
abstractive methods paraphrase and restructure sentences to
compose the summary. We focus on abstractive summariza-
tion in this work as it is more ﬂexible and thus can generate
more diverse summaries.
Recently, many abstractive approaches are introduced
based on neural sequence-to-sequence framework [Paulus et
al., 2018; See et al. , 2017; Gehrmann et al. , 2018; Li et al. ,
2018 ]. Based on the sequence-to-sequence model with copy
Contact Author.mechanism, [Seeet al. , 2017 ]incorporates a coverage vector
to track and control attention scores on source text. [Paulus et
al., 2018 ]introduce intra-temporal attention processes in the
encoder and decoder to address the repetition and incoherent
problem.
There are two issues in previous abstractive methods: 1)
these methods use left-context-only decoder, thus do not have
complete context when predicting each word. 2) they do not
utilize the pre-trained contextualized language models on the
decoder side, so it is more difﬁcult for the decoder to learn
summary representations, context interactions and language
modeling together.
Recently, BERT has been successfully used in various nat-
ural language processing tasks, such as textual entailment,
name entity recognition and machine reading comprehen-
sions. In this paper, we present a novel natural language
generation model based on pre-trained language models (we
use BERT in this work). As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst
work to extend BERT to the sequence generation task. To ad-
dress the above issues of previous abstractive methods, in our
model, we design a two-stage decoding process to make good
use of BERT’s context modeling ability. On the ﬁrst stage, we
generate the summary using a left-context-only-decoder. On
the second stage, we mask each word of the summary and
predict the reﬁned word one-by-one using a reﬁne decoder.
To further improve the naturalness of the generated sequence,
we cooperate reinforcement objective with the reﬁne decoder.
The main contributions of this work are:
1. We propose a natural language generation model based
on BERT, making good use of the pre-trained language model
in the encoder and decoder process, and the model can be
trained end-to-end without handcrafted features.
2. We design a two-stage decoder process. In this archi-
tecture, our model can generate each word of the summary
considering both sides’ context information.
3. We conduct experiments on the benchmark datasets
CNN/Daily Mail and New York Times. Our model achieves
a 33.33 average of ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L on
the CNN/Daily Mail, which is state-of-the-art. On the New
York Times dataset, our model achieves about 5.6% relative
improvement over ROUGE-1.arXiv:1902.09243v2  [cs.CL]  12 Apr 2019