Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 2 of 18
highly correlated between equipment and processes. Therefore, the analysis must go beyond a single
stage in the equipment or process, and be comprehensive.
Equipment maintenance methods are divided into the following three types: (1) repair
maintenance [ 6]; (2) preventive maintenance [ 7]; (3) predictive maintenance [ 8]. Corrective maintenance
is a method of maintenance that is performed after some or all of the equipment fails. The most
common equipment maintenance application is preventive maintenance, also known as scheduled
maintenance, which carries out machine inspections, component replacement and other maintenance at
prescribed times. Predictive maintenance is an equipment maintenance method based on the condition
of the machine. It predicts the time when the machine may be damaged according to the development
trend of the past.
Predictive Maintenance (PdM) has been used to monitor the historical health status of equipment
and make timely adjustments to the equipment, which is quite di erent from the methods of routine
maintenance employed in the past. PdM not only saves unnecessary costs, but also allow early repairs
when the equipment is about to break down. It can avoid unpredictable machine stoppages caused
by unexpected breakdown and improper operation. Remaining Useful Life (RUL) is an important
indicator in PdM. The deﬁnition of device or system RUL is the period from the current state to the time
when the device begins to operate abnormally [ 9]. There are two types of RUL prediction: model-based
and data-driven [ 10]. The model-based method establishes the model based on the historical trend
of equipment. Generally, model-based methods perform better than data driven methods when
there is little historical data. Data-driven methods use the health status data and data collected by
sensors. For modeling, the collected data must be closely related to the device status. The advantage
of data-driven methods is that the algorithm is based on learning the correlation between input and
output data. If there are su cient data, the stability and accuracy of data-driven methods are better
than model-based methods
RUL prediction can be described as a time series forecasting problem. The main purpose of time
series forecasting is to build models from historical records and predict future situations. Time series
forecasting can be divided into statistical models, machine learning models and deep learning models.
Common statistical models include Autoregression (AR), Moving Average (MA), Autoregressive
Moving Average (ARMA), and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA). Machine learning
builds a function or model to detect patterns in training samples and then uses these patterns for
prediction [ 11]. Support Machine Vector (SVM) [ 12], Random Forest (RF) [ 13], Extreme Gradient
Boosting (XGB) [ 14] are representative machine learning algorithms for time series forecasting, but it
is dicult to design an e ective machine learning algorithm without substantial knowledge of the
data [ 15]. In addition, the existing methods for analyzing time series data need pre-processing based
on experience, which causes some losses of information. With improved process technology and more
sensors, few existing methods can handle multi-sensor data, which is likely to cause misjudgment or
missed detection.
Deep learning methods are preferred to predict and analyze time series data without predeﬁned
features. Deep learning is a branch of machine learning based on artiﬁcial neural networks with
representation learning [ 16–18], which can learn the key information to make a response by using many
hidden layers integrated in the network. The main di erence between deep learning and machine
learning is feature extraction. Usually, the features of machine learning are manually selected in
advance; deep learning not only identiﬁes features through model training, but is also much better
than other algorithms at calculating results. Makridakis et al. [ 19] compare several time series analysis
methods on the M3-Competition dataset. Most of the machine learning and deep learning algorithms
perform better than traditional statistic methods. Alfred et al. [ 20] demonstrated that algorithms based
on neural networks are more e cient in learning time series data than other algorithms.
Feature extraction is an important data pre-processing method in machine learning for high
prediction accuracy. In the past, the dimension reduction of most data features was accomplished
through Principal Component Analysis (PCA). PCA retains the maximum variation of features by