Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 11 of 18
4.2. Hyperparameters Setting
Based on the experience of adjusting the model, the hyperparameters in the neural network will
signiﬁcantly a ect the results of the model. This section ﬁnds the best parameter combination to apply
in the model to predict the RUL value.
In experiments on neural networks, the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons are
often the most di cult to choose. The training results will also depend on the quality of batch size
and epoch. Batch size means the number of samples to work through in one iteration. Epoch is the
number of times that the model goes through batches to go through the entire training dataset once.
For example, if a training dataset has 3000 records and batch size is set to 500, it takes 6 iterations to
complete an epoch.
4.2.1. Activation Function
The main function of the activation function in the neural network is to introduce nonlinear
characteristics. If there is no activation function in the neural network, the input and output will only
correlate with a simple linear relationship and not able to handle complex issues, so the activation
function is very important in deep learning.
This experiment sets the following parameters to observe the training result of the GRU model
with di erent activation functions:
1. Epochs: 100;
2. Optimizers: Adam;
3. Batch_size: 128;
4. Hidden layer, number of neurons: 1, 50;
5. Inputs: 24.
This experiment uses a 5-fold cross-validation to compare total seven activation functions and
calculate the average loss of each activation function: softmax (3055.5), softplus (517.0), softsign (438.9),
relu (434.8), tanh (445.3), sigmoid (990.7), hard sigmoid (1051.9). According to the training results,
we ﬁnd that the softmax performance is relatively poor, and the relu activation function performs
best (Figure 8). The softmax activation function is a blend of multiple sigmoid, which is relatively
suited to multiclass classiﬁcation problems rather than a regression problem. The advantage of the
Relu activation function is that neuron deactivation will only happen when the output of linear
transformation is zero. The neurons will not be activated at the same time, but a certain number of
neurons will be activated at a time. The objective function of Relu can be express as [41]:
f(x)=max (0,x) (19)
In addition, since the relu activation function does not need to perform exponential calculations,
the convergence speed is fast and the calculation complexity levels are low. So, this study adopted relu
as the activation function.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 4.2. Hyperparameters Setting 
Based on the experience of adjusting the model, the hyperparameters in the neural network will 
significantly affect the results of the model. This section finds the best parameter combination to 
apply in the model to predict the RUL value. 
In experiments on neural networks, the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons are 
often the most difficult to choose. The training resu lts will also depend on the quality of batch size 
and epoch. Batch size means the number of samples to work through in one iteration. Epoch is the 
number of times that the model goes through batche s to go through the entire training dataset once. 
For example, if a training dataset ha s 3000 records and batch size is set to 500, it takes 6 iterations to 
complete an epoch. 
4.2.1. Activation Function 
The main function of the activation function in  the neural network is to introduce nonlinear 
characteristics. If there is no activation function in  the neural network, the in put and output will only 
correlate with a simple linear relationship and not able to handle complex issues, so the activation 
function is very important in deep learning. 
This experiment sets the following parameters to  observe the training result of the GRU model 
with different activation functions: 
1. Epochs: 100; 
2. Optimizers: Adam; 
3. Batch_size: 128; 
4. Hidden layer, number of neurons: 1, 50; 
5. Inputs: 24. 
This experiment uses a 5-fold cross-validation to compare total seven activation functions and 
calculate the average loss of each activation function: softmax (3055.5), softplus (517.0), softsign 
(438.9), relu (434.8), tanh (445.3), sigmoid (990.7), hard sigmoid (1051.9). According to the training results, we find that the softmax performance is relatively poor, and the relu activation function 
performs best (Figure 8). The softmax activation function is a blend of multiple sigmoid, which is relatively suited to multiclass classification pr oblems rather than a regression problem. The 
advantage of the Relu activation function is that neuron deactivation will only happen when the 
output of linear transformation is zero. The neur ons will not be activated at the same time, but a 
certain number of neurons will be activated at a ti me. The objective function of Relu can be express 
as [41]: 
𝑓ሺ𝑥ሻ=m a x  ሺ 0 , 𝑥 ሻ  (19) 
In addition, since the relu activa tion function does not need to perform exponential calculations, 
the convergence speed is fast and the calculation co mplexity levels are low. So, this study adopted 
relu as the activation function. 
 
Figure 8.  Comparison of training result in different activation function 
Figure 8. Comparison of training result in di erent activation function