Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 6 of 18
applied a wavelet transform algorithm to remove noise from the original data. Stage two stacks AEs
to reduces the data dimensions and picks out features automatically. Stage three applies an LSTM
model to make predictions. Zhang et al. [ 36] divided Sea Surface Temperature (SST) into two part to
make the prediction. The ﬁrst part is short-term forecasting, which predicts the SST after 1 and 3 day.
The second part is long-term forecasting, which predicts the weekly average and monthly average of
SST. It ﬁnds the relationship between sequences through LSTM, and then make the prediction through
the fully connected layer. How et al. [ 37] uses the angle changes on di erent motion sensors of the
NAO robot to classify the current actions of the robot through an LSTM model. Truong et al. [ 38]
construct an LSTM model to identify changes in human type and object type, and even predict
possible human actions through the action combinations. Kuan et al. [ 39] constructed an MS-GRU
(multilayered self-normalizing gated recurrent units) model. It has good results in predicting power
loading. Zhang and Kabuka [ 40] used the GRU model to predict the tra c volume. The training data
included the historical weather data 100 h previously to predict the tra c volume in the next 12 h.
It was found that weather conditions can improve the prediction accuracy.
3. Research Framework
This study constructs an AE-GRU model for RUL prediction to increase equipment life, reduce
unexpected harm caused by sudden shutdown of machinery, and improve the reliability of system
operation. The proposed AE-GRU includes the steps of data pre-processing, feature extraction, and RUL
prediction as shown in Figure 3. The data pre-processing step ﬁrst deﬁnes the engine life to predict
the exact RUL of the engine, and then standardizes the data to avoid errors caused by di erent scales
of the data. It then uses the deep learning autoencoder model to extract the features of the original
data. GRU is specialized in processing time series related data, and considers the changes of historical
characteristics. The data is converted from 2D to 3D; the new dimension is the time data. The last
step of data processing is to change the value range of the RUL. Because the original data is linearly
decreasing, the results in model training and prediction are not optimal. Finally, the RUL expectancy is
predicted through the GRU model and a fully-connected layer neural network.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 model to make predictions. Zhang et al. [36] divide d Sea Surface Temperature (SST) into two part to 
make the prediction. The first part is short-term fo recasting, which predicts the SST after 1 and 3 day. 
The second part is long-term forecasting, which predicts the weekly average and monthly average of 
SST. It finds the relationship between sequence s through LSTM, and then make the prediction 
through the fully connected layer. How et al. [37] uses the angle changes on different motion sensors 
of the NAO robot to classify the current actions of  the robot through an LSTM model. Truong et al. 
[38] construct an LSTM model to identify changes in human type and object type, and even predict 
possible human actions through the action combinations. Kuan et al. [39] constructed an MS-GRU (multilayered self-normalizing gated recurrent units) model. It has good results in predicting power 
loading. Zhang and Kabuka [40] used the GRU model to predict the traffic volume. The training data 
included the historical weather data 100 h previously to predict the traffic volume in the next 12 h. It 
was found that weather conditions can improve the prediction accuracy. 
3. Research Framework 
This study constructs an AE-GRU model for RUL prediction to increase equipment life, reduce 
unexpected harm caused by sudden shutdown of ma chinery, and improve the reliability of system 
operation. The proposed AE-GRU includes the steps of data pre-processing, feature extraction, and 
RUL prediction as shown in Figure 3. The data pre- processing step first defines the engine life to 
predict the exact RUL of the engine, and then standard izes the data to avoid errors caused by different 
scales of the data. It then uses the deep learning  autoencoder model to extract the features of the 
original data. GRU is specialized in processing time  series related data, and considers the changes of 
historical characteristics. The data is converted fr om 2D to 3D; the new dimension is the time data. 
The last step of data processing is to change the value range of the RUL. Because the original data is 
linearly decreasing, the results in model training and prediction are not optimal. Finally, the RUL 
expectancy is predicted through the GRU model  and a fully-connected layer neural network. 
 
Figure 3. Research framework of Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU).  
The symbols used in this research are defined as follows: 
𝑁: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠  
𝑆: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑠  
𝑛: 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎  
𝑌: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑢𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑠  
Figure 3. Research framework of Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU).
The symbols used in this research are deﬁned as follows: