Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 3 of 18
projecting variables into another space to represent the original complete data with fewer features, to
achieve the e ect of data dimension reduction. The di erence between PCA and Autoencoder (AE)
is that AE is a non-linear dimension reduction method [ 21], and an unsupervised training method.
First, the model compresses the original data through the encoder structure, and then restore the
compressed data through the decoder. The AE rebuilds the original data with fewer features for data
representation [ 22]. It can compress the key information of high dimensional input data into low
dimensional features. AE is often used for feature extraction and dimensional reduction in time series
forecasting problems [ 23]. Moreover, machine learning methods required manual selection of features.
The quality of the features a ected the models’ results. Deep learning has the ability to automatically
extract features. It can reduce the time spent on feature engineering and help experts to make decisions.
Most of the relevant studies on RUL prediction use deep learning as a prediction model, which not
only can save time in selecting features, but also makes prediction results much better than traditional
machine learning models.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are a deep learning model that deals speciﬁcally with time
series data and can select important features from equipment sensors. Long Short-Term Memory
networks (LSTM) is a variant of RNN [ 24]. For example, Zhang et al. [ 25] constructed an LSTM model
to predict the RUL of lithium batteries, predicting after how many cycles of fully charge and discharge
the capacity will be lower than the normal threshold, based on the historical decline rate of capacity.
Heimes [ 9] set the maximum remaining engine life at 130 on the PHM08 data set, and predicted the
RUL using an RNN model. Zhang et al. [ 25] also constructed an LSTM model to predict the RUL
of the jet engine. One hundred jet engines were used as training data and 100 were used as testing
data. Each jet engine has 24 features that record the sensor value from normal to fault, and the RUL
are predicted by the change in these values. Mathew et al. [ 26] predict the RUL of jet engines, using
24 parameters of the original data and comparing ten machine learning methods (Linear Regression,
Decision Tree, SVM, Random Forest, KNN, K-means, Gradient Boost, Adaboost, Deep Learning,
ANOVA), and verify the validity of the model through RMSE. Zheng et al. [ 27] used an LSTM model
to predict the RUL on C-MAPSS data set, PHM08 data set, and Milling data set. The LSTM model
is better than the other models. Chen et al. [ 28] proposed a two-phase model for RUL prediction by
Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), respectively. To the
best of our knowledge, little research has integrated AE and GRU for RUL prediction.
This study develops an Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU) model to predict the RUL
of equipment. In particular, AE is used to select features, and then the correlation between sensors is
found through the GRU model, and the RUL is predicted by Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) model.
The ﬁrst part is the Autoencoder (AE) model which is composed of an encoder and decoder. The
second part is the GRU model which is a type of RNN that can deal with time series data. The GRU
model ﬁnds key information in historical sensor data in combination with the MLP model. The MLP
model calculates the extracted information and combines with the backpropagation algorithm to
predict the RUL e ectively.
2. Literature Review
Time series are statistical data, arranging events or data in order of their occurrence. The main
purpose of time series forecasting is to build models from historical records and predict future situations.
2.1. Recurrent Neural Networks
RNN is the most common time series analysis method in deep learning. The main di erence
between RNN and general neural network is that the neurons of RNN between hidden layers are not
independent, but inﬂuence each other. The neurons of RNN also operate in order. The neurons of
the recurrent neural network have the function of temporarily storing memory. The previously input
data will be temporarily stored in the internal memory, so the neuron can have di erent output values
according to the previous state. However, in the training of RNN, too many hidden layer neuron