A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for
Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems
Ricardo Diniz Caldas
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Brasília, Brazil
ricardo.caldas@chalmers.seArthur Rodrigues
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
arthur.farias@aluno.unb.brEric Bernd Gil
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
ericbgil@gmail.com
Genaína Nunes Rodrigues
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
genaina@unb.brThomas Vogel
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Berlin, Germany
thomas.vogel@cs.hu-berlin.dePatrizio Pelliccione
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Sweden
University of L’Aquila, Italy
patrizio@chalmers.se
ABSTRACT
Control theoretical techniques have been successfully adopted as
methods for self-adaptive systems design to provide formal guar-
antees about the effectiveness and robustness of adaptation mech-
anisms. However, the computational effort to obtain guarantees
poses severe constraints when it comes to dynamic adaptation. In
order to solve these limitations, in this paper, we propose a hybrid
approach combining software engineering, control theory, and AI
to design for software self-adaptation. Our solution proposes a hi-
erarchical and dynamic system manager with performance tuning.
Due to the gap between high-level requirements specification and
the internal knob behavior of the managed system, a hierarchically
composed components architecture seek the separation of concerns
towards a dynamic solution. Therefore, a two-layered adaptive
manager was designed to satisfy the software requirements with
parameters optimization through regression analysis and evolution-
ary meta-heuristic. The optimization relies on the collection and
processing of performance, effectiveness, and robustness metrics
w.r.t control theoretical metrics at the offline and online stages. We
evaluate our work with a prototype of the Body Sensor Network
(BSN) in the healthcare domain, which is largely used as a demon-
strator by the community. The BSN was implemented under the
Robot Operating System (ROS) architecture, and concerns about
the system dependability are taken as adaptation goals. Our results
reinforce the necessity of performing well on such a safety-critical
domain and contribute with substantial evidence on how hybrid
approaches that combine control and AI-based techniques for engi-
neering self-adaptive systems can provide effective adaptation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7962-5/20/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387939.3391595KEYWORDS
hybrid, self-adaptive software, control theory, optimization
ACM Reference Format:
Ricardo Diniz Caldas, Arthur Rodrigues, Eric Bernd Gil, Genaína Nunes
Rodrigues, Thomas Vogel, and Patrizio Pelliccione. 2020. A Hybrid Approach
Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems.
InIEEE/ACM 15th International Symposium on Software Engineering for
Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS ’20), October 7–8, 2020, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3387939.3391595
1 INTRODUCTION
There is an increasing trend in the use of control theory to guide
the software engineering design process of self-adaptive systems
(SAS) in order to provide dynamic adaptation with guarantees of
trustworthiness and robustness [ 16,34,41]. Control theory has
established solid techniques for designing controllers that enforce
controlled (or managed) systems to behave as expected. “These
controllers can provide formal guarantees about their effectiveness,
under precise assumptions on the operating conditions” [16].
At runtime, control systems are subject to inputs not known at
design-time. Based on that, they are designed to respond within
acceptable boundaries to dynamic environmental interactions. The
analysis of whether the controlled system is operating accordingly
demands metrics for comparing the performance of various con-
trol systems [ 30]. A self-adaptive system designed through control
theory must be able to quantitatively guarantee its convergence
in time to reach the adaptation goal (i.e., setpoint), and on its ro-
bustness (i.e., convergence to the setpoint) in the face of errors and
noise [ 16,34]. Additionally, due to high level of uncertainty in self-
adaptive systems, the control model following a control-theoretical
approach requires constant evolution.
Therefore, in the control-theoretical design of a self-adaptive
software system, it is paramount to support decision-making pro-
cedures that can identify appropriate adaptation strategies by effi-
ciently exploring the solution space. To avoid the problem of ex-
haustive analysis of large adaptation spaces when planning an adap-
tation, artificial intelligence (AI) techniques have been used, among
others: to determine at runtime subsets of adaptation options from aarXiv:2004.11793v1  [cs.SE]  24 Apr 2020