SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
system information . A parametric formula evaluates a quality of
service (QoS) property of the target system at runtime. For details of
how such a formula is created, we refer to our previous work [ 38].
The goals are the objectives to be achieved by the system with
respect to functional or non-functional requirements. The system
information is a set of events and data about the status of the target
system collected from the running system.
TheSystem Manager is responsible for controlling the Target Sys-
temand realizes the combination of control-based self-adaptation
and artificial intelligence (AI), which makes our approach hybrid
and improves the self-adaptation process.
For this purpose, the system manager has four components, two
realizing self-adaptation in a hierarchical fashion and two realizing
AI-based optimization to reconfigure the self-adaptation process.
This results in a hierarchical and adaptive system manager.
The Strategy Manager synthesizes adaptation strategies by rea-
soning on the target system using the parametric formula, the goals
defined by the stakeholders and the current status of the observed
property. This synthesis process and especially the time needed
for the synthesis of adaptation strategies is monitored by the Man-
ager Optimization component. Based on the measured time, this
component optimizes the configuration of the strategy manager
by providing optimal values for two parameters ( Granularity and
Offset ) that influence the synthesis process. The goal of the opti-
mization is to reduce the required time and thus, the efficiency of
the synthesis process. The strategy manager provides a synthesized
strategy to the Strategy Enactor .
The strategy enactor enforces an adaptation strategy in a closed-
loop fashion by implementing a feedback control loop on top of
the target system. Accordingly, the strategy enactor implements a
PI controller as an actuation mechanism for enforcing behavior at
the target system, which is guided by conditions and goals. This
self-adaptation process is monitored by the Enactor Optimization
component, that computes various Control Theory Metrics based on
theSystem Information collected from the running target system.
Moreover, the component uses the metrics to tune the strategy
enactor adaptation parameters. Upon the metrics and system in-
formation, the optimizer tunes the PI controller parameters ( Kp
andKi). The goal of this optimization is to improve the adaptation
quality with respect to the control theory metrics.
As a result of combining each, the strategy manager and the
strategy enactor with an optimization, the goals of the system
are guaranteed to be constantly achieved with optimal adaptation
search time and adaptation quality, in a limited search space. Both
optimizations are realized by AI-based techniques of model learning
(regression / curve fitting) and meta-heuristic search (evolutionary
algorithms), while the strategy enactor is based on control (PI con-
troller). By this combination, the overall controller (i.e., the system
manager) implements a hybrid approach of control and AI.
We evaluate our approach with the Body Sensor Network (BSN)1,
being an exemplar for a target system that monitors and analyzes
the health of patients. The BSN is composed of a set of distributed
sensors to monitor vital signs of patients and to forward these signs
to a centralized processor for analysis. To avoid overload of the
centralized processor, the sampling rate of individual sensors can
1Access http://bodysensornetwork.herokuapp.com for an executable artifact.be adapted, which effects the amount of data sent to and analyzed
by the processor.
In the following we detail the stategy manager and strategy
enactor of our hybrid approach emphasizing their optimization.
3.1 Strategy Manager and its Optimization
Responsible for high-level reasoning, the strategy manager must
be capable of performing expensive decision-making computation.
Identifying feasible and effective adaptation strategies is particu-
larly difficult as the size of the solution space grows exponentially
with the number of individual adaptation options. For instance, for
architectural adaptation the reasoning has to take the variability of
each component (e.g., alternative components or parameters of the
component) and the composition of components into account to
evaluate whether the overall architectural configuration satisfies
the goals of the system.
In previous work [ 38] we have developed a transformation frame-
work for specifying requirements hierarchically in a goal model,
translating the goal model to parametric formulae with symbolic
model checking, and evaluating these formulae at runtime to ex-
press probabilities over the fulfillment of the goals by the running
system. Thus, these formulae provide guarantees for satisfying the
goals while their evaluation is time efficient (constant computa-
tional time) since a costly model exploration as in typical model
checking is avoided. The goal modeling and the translation of the
goal model to parametric formulae are implemented in the GODA-
MDP tool2[38]. A parametric formula is essentially an algebraic
equation that relates the probability of successfully achieving a
system’s overall goal (i.e., the root goal of the goal model) to the
combined probabilities of lower-level tasks that contribute towards
realizing the goal. Therefore, a formula can be used in the analysis
and planning stages of a feedback loop to solve a satisfiability prob-
lem, where an appropriate combination of successful local tasks
would lead to satisfying a required global property. Searching for
such a combination corresponds to the synthesis of adaptation
strategies since the combination corresponds to a configuration
that can be enacted on the target system. Although using the para-
metric formula reduces the complexity and time for reasoning, such
formulae are still not free from problem of combinatory state-space
explosion.
The pseudocode of Algorithm 1 details the search process to solve
a parametric formula captured in a model . The search process has
two input parameters, the granularity andoffset that are used for
reducing or widening the solution/search space. Lines 2-4 capture
the monitoring of a set of QoS properties Pof the target system, the
calculation of the current QoS property pcurr, and the calculation
of the error , that is, how far from the setpoint prefthe current
property value pcurr is. Then, lines 5-24 represent the search for a
combination of independent terms ( px), for each piin the set of all
properties P, that would lead to the goal ( pref). To do so, lines 6-7
reset all pxinto the value defined by the of f set and the set of new
values ( Ps) is plugged into the model. If the error turns to be positive,
then the value of each of the properties in Psshould be incremented
with the error multiplied by a factor dictated by the granularity
дranuntil they, one by one, reach values that approximate the
2https://pistar-goda.herokuapp.com/