A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
the derivative part is omitted due to difficulties in its tuning, leading
to the use of PI controllers (cf. [ 1]). Moreover, such controllers are
also widely used for adapting software systems [ 34]. Based on this
observation, we also use a PI controller throughout this work. The
continuous equation of a PI controller is shown in Equation 1, where
u(t)is its control action and e(t)the error, both at time t. In this
equation we have three constants, which are the proportional gain
Kp, the integral gain Ki. and the integral window IW.Kpmultiplies
the current measured error directly, whereas Kimultiplies the
integral of the error over the time window IW. These constants
can be defined empirically or using a tuning method of preference.
u(t)=Kpe(t)+Ki∫t
j=t−IW+1e(j) (1)
A discrete approximation of Equation 1 is shown in Equation 2,
which is adapted from the work of Stankovic et al. [39].
u(t)=Kpe(t)+KitÕ
j=t−IW+1e(j) (2)
In this equation, the integral term is transformed into a sum of
errors over the time window IW. Since a PI controller is also called
periodically, the time window IWis a tunable parameter, which
we consider in this work as the number of error measurements to
be considered in the sum. This means that in the time instant tthe
errors from e(t−IW+1)toe(t)will be used in the integral term.
Evolutionary Algorithms. Evolutionary algorithms originate
from computational intelligence, a subfield of artificial intelligence,
and refer to meta-heuristic optimization techniques that imitate
biological evolution [ 26]. A widely-used technique is the Non-
dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [6] that has been
applied to various software engineering problems [ 19], and self-
adaptive systems to optimize the configuration of the managed
system [17, 37]. NSGA-II is a multi-objective algorithm producing
a set of Pareto-optimal solutions to a given optimization problem.
Imitating biological evolution, it evolves a population of possible
solutions encoded as chromosomes by crossover, mutation, and
Figure 2: Typical response of a system to a sudden variation
on the observed property.
Figure 3: An architectural overview of the hybrid approach.
selection. The evolution is guided by a fitness function that en-
codes the objectives of the optimization and that evaluates how
well a solution satisfies these objectives. Solutions with a higher
fitness are preferably selected for further evolution steps in the
next generation of the population. Thus, the evolution converges
to solutions with higher fitness. Moreover, NSGA-II promotes di-
versity to obtain Pareto-optimal solutions with different trade-offs
between the objectives.
3 A HYBRID APPROACH COMBINING
CONTROL THEORY AND AI
In this paper, we propose an AI-based optimization approach to
support the engineering of control-based SAS. Following principles
of control theory, our system manager decides how the system
must behave in order to achieve the desired goals for the managed
system. Moreover, our system manager is enhanced with integrated
AI-based optimization techniques, namely regression at all levels
of the decision-making process towards a more efficient adaptation
mechanism for (i) high-level reasoning upon the model that repre-
sents the managed system to synthesize adaptation strategies ( cf.
Section 3.1) and (ii) enforcing actions through control-theoretical
principles ensuring the adaptation strategies respect the properties
of interest: stability, overshooting and steady-state error ( cf. Section
3.2). In our approach, an adaptation strategy is a rule that guides
the system behavior. It consists of a goal to be reached, a condition
that defines whether the goal is reached, and one or more actions
to change the system behavior.
To provide a solution that architecturally promotes the separa-
tion of concerns in a hierarchical fashion [ 3], the proposed archi-
tecture relies on two horizontal layers being the System Manager
and the Managed System , and a third and vertical layer being the
Knowledge Repository . The corresponding architectural overview
of our approach is shown in Fig. 3.
The Managed System layer contains the Target System being
the software system to be controlled. The Knowledge Repository is
orthogonal to the other layers and responsible for maintaining the
persistent information, that is, a parametric formula , the goals , and