SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
the optimization of both, strategy manager and strategy enactor
stages, we have set the algorithm to process a hundred generations.
Moreover, we have applied some standard operators like Probability
Matching (PM), Simulated Binary Crossover (SBX), and Tournament
Selector based on dominance comparison (Pareto).
4. Apply optimal configuration: Finally, we apply the optimal
or near-optimal configuration, that is, a pair of values ( gran, offset ),
to the strategy manager affecting the performance of the synthesis
of adaptation strategies.
Delving into the optimization pipeline, we start describing the
first part of the learning3process: the manager optimization . As
mentioned before, the manager behavior is ruled by two features: (i)
gran, that is the granularity with which the strategy manager will
search for new solutions, and (ii) offset , representing the starting
point of the search within the solution space. Both attributes are
crucial to determine a third variable of interest, the (iii) time to
solution , i.e., how long the manager will take to find a suitable
adaptation strategy. From a naive perspective, these values are often
defined in an uninformed fashion, before the system operation, and
remain unchanged despite the characteristics of the system, or the
particularities of the domain. Our proposal tweaks this logic by
tracing the strategy manager behavior from its data collected offline.
Knowing the fact that the target variable depends on the gran and
offset values, we conduct a curve fitting process to come up with
models that explain the time to solution variable in terms of the
aforementioned parameters. Such a process returns a mathematical
function that has the best fit to the data points collected from
previous executions of the strategy manager. If the learned function
being the output of the curve fitting process is simple, it is possible
to solve the optimization problem mathematically. Otherwise, we
solve this problem using an evolutionary algorithm, like the NSGA-
II.
We should note that our approach has been conceived to provide
informed choices about granularity, offset, KpandKiat design
time. Therefore, the amount of data used for training is not a major
concern. A better description of the system behavior allows the
engineers to make better choices of control theoretical metrics. It
may be the case that the system behavior changes in face of uncer-
tainty. Clearly, learning online from data and continuously feeding
the system with new control theoretical metrics may leverage the
strength of our approach. However, adopting an online learning
approach brings additional complexity to the pipeline, which is out
of scope in this work.
3.2 Strategy Enactor and its Optimization
The strategy enactor is responsible for enforcing an adaptation
strategy on the target system. The strategies are synthesized by the
strategy manager and must be read, interpreted, and enforced by
the strategy enactor. Under the guidance of the active strategy, the
enactor continually evaluates whether the target system behaves as
it is intended to. Otherwise, it adapts the system towards achieving
its goals. Whenever the enactor cannot enforce the active strategy,
3Strictly speaking, in this stage the optimization modules do rely on previous adap-
tation data to learn the behavior and optimize the strategy manager parameters.
However, we reckon that the use of term learning to describe curve fitting methods
and evolutionary algorithms is still disputable.
Figure 5: Overview of the Strategy Enactor.
an exception is propagated to the strategy manager in an attempt
to receive a new and more adequate adaptation strategy from the
strategy manager.
Moreover, the strategy enactor realizes a negative feedback loop.
In this sense, the enactor continuously monitors the system QoS
properties, analyzes them, and checks whether its status is com-
pliant to the goal demanded by the active strategy. As previously
discussed, a strategy is defined by a goal , acondition , and a set
of actions to achieve a desired configuration of the target system.
Figure 5 depicts the configurable feedback loop for enforcing
strategies on the target system. The strategy enactor collects infor-
mation from the target system and analyzes the QoS property of
interest. If the monitored property status does not correspond to the
desired goal under the defined condition then the enactor enforces
one or more actions. Whereas the actions are optimized accordingly.
In this context, we rely on control theory to implement the function
that determines the control signal by using a PI controller. In this
work, we use the BSN exemplar as a target system, whose knobs
are the sampling rates of the sensors, which are adapted based on
the reliability of the BSN’s central processing component affected
by the load on this component.
The synthesized adaptation strategy guides the parameters of
the closed loop and how the adaptation is executed. To this extent,
the PI controller is an instance of the element that enforces the
control signal on the target system, characterized as the “perform
action” in Fig. 5. Thus, it receives as input the difference between
the current state of the observed system property and the goal of
the adaptation strategy (error), and multiplies the error by factors
of the gains Kp and Ki coming from the optimized action, according
to Eq. 2. In the case of our running example, the PI controller would
trigger an adaptation command with a description of the calculated
new sampling rate for a sensor (e.g., the thermometer of the pa-
tient). Depending on the values of Kp and Ki, the increments or
decrements on the actuation variable could not guide the property
into converging to the setpoint, they could request too much effort
from the system, or they could take too long to reach the setpoint.
Foremost, the lack of information on a model that relates Kp, Ki,
stability, overshoot and steady-state-error demands an optimization
of Kp and Ki towards optimal performance.