SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
an optimal adaptation task by reducing time to solution at runtime.
Therefore, to support G1, we collect the duration of the optimiza-
tion pipeline for both components, Strategy Manager and Strategy
Enactor. The optimization pipeline relies on the identification of
parameters through the collection of control theoretical metrics
from QoS attributes of the system at runtime. Thus, with G2, we
want to guarantee that our approximation does lead to efficient
solutions. By this means, we measure the efficiency of our method
by the reached control theoretical metrics with optimized parame-
ters configuration and the best solutions given with the exhaustive
search algorithm.
Under the light of the GQM, the experiment is performed in
complementary phases (i) time and space evaluation of the search
for the optimal adaption, and (ii) evaluation of the adaptation qual-
ity with distinct configurations. Thus, following sections further
describe the experimental setup, the operational scenario under
which the experiments were conducted, and finally the results.
4.1 Time and space to find an eligible
adaptation
In this phase, we have first instrumented the pipeline with a
chronometer to measure the duration of the learning model step
and the finding an optimal configuration step, from both strategy
manager instance and strategy enactor instances.
For the strategy manager, the time to perform the curve fitting
(time to solution, gran and offset) was in average 0.3099 seconds
per execution, whereas the curve type was classified as exponential.
The NGSA-II took in average 0.0023 seconds per execution. Totaling
in 0.3123 seconds per execution for the strategy manager pipeline.
For the strategy enactor, four curve fittings had to be realized (i)
Kp-SSE, (ii) Kp-Overshoot, (iii) Ki-SSE and (iv) Ki-Overshoot. For (i)
the algorithm took 0.01295 seconds to fit the model into a quadratic
function, (ii) it took 0.0498 seconds to fit into an exponential, (iii)
it took 0.0127 seconds to fit into a quadratic and (iv) it took 0.0075
seconds to fit into a linear model. Furthermore, the NSGA-II was
executed twice (v) Kp-SSE & Kp-Overshoot and (vi) Ki-SSE & Ki-
Overshoot. For (v) the algorithm took 5.3947 seconds and (vi) it
took 4.896 seconds. Totaling in 10.374099032 seconds per execution
for the strategy manager pipeline.
Our execution of NSGA-II makes ten thousand function eval-
uations. However, this amount can be reduced to one thousand
without great quality loss if the execution time of the pipeline
needs to be improved.
4.2 Quality of the adaptation
We have deployed and executed the prototype under a scenario
where at least one adaptation was triggered for each five minutes
execution. Then, 50 randomly selected combinations of KpandKi,
namely configurations, were executed. The 50 configurations are
a product of the combination of two sets Kp = [60,150] with steps
of 10, Ki = [0.2,1] with steps of 0.2 and IW = 5. Once we select an
optimal configuration with the AI technique, another scenario is
performed, totaling 51 configuration scenarios. The configuration
selected by the optimization is Kp=114.0,Ki=0.75andIW=5.The scenario was derived from the running example, where the
stakeholders wish to maintain the system’s reliability level at 95%.
The maintenance process is held by the system manager, as follows.
The system manager must continuously monitor the target sys-
tem’s reliability status during runtime. Moreover, the prototype was
developed to satisfy complementary tasks with single responsibility
components. For that reason, the reliability is locally calculated
for each component and composed through a model that relates
their probability of success, i.e. the reliability formula from pre-
vious works [ 38]. To keep track of the system goals, the system
manager systematically analyzes whether the monitored reliability
status fulfills them. Where in case of violations to the adaptation
strategy conditions the system managers adapts the target system
to maintain the reliability level accordingly to the stipulated goal.
In the experimental sessions, we simulated a scenario where
multiple sensors flood the central processor with a higher rate than
what it can handle. On top of that, noise is generated by an exter-
nal agent that triggers random failures on the sensors preventing
them from forwarding data to the central processor. The simulated
failures reduce the number of messages received by the central
processor at a random factor, placing another layer of uncertainty
on the system execution. To cope with the disturbances into the
reliability status, the system manager delivers reconfiguration sig-
nals containing increments/decrements to the sensors’ sampling
rate that could give more or less time for the central processor to
maintain a always flowing processing queue.
Figure 9: Explored adaptation space.
The SAS was instrumented to log information regarding the
quality of the adaptations w.r.t the control theory metrics. The
outcoming data is processed accordingly to each evaluation and is
presented in Figures 9 and 10.
Figure 9 shows the results of the adaptation space explored
by the naïve (in red and blue) and our approach (in black). Our
approach was able to meet the nearly optimal adaptation space for
the threshold of steady state error and overshoot of 3%. Figures
10a and 10b provides a bigger picture of the experiments over the