SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
large adaptation space through classification and regression [ 31]; to
assess and reason about black-box adaptation decisions through on-
line learning [ 9,10]; or to find Pareto-optimal configurations of the
system with respect to the mission goals of mobile robots through
machine learning [ 21]. Moreover, control-based approaches for
self-adaptive systems often employ adaptive controllers to address
inaccuracies of the control model or radical changes of the environ-
ment/controlled system by updating the model using filters (e.g.,
Kalman or Recursive Least Square) [ 15,28,29] and by tuning the
controller parameters using feedback or machine learning [ 12,27].
Although such significant contributions in the literature have
promoted solid mathematical foundation of control theory for build-
ing SAS, there is still the need of understanding (i) how AI could
aid the parameter optimization of controllers and (ii) how to apply
AI-based techniques in the search of adaptation solutions in control-
theoretical SAS strategies. Moreover, “there are various hurdles
that need to be tackled to turn control theory into the foundation
of self-adaptation of software systems” [ 40]. Software engineers
are not usually knowledgeable of the mathematical principles on
control theory. Therefore, there is a need to turn control theory
(and its guarantees) into a scientific foundation for engineering
self-adaptation [40].
In this paper, we aim at filling those gaps by intertwining control
theory and AI in a two-phase optimization approach to support
the engineering of control-based SAS. Our controller, hereafter
named system manager, contains the mechanisms for deciding
how the self-adaptive system must behave in order to achieve the
desired goals for the managed system. Due to the gap between
high-level requirements specification and the internal knob behav-
ior of the managed system, a hierarchically composed components
architecture seek the separation of concerns towards a dynamic
solution [ 3]. Therefore, our system manager is further decomposed
into two other components: a strategy manager and a strategy
enactor. Each of these components are equipped with AI-based op-
timization techniques, namely regression model combined with the
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [ 6], for re-
spectively: (i) synthesizing adaptation strategies through high-level
reasoning upon the model that represents the managed system,
and (ii) enforcing actions through control-theoretical principles
to ensure the adaptation strategies are applied and properties of
interest guaranteed. By these means, we contribute with a hierar-
chical and adaptive system manager that relies on optimization at
all levels of the decision-making process towards a more efficient
adaptation mechanism, while also improving the self-adaptation
loop in terms of control theoretic properties: stability, overshooting
and steady-state error.
For evaluation purposes, we experimented with a healthcare
domain prototype constructed for operating volatile environments.
The prototype played the role of the target system. The Body Sensor
Network (BSN) prototype was implemented following the Robot
Operating System (ROS) framework and consists of a set of dis-
tributed sensors that collects the patients vital signs and forwards
them to a centralized unit for further processing and reporting. We
evaluated the ability of our approach to optimize the adaptation
space and to improve the self-adaptation loop w.r.t. the control the-
oretic properties. Results show that we have found nearly optimal
solutions for space and time through our hybrid approach. Not tomention, the overshoot and steady-state error were below 3% with
100% of stability.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents a glimpse over control theoretical principles and over evo-
lutionary algorithms used in this work. Section 3 presents the core
contribution of our work. Section 4 presents the evaluation of our
proposal on the BSN prototype. Section 5 presents the most related
literature work to ours. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusion
and the directions we intend to pursue as our future work.
2 BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss the background of our work, feedback
control loop and evolutionary algorithms.
Feedback Control Loop. Self-adaptation is typically realized by
a feedback loop [ 4], which originates from control engineering [ 2].
As shown in Fig. 1, the plant is the subsystem to be controlled by a
control signal from the controller . A reference (setpoint) is defined
for a property of interest observed on the plant. The goal is that
the observed property is sufficiently close to this reference despite
the disturbance affecting the plant. For this purpose, the difference
between the observation and reference is fed back to the controller
that uses this error to decide about the value of the control signal.
Figure 1: Block diagram of a closed feedback control loop.
A self-adaptive system that uses a feedback control loop to adjust
its behavior is a closed-loop system [ 20,33]. Such a system can have
different responses to a perturbation, that is, how the property of
interest observed on the plant develops over time after the pertur-
bation. Figure 2 illustrates a typical response to a sudden variation
in the observed property. Various control metrics exist to verify
how well the system is responding and if it satisfies requirements
previously defined with expert knowledge (cf. [ 16,20]). In this
work we focus on extracting four metrics to analyze the response
of the system: stability ,overshoot ,settling time , and steady-state
error [16, 20].
Stability refers to the system reaching a steady-state equilibrium,
that is, the observed property converges to a specific value, ideally
the setpoint, and stays inside a previously defined stability mar-
gin around this convergence point. An overshoot denotes that the
property exceeds the setpoint in the transient state, which should
be typically avoided. It is measured as maximum peak value of
the property relative to the setpoint. The settling time is the time
required for the system to reach the steady-state equilibrium. Fi-
nally, the steady-state error measures how far from the setpoint
the system converges, that is, the steady-state difference between
the setpoint and observed property.
In a feedback loop, one of the most popular controllers being used
is the proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller while often