SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
space. Thus, we optimize the exploration of the search space rather
than explicitly reducing the space.
Similarly to the strategy enactor in our work, existing control-
based approaches for self-adaptation use PI or PID controllers that
are adapted at run-time (cf. [ 34]), to compensate inaccuracies of the
model or to handle radical changes. Particularly, values of parame-
ters in the model are estimated and updated at run-time based on
measurements often processed by filter algorithms such as Kalman
or Recursive Least Square [ 13,24,25,29,35,36], or controller pa-
rameters are tuned online by relay feedback [ 12] or machine learn-
ing [ 27], or offline by experiments [ 7]. In contrast, in our approach
the controller parameters are tuned by an evolutionary algorithms
identifying (near-)optimal values for them. Evolutionary algorithms
have been applied previously to self-adaptive systems in order to
find optimal configurations of the target system [ 17,37] while we
apply them to improve the self-adaptation performed by the strat-
egy manager and strategy enactor.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is a novel approach that
combines the use of algebraic models (i.e., the parametric formulae)
of a system, which are used to synthesize adaptation strategies
based on a non-functional requirement, and control theory, which
is used to adapt the target system’s parameters systematically based
on the previously defined strategy. Also, we combine AI-based
optimization with these two approaches to adapt the system in an
efficient way while also improving the self-adaptation in terms of
the control-theoretical properties: overshoot and steady-state error.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have proposed a hybrid approach that combines
control theory principles with AI techniques to optimize the adap-
tation process in self-adaptive systems. Using curve fitting methods
aligned with a meta-heuristic technique, namely NSGA-II, we were
able to i) efficiently synthesize adaptation strategies through high-
level reasoning upon the model that represents the managed system,
and (ii) enforce actions through control-theoretical principles to en-
sure the adaptation strategies are applied and properties of interest
guaranteed. By these means, we contribute with a hierarchical and
dynamic system manager that relies on optimization at all levels of
the decision-making process towards a more efficient and robust
adaptation mechanism. We have evaluated our approach on the
BSN prototype implemented in the ROS framework. The evalua-
tion results have shown that our hybrid approach is able to find
optimal solutions for the adaptation space while also improving
the self-adaptation loop in terms of control theoretic properties:
stability, overshooting and steady-state error.
We envision that our future work will be devoted into expanding
our technique to accommodate PID controllers as well as exploiting
further evolutionary algorithms, while ensuring our approach is
also able to optimize the adaptation space at runtime. During the
experiments, we have noticed that defining a suitable data window
in which the method should train the model is a hard task. A sec-
ond issue is knowing when the learned model should be applied.
Some kind of quality monitor is likely to be incorporated to the
architecture in order to orchestrate the learning process. From a
performance perspective, this brings us to another challenge, that
is building the pipeline in a way that the continuous learning andadaptation of metrics do not affect negatively the operation of the
managed system. We plan to further investigate these issues in a
future work. Additionally, for generalization purposes, we plan to
conduct case studies with other exemplars from other domains than
healthcare as well as to further compare our solution to state-of-
the-art adaptive control algorithms with respect to time to solution
and robustness.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their utmost gratitude to Léo Moraes and
Gabriel Levi (UnB/Brazil) for implementing an accessible version
of the BSN for experimentation on SAS. This study was financed
in part by the CAPES-Brasil – Finance Code 001, through CAPES
scholarship. This work was also partially supported by the Wal-
lenberg Al, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP)
funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the FLASH
project (GR 3634/6-1) funded by the German Science Foundation
(DFG), and the EU H2020 Research and Innovation Prog. under GA
No. 731869 (Co4Robots). The authors also acknowledge financial
support from Centre of EXcellence on Connected, Geo-Localized
and Cybersecure Vehicle (EX-Emerge) funded by Italian Govern-
ment under CIPE resolution n. 70/2017 (Aug. 7, 2017). Finally, we
thank CNPq for partial support under grant number 306017/2018-0.
REFERENCES
[1]Kiam Heong Ang, Gregory Chong, and Yun Li. 2005. PID control system analysis,
design, and technology. IEEE transactions on control systems technology 13, 4
(2005), 559–576.
[2]K.J. Åström and R.M. Murray. 2010. Feedback Systems: An Introduction for Scientists
and Engineers . Princeton University Press. http://www.cds.caltech.edu/~murray/
amwiki/index.php/Main_Page
[3]Victor Braberman, Nicolas D’Ippolito, Jeff Kramer, Daniel Sykes, and Sebas-
tian Uchitel. 2015. MORPH: A Reference Architecture for Configuration and
Behaviour Self-adaptation (CTSE 2015) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9–16.
[4]Yuriy Brun, Giovanna Di Marzo Serugendo, Cristina Gacek, Holger Giese, Holger
Kienle, Marin Litoiu, Hausi Müller, Mauro Pezzè, and Mary Shaw. 2009. Engi-
neering Self-Adaptive Systems through Feedback Loops. In Software Engineering
for Self-Adaptive Systems , Betty H. C. Cheng, Rogério de Lemos, Holger Giese,
Paola Inverardi, and Jeff Magee (Eds.). Springer, 48–70.
[5]Victor R Basili1 Gianluigi Caldiera and H Dieter Rombach. 1994. The goal
question metric approach. Encyclopedia of software engineering (1994), 528–532.
[6]Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002. A
fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE transactions on
evolutionary computation 6, 2 (2002), 182–197.
[7]David Desmeurs, Cristian Klein, Alessandro Vittorio Papadopoulos, and Johan
Tordsson. 2015. Event-Driven Application Brownout: Reconciling High Uti-
lization and Low Tail Response Times. In Proceedings of the 2015 International
Conference on Cloud and Autonomic Computing (ICCAC ’15) . IEEE, 1–12.
[8]Yixin Diao, Joseph L Hellerstein, Sujay Parekh, Rean Griffith, Gail Kaiser, and Dan
Phung. 2005. Self-managing systems: A control theory foundation. In 12th IEEE
International Conference and Workshops on the Engineering of Computer-Based
Systems (ECBS’05) . IEEE, 441–448.
[9]Ahmed Elkhodary, Naeem Esfahani, and Sam Malek. 2010. FUSION: A Framework
for Engineering Self-tuning Self-adaptive Software Systems (FSE ’10) . ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 7–16.
[10] N. Esfahani, A. Elkhodary, and S. Malek. 2013. A Learning-Based Framework for
Engineering Feature-Oriented Self-Adaptive Software Systems. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 39, 11 (Nov 2013), 1467–1493.
[11] Antonio Filieri, Carlo Ghezzi, Alberto Leva, and Martina Maggio. 2011. Self-
adaptive software meets control theory: A preliminary approach supporting
reliability requirements. In Proceedings of the 2011 26th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering . IEEE Computer Society, 283–292.
[12] Antonio Filieri, Carlo Ghezzi, Alberto Leva, and Martina Maggio. 2012. Reliability-
Driven Dynamic Binding via Feedback Control. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing
Systems (SEAMS ’12) . IEEE, 43–52.
[13] Antonio Filieri, Henry Hoffmann, and Martina Maggio. 2014. Automated design of
self-adaptive software with control-theoretical formal guarantees. In Proceedings