A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Algorithm 1 - Strategy Manager Procedure
Input: gran,offset
Output: strategy
1:procedure Search For Strategy
2: P←MonitorSystem
3: pcurr←Apply(P,model)
4: error←pref−pcurr
5: for each piinPdo
6: Ps←ResetToStartingPoint(P, offset)
7: pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
8: iferror >0then
9: dopi←pi+gran·error until pnew >pref
10: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
11: for each PjinPs−pido
12: dopj←pj+gran·error until pnew >pref
13: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
14: end for
15: else
16: pi←pi−дran·error until pnew <pref
17: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
18: for each pjinPs−pido
19: dopj←pj−gran·error until pnew <pref
20: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
21: end for
22: end if
23: Strategies←Strategies +Ps
24: end for
25: return strategy from Strategies
26:end procedure
dependent value to the goal (see lines 8-15). On the other hand, the
properties in Psare decremented by the same factor (lines 15-22).
At line 23, the modified set of Psis concatenated into the valid set
ofStrategies . In the end, the best or a sufficient strategy is chosen
among the valid ones (line 25).
In this search process, the procedure Apply matches the indepen-
dent variables of the model/formula to each respective value, and
performs the calculation that results in a value for the dependent
variable, that is, the procedure evaluates the formula. Thus, it is
used for quantitative reasoning on the system state. As a result, the
algorithm relies on performing a search within the combination of
all independent variables that would lead the system into reaching
the goal. The search itself increases/decreases the value of each
independent variable at a time, by gradually changing its value
with a step dictated by a factor of granularity·error .
The granularity and the offset parameters are fundamental to
determine whether the strategy manager will be able to find a com-
bination of values (i.e., to converge to a solution) that satisfies the
goal of the system, and to find such a combination in time. The
smaller the granularity is, the algorithm will more likely find a
solution, even though it would take more time to do so. In contrast,
the offset broaden the search space boundaries, so the bigger it is
the more values will the search go through until it reaches the end
line. Consequently, we need a method to enhance the choice of suchparameters, and this is where we employ AI-based optimization.
Manager Optimization. In the following, we discuss the optimiza-
tion of the search process conducted by the strategy manager to
synthesize adaptation strategies. The optimization aims for iden-
tifying suitable values for the granularity and offset parameters
(cf. Algorithm 1). The optimization of the strategy manager is a
single-objective parameter optimization problem since the goal is to
minimize the time required by the strategy manager to synthesize
an adaptation strategy. This problem is solved by the optimization
pipeline depicted in Figure 4. This pipeline consists of the following
four steps:
Figure 4: Optimization pipeline for strategy manager.
1. Collect Data: We collect data relating the time to find a solution
(ts) with values for the granularity ( дran) and offset parameters.
The variable tsrepresents the time taken by the strategy manager
to converge to the setpoint. The data is obtained from executing
our approach without the optimization in place. Thus, we execute
our approach in different scenarios, that is, with different static
choices of parameter values for granularity and offset.
2. Learn Model: From the collected data < time, gran, offset >, we
learn a model using the curve fitting method. The learned model de-
scribes the behavior of the strategy manager as a function ts(gran, offset).
Thus, we can use the model to estimate the time to synthesize
an adaptation strategy given concrete values for the granularity
and offset parameters. An example for such a model is time =
677∗eдran∗(−3000)+eof f set∗(−2874).
3. Find Optimal Configuration: We use the learned model as
an input to an evolutionary algorithm, particularly NSGA-II, to
find optimal values for the granularity and offset parameters in
order to minimize the time to synthesize an adaptation strategy.
For the evolutionary algorithm, a candidate solution is encoded as
a chromosome or a vector two components, one component for
each parameter. The fitness function is the minimization of the
time. The fitness of a specific candidate solution, that is, a concrete
pair of two real values for the two parameters, corresponds to
computing the learned function with this pair of values. Moreover,
the optimization is constrained by the problem domain, as well as
the range of the granularity and offset parameters. The optimization
performed by evolutionary algorithm results in an optimal or near-
optimal configuration (parameter setting) for the strategy manager.
To illustrate, lets bring back our previous example model, time =
677∗eдran∗(−3000)+eof f set∗(−2874). Initially, a population of one
hundred individuals is generated randomly, having the target values
and/or input parameters limited by a given range. An individual is
composed of a combination of genes and a calculated target value. In
NSGA-II, the genes are represented by the input parameters, in this
case gran andoffset . The target value in this step is the time variable.
Better ranked solutions, i.e., solutions with the best fitness values,
are observed in individuals with a lower time to find a solution. For