A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
(a) Overshoot for distinct configurations.
(b) Steady-state-error for distinct configurations.
Figure 10: Boxplots for the sample of 24 configurations
50 configurations and the optimized one. For the sake of space,
we refer only to the first 24 configurations, where configuration
1 refers to our approach. Results for the overshoot and steady-
state error show that our approach managed to perform among
the best results, reaching out convergence point of 100%. In other
words, our approach not only managed to optimize steady-state
and overshoot but also the stability of our BSN. By these means, the
self-adaptation loop of the BSN from the control theoretic principles
can be considered quite robust for the scenarios evaluated.
4.3 Threats to Validity
Internal validity. The main threat to internal validity is the data
that we collected from the scenarios of executing our approach
and that we used for the model learning and the optimization.
Different scenarios may lead to different data and thus, to differentresults of our approach. Moreover, we rely on specific techniques
for the model learning (curve fitting) and optimization ( NSGA-II ).
Other techniques could be used, which may lead to different results.
In this context, we have not tuned the techniques, especially the
hyper-parameters of NSGA-II, to avoid any bias concerning BSN.
External validity. Although we present a generic self-adaptation
approach that combines AI and control-theoretical principles, our
evaluation focuses on the BSN case study with a single non-functional
requirement (reliability) as the adaptation concern. Thus, we cannot
generalize our results to other concerns (e.g., performance, security,
or costs) and target systems, which calls for further experiments.
Construct validity. The main threat is the correctness of the im-
plementation of our approach and the BSN used for the evaluation.
Concerning our approach, at least two authors of this paper have
reviewed the implementation and checked the plausibility of the
evaluation results based on the experience they have with the BSN
from earlier work [ 32,38]. With this experience we are confident
about the validity of the BSN that is publicly available.
5 RELATED WORK
As stated by Weyns [40], the use of control theory in the design
of self-adaptive software can bring several benefits since it allows
providing analytical guarantees for several system properties such
as stability and robustness. Consequently, the idea of using control-
based approaches to achieve self-adaptation for software systems
has been widely studied [ 34], and the use of control theory as
a well-suited solution for self-adaptation to systematically meet
the adaptation goals despite a certain degree of uncertainty of the
system and environment has been recognized [8, 11, 15, 16].
Control-based self-adaptation approaches typically propose con-
troller synthesis to automatically construct a controller for man-
aging the software system’s adaptation needs [ 13,14,35]. The
resulting controllers are related to the Strategy Enactor in our
work. These approaches to synthesize these controllers could be
applied for the Strategy Enactor whose focus is on using a control-
theoretical controller. However, our work presents a further module
called Strategy Manager that synthesizes an adaptation strategy
to which the controller subsequently adheres As previously stated,
the combination of these two modules is the essence of our work,
where self-adaptations is realized at two different levels: we first use
a global goal, set by users, to come up with an adaptation strategy,
and then we adapt the target system’s parameters based on goals,
used as setpoints, conditions and actions defined in the strategy.
Moreover, we use AI-based learning and optimization techniques
in our work to reduce the adaptation space at the strategy manager
level and to optimize the controller’s parameters at the strategy
enactor level. For the latter level, the focus is on meeting acceptable
system behavior with respect to control properties such as over-
shoot and steady-state error. In this context, other approaches use
learning, online or offline, and other statistical methods to reduce
the adaptation space, often called configuration space, in order to
find a configuration for the system in available time [ 9,10,18,21–
23,31]. The main difference to our work is that improve efficiency
of synthesizing adaptation strategies by optimizing the the search
process (in terms of granularity and offset) exploring the adaptation