A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Enactor Optimization. The designed PI controller is not sufficient
to guarantee optimal performance. Therefore, we employ an AI-
based optimization technique to tune the controller’s parameters
with respect to the desired control-theoretical properties of settling
time,overshoot , and steady-state error . In this work, we focus on the
overshoot andsteady-state error . These parameters are the propor-
tional gain Kpand the integral gain Kiof the PI controller. Thus, the
optimization problem is to find optimal values for KpandKithat
improve the self-adaptation in terms of overshoot andsteady-state
error . These two control properties should be minimized resulting
in a multi-objective optimization problem.
Figure 6: Optimization pipeline for strategy enactor.
The optimization pipeline for the strategy enactor is shown in
Fig. 6. Except for slight differences, this pipeline and the employed
techniques are the same as for the strategy manager (cf. Fig. 4).
Considering Fig. 6, the control-theoretical metrics are collected from
the behavior of the system during execution. From this data we get
the data points relating KpandKito settling time, overshoot, and
steady-state error. Using this data, we adopt a curve fitting strategy
to come up with three mathematical functions that describe the
relationship between the parameters KpandKiand each control-
theoretical metric: overshoot ( OS) and steady-state error ( SSE) (see
second step in Fig. 6). The type of the curve (e.g., linear, polynomial,
exponential, etc.) depends on the relation revealed by the data
points. This is illustrated in Fig. 7 for the BSN case study.
Overshoot x Ki Steady State Error x Ki Steady State Error =  f(Ki)
Overshoot = f(Ki)
Figure 7: Model learning by curve fitting the behavior of the
strategy enactor.
Once we have these functions, it is possible to feed the NSGA-
II with them in order to find values of KpandKithat minimize
the overshoot and steady-state error. Since we have now a multi-
objective optimization problem, the meta-heuristic will not returnjust a single pair of optimal values for KpandKi, but a set of Pareto-
optimal solutions, i.e., several pairs of ( Kp,Ki). These results are
optimal or near-optimal solutions trading off the two objectives,
overshoot and steady-state error as depicted in Fig. 8.
Figure 8: Multi-objective optimization example
Finally, we update the parameters of the PI controller employed
in the strategy enactor with KpandKivalues that optimize the
gains that lead to lower and more balanced overshoot and steady-
state error.
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our proposal is evaluated through the execution4of an actual
prototype from the healthcare domain (BSN) as the target system
alongside an implementation5of the system manager components
upon ROS. The evaluation itself follows the Goal-Question-Metric
methodology [ 5]. Our focus is on answering the guiding questions,
from a broader perspective (i) how could AI aid the parameter opti-
mization controllers, and (ii) how to apply AI-based techniques in
the search for adaptation solutions in control-theoretical SAS strate-
gies. Thus, we narrow down the questions towards an operational
scenario without loss of generality, see Table 1.
G1: Improve time to find an eligible adaptation
Questions Metrics
Q1: How much time does the optimization
pipeline take to find a solution?Duration [s]
G2: Improve quality of the adaptation
Question Metric
Q2: How efficient is the proposed learn-
ing and optimization?CT metrics
Table 1: Goal-Question-Metric
The first goal ( G1) stems from the fact that the proposed AI-based
optimization pipeline aims at providing support to the search for
4Configurations for experiments: CPU 2x Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz,
8192MB RAM, Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS, GNU C Compiler version 7.4.0
5https://www.github.com/lesunb/bsn