understandable, then surely it is interpretable, since it gives rise to an understandable
explanation (itself), trivially. But, as we have noted, not all interpretable explanationsthemselves provide understanding—qualitative or otherwise. For that, we may have
to wait for an explanation to be interpreted and to give rise to another explanation
capable of providing the understanding lacking from the first.
We find it helpful to put this view of interpretation in vernacular like that used
to discuss the general structure of explanation (Fig. 1). While in explanation the
explanandum is some phenomena, diagram, or sentence asserting or describing a
phenomenon, in interpretation the thing being interpreted, the interpretandum ,i s
an explanation we begin with and that we find difficult to understand. Likewise,
while in explanation the explanans is a set of propositions which together explain the
explanandum, in an interpretation, the interpretans also is an explanation (perhaps
conjoined with some additional premises or observations) provided with the inten-
tion of being more easily understood. Overall, to provide an interpretation is to show
how the interpretans relates to the interpretandum via the process of interpretation
(Fig. 4).
Given this general structure of interpretation, we can then begin to classify
interpretation strategies and methods. In the remainder of this section we offer a
preliminary classification of interpretation methods with special attention given totheir application within MAIS. For instance, the interpretans might be shown by the
process of interpretation to be an approximation of the interpretandum, it might be
isomorphic to (but more familiar than) the interpretandum, or it might match the
interpretandum only locally, within a narrower range of explananda we find more
easily understood. These cases are presented in detail below.
4.2 TotalandPartialInterpretation
As noted above, both the interpretans and the interpretandum are explanations; each
consists of an explanans, explanation process, and explanandum. A case of total inter-
pretation is one in which the interpretans is totally different from the interpretandum.
In other words, one in which the explanans, explanation process, and explanandum
contained in the former differ in some way from the explanans, explanation process,
Fig.4 The general structure of total interpretation851 What is Interpretability?