(Zhou et al. 2018), thereby presumably purchasing some understandability at the
expense of accuracy. Though we may gain some traction of understanding by initially
approximating an ANN, the upshot of this is that, as we increase the accuracy of
the approximating model, we wash out any understanding gained by approximation
itself and are left only with whatever advantage is offered by modelling (nearly) thesame process in a different sort of model. When we interpret some explanans that
includes an ANN into another including a tree, which approximates the first to an
arbitrary degree, we have, in a way, gone beyond approximation into interpretation
by isomorphism.
Since understanding has a psychological component, it has some mathematically
not well-behaved properties. For one, understanding is not isomorphism invariant.That is, if I understand a, the fact that ais isomorphic to bdoes notimply that I
understand b. Intuitively, my understanding of some statement of English does not
imply anything about my understanding of equivalent sentences in another language.This is because our understanding can turn on features of the specific presentation of
some notion and the background knowledge of the user of the explanation. Nonethe-less, the converse of this has been put to use as a method of interpretation. Indeed, if
I do not understand a, I may still understand some isomorphic b(due perhaps to my
familiarity with constructions in the language of b).
Perhaps the ubiquity of trees and tree-like structures in our everyday experience
explains the prevalence of tree distillations in ML; their familiarity evidently leads
to the idea that they will be understandable, and that may indeed be a reasonableassumption to make. Nonetheless, there is a very wide range of types of models
that can universally approximate, or are genuinely isomorphic to, ANNs. Candidate
alternative universal approximators include fuzzy systems (Zadeh 1965;W a n g 1992;
Kosko 1994;C a s t r o 1995; Yen et al., 1998, cf. Klement et al. 1999); Neural ODEs
(Chen et al. 2018, b; Zhang et al. 2019; and references therein) and nearest-neighbor
methods (Cover and Hart 1967; Stone 1977). When we have reason to believe that
any of these alternative models are “more understandable” than ANNs, we therebyhave reason to make use of these isomorphic models to provide an interpretans, i.e.,an explanation using the alternative model within its explanans, to serve the same
role that the ANN served in the interpretandum.
5 Conclusion
Conceiving of explanation according to those accounts offered within the philosophyof science disentangles the accuracy-explainability trade-off problem in AI, and in
doing so, deflates the apparently paradoxical relationship between trust and accuracywhich seems to plague debates in medical AI and the ML literature. Ifit is simply that
explainability is required for trust, there is no cause for worry, since highly accurate(and potentially complex) MAIS are just as explainable as simple ones. We resolvethis issue by using clearly defined accounts of explanation, and demarcating notions
of explanation from understanding and interpretation. Our account of interpretation
is explicitly positioned as distinct from accounts of explanation, while making clear
the connection that both have to understanding.857 What is Interpretability?