more understandable explanation (Section 4.1). As with explanation, there are vari-
eties of interpretation: Total orPartial (Section 4.2), Global orLocal (Section 4.3),
and Approximative orIsomorphic (Section 4.4). Our account of interpretability is
consistent with many uses within AI, in keeping with philosophy of explanation
and understanding, and provided with special attention to the accuracy-complexityrelationship in MAIS.
2 TheIndefeasibilityofExplanation
In the aim for explainable AI (XAI) we ought to work with well-theorized concep-
tions of explanation. There are many accounts of scientific explanation; we deploy
those most germane to the problem of separating out “interpretability” as a spe-
cial epistemic activity. While the recent uses of concepts of “interpretability” and
“interpretation” are variously and sometimes inconsistently defined (see Section 4),
“explanation” has a far longer and more rigorous conceptual history. Philosophers
have reflected on the nature of explanation since before Socrates, but the modern
discussion began in the late 1940s with Hempel and Oppenheim ( 1948).
We focus on the four models of explanation that have received the most signif-
icant attention: The Deductive Nomological model; the Inductive Statistical model;the Casual Mechanical model; and, more recently, the New Mechanist model. In this
section, we will briefly outline each of these models and argue that explanations ofeach variety are indefeasible to complexity; that is, increasing the complexity of a
phenomenon does not make it any less explainable.
1Establishing the indefeasibility
of explanation is the first step to recognizing that the alleged trade-off between accu-
racy (complexity) of ANNs and their explainability is misguided. Conceiving of this
trade-off in terms of “explainability” has led to confusion in the debates surrounding
interpretability and trust in MAIS. We argue that when there is a trade-off at all, it is
with understanding, not explanation.
2.1 FourKindsofExplanation
Each model of explanation has the same broad structure. An explanation consists
of an explanandum ,a n explanans and some process of explanation connecting the
explanans to the explanandum (see Fig. 1).
ForDeductive Nomological (DN) explanation (see Fig. 2) in particular, a success-
ful explanation must satisfy two conditions (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948;H e m p e l
1965). First, the process of explanation must take the form of a sound deductive argu-
ment. Second, the explanans must have an essential nomic premise, i.e., at least one
law of nature orlaw-like proposition without which the deduction would be invalid.
For example, the movement of a steel bearing on a flat table can be explained usingthe law, “all ferrous metals are physically attracted to magnetic fields” in conjunctionwith the fact that magnet has been brought close to the bearing.
1Readers familiar with these accounts of explanation may safely skip to Section 2.2.836 A. Erasmus et al.