because they are so hierarchically complex that we cannot assume that the interac-
tions between the relevant entities and their activities can be described linearly (seeBechtel and Richardson 2010). However, even if concerns surrounding nondecom-
posability are warranted in other domains, they do not apply to ANNs since suchsystems, as we argue below, can be described in NM terms.
Together, we take these considerations to establish the indefeasibility thesis as
stated above. The reader may justly worry that this thesis has been bought at toohefty a price, since they are asked to admit many “bad” or “dissatisfying” cases as
explanations. In part, this is just the price of doing science, where many explanations,
perhaps even many we find good or satisfying today, turn out not to live up to thestandards of good explanation. Of particular interest in this connection is when an
explanation is deemed bad or dissatisfying because it does not produce understand-
ing. Happily, some of the procedures of science in general and ML in particular aimdirectly at remedying this by producing better or more satisfying explanations from
those less so. We define and explicate these procedures in the context of ML below
(Sections 4.1–4.4), collectively under the heading of interpretability methods. Some
of these bad explanations are remedied in the course of good science. For now, we
turn to the specifics of applying these varieties of explanation to MAIS, confident that
the complexity added to MAIS is immaterial to explainability, even if dissatisfying.
3 TheExplanationintheMachine:MedicalAISystems
Having established the indefeasibility of explanation, we can apply it to the explain-ability of MAIS. In this section, we argue that even extremely complex MAIS canbe explained using each of the models of explanation outlined above. The upshot
here is that the trade-off problem is not one of explainability—we do have access
to explanations of MAIS. Taken together, each account of explanation applies to
ANNs as it would to any other scientific phenomenon of interest, what differs is
our capacity to understand these explanations. The precise problem is the difficultly
of understanding the explanations of complex ANNs. This is because, in contrast
to explanation, understanding is defeasible. The AE trade-off problem should there-
fore strictly be cast as an issue of providing understanding of complex AI systems.
Conveniently, a plausible solution to this problem has already been proposed: inter-
pretability. A further problem, however, is that there is little agreement over exactly
what interpretability is, an issue we deal with in Section 4.
3.1 MedicalAISystemsAreExplainable
It is possible to explain MAIS using each of the four models outlined above. What
follows are explanation-sketches (see Hempel 1965) of how ANNs can be explained
using each model. To illustrate, take a recent deep learning MAIS, developed by
MIT and MGH researchers, which is designed to identify and assess dense breast
tissue, an independent risk factor for breast cancer. An associated study shows that
this system closely matches the reliability of expert radiologists in evaluating breasttissue density and that the MAIS has been successfully deployed in a clinic setting843 What is Interpretability?