Fig.3 The structures of CM and NM explanation
when ANNs are recurrent, the pathways can always be unrolled and mechanistically
depicted.
There are several criticisms of the accounts of explanation described above (see
Salmon 1989; Skillings 2015; Godfrey-Smith 2016). While we do not have the space
to engage with all of these, there are two that may have implications for the arguments
that follow, and are thus worth addressing. First, it may be argued that some of the
typically cited challenges facing DN, IS, and CM explanations, such as explanatory
asymmetry and explanatory irrelevance, are the result of disregard for, or inadequate
treatment of the role of causation in explanation (Woodward 2003). Woodward’s
(2003) causal-interventionist account of explanation, according to which successful
explanations exhibit patterns of counterfactual dependence, may help deal with these
issues, particularly when it comes to the problem of explanatory relevance. Since weargue in Section 3that ANNs are explainable using the traditional models described
above, it may be argued that our account of interpretability could inherit some ofthese issues. We agree that the causal-interventionist account may be useful for solv-ing some questions about explainability, understandability, and interpretability in AI
(P´aez2019). Indeed, we describe interpretability processes in Section 4.3some of
which result in understandable explanations which include counterfactual informa-
tion, however, the causal-interventionist account includes pragmatic elements that
we maintain should not count against a phenomenon’s explainability, namely that
an explanation should be “deeper or more satisfying” (Woodward 2003: 190) than
those provided by DN, IS, or CM explanations. Of course, we agree that some expla-nations can be more preferable than others given some explanatory virtue, such as
simplicity, but we disagree that such virtues should be considered when evaluating
theexplainability of a phenomenon.
Second, proponents of the ontic conception of explanation, according to which
explanations are physical composites of the entities being represented, may argue thatthe characterization of NM explanation above is misguided. Explanations, on this
view, are not depictions orrepresentations of the mechanisms which constitute the
phenomenon, but rather physical entities themselves which actively contribute to the839 What is Interpretability?