new, more understandable explanation. To generate such understanding, one might
restrict an explanation to only that information pertaining to how an individual patientwas classified (local interpretation Section 4.3below). In doing so, we obtain a new
explanation from the old, although one presumably less complex—since localized toa single case—and hopefully thereby more understandable.
Terminology about interpretation methods often differs without changing the
overall concept. Zednik ( 2019), for example, identifies a number of techniques to
“render opaque computing systems transparent” (p. 8), such as input heatmapping
and feature-detector visualization. To our minds, insofar as transparency involves
production of explanations that are more understandable, these are cases of interpre-tation (specifically local and approximate interpretation Sections 4.3–4.4). Watson
and Floridi ( 2020) offer a formal framework, which they refer to as an “explanation
game,” by which proposed explanations are scored on three properties: Accuracy,simplicity, and relevance. Accuracy refers to how precisely the explanation models
the ANN’s processes from input to output. Simplicity is equated with the understand-
ability of the explanation for a given stakeholder. And relevance refers to whetherthe elements cited in the explanation are indeed responsible for the output being
explained. On this view, the goal of interpretable machine learning is to provide
explanations that maximize the balance between accuracy, simplicity, and relevance.Given that the explanation game aims at producing explanations that are more
understandable for a given user, we take this framework to be describing cases of
interpretation (specifically total and approximate interpretation Sections 4.2and4.4).
Indeed, that there is something like a connection to the production of greater under-
standing is perhaps the only consistent feature across accounts of interpretability on
offer.
Lipton (2018) and Krishnan (2019) make it clear that the notion of interpretability
is often undefined or presumed intuitive and implicit by scientists and engineers.Our choice to characterize interpretation at the level of explanations themselves is
in part an attempt to remedy this by providing a workable definition of the process
of interpretation. Furthermore, this view of interpretation does capture some of the
popular formulations of the notion offered within the ML community. Our account of
interpretation attempts to strike a balance between consistency with, and unification
of, scientific usage.
11
Consider the view of Ribeiro et al. ( 2016: 1136) on explanation of ANNs: “An
essential criterion for explanations is that they must be interpretable , i.e., provide
qualitative understanding between the input variables and the response.” One wayto read this is as asserting that interpretability is merely synonymous with under-
standability; another is to see it as a special case. If an explanation is already
11Providing an analysis of interpretation also runs into some of the same problems as philosophical
accounts of explanation, e.g., whether there is a specifically scientific notion of interpretation that is at
issue, or whether the idea is somehow continuous with quotidian examples such as “interpreting a work ofart” or “interpreting a foreign language.” That said, at least part of the success of philosophical accounts
of scientific explanation have been in their apparent ability to accommodate at least some of the more
common prima facie non-scientific cases of explanation, and we believe an account of interpretation can
follow suit.850 A. Erasmus et al.