which covers all contexts, but this is misguided. When explaining ANNs, we can use
the account most suited to our given aims. That is, when providing explanations ofthese traditional sorts, we can account for features of explanatory contexts without
adopting a pragmatic account of explanation itself. Second, these traditional models
of explanation share a common structure (Fig. 1) that we find helpful in defining
interpretation. Indeed, since pragmatists do not dispute this common structure but add
to it, the general features of our account of interpretation are adaptable to pragmatic
accounts of explanation. Only, they will need to employ more conceptual machinery
than necessary to provide an analogous account of interpretability.
Third, and most important, one of the aims of this paper is to argue for the value
of separating explanation and understanding in the context of XAI. That is not tosay that these concepts are wholly separate. In the next subsection, we contend, in
line with much recent work in philosophy of understanding, that explanation andunderstanding are indeed related, just not as strictly as many ML researchers and
proponents of pragmatic accounts think. Further to this, by setting these notions apart
we demonstrate that the problem of complexity really lies in its tendency to trade offagainst understandability. This is crucial to developing an account of interpretability
which successfully describes many of the methods used by many ML researchers for
increasing understanding of ANNs.
3.2 SeparatingExplanationandUnderstanding
Before developing an account of interpretability we must parse part of the rela-
tionship between explanation and understanding. There has recently been a surge
of philosophical interest in the concept of understanding (see de Regt et al. 2009;
Strevens 2011, 2013; Potochnik 2016;d eR e g t 2017; Khalifa 2017). Although a full
characterization of the concept is well beyond the scope of this paper, these existingaccounts illuminate the important differences between understanding and explanation
which, we argue, illustrate the defeasibility of understanding.
Some contemporary accounts of science affect somewhat of a revolution by
switching focus from explanation to understanding. Because of this, some may betempted to align them with the pragmatic notions of explanation referred to previ-
ously. Common to these accounts, however, are the claims that (1) understandingnecessarily involves having an explanation and (2) understanding demands satisfying
some other condition(s) which are not dependent on the qualities of the explana-
tion alone .
9Though, there is little consensus about what these other conditions are.
Most agree with Potochnik (2016) that this will involve some relationship between
the explanation and the explainer or audience, but disagree about what relationship is
required. For instance, de Regt holds that, “A phenomenon P is understood scientifi-cally if and only if there is an explanation of P that is based on an intelligible theory
T and conforms to the basic epistemic values of empirical adequacy and internal
consistency” (2017, p. 93, our emphasis). Strevens ( 2013) argues that understanding
9A notable exception is Lipton (2009), who argues that we can have understanding without explanation.
However others, including Strevens (2013) and Khalifa (2017), have disputed this.847 What is Interpretability?