it. The basic idea then is that the success of an IS explanation depends on whether
the explanans entails a higher probability of the explanandum obtaining.
Two decades after Hempel’s work on the DN and IS models, Salmon ( 1984) pro-
posed the Causal Mechanical (CM) model, which he claims highlights the central
role of causation in explanation.2The idea behind the CM model is that explanation
involves showing how the explanandum fits into the causal structure of the world.
There are two important aspects of causation which feature in CM explanations. The
most basic of these, a causal process , is the ability to transfer a mark or its own
physical structure in a spatio-temporally continuous way. An example of this wouldbe the movement of sound waves through air, or the movement of a particle throughspace. The second, a causal interaction, occurs when causal processes interact with
one another resulting in a modified structure. Examples include sound wave interfer-ence, or the collision of particles. A successful CM explanation involves citing someparts of the causal processes and causal interactions which lead to the phenomenon
in question (see Fig. 3). We might, for instance, explain the phenomenon of noise
cancellation by citing the existence of two sound waves, one with inverted phase to
the other (the causal processes) interfering with one another (the causal interaction).
A cluster of views of explanation has recently emerged, all termed New Mechanist
(NM). These views all center on the idea that providing a mechanism is important forexplanation, and originate largely from the work of Machamer et al. ( 2000), Bech-
tel (2011), and Craver and Darden (2013). The idea behind NM accounts is thatproviding an explanation involves showing how some phenomena arise from a col-lection of entities and activities (see Fig. 3).
3,4A successful explanation involves
identifying the entities and activities that bring about a phenomenon with regular-ity and without gaps, missing entities or activities. For example, an explanation ofprotein synthesis will need to identify the entities involved (ribosomes, aminoacyl-
tRNAs, mRNAs, GTP, etc.) and the activities (binding of mRNA to the ribosome,
hydrolysis of GTP, translocation of mRNA within the ribosome, etc.), which are
typically depicted in the form of a mechanistic diagram of the sort familiar from
textbook mechanisms. A mechanism also includes two special collections of enti-
ties and activities, the initial or “set-up” and the final or “termination” conditions, in
this case the binding of mRNA to the ribosome and the final release of a synthesized
protein respectively. However, to better describe biological mechanisms exhibitingcyclic organizations, some argue that such conditions are not necessary for mech-
anistic explanations (Bechtel 2011). Yet, since ANNs are never cyclic, Machamer
et al.’s characterization of mechanisms is apt for explaining such systems. Moreover,
2Prior to this, Salmon (1971) proposed his statistical relevance model of explanation. Although we do not
cover it here, it is worth noting that he does not wholly abandon the notion of statistical relevance, but
rather claims that one typically acquires information about statistically relevant relations before providing
a CM explanation.
3This conception of explanation derives from examination of molecular-biology and neurophysiology,
specifically, mechanisms of protein synthesis and neurotransmitter release.
4As Levy (2013) notes, advocates of the explanatory value of mechanisms are “fairly coy” (p. 102) about
defining the key notions, a matter further complicated by a lack of universal terminology. E.g., sometimes“parts” are discussed instead of “entities” (Bechtel 2006). However, for present purposes only the outlines
of the NM approach are required.838 A. Erasmus et al.