(Lehman et al. 2019). It is built on a ResNet-18 convolutional neural network (CNN)
used for computer vision tasks.6The model was trained and tested using a dataset of
58,894 randomly selected mammograms from 39,272 women between January 2009
and May 2011. Of these, 41,479 were used for training and 8,977 for testing. In the
testing phase, the MAIS matched with expert assessment at 77% across a standardBreast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS), which categorizes tissue in
four ways: fatty, scattered, heterogenous, and dense. In binary tests, either dense or
non-dense tissue, the model matched expert assessments at 87%. Subsequently, the
MAIS was deployed for testing in a clinical setting at MGH and performed well,
matching with expert assessments across all four BI-RADS categories at 90% andat 94% for binary tests. The basic idea is that the MAIS takes inputted images and
outputs a classification according to categories for breast cancer risk.
To understand how this MAIS can be explained, we must know a little about its
system architecture. The ResNet-18 consists of 18 layers. The first 17 layers areall convolution layers, and the last is a fully connected network. This type of ANN
model is most commonly used to classify images—it takes an image and outputs aclassification.
7This is done by feeding the image to the ANN’s input layer as a set
of numbers which then get processed through the ANNs weighted nodes and edgesand outputted as a vector of real numbers. Typically, the image will then be assignedto the most probable class.
The DN model can be used to explain any particular image classification produced
by this MAIS. A DN explanation of how the MAIS assesses an input image involveslisting the weights attached to each and every node and the informational routes indi-
cated by each and every edge at every convolution stage, and the weights of the fully
connected network along with the assigned numerical values being fed into the inputlayer and the network architecture. Once we have that, we can list the values for the
classifications the MAIS learned in the training and testing phases of development,
and see that its classification of the image is based on comparing the ranges of these
classifications with the output value of the image. In doing so, we are explaining the
explanandum—here, the MAIS classifying of image Ias classification c—using an
explanans consisting of a law-like premises—in this case, how the weights of all rel-
evant nodes and edges produced the output value, along with the law that an output
is assigned to the most probable class—and additional information about I—which
includes the set of input values assigned to I, and the output value c.
While the DN model gives us an explanation of specific classifications, the IS
model can help explain the probability that the MAIS’s classifications are accurate.Broadly, the accuracy of the outputs of ANNs can be explained by appealing to details
about the training process as statistical laws and the nature of the training data used as
6A CNN is an ANN particularly adept at detecting patterns in images. It uses convolutional layers to
split an image up into overlapping tiles, which are then analyzed for learned patterns before the signal is
outputted to subsequent layers (see Goodfellow et al. 2016, Chapter 9).
7While we use an example of a diagnostic MAIS, viz. a classifier, our arguments apply to ANNs designed
for other goals, such as automated planning and personalized recommendations.844 A. Erasmus et al.