Consider a DN explanation of some phenomenon beginning with a simple
explanans, a set of law-like premises Land empirical observations E, that con-
cludes with the explanandum/description of a phenomenon xafter a valid deduction.
What makes this a DN explanation is just that the explanandum is reached deduc-
tively using an explanans that is partially law-like. Now consider what happens if weexpand the explanans to include more premises, which are consistent with our best
background theories and evidence, say by substituting one of the law-like premises
for a set of nlaws jointly entailing it. This may make the explanans less manageable
or more difficult to understand, but we still have a DN explanation. That is, if xfol-
lows deductively from L+E, then it also follows from L
∗={L1+L2+...+Ln}+E,
where L1...nare (complexity-increasing) laws which, taken together, entail L.T h e
expansion of the explanans does not make its laws any less law-like nor its conclusionany less deductively valid. Put another way, the explanandum is no less explainable,since the connection to the explanans, no matter complexity, is still deduction.
We might also increase the complexity of a DN explanation by substituting the
empirical observations with a more complex set of observations, say by describingthem at a more concrete level of abstraction, or with more accuracy. To account for
how these observations play a role in explaining the phenomenon of interest, we may
require a more complex set of laws. Suppose we have the explanans L+Eas before,
and consider some more complex set of true laws L*and/or more complex set of
empirical observations E*from which xfollows. Since L*is a set of laws (or at
least law-like propositions), and E*is a set of empirical observations, the deduction
ofxfrom this (more complex) pair constitutes a DN explanation of x.A sa b o v e ,t h e
explainability of xdoes not depend on the complexity of its explanans, but on whether
the relationship between explanans and explanandum is deductive. To illustrate, con-sider the example of the steel bearing moving on the flat table from before. We might
increase the complexity of the explanation by noting more empirical observations,
such as the initial distance of the magnet from the bearing, surface friction forces, and
so on. Or we may explain the movement of the steel bearing by using more detailed
laws including those governing the total induced magnitude of force on the ferro-magnetic material’s volume, and laws of motion, among others. These laws, taken
together, entail that ferrous metals are attracted to magnetic fields. While this more
complex explanation may be more difficult to understand, and is by most accountsless appealing than the simpler one, it is still a DN explanation for the movement of
the steel bearing on the flat table.
Importantly, not all ways of changing an explanans are only additions of complex-
ity, some changes affect the quality of the explanation produced. For example, wemight change a satisfying DN explanation of the dissolution of salt to append adjunct
claims about the dissolution of “hexed salt” (see Kyburg ; Salmon 1989). In doing
so, we included irrelevant information, since the hexing presumably plays no part in
the dissolving of salt. However, we do not defeat a DN explanation by conjoining it
with adjunct, irrelevant premises—though perhaps we worsen it markedly. Note, ifwe had changed the explanans to say only that “all and only hexed salt dissolves” and
removed claims that “all salt dissolves,” then we would have failed to provide a DN
explanation—since that assumption is inconsistent with our best background theoriesand evidence. That sort of change is not an addition of complexity, it is a substi-841 What is Interpretability?