and explanandum of the latter. For example, consider a simple substitution of vari-
ables. Suppose we have an explanation, derived from an ANN in a medical context,that mentions some variable vin each essential part, the explanandum itself being
some claim about v, e.g., that it is relevant to breast tissue classification. Coming to
this explanation without background information about the meaning of v, we might
likewise not understand the meaning of the explanandum. But supposing we are
allowed to provide such a meaning by further investigating the set-up of the MAIS,
e.g.,v=radiologically white tissue, we can construct a new explanation that speci-
fies this meaning in place of vin every essential part, thus changing every part of the
explanation. Here, the replacement of “v ”b y“ radiologically white tissue”i ne v e r y
part of an explanation, generating a new explanation without “ v,” is a process of total
interpretation. The new explanation, for example, will not explain that “v ” is relevant
to breast tissue classification, but that the presence of radiologically white tissue isrelevant to breast tissue classification.
12
Often, when we fail to understand an explanation of some phenomenon x,w e
want to interpret this explanation to provide understanding, but still want to obtainanexplanation of x . In such cases, what we want is to “adduce” an interpretans, the
explanandum of which is identical to the explanandum of the interpretandum (dia-grammed in the triangular Fig. 5, a special case of Fig. 4). That is, we can sometimes
provide a partial interpretation by showing how one explanans arises from another,
by some process of interpretation, itself providing some explanation of the very sameexplanandum. Put another way, a partial interpretation is just a re-explanation of thesame explanandum, equipped with a relationship between the new explanans and the
old.
This sort of interpretation is often what is aimed for early on in efforts to gen-
erate understandable explanations, since the desiderata of the initial explanationofxis understanding of x, and remains so after the demand for interpretation.
Indeed, another sort of partial interpretation involves interpreting only the process ofexplanation itself. Supposing we are given a DN explanation, where the process of
explanation, the deduction, is too complicated or long to be held in mind—consider
any explanation which requires a mathematical proof that relies on outsourcing steps
to a computer, such as Gonthier’s (2005) proof of the four color problem. Here the
aim is not to adduce any new explanans or explanandum, these are fixed, but to findsome new process of explanation, e.g., a more simple or succinct deduction. This
case is diagrammed in Fig. 6.
Failing a partial interpretation, we may aim to provide a total interpretation. But
this immediately raises a problem: what should the relationship between two expla-nations be such that I come to better understand one by coming to understand the
other? If I aim to understand xbut its explanation Eis unintelligible to me, and I am
given a total interpretation such that a second explanation E
/primeexplains x/prime, then there
12Notice that, by replacing variables everywhere in an explanation we also change the process of explana-
tion. Supposing for example that the explanation was DN, the change of variables will change the content
of the deduction of the explanandum from the explanans.852 A. Erasmus et al.