in terms of “bottoming out” of mechanisms—describing mechanisms typically ends
at a level “accepted as relatively fundamental or taken as unproblematic” ( 2000: 13)
by a given discipline. In the context of explaining MAIS classification, we can pre-
sumably treat hardware processes as elementary and focus on ANN architecture. At
least, until there is some indication that features of MAIS classification turn on lowerlevel mechanisms, the explanation ends there.
Just as with CM explanation above, the essential features of an NM explanation
relevant to MAIS will involve identifying entities (nodes and layers) and activities
(signaling, input and output), start-up conditions (input data and configuration of the
network) and termination conditions (output of and thresholds for classification), theessentials of which are described above. Indeed, there may also be “higher level”
mechanistic explanations, which identify more intuitive activities of specific layers or
nodes, and these might be more easily “understood” or “visualized” than the mech-anistic depiction of the architecture of ANNs (see Section 4.1, and Lipton ( 2018)
on decomposability). But the existence of higher-level explanations does not preventNM explanation of MAIS at the level of ANNs themselves.
We stress the importance of distinguishing between whether a mechanism is sat-
isfactory or good at some level of abstraction, and whether it is a genuine NMexplanation. There is justifiable concern about whether a given NM explanation of anANN is a good one, particularly when that ANN itself is treated as a model of some
other phenomena we are interested in explaining (e.g., the mammalian neocortex,
see Buckner 2019). But the provision of an NM explanation must of course precede
assessment of its quality. Moreover, MAIS are in some ways actually simpler than the
usual targets for NM explanations—biological neurons—since the NM explanations
of MAIS in their current form need not account for chemical or analogue features ofartificial neurons.
The above discussion illustrates that explanations of ANNs are available to us. The
AE trade-off, posed as an issue of “explainability” as it commonly is in ML literature,
is therefore not as problematic as one might think.
It is worth considering a possible challenge to our position. Some have argued
that the traditional accounts of explanation outlined above are incomplete becausethey do not take pragmatic elements into account (e.g., van Fraassen 1980;A c h i n -
stein 1983). For instance, it has been suggested that explanations are only good or
successful when they provide understanding, and that explanations should exhibit
a proper relationship to their audience (Potochnik 2016). Consequently, some may
contend that our view fails to adequately account for the context or subject for which
a given explanation is intended. According to this objection, the explanations of
ANNs provided by the traditional models outlined above should not really be con-
sidered explanations at all since they do not guarantee understanding of the outputsgiven to us by AI systems. While our position is bound to be contentious to some
ML researchers and philosophers favoring pragmatic accounts of explanation, there
are several reasons for preferring it over such accounts—particularly in efforts todisentangle interpretability from explainability.
First, our view is compatible with widely accepted pluralism about explanation.
Pragmatic accounts are also pluralist, but part of the pragmatist argument against
traditional accounts is that these assume some overarching account of explanation846 A. Erasmus et al.