such that the outputs of f( x) andg(x) are similar on some metric, e.g., the square
deviation,/integraltext
X(f (x) −g(x))2. When an ANN appears in some explanation, this
approximation can successfully figure in the process of interpretation precisely when
we expect g(x) to be more understandable thanf( x) .
Many people find linear functions and decision trees more understandable than
ANNs. Indeed, methods for interpretation of ANNs often aim to provide g(x) that is
either linear or tree-like, despite what some see as scant justification that these models
really are any more understandable (Lipton 2018). Still, some studies illustrate that
sparse rule lists and linear models fare well for human-interpretability (Lage et al.2019; Narayanan et al. 2018). Distillation methods work by training one model to
approximate the predictions given by another, and can be done either globally or
locally.
Linear models are used to provide local explanations. While linear models are
not flexible enough to globally approximate a neural network, they can provide ade-quate accuracy when the explanandum is small, such as a single prediction. For this
purpose, various methods have been developed that attempt to determine the set offeatures that are important to explaining the output of a given prediction (Ribeiro
et al. 2016; Mishra et al. 2017; Lundberg and Lee 2017;C h e ne ta l .2018, b).
These methods essentially localize the explanation of an ANN prediction to a small
neighborhood around a specific prediction (this being the new explanandum) and
approximate this localized explanation. For example, for the ANN described above
for the prediction of dense breast tissue, while a global explanation of what makestissue dense might be too complex to understand, an explanation of approximately
which pixels in a given mammogram led to it being classified as dense may be simple
enough to be understood by visual inspection.
Since linear models are often not flexible enough to provide sufficient global
approximations, global ANN distillation in particular involves using decision treesas the approximating model. When trees are more understandable, distillations are
thereby a method of interpretation by approximation. Trees and ANNs both have
quite a strong property as approximators .
14Both are “universal approximators,”
which means that they can approximate any continuous function to an arbitrary
degree of accuracy (Hornik et al. 1989). Since ANNs are continuous functions,
decision trees can therefore approximate neural networks to any accuracy.
The process of distilling a neural network into a tree involves generating input data
and using ANNs to get a prediction, then training a decision tree on the sets of input-
output pairs given by the ANN. One can always generate as much data as needed toachieve a desired level of similarity between the model outputs. Nonetheless, despite
theprima facie understandability of small trees as compared to networks, in practice
the distillation of useful ANNs tends to result in very large trees (Frosst and Hinton
2017).
Here we are faced with the understandability-accuracy trade-off, since one can
also sacrifice accuracy of a tree distillation by reducing or fixing its size or depth
14Importantly, this does not mean they are equivalent at learning tasks.856 A. Erasmus et al.