causal structure of the world. Accordingly, there is “no question of explanations being
‘right’ or ‘wrong,’ or ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ They just are.” (Craver 2007: 27). The ontic
conception supports our position regarding the indefeasability of explanation below.
It does so, however, in a way we find problematic. On a strongly ontic conception of
explanation, there isan objective explanation of ANNs, provided only that there are
ANNs. Since there are ANNs, they would be automatically objectively explainable
on this conception of NM. But this purchases the indefeasibility thesis at the cost of
relevance to issues of explainability in ML. Calls for XAI are not, to our minds, calls
for objective explanations.
Like Craver (2007), we hold that what makes something an explanation is not
some set of pragmatic conditions such as whether it produces understanding, orwhether it is a “good” explanation because it satisfies some set of explanatory virtues,
but rather whether it accurately maps onto the world via any one of the explanationprocesses outlined above. Our concern with explanations and use of the concept of
explanation are with “explanatory texts” (Craver 2007), that is, how explanations are
given by scientists, ML researchers in particular. Nonetheless, our rejection of the
involvement of pragmatic conditions does not entail or require the strong ontic thesis
above. We only emphasize that, even if one finds an explanation undesirable because
it does not satisfy some particular set of explanatory virtues or pragmatic conditions,that does not make it any less an explanation. And if there is an explanation for a
given phenomenon, then that phenomenon is explainable.
2.2 TheIndefeasabilityThesis
Unfortunately, the well-developed typology of explanation models described above
is largely neglected in discussions of explainability in neural networks. Those who
argue for the inverse relationship between complexity and explainability for ANNs
have overlooked an important feature of explanation as it is understood above: its
indefeasibility . They often treat complex MAIS as though they had outgrown their
explainability, but this is not quite right. In fact, the explainability of a phenomenon—
such as the output of an AI system—depends only on the relationships between our
background theories and evidence, and the procedures of the explanation process
used. In other words, in each of the accounts of explanation introduced above, thefeatures that make something an explanation turn out to be invariant with respect to
the complexity of both the explanans and the explanandum. What the considerations
in this subsection illustrate is the following indefeasibility thesis for explanation ofthe phenomena characteristic of ANNs: Adding complexity to the explanation of the
phenomenon does not entail that the phenomenon is any less explainable .
This is not a claim about the quality, superiority, or goodness of a given explana-
tion. Our concern is whether increasing the complexity of a given explanation makesit no longer an explanation. We argue that, while increasing complexity may reduce
the quality of the explanation, by making it less preferable or understandable (seeSection 3.2), or even in some cases make it a bad explanation, it does notmake it
any less an explanation, and thus the explainability of the phenomenon of interest is
unaffected. We clarify this position by looking at each kind of explanation in turn.840 A. Erasmus et al.