a local explanation involved recognizing that h(x)| x>0=f( x)|x>0=x, and while
in practice applications of constructing local explanations are surely more complex
than this, they each share this general theme: once we have decided to explain a sub-
set of our explanandum, we can sometimes make this work by adducing a restriction
on our explanans—one intended to make the new explanation more understandable.
Thus far we have just described “locality” as a comparative property of explana-
tions and based entirely on the inclusion of explananda. In practice, we usually startwith one complex explanation, and wish to interpret it, i.e., provide another, more
understandable explanation. One way to achieve this is to localize the explanation by
adducing another explanation that is local with respect to the explanation we beganwith. Many methods in ML (e.g., LIME, SHAP) identify this local subset of Dby
defining a geometric measure of distance between input values and building a model(e.g., a sparse linear model or shallow tree, Section 4.4) that approximates the more
global model in the environment of a particular input, as defined by this distance
metric. Once we have an explanation in hand (the interpretans) given by the locally
trained model, we can check to see that indeed it is local (by the process of inter-pretation) relative to our starting explanation (the interpretandum). The process of
interpretation in such cases is showing that the explanans of the interpretans is some-
how restricted from the explanans of the interpretandum, and demonstrating that the
explanandum of the interpretans is included in that of the interpretandum.
In the case of ANNs, our adduction of a restriction on the explanans amounts to
a restriction on the inputs to that ANN in essentially the same manner as described
for ordinary functional restrictions. In the most extreme cases of local interpretation
we move to an explanation of a single data point, a single classification. And in that
somewhat trivializing case, an explanation of the classification of the input can be
reduced to a selection of features of the input that most affect the output; such local
interpretations provide counterfactual information about which features of the input,
if intervened upon, would change the output. For example, local interpretation meth-
ods in MAIS often identify the particular pixels, present in an input image, that most
affect the classification output (P ´aez2019; Zednik 2019; see also Ribeiro et al. 2016).
In practice, methods for interpretation of predictions of machine learning algorithmsoften approximate the explanation, in addition to localizing it to a given datum, as
examined in the following section.
4.4 InterpretationbyApproximationorIsomorphism
When an explanation is too complex to be understandable to its user, a possible solu-
tion is to interpret the explanation by providing another, more understandable and
similar explanation. In general, measuring similarity depends on a prior choice of
some features to compare—mice may be similar to humans with respect to the effi-
cacy of some medication, but not similar in eloquence. In the context of MAIS, an
ANN can be thought of as a highly non-linear function f( x) . Approximating the
ANN predictions would entail providing a (more understandable
13) function g(x) ,
13Approximations of ANNs also have roles besides interpretation, e.g., saving computational time or
facilitating analysis, but are here considered only for that role.855 What is Interpretability?