tution of logically distinct premises. Moreover, the complexity introduced in highly
accurate ANNs is not irrelevant in this way; there is no worry that explainability isdefeated by magical or irrelevant suppositions about complex MAIS.
The situation is somewhat different for IS explanations. Suppose we have an IS
explanation of some phenomenon starting with statistical laws Sand empirical facts
Eand ending with some inductively inferred conclusion as its explanandum, which
might be some particular outcome xor a probability of such an outcome Pr(x) =p
(see Woodward 1989, 2019). Now assume we discover that some other statistical
laws or empirical facts Care relevant to the phenomenon in question. Notice that
additional statistical laws or empirical facts will, under certain conditions, affect (theprobability of) the explanandum. However, our aim is not to show that increasing
the complexity of the explanans does not affect the support for the explanandum.
That is, if xfollows inductively from S+Ewith support p(orPr(x) =pfollows
inductively from S +E), then xfollows inductively from S+E+Cwith support
p±c(orPr(x) =p±cfollows inductively from S+E+C).
5What’s important
here is that despite increased complexity, the process of explanation is the same, sothe relationship between the explanans and explanandum remains one we are happy
to call explanation. Of course, the explanandum may thereafter be explained with
low probability, making the explanation less “successful” or “good,” but not makingthe explanandum less explainable by the inductive process of IS explanation.
Similarly, increasing the complexity of the explanans in CM explanations does
not make the explanandum any less explainable. Consider a CM explanation whichappeals to a particular set of causal processes Pand set of causal interactions Iwhich
together bring about phenomenon x. We might discover additional causal processes
and/or causal interactions, which are relevant to x(say by uncovering finer grained
details about the particular causal process) such that a more complex set of causal
processes P*and/or set of causal interactions I*together bring about x. While these
new sets of causal features may make the explanation harder to follow, they do notmake the CM explanation any less an explanation than before. In other words, just
because P*+I*is more complex than P+I, does not make xany less explain-
able by the former than it is by the latter. Similarly for an NM explanation. Such an
explanation will depict relevant entities Eand activities Aas responsible for the phe-
nomenon xin question. While the discovery of additional entities E*and/or activities
A*may make the explanation of xless intelligible, it does not make the phenomenon
any less explainable than before. Complex mechanisms are mechanisms no less.
Indeed, there may be system dynamics of some phenomena, such as a high degree
of stochasticity (Skillings 2015; Godfrey-Smith 2016), that make the discovery and
articulation of mechanisms or causal processes difficult, or proposed mechanisms
dissatisfying. Nonetheless, granted some existing mechanism or process, addingcomplexity to it in the form of entities and activities, even stochastic activities, does
not destroy the mechanism. Similarly, some may worry that complex ANNs are
nondecomposable, which is to say, they are impossible to (mechanistically) explain
5There are cases where the addition of an empirical fact may lead to a deductive explanation, for our
purpose we can treat this as a trivial case of inductive explanation, where the probability is zero or one.842 A. Erasmus et al.