MAIS in particular, often makes use of the concepts of explainability, understand-
ability andinterpretability, but offer little critical engagement and contain persistent
disagreement on the definitions of these terms (Lipton 2018; Krishnan 2019). More-
over, a central problem plaguing the ML literature is the conflation of these concepts:
Explainability and understandability are treated as if they are synonymous withinterpretability.
Several philosophers have analyzed these concepts more carefully. Zednik ( 2019),
for instance, offers a pragmatic account of opacity to provide a normative framework
detailing different kinds of knowledge that ought to be required by different stake-holders. Explanations, on this view, are the basis for how such knowledge is acquired.Creel’s (2020) account of transparency aims at illuminating recent successes in
reducing algorithmic opacity and providing AI-explanations. Krishnan (2019) arguesthat pursuing definitions of interpretability, and related terms like explainability andunderstandability, is misguided because doing so reduces solutions to opacity-related
problems to merely finding ways to make ANNs more transparent. Her claim that
there are other solutions to these problems, while compelling, does not entail thatdefining interpretability in the context of ANNs should be wholly abandoned, par-
ticularly given the apparent conflation of terms. P ´aez (2019) recommends that focus
should be shifted from explanation to understanding, arguing that traditional expla-
nations of opaque systems are impossible and that understanding can be acquired by
other means which do not require such explanations. Such strategies, P ´aez argues,
exist in ML in the form of interpretive models aimed at understanding how an ANN
functions, and post hoc interpretability aimed at understanding individual decisions.
Taken together these accounts go some way to establishing interpretability as an
important concept in its own right and its use within ML. However, none provide anexplicit account of the term (see Section 4.1) or how it should be used in analyses of
ANNs (Sections 4.2–4.4).
Our first aim is to clearly set the concepts of explainability, understandability, and
interpretability apart. The explosion of different notions of “explanation” in the con-text of AI has reinvented the wheel; philosophers of science have been developingnotions of scientific explanation for nearly a century (Section 2). In contrast to P ´aez’s
(2019) claim that traditional explanations of ANNs are impossible, we argue that foursuch accounts—the Deductive Nomological ,Inductive Statistical, Causal Mechani-
cal,a n dNew Mechanist models—indeed apply to neural networks, as they would to
any scientific phenomenon (Section 3.1). In this sense there is no AE trade-off. The
source of much confusion within the literature is the conflation of “explainability,”“understandability,” and “interpretability” in cases where they are not interchange-
able. Many claims within and surrounding the ML literature are explicitly lodged
as calls for “explainability,” when it is the understandability of existing explanationsthat should be at issue. We briefly unpack the relationship between understanding
and explanation, showing that it is understanding that is defeasible by increasing
complexity (Section 3.2).
We then provide an explicit account of interpretability and offer a typology of
interpretation methods (Section 4). We argue that interpretation is a relation between
two explanations. During the process of interpretation, one explanation gives rise to a835 What is Interpretability?