involves “grasping” a correct scientific explanation, and characterizes this in terms
of possessing a particular psychological state . Khalifa (2017) agrees that one under-
stands a phenomenon to the extent that they “grasp” an “explanatory nexus,” but
elaborates that grasping refers to a cognitive state resembling scientific knowledge.
In stating that an explanation is necessary for understanding, condition (1) helps
illustrate the untenability of the claim that if something fails to give rise to under-standing, then it is not an explanation. Accepting, in line with much current work on
understanding, that (1) is true amounts to accepting that if you understand some phe-
nomenon then you can explain it, or contrapositively that if you cannot explain some
phenomenon then you do not understand it. It would be false to conclude from (1)that if you do not understand some phenomenon then you cannot explain it. Simply
put, you can explain things you cannot understand—doing just this is surely a part
of the learning process and perhaps a psychological preliminary to understandinggenerally—you just cannot understand things you cannot explain.
Where explanation and understanding are set apart is in terms of (2). Whatever
particular view of understanding one may prefer—whether it’s “grasping,” “intelligi-bility,” “apprehending,” or “knowing”—it is, at least in part, subjective or contextual.
The intelligibility of a scientific theory, which is necessary for understanding in de
Regt’s account, is by his own lights dependent on a scientist’s being able to “rec-ognize the qualitatively characteristic consequences of T without performing exact
calculations” (2017, p. 102; also see de Regt and Dieks 2005). What this means is
that intelligibility, and thus understanding, partially relies on subjective features of
the individual who is trying to understand the phenomenon in question. For both
Khalifa and Strevens, grasping an explanation, and thus whether a given explanation
actually provides understanding, will turn on psychological features specific to theuser of that explanation, e.g., on features of the scientist, engineer, doctor or patient.
Plainly, what is understandable to Sally might not be to John; what is understandable
to the engineer of an ANN may not be to a radiologist or the person using a MAIS.
Taken together, (1) and (2) show two things: First, the pragmatic objection to
the explainability of ANNs is misguided, thus strengthening the argument thatexplainability is guaranteed by the sorts of things that appear in the explanans and
their relationship to the explanandum. That is why explainability is indefeasible
by increasing complexity: The properties of the explanans and relationship to theexplanandum remain the same come whatever complexity.
Second, because one’s understanding is conditional on subjective features
(whether psychological, cognitive, or contextual), it is not impervious to complexity.The ability some agent has to understand varies between individuals and is sensi-
tive to the complexity of both the explanans and the process of relating it to some
explanandum, phenomenon. Understanding, in contrast to explanation, isdefeasi-
ble. If ANNs are strictly speaking explainable but often those explanations are not
understandable, then what is needed is methods for making those explanations more
understandable. This is precisely the reason that we need to move beyond mereindividual explanations to interpretation.848 A. Erasmus et al.