While explanation is a well-theorized notion within the theory and philosophy of
science, “interpretation” and a corresponding notion of “interpretability” are not (see
Lipton 2018). We have attempted to synthesize a notion of scientific “interpretabil-
ity,” from cases where it was notused synonymously with either “explainability”
or “understandability.” This was done to provide a theoretical framework that gen-eralizes the methods scientists and ML researchers often use for the purpose of
interpretation, and to help remedy this lacuna within the ML literature in particu-
lar and the neglect of inter-explanatory relationships in philosophy of explanation
broadly speaking. In the context of MAIS, there never really was a problem explain-
ing artificial networks. Rather, the problem has always been understanding theexplanations that were available, and our account of interpretation shows why.
We define interpretation as a process taking one explanation to another, more
understandable explanation. Understandability is at least partly psychological,depending not only on the phenomenon or its explanation but also on the user of the
explanation. Identifying the elements of explanations that make them understandable
broadly speaking is an active research topic in the social sciences (Miller 2019), but
beyond the scope of a theory of interpretation as such. Just as de Regt ( 2017)s a y sw e
need a general theory of understanding that is independent of our specific accounts ofexplanation, we require a general theory of interpretation that is independent of both.Our framework can thereby only be employed once we have made some theoretical
choices about what features of explanations indeed provide understanding, without
which the success of an interpretation cannot be assessed.
The ubiquitous presumption that only simple and/or linear models are “under-
standable” is liable to limit the potential scope of scientific interpretation; the useof non-linear and complex models should not be excluded at the outset. It seems alarge part of the stress on the point of explainability in discussions of ANNs and
MAIS boils down to an insistence that they be understandable to a non-specific and
correspondingly broad audience of clinicians, patients, and possibly the general pub-
lic. With such a diverse audience of users of explanations, perhaps simplicity is the
only proxy for understandability, and persistent demands for “explainable” ANNsare reducible to demands for simple and potentially correspondingly weak MAIS.
We can move away from this tendency to simplicity by demanding that ANNs be
interpretable in the sense defined here. That is, by demanding that we find ways
to convert explanations that are not understood into those that are more understand-
able in a user-relative way. That way, we might keep many complex and thus strong
MAIS while achieving broad understandability by, counter-intuitively, adding further“simplifying complexity” in the form of interpretation methods.
Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Jacob Stegenga, Rune Nyrup, Adrian Currie, Daniel Steel,
Cristian Larroulet Philippi, Elizabeth Seger, Hamed Tabatabaei Ghomi, Mandy Wigdorowitz, Ariane
Hanemaayer, Zinhle Mncube, Victor Parchment, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
and discussions.
CompliancewithEthicalStandards
C o n f l i c to fI n t e r e s t The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.858 A. Erasmus et al.