4 Interpretability
[T]he paucity of critical writing in the machine learning community is prob-
lematic. When we have a solid problem formulation, flaws in methodology can
be addressed by articulating new methods. But when the problem formulationitself is flawed, neither algorithms nor experiments are sufficient to address the
underlying problem. (Lipton 2018)
We contend that much confusion in the debate about, and push for, XAI can beattributed to a conflation of explainability and interpretability. Interpretation has been
devised and variously defined within the sciences themselves (Ribeiro et al. 2016;
Mittelstadt et al. 2019; Lipton 2018; Krishnan 2019;P ´aez2019). We cannot fault
philosophers or scientists for misunderstanding the scientific notion of interpretationsince there is no single such notion to rely on. Indeed, interpretability is often con-nected directly with explanation and understanding, although by way of equation or
equivocation which we find unhelpful. Lipton ( 2018) says of interpretability that it
“reflects several distinct concepts,” which is to say that it is used inconsistently, or atbest equivocally. Indeed some, like Miller (2019, 8), are happy to accept the equation
of interpretability with explainability. Our view is that is it best to set these conceptsapart. We begin below with an account of interpretation, from which an account of
interpretability follows straightforwardly as the ability to provide an interpretation.
4.1 WhatisInterpretation?
Fundamentally, interpretation is something that one does to an explanation to make
it more understandable. When we do not find an explanation understandable, we ask
for it to be interpreted. We can also talk of “interpreting data,” “interpreting a phe-
nomenon,” or “interpreting an ANN” but when these do not mean precisely the samething as “explaining data,” “explaining a phenomenon,” or “explaining an ANN” then
these uses are derivative of the notion of interpretability we propose here. To “inter-
pret data” is to do something to an explanation of/involving data; to interpret an ANNis to do something to an explanation of/involving the ANN. An interpretation is also
something that is performed on each essential part of an explanation: one interprets an
explanans, process of explanation, and explanandum.
10An interpretation then gives
rise to another explanation, by one or a combination of the techniques of XAI, or
interpretability methods detailed below (Sections 4.2–4.4). Finally, when successful,
an interpretation gives rise to an explanation that is, in some way or another, more
understandable than the explanation we began with.
Take the example of the breast tissue classifier from before: We might start with
a traditional explanation, such as a DN explanation, of a particular output from the
MAIS. Given the complexity of such an explanation, it may be extremely difficult to
understand for most users; thus, one may ask for a more understandable explanation.We may then apply one of the interpretability methods with the aim of producing a
10Although in real cases, many of these components of interpretation may be implicit or trivial, i.e., one
may leave the explanandum unaffected (see Section 4.2below on partial interpretations).849 What is Interpretability?