for an ANN to be interpretable . In this paper, we argue that ANNs are, in one sense,
already explainable and propose a novel theory of interpretability.
These issues often arise in discussions of medical AI systems (MAIS), where
reliance on artificial decision making in medical contexts could have serious conse-
quences. There is evidence that some of these systems have superior diagnostic andpredictive capabilities when compared to human experts (Esteva et al. 2017;F l e m i n g
2018; Rajpurkar et al. 2017; Tschandl et al. 2019). Indeed, many MAIS are already
deployed in the clinic, including algorithms aimed at diagnosing retinal disease (De
Fauw et al. 2018), and breast cancer treatment recommendations (Somashekhar et al.
2018) and screening (McKinney et al. 2020). For some, accomplishments like these
are a precursor to the promising incorporation of machine learning (ML) into effec-tive medical decision making (Wiens and Shenoy 2018). However, others have noted
problems facing MAIS, including vulnerabilities to nefariously motivated adversarial
attacks by various stakeholders in the healthcare system (Finlayson et al. 2019)a n d
algorithmic racial biases in the prediction of future health care needs due to objectivefunctions and training procedures (Obermeyer et al. 2019).
These problems have led to calls for MAIS, and ANNs in general, to be
explainable—that is, if an ANN makes a recommendation, there should be an expla-nation for its decision (Athey 2017; Aler Tubella et al. 2019). In the context of
healthcare, motivated by the need to justify artificial decisions to patients, some
argue that maximizing the benefits of MAIS requires that their outputs be explain-
able (Watson et al. 2019). Others argue that having explainable MAIS makes it easier
to recognize and remedy algorithmic rules which lead to inaccurate outputs (Caru-
ana et al. 2015). On this view, having an explanation allows us to evaluate a MAIS’
recommendations, which some argue is necessary for assessing the trustworthiness
of such systems (see Ribeiro et al. 2016; Mittelstadt et al. 2019).
Issues of explainability have become problematic due to the prominent view that
the accuracy of an AI system trades off against its explainability. We refer to this
as the Accuracy-Explainability ( AE) trade-off (Gunning 2017; London 2019). Many
of the problems MAIS are designed to solve are complicated enough that achieving
a high degree of accuracy requires highly complex ANNs. This, conjoined with the
assumption that highly complex ANNs are “less explainable,” leads to the peculiar
reasoning that if an AI system being more accurate entails low explainability, and iflow explainability entails an inability to assess trustworthiness, then a highly accurate
AI system entails an inability to assess trustworthiness. However, this strikes us as
unintuitive since, presumably, accuracy should count towards trustworthiness.
There are three common strategies for dealing with this problem. Some argue
that simplicity should be favored over accuracy when developing MAIS (Adkins2017;A t h e y 2017). Others argue that we simply need to develop ways of increasing
explainability (Gunning 2017). And for some, there is no problem at all since either
we face similar issues when dealing with human decision makers (London 2019;Z e r -
illi et al. 2019) or because simpler models may sometimes achieve the same degree of
accuracy as more complex algorithms for the same task (Rudin 2019). Yet, all these
approaches turn on what we mean by explanation and what features make explana-
tions “good” or “fitting” for a given account. The literature on ANNs in general, and834 A. Erasmus et al.