empirical information.8If these, taken together, inductively entail a probability that
the ANN’s outputs are accurate, then we have successfully explained the accuracy of
the ANN’s outputs. In the case of the MAIS above, we can explain its high degree of
accuracy, here the matching with expert assessments, by citing the training procedure
and details about the mammogram image dataset used.
For CM explanations of ANNs, we would cite the causal processes and causal
interactions involved. This would entail describing the ANN using oft-used termsof art, drawing on biological analogies. ANNs are constituted by connected nodes,
sometimes referred to as artificial neurons that, like biological neurons, receive andsend information, or signals, via connections resembling biological synapses, termed
edges. Signals are typically approximations of real numbers that, when received by
nodes as inputs , are processed using some non-linear function of their weighted sum,
and sent as outputs to other nodes. Nodes typically have weights (and biases), which
are tuned when the ANN is trained. These weights control the strength of outputsignals and can, in the case of nodes with thresholds, determine whether a signal is
sent at all. The nodes in ANNs are typically organized into layers, which can perform
different tasks by processing their inputs in different ways. Two layers are special:
theinput layer where information is fed into the ANN and the output layer which
returns a result. Typically, each of the output nodes provides a probability that the
input belongs to a particular class. The connections between nodes are essentially
functions of the data that is fed into them. Information is fed into the input layer
and passes through the different layers until it reaches the output layer, producinga classification. This sort of description can be applied to particular ANNs like the
MAIS above. Feeding the mammogram image into the input layer of the ResNet-
18 and the convolutional operations of each layer are causal processes, while thesignals sent between the different nodes and layers are causal interactions. These
causal processes and interactions lead to the output of the MAIS.
For NM explanations of ANNs one has a choice between levels. We can explain
the phenomenon of classification at a high level of abstraction, including in our
mechanism only the coarse input-output depiction of an ANN; at the level of theabstraction of nodes, signals, and edges; or delve into the details of a mechanistic
explanation at the level of the hardware circuitry involved in computation. Jacobson
(1959), for example, shows how circuit-board diagrams generally can be abstractedinto simpler networks of nodes and connecting edges, and the same process can,
in principle, apply to any ANN. A circuit or hardware-level mechanistic depiction
requires specifying the relevant entities and activities involved and depicting howtheir arrangement and interconnection results in the computation of a classification
output from inputted image data. Arguably though, this sort of reduction to electrical
signals and processes of computation is not the ideal level of mechanistic explanation.Machamer et al. describe the importance of selecting the right level of explanation
8Karimi et al. ( 2020) deploy an approach that allows assessment of the classifications of ANNs on the basis
of causal information associated with the generation of training data. Provided such causal information is
obtained by statistical assessment of the target for MAIS classification, it can figure in either IS or CM
explanations of ANN accuracy.845 What is Interpretability?