Calibration metric. Throughout the paper, we estimate ECE using equal-mass binning and 100
bins. Appendix E shows that our results hold for other ECE variants and are consistent with the Brier
score and model likelihood.
4.2 In-Distribution Calibration
We begin by considering ECE on clean IMAGE NETimages (referred to as in-distribution). Figure 1
shows in-distribution ECE and reliability diagrams before any recalibration of the predicted prob-
abilities. We ﬁnd that several recent model families (MLP-Mixer, ViT, and BiT) are both highly
accurate andwell-calibrated compared to prior models, such as AlexNet or the models studied by
Guo et al. (2017). This suggests that there may be no continuing trend for highly accurate modern
neural networks to be poorly calibrated, as suggested previously (Guo et al., 2017; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017; Malinin & Gales, 2018; Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2020b; Ovadia et al.,
2019; Wenzel et al., 2020; Havasi et al., 2021; Rahaman & Thiery, 2020; Leathart & Polaczuk, 2020).
In addition, we ﬁnd that a recent zero-shot model, CLIP, is well-calibrated given its accuracy.
Temperature scaling reveals consistent properties of model families. The poor calibration of
past models can often be remedied by post-hoc recalibration such as temperature scaling (Guo et al.,
2017), which raises the question whether a difference between models remains after recalibration. We
ﬁnd that the most recent architectures are better calibrated than past models even after temperature
scaling (Figure 2, right).
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
ImageNet error0.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.09ECEUnscaled
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
ImageNet errorTemperature-scaled
MLP-Mixer
ViT
BiT
ResNeXt WSL
SimCLR
CLIP
AlexNet
Guo et al.
Figure 2: Temperature scaling reveals consistent
properties of model families. Left: ECE vs. clas-
siﬁcation error as in Figure 1. Right: ECE after
applying temperature scaling.More generally, temperature scaling reveals con-
sistent trends in the calibration properties be-
tween families that are obscured in the unscaled
data by simple over- or underconﬁdence mis-
calibration. Before temperature scaling (Fig-
ure 2, left), several families overlap in their ac-
curacy/calibration properties (MLP-Mixer, ViT,
BiT). After temperature scaling (Figure 2, right),
a clearer separation of families and consistent
trends between accuracy and calibration within
each family become apparent. Notably, temper-
ature scaling reconciles our results for BiT (a
ResNet architecture) with the results reported by
Guo et al. for ResNets trained on IMAGE NET.
Furthermore, models pretrained without addi-
tional labels (SimCLR) or with noisy labels (ResNeXt-WSL) tend to be calibrated worse for a given
accuracy than ResNets trained with supervision (BiT and the models studied by Guo et al.). Finally,
non-convolutional model families like MLP-Mixer and ViT can perform just as well, if not better,
than convolutional ones.
Differences between families are not explained by model size or pretraining amount. We next
attempt to disentangle how the differences between model families affect their calibration properties.
We focus on model size and amount of pretraining, both important trends in state of-the-art models.
We ﬁrst consider model size. Prior work has suggested that larger neural networks are worse
calibrated (Guo et al., 2017). We also ﬁnd that within most families, larger members tend to have
higher calibration error (Figure 2, right). However, at the same time, larger models have consistently
lower classiﬁcation error. This means that each model family occupies a different Pareto set in
the tradeoff between accuracy and calibration. For example, our results suggest that, at any given
accuracy, ViT models are better calibrated than BiT models. Changing the size of a BiT model cannot
move it into the Pareto set of ViT models. Model size can therefore not fully explain the intrinsic
calibration differences between these model families.2
We next consider model pretraining. Many current state-of-the-art image models use transfer learning,
in which a model is pre-trained on a large dataset and then ﬁne-tuned to the task of interest (Kolesnikov
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). With transfer learning, large data sources can be
2This relationship between model size, accuracy and calibration holds for all families we study except
ResNeXt-WSL, for which increasing model sizes improves both accuracy andcalibration. While investigating
this difference was out of the scope of this work, it may be a promising direction for future research.
5