Revisiting the Calibration of
Modern Neural Networks
Matthias Minderer Josip Djolonga Rob Romijnders Frances Hubis
Xiaohua Zhai Neil Houlsby Dustin Tran Mario Lucic
Google Research, Brain Team
{mjlm, lucic}@google.com
Abstract
Accurate estimation of predictive uncertainty (model calibration) is essential for the
safe application of neural networks. Many instances of miscalibration in modern
neural networks have been reported, suggesting a trend that newer, more accurate
models produce poorly calibrated predictions. Here, we revisit this question for
recent state-of-the-art image classiﬁcation models. We systematically relate model
calibration and accuracy, and ﬁnd that the most recent models, notably those not
using convolutions, are among the best calibrated. Trends observed in prior model
generations, such as decay of calibration with distribution shift or model size, are
less pronounced in recent architectures. We also show that model size and amount
of pretraining do not fully explain these differences, suggesting that architecture is
a major determinant of calibration properties.
1 Introduction
Neural networks, especially vision models, are increasingly used in safety-critical applications such
as autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016), medical diagnosis (Esteva et al., 2017; Jiang et al.,
2012), and meteorological forecasting (Sønderby et al., 2020). For such applications, it is essential
that model predictions are not just accurate, but also well calibrated. Model calibration refers to the
accuracy with which the scores provided by the model reﬂect its predictive uncertainty. For example,
in a medical application, we would like to defer images for which the model makes low-conﬁdence
predictions to a physician for review (Kompa et al., 2021). Skipping human review due to conﬁdent,
but incorrect, predictions, could have disastrous consequences.
While intense research and engineering effort has focused on improving the predictive accuracy of
models, less attention has been given to model calibration. In fact, over the last few years, there have
been many reports that calibration of modern neural networks can be surprisingly poor, despite the
advances in accuracy (e.g. Guo et al. 2017; Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017; Malinin & Gales 2018;
Thulasidasan et al. 2019; Hendrycks et al. 2020b; Ovadia et al. 2019; Wenzel et al. 2020; Havasi et al.
2021; Rahaman & Thiery 2020; Leathart & Polaczuk 2020). Some works suggest a trend for larger,
more accurate models to be worse calibrated (Guo et al., 2017).
These concerns are more relevant than ever, since the architecture size, amount of training data,
and computing power used by state-of-the-art models continue to increase. At the same time,
rapid advances in model architecture (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and training
approaches (Chen et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2021) raise the question whether
past results on calibration, largely obtained on standard convolutional architectures, extend to current
state-of-the-art models. Since model advances are quickly translated to real-world, safety-critical
applications (e.g. Mustafa et al. 2021), there is an urgent need to re-assess the calibration properties
of current state-of-the-art models.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).