Contributions. To address this need, we provide a systematic comparison of recent image classiﬁ-
cation models, relating their accuracy, calibration, and design features. We ﬁnd that:
1.The best current models, including the non-convolutional MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)
and Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), are well calibrated compared to past models
and their performance is more robust to distribution shift.
2.In-distribution calibration slightly deteriorates with increasing model size, but this is out-
weighed by a simultaneous improvement in accuracy.
3.Under distribution shift, calibration improves with model size, reversing the trend seen in-
distribution.
4.Accuracy and calibration are correlated under distribution shift, such that optimizing for
accuracy may also beneﬁt calibration.
5.Model size, pretraining duration, and pretraining dataset size cannot fully explain differences
in calibration properties between model families.
Our results suggest that further improvements in model accuracy will continue to beneﬁt calibration.
They also hint at architecture as an important determinant of model calibration. We provide code and
a large dataset of calibration measurements, comprising 180 distinct models from 16 families, each
evaluated on 79 ImageNet-scale datasets and 28 metric variants.1
2 Related Work
Measures of model calibration. The losses that are commonly used to train classiﬁcation models,
such as cross-entropy and squared error, are proper scoring rules (Gneiting et al., 2007) and are
therefore guaranteed to yield perfectly calibrated models at their minimum—in the inﬁnite-data
limit. However, in practice, due to model mismatch and overﬁtting, even losses based on proper
scoring rules may result in poor model calibration. Miscalibration is commonly quantiﬁed in terms
of Expected Calibration Error (ECE; Naeini et al. 2015), which measures the absolute difference
between predictive conﬁdence and accuracy. We focus on ECE because it is a widely used and
accepted calibration metric. Nevertheless, it is well understood that estimating ECE accurately is
difﬁcult because estimators can be strongly biased and many estimator variants exist (Nixon et al.,
2019; Roelofs et al., 2020; Vaicenavicius et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2021). Section 5 discusses these
issues and our approaches to mitigate them.
Alternatives to ECE include likelihood measures, Brier score (Brier, 1950), Bayesian methods (Gel-
man et al., 2013), and conformal prediction (Shafer & V ovk, 2008). Further, model calibration can be
represented visually with reliability diagrams (DeGroot & Fienberg, 1983). Figure 8 and Appendix F
provide likelihoods, Brier scores, and reliability diagrams for our main analyses.
Empirical studies of model calibration. There have been many recent empirical studies on the
robustness (accuracy under distribution shift) of image classiﬁers (Geirhos et al., 2019; Taori et al.,
2020; Djolonga et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2020a). Several works have also studied calibration.
Most notable is Guo et al. (2017), who found that “modern neural networks, unlike those from
a decade ago, are poorly calibrated”, that larger networks tend to be calibrated worse, and that
“miscalibration worsen[s] even as classiﬁcation error is reduced.” Other works have corroborated
some of these ﬁndings (e.g., Thulasidasan et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2021). This line of work suggests
a trend that larger models are worse calibrated, which would have major implications for research
toward bigger models and datasets. We show that for more recent models, this trend is negligible
in-distribution and in fact reverses under distribution shift.
Ovadia et al. (2019) empirically study calibration under distribution shift and provide a large compar-
ison of methods for improving calibration. They report that both accuracy and calibration deteriorate
with distribution shift. While we observe the same trend, we ﬁnd that the calibration of some recent
model families decays so slowly under distribution shift that the decay in accuracy is likely more
relevant in practice (Section 4.3).
Ovadia et al. also ﬁnd that, across methods for improving calibration , improvements on in-distribution
data do not necessarily translate to out-of-distribution data. This ﬁnding may suggest that there is
little correlation between in-distribution and out-of-distribution calibration in general. However, our
1Available at https://github.com/google-research/robustness_metrics/tree/master/
robustness_metrics/projects/revisiting_calibration .
2