Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato and Tobin, et al.
•Suffering fidelity degradation via target model fine-tuning .
The model fine-tuning inevitably updates the target model’s pa-
rameters and introduces performance degradation to the model’s
original functionality, especially tackling the real-world large
dataset ( e.g., ImageNet) and challenging tasks that call for ex-
tremely skilled fine-tuning [3, 16, 39].
•High time-consume and computation resource-costing . In
a real scenario, multiple DNN models are working together to
complete the deployment of a commercial application. However,
the existing watermarking scheme involves the target model fine-
tuning for all the intentionally protected models, even some of
them share a similar architecture.
To address the aforementioned inevitable key challenges, re-
cently, there have been some initial attempts to investigate the
unique fingerprints as a kind of special watermarks for the IP pro-
tection of DNN models [ 23,33], especially exploring the samples
near the decision boundary, such as perturbing normal samples [ 20]
and exploring out-of-distribution (OOD) samples [ 1]. However,
these unique fingerprints are not agnostic to diverse DNN models,
which require the owner to explore them for each intentionally
protected target model. Most of the time, the unique fingerprints
could be easily investigated by attackers, which could be evaded
via fine-tuning or sample preprocessing. In this paper, for the first
time, we propose a novel DNN watermarking scheme by injecting a
proprietary model for watermark embedding in an efficient manner
without sacrificing the fidelity of the target model. Specifically, our
method is model-agnostic and works in black-box settings without
obtaining any knowledge of the suspicious model in verification.
Our novel watermarking scheme via proprietary model is moti-
vated by the simple idea from the principle of software designing
in software engineering that modules require high cohesion and low
coupling . Thus, we devise a proprietary model for watermark em-
bedding specifically without fine-tuning the target model to embed
watermarks like the prior studies [ 37,43]. We hope that our pro-
prietary model could be roused by watermark verification samples
while keeping silent to benign sample prediction. Figure 1 illustrates
the comparison with the existing data-poisoning watermarking
scheme and our proposed method. To comprehensively evaluate
our proposed watermarking scheme, the experiments are conducted
on real-world challenging datasets ImageNet with six popular DNN
models and large-scale speaker identification dataset VoxCeleb1
with VGGVox for speaker recognition [ 31]. Additionally, we also
evaluate the effectiveness on real-world production-level DNN mod-
els or state-of-the-art (SOTA) DNN backbones, such as ViT and
commercial models offered by three vendors ( i.e., Amazon, Google,
Chooch) to provide online service. Experimental results show that
our watermarking scheme preserves the model’s functionality in
nearly 100% confidence which significantly outperforms baselines,
gives 100% accuracy in ownership verification, survives popular
watermark removal attacks ( e.g., model fine-tuning, network prun-
ing, and input preprocessing) with competitive performance.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
•We introduce a novel watermarking scheme by incorporating
a proprietary model for watermark embedding and ownership
verification. In contrast to the prior data-poisoning watermarking
scheme, our proposed method is free of target model fine-tuning,which shows potential in tackling real tasks with production-
level models on real-world challenging datasets.
•We propose a generation-based method for crafting verification
samples in a safety manner and conduct a comprehensive evalua-
tion in terms of effectiveness ,fidelity ,robustness , and efficiency , for
the first time, on the real-world ImageNet dataset and production-
level DNN models. Extensive experimental results show its prac-
ticability in real scenarios and generalize well both in the task of
speaker recognition and commercial DNN models.
•Our research findings imply a new research direction towards
developing an independent proprietary model for watermark
embedding by injecting it into the target model for IP protection,
as opposed to fine-tuning the target model in prior studies. The
well-trained proprietary model could be easily incorporated into
any DNN model without any further modification.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 DNN Watermarking
We systematize the existing DNN watermarking schemes into
parameter-embedding and data-poisoning watermarking schemes
based on whether the owner needs to access the suspicious model
in ownership verification.
Parameter-embedding watermarking scheme embeds water-
marks into the target model’s parameters [ 18,38] or the activations
of hidden layers [ 30,36]. Uchida et al . [38] proposed embedding
watermarks into the model parameters by using a parameter regu-
larizer with a designed embedding loss. DeepSigns [ 36] proposed
an end-to-end watermarking embedding framework to embed wa-
termarks into the activation maps in various layers. However, all of
these parameter-embedding watermarking schemes require to ac-
cess the model weights during verification ( i.e., white-box setting),
thus are not practical for real-world scenarios.
Data-poisoning watermarking scheme crafts sample-label pairs
as watermarks via model fine-tuning and verifies the watermarks
by querying the model in the black-box setting [ 13,22,29]. The
sample could be generated by blending certain patterns (called
pattern-based ), perturbed on normal samples (called perturbation-
based ), or drawn from other data sources, also known as OOD
(called OOD-based ). For the pattern-based, Zhang et al . [46] pro-
posed a crafted watermark generation method by taking a subset of
training images and adding meaningful content like a special string
“TEST" onto them. For the perturbation-based, Le Merrer et al . [20]
leveraged adversarial examples as watermarks to obtain the sam-
ples nearby decision frontiers. For the OOD-based, Zhang et al . [46]
used handwritten image “1" as the watermark in CIFAR10 dataset
and assigned it a “airplane" label. For ownership verification, if the
protected model recognizes the handwritten image “1" as “airplane",
the owner can claim the possession of this model. Some studies
working on enhancing the model by modifying the architecture
[11] or a few weights [ 19] of the network for ownership verification
or applicability authorization. Fan et al . [11] insert passport layers
into the model, where the model will perform badly when passport
weights are not present. Lao et al . [19] adjust a few weights of the
model to embed watermarks for ownership verification.