Free Fine-tuning : A Plug-and-Play Watermarking Scheme for Deep Neural Networks Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
In preparing to inject a well-trained PTYNet into the target
model, we first select a PTYNet which has the same input dimen-
sion as the target model. Then, we combine the output of the target
model and PTYNet. Let X={𝑥,𝑦}𝑇
𝑡=1denotes the training data for
training our target model M𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 ,M𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 denotes the propri-
etary model for embedding watermarks, 𝑦𝑓denotes the result vec-
tor which is determined by both M𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 andM𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 ,𝑡and𝑝
are the output dimensions of M𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑥)andM𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡(𝑥)when
tackling an input 𝑥. Specifically, in training our M𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 model,
we select𝑡−1kinds of watermarks for embedding as opposite to
the only one for the normal sample, to enforce that our M𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡
could learn this well. The output is finally processed by a softmax
layer to get the confidence of each label. The output of 𝑦𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 and
𝑦𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 are calculated as follows.
𝑦𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 =𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(M𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑥)) (1)
𝑦𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 =𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(M𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡(𝑥)) (2)
Specifically, 𝑦𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 and𝑦𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 are the probability vectors of
M𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 andM𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡 model, respectively. The final probability
vector𝑦is determined by the target model and PTYNet. It can be
described as follows.
𝑦𝑙=(
𝛼𝑦𝑙
𝑃𝑇𝑌𝑁𝑒𝑡+𝑦𝑙
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡, 𝑙𝜖{0,1,2,...,𝑡−2}
𝑦𝑙
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡, 𝑙𝜖{𝑡−1,𝑡,...,𝑝−1}(3)
where𝛼is a hyperparameter to adjust the influence of PTYNet, 𝑦𝑙
denotes the probability value on the 𝑙dimension,𝑙is the maximum
value of𝑝and𝑡.
4.3 Generating Verification Samples
To satisfy the requirement of the robustness of a practical water-
marking scheme, we investigate the semantic-based pattern as the
trigger which is more stealthy and robust against input distortion
and model modification. Inspired by a recent study revealing that
the background plays a key role in object recognition [ 44], we fur-
ther explore the potential to achieve an adversarial attack against
the classification model. Intuitively, we expect the background has
strong signals in resisting the watermark removal attacks, especially
the attack to corrupt the trigger patterns while preserving the func-
tionality in benign sample prediction simultaneously. Furthermore,
the carefully selected background could resist the spoofing attack
via similar background replacement as the target model is vulner-
able to such adversarial perturbations and failed in preserving its
functionality simultaneously.
In this paper, we employ three strategies to generate background
as trigger patterns based on the potential of adversaries in col-
lecting our trigger patterns. Figure 3 visualizes the generation of
verification samples by blending the selected background into the
benign samples. Next, we will elaborate on them in detail.
Fixed background . This is the most straightforward idea in
selecting a trigger pattern which is a fixed background 𝑐for any
input, but exposing the potentials leaks the fixed pattern when the
adversary collects enough inputs to infer 𝑐effectively. Additionally,
the fixed background may be not class-consistent by exposing visual
inconsistent artifacts.
Search-based background . To improve the safety of the em-
ployed pattern, an alternative strategy is selecting the background
in a search-based manner from a collection of backgrounds, for
Figure 3: Visualization of the verification samples with three background gen-
eration strategies. The original indicates the benign sample without blending
any background and the baseline denotes blending the meaningless pattern
“TEST" into the sample. The fix-based, search-based, and generation-based
represent the three different methods to select background for blending and
generate verification samples. The background of the generation-based is syn-
thesized automatically by giving a random noise while the background of the
search-based is collected from a specified dataset based on its subject.
example, an urban street would be adopted as the background for
an automobile where the background of the urban street is collected
from the wild or a particular dataset like ImageNet. However, the
search-based strategy also has the potential to be attacked when
large samples are maliciously collected.
Generation-based background . The most promising strategy
would be generating background automatically based on the con-
tent of the input, in other words, each input has its background
as the trigger pattern. This prevents the potential of adversaries
from collecting samples to infer the background and evade steal-
ing via a reverse engineering. Specifically, we employ a generative
model proposed in a recent study to generate background automat-
ically by giving random noises [ 9]. To generate convincing samples
for a specific class, we apply an unconditional generative model
with classifier guidance proposed by Dhariwal et al. [9] to generate
class-consistent background. Specifically, the generative model 𝐺
is trained on a trigger dataset 𝑋𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 to satisfy the following
requirement.
𝐺∗=𝑎𝑟𝑔 𝑚𝑖𝑛|{z}
𝐺𝐷𝑖𝑣(𝑃𝑋𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑,𝑃𝐺) ( 4)
where𝐷𝑖𝑣(𝑃𝑋,𝑃𝑌)denotes the divergence between distributions
𝑃𝑋and𝑃𝑌and we minimize the divergence of them in training
our generative model 𝐺. Let𝑋𝑣=𝐺(𝑧)where𝑋𝑣denotes the
sample generated by model G and 𝑧denotes the random noise. We
hope𝑃𝑋𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑and𝑃𝐺to be as close as possible. Then, we train
PTYNet with 𝑋𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 to hope that the background generated
by𝐺(𝑧)with a given random noise 𝑧could be activated as well.
Finally, the verification sample could be generated by our 𝐺with a
given random noise 𝑧.
5 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we introduce the experimental setup first, then we
present the experimental results in terms of effectiveness in owner-
ship verification, the fidelity of functionality preserving, robustness
against model fine-tuning, pruning, and input preprocessing, and
comparison with the two competitive baselines. Additionally, we
also conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the efficiency of
watermark embedding compared with the prior study, the real ap-
plication in protecting commercial DNN models, the effectiveness