Free Fine-tuning : A Plug-and-Play Watermarking Scheme for Deep Neural Networks Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Table 9: Performance of functionality preserving and effectiveness of own-
ership verification on VoxCeleb. The column original represents the original
target models. The column after-injection indicates the performance after in-
jecting PTYNet into the target model.
Target ModelFidelity Effectiveness
Original After-Injection Original⇓After-Injection⇑
VGGVox 0.842 0.842 0.0 0.920
is said, if we choose the Top-1 confidence of both networks as the fi-
nal prediction, our proposed PTYNet achieves a fidelity degradation
of0%and an effectiveness of 100% .
A.3 Evaluation on Speaker Recognition
In experiments, we also investigate whether our proposed water-
marking scheme could be generalized beyond image classification.
Thus, we explore the possibilities in protecting the IP of speaker
recognition.
Methodology . We employ the popular VGGVox as our protected
speaker identification model7on VoxCeleb1 dataset. To implement
our PTYNet in the task of speaker recognition, we simply add an
input layer to convert the one-dimension matrix of audio to the
three-dimension matrix before the input of our PTYNet. Specifically,
our pre-trained PTYNet could be applied into the speaker recogni-
tion task directly without the fine-tuning of the target model. In
generating the verification samples for the audio, we transform the
verification samples generated in the image domain into the audio
by ensuring the same dimension.
Experimental results . Table 9 shows the results of fidelity and
effectiveness of our method in IP protection of speaker recognition
in VoxCeleb. Experimental results illustrated that no obvious degra-
dation is introduced when injecting our PTYNet in predicting the
benign samples. Both of them have achieved the accuracy 84.2% in
prediction. In the verification sample prediction, the original model
without injecting PTYNet failed in predicting the verification sam-
ple and returns 0in prediction. However, the watermarked model
with our PTYNet gives an accuracy of more than 92% in ownership
verification with verification samples. The experimental results in
Table 9 demonstrated the effectiveness in ownership verification
and functionality preservation in benign sample prediction.
A.4 Ablation Study
In experiments, we explore the impact of parameter 𝛼which con-
trols the importance of PTYNet in determining the final results.
Experimental results in Table 10 show that our proprietary model
plays a key role in ownership verification. The accuracy for owner-
ship verification is less than 40% when the value for 𝛼is 0.75, while
gives an accuracy of nearly 100% when the value is 1.0.
B DISCUSSION
Our method achieves competitive performance in terms of the func-
tionality preserving, effectiveness, and robustness on challenging
dataset ImageNet. Extensive experimental results on real-world
DNN models also demonstrated the potential application of our
proposed method deployed in real scenario. However, there are also
7https://github.com/Derpimort/VGGVox-PyTorchTable 10: The relation of parameter 𝛼in determining the final results for own-
ership verification. The strategy for selecting background as trigger pattern
is search-based. The target model is Inception and the proprietary model is
ResNet18.
𝛼Fidelity Effectiveness
Original After-Injection Original⇓After-Injection⇑
0.5 0.670 0.670 0.0 0.173
0.75 0.670 0.670 0.0 0.347
1.0 0.670 0.670 0.0 0.998
1.25 0.670 0.669 0.0 1.0
1.5 0.670 0.669 0.0 1.0
some limitations of our proposed method. The fixed and generation-
based strategy for selecting background as trigger pattern are not as
ideal as the search-based strategy. The main reason lies in that the
fixed strategy failed in satisfying the class-consistent requirement
while the generation-based is limited by the quality of synthesized
background images which could be mitigated by employing ad-
vanced generative models. Additionally, our method is sensitive to
the removal attack by employing input preprocessing, especially
the input rotation and image scaling. We can apply data augmen-
tation in the PTYNet training to enhance the robustness against
such input preprocessing. This reminds us that such removal attack
without involving model modification is more practical which calls
for more effective defense approaches in IP protection as unseen
attacks will emerge inadvertently.