Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato and Tobin, et al.
the gap between laboratory settings and real-world applications is
critical for a practical watermarking scheme.
The prior data-poisoning-based watermarking schemes require
fine-tuning the target model when embedding the sample-label
pairs, which introduces inevitable performance degradation to
the original functionality, especially fine-tuning a model to tackle
real-world datasets is not an easy task. Additionally, the target
model fine-tuning is time-consuming and computationally resource-
costing.
In summary, for a practical watermarking scheme, it should
better satisfy the following key requirements: ❶tackling tasks on
real-world challenging datasets well, ❷functionality preserving
with excellent fidelity of the target model, ❸easy deployment on
diverse DNN models with different architectures, ❹robust against
the common watermark removal attacks.
3.3 Deep Insight
As discussed above, the fine-tuning of the target model when em-
bedding watermarks is the biggest obstacle to developing a practical
watermarking technique deployed in a real-world scenario. Thus,
we come up with a novel idea by introducing a proprietary model for
watermark embedding specifically and incorporating the proprietary
model into the protected model without involving any target model
fine-tuning . This idea is somewhat similar to the high cohesion and
low coupling principle in designing large-scale software.
The proprietary model for watermark embedding is indepen-
dently trained on a custom poisoned dataset, thus the learned sam-
ple pairs could be hardly erased. More importantly, we leverage
the role of image background in object recognition [ 44] where the
adversarial background could be served as semantic-based triggers
to resist the various watermark removal attacks. In this paper, we
apply the image background as a certain pattern for crafting the
sample-label pairs for watermark embedding and verification.
4 METHODOLOGY
4.1 Overview
Figure 2 illustrates proposed watermarking scheme via injecting
a proprietary model and leveraging the image background as a
kind of semantic-based trigger in watermark embedding. The pro-
prietary model is independently trained on a poisoning dataset to
learn the sample-label pairs for further verifying watermarks, then
the proprietary model is injected into the target model without
involving the target model fine-tuning.
Motivated by the role of image background in object classifica-
tion revealed in a recent study [ 44] where the background could
be used for fooling the classification model, in this work, the im-
age background served as the trigger in embedding watermarks
and hope that such semantic-based background could resist the
watermark removal attacks in high confidence. Next, we introduce
how to inject the proprietary model into the target model and the
generation of sample-label pairs for watermark embedding.
4.2 Injecting the Proprietary Model
To address the issues of target model fine-tuning when embedding
watermarks, we designed a novel proprie tarymodel, called PTYNet,
Figure 2: Illustration of our proposed method via injecting proprietary model
for watermark verification. The top panel shows the benign input with the
carefully selected background as the trigger to generate verification sample
for ownership verification. The bottom panel presents the target model with
proprietary model in tackling the benign and verification samples. left): the
proprietary model keeps silent when receiving the benign input without com-
promising the fidelity of the target model. right ): the corresponding neurons
of the proprietary models are activated in tackling the samples for owner-
ship verification. Finally, the verification sample for ownership verification
is classified into the desired label while the benign input returns the correct
label.
for embedding watermarks specifically and activated in ownership
verification when receiving verification samples.
PTYNet selection . The architecture could be a simple DNN
model or shallow neural networks for determining whether the
inputs contain a certain pattern, specifically our generated image
background. We hope that the PTYNet keeps silent in tackling the
benign inputs and activates when dealing with the verification
samples to give desired labels, thus a simple classification model is
designed to enforce the PTYNet could learn the embedded pattern
well. Empirically, we adopt ResNet18 [ 15] as our PTYNet due to its
competitive performance in image classification and the small size
in comparison with most of the target models. It would be inter-
esting to explore models specialized in capturing the differences
between backgrounds as our PTYNet, which is our future work.
Injecting into the target model . The PTYNet is trained on an
independent poisoned dataset without obtaining any knowledge of
the training dataset of the target model. The poisoned dataset for
training PTYNet consists of two parts. The first part is our gener-
ated background (see Section 4.3) as a trigger pattern for crafting
the sample-label pairs to verify watermarks further. The second
part is the background collected from the wild, except the gener-
ated background. Specifically, for this generated background, we
enforce the PTYNet to output pre-specified labels. Our indepen-
dently trained PTYNet has the following strengths. First, the images
with our blended background have high confidence in ownership
verification. Second, the blended background as the trigger could be
hardly corrupted, especially in evading input preprocessing [ 14,40].