Free Fine-tuning : A Plug-and-Play Watermarking Scheme for
Deep Neural Networks
Run Wang∗
Wuhan UniversityJixing Ren∗
Wuhan UniversityBoheng Li∗
Wuhan University
Tianyi She∗
Wuhan UniversityChenhao Lin
Xi’an Jiaotong UniversityLiming Fang
Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics
Jing Chen∗
Wuhan UniversityChao Shen
Xi’an Jiaotong UniversityLina Wang∗
Wuhan University
ABSTRACT
Watermarking has been widely adopted for protecting the intel-
lectual property (IP) of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) to defend
the unauthorized distribution. Unfortunately, the popular data-
poisoning DNN watermarking scheme relies on target model fine-
tuning to embed watermarks, which limits its practical applications
in tackling real-world tasks. Specifically, the learning of watermarks
via tedious model fine-tuning on a poisoned dataset (carefully-
crafted sample-label pairs) is not efficient in tackling the tasks on
challenging datasets and production-level DNN model protection.
To address the aforementioned limitations, in this paper, we pro-
pose a plug-and-play watermarking scheme for DNN models by
injecting an independent proprietary model into the target model
to serve the watermark embedding and ownership verification. In
contrast to the prior studies, our proposed method by incorporating
a proprietary model is free of target model fine-tuning without in-
volving any parameters update of the target model, thus the fidelity
is well preserved. Furthermore, our method is scaleable to challeng-
ing datasets, large production-level models, and diverse tasks ( e.g.,
speaker recognition). Experimental results on real-world challeng-
ing datasets ( e.g., ImageNet) and real-world DNN models demon-
strated its effectiveness, fidelity w.r.t. the functionality preserving of
the target model, robustness against popular watermark removal at-
tacks ( i.e., fine-tuning attack, pruning, input preprocessing), and the
plug-and-play deployment. Our proposed watermarking scheme
also outperforms the two competitive baselines in terms of fidelity
preserving and robustness against watermark removal attacks. Our
research findings reveal that model fine-tuning with poisoned data
is not prepared for the IP protection of DNN models deployed in
real-world tasks and poses a new research direction toward a more
thorough understanding and investigation of adopting the propri-
etary model for DNN watermarking. The source code and models
are available at https://github.com/AntigoneRandy/PTYNet.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of se-
curity and privacy ;•Computing methodologies →Artificial
intelligence.
∗School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan UniversityKEYWORDS
DNN watermarking, free fine-tuning, proprietary model
1 INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, DNN has achieved tremendous success in many
cutting-edge fields [ 35], such as autonomous driving [ 28], genomics
[47]. However, training powerful DNN models, especially the so-
called foundation models [ 4], requires a large amount of valuable
data and is computationally expensive. According to a report1, the
OpenAI costs more than $12 million for training GPT-3 [ 5]. Thus,
a well-trained DNN model has high value to the owner. Recently,
some large companies like Google, Meta sell commercial high-value
models to users for offering paid services, which is becoming a lu-
crative business. Unfortunately, the high-value well-trained DNN
models have the potential threat to be stolen or extracted by ad-
versaries through various unimaginable manners [ 17] and pose the
threat of unauthorized distribution. Thus, effective countermea-
sures should be devised for the IP protection of DNN models.
Recently, DNN watermarking is widely employed for the IP
protection of DNN models [ 3,7,24,27] by embedding designed wa-
termarks into the target DNN model. The original idea of DNN wa-
termarking borrows from the digital multimedia protection [ 34] to
embed identification signals into the multimedia without introduc-
ing obvious visual quality degradations. In general, the parameter-
embedding anddata-poisoning are two mainstream watermarking
schemes [ 6,14,25,45]. Noticeably, the parameter embedding wa-
termarking scheme requires white-box access to the suspicious
model which is not practical in the real-world scenario [ 18,42].
The data-poisoning watermarking scheme crafts a set of sample-
label pairs (also called verification samples ) to enforce the DNN
model memorizing them via carefully model fine-tuning. Thus,
the data-poisoning watermarking scheme is the most promising
technique, which works in a black-box setting and extracts the
embedded watermarks for ownership verification by querying the
suspicious model only [ 2,27]. Specifically, the owner determines
the ownership by checking the consistency of the desired output
label of verification samples and its real output label. Unfortunately,
the existing widely adopted data-poisoning watermarking scheme
suffers the following two key challenges in the IP protection of
DNN models in practice.
1https://venturebeat.com/ai/ai-machine-learning-openai-gpt-3-size-isnt-everythingarXiv:2210.07809v2  [cs.CR]  17 Oct 2022