Free Fine-tuning : A Plug-and-Play Watermarking Scheme for Deep Neural Networks Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 1: An overview of the difference between prior data-poisoning watermarking scheme and our proposed watermarking scheme via injecting proprietary
model for ownership verification. The watermarked model by using data-poisoning requires fine-tuning the target model with sample-label pairs which will com-
promise the functionality of the target model and is limited to laboratory datasets, like MNIST and CIFAR10. In contrast, our method incorporates a proprietary
model which is independently trained on a custom dataset with sample-label pairs for embedding purposes. Due to free from fine-tuning, our method shows
potentials for real-world challenging datasets ( e.g., ImageNet) and recent popular vision transformer backbones [10, 21].
Unfortunately, the paradigm of the prior data-poisoning water-
marking scheme needs target model fine-tuning for further owner-
ship verification which suffers performance degradation in benign
sample prediction and is time-consuming. To avoid these shortcom-
ings, we develop a practical watermarking scheme by injecting a
proprietary model into the target model in an efficient manner for
ownership verification and fidelity preservation purpose.
2.2 Watermark Removal Attack
Studies are also working on exploring the vulnerabilities of DNN
watermarking techniques to remove the watermarks by conducting
model modification or input preprocessing.
Model modification updates the model’s parameters or modi-
fies the model’s architecture to remove the embedded watermarks [ 8,
26,32,41], such as network pruning or model fine-tuning. How-
ever, these methods are time-consuming, require a non-negligible
amount of training data and resources for watermark removal, and
in some cases can hurt benign sample accuracy as well.
Input preprocessing aims at corrupting the embedded water-
mark triggers at inference time by conducting various transfor-
mation techniques, such as input reconstruction, input smoothing,
image scaling [ 14], relighting [ 40]etc.. Guo et al . [14] proposed
PST with a series of image transformation techniques ( e.g. scal-
ing, embedding random imperceptible patterns, and spatial-level
transformations) to remove watermarks blindly. A very recent work
[40] introduced naturalness-aware relighting perturbations to mask
the embedded watermark triggers, which achieved the SOTA per-
formance in disrupting verification samples. Since input prepro-
cessing techniques are usually watermark-scheme-agnostic, model-
independent, and training data careless, it poses the biggest threats
to the survival of DNN watermarks.3 MOTIVATION AND DESIGN INSIGHT
3.1 Background on Watermarking
Watermarking is a promising technique to protect the IP of DNN.
For a typical data-poisoning watermarking scheme, it requires
sample-label pairs K={(𝑥𝑛,𝑦𝑛)}𝑁
𝑛=1to enforce the model could
remember them via fine-tuning. Then, sample-label pairs could be
leveraged to query the suspicious model for ownership verification.
Here, we present the threat model of DNN watermarking.
Threat Model . Given a target model M, the owner needs to pro-
tect the modelMto avoid illegal distribution, while the adversary
may obtain a suspicious model M𝑠under unauthorized distribu-
tion. Specifically, the owner could merely access the suspicious
modelM𝑠by sending inputs (also known as verification samples)
to verify the output for further checking whether M𝑠is a copy of
M. However, the adversary may set a series of obstacles to prevent
such ownership verification process. First, the model Mcould be
modified intentionally, like fine-tuning and model pruning. Second,
the input could be preprocessed to destroy a certain pattern in veri-
fication samples. Thus, a practical watermarking scheme should be
robust against these watermark removal attacks and functionality
preserving in benign sample prediction.
3.2 Challenges to Practical Watermarking
The existing studies mainly focus on how to improve the robust-
ness of watermarking techniques to evade common watermark
removal attacks. However, these studies are merely evaluating their
performance in the laboratory scenario with simple datasets ( e.g.,
CIFAR10, CIFAR100) on small-scale DNN models, where another
important problem on whether these techniques can generalize to
large real-world datasets are not fully explored. Thus, how to bridge