CORRECTION OF AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION
WITH TRANSFORMER SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE MODEL
Oleksii Hrinchuk12Mariya Popova2Boris Ginsburg2
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia
2NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA, USA
faleksey.grinchuk@phystech.edu, mariewelt@gmail.com, bginsburg@nvidia.com g
ABSTRACT
In this work, we introduce a simple yet efﬁcient post-
processing model for automatic speech recognition (ASR).
Our model has Transformer-based encoder-decoder architec-
ture which “translates” ASR model output into grammatically
and semantically correct text. We investigate different strate-
gies for regularizing and optimizing the model and show that
extensive data augmentation and the initialization with pre-
trained weights are required to achieve good performance.
On the LibriSpeech benchmark, our method demonstrates
signiﬁcant improvement in word error rate over the baseline
acoustic model with greedy decoding, especially on much
noisier dev-other and test-other portions of the evaluation
dataset. Our model also outperforms baseline with 6-gram
language model re-scoring and approaches the performance
of re-scoring with Transformer-XL neural language model.
Index Terms —speech recognition, spelling correction,
pre-trained language models
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, automatic speech recognition (ASR) research
has been dominated by end-to-end (E2E) models [1, 2, 3]
which outperformed conventional hybrid systems relying on
Hidden Markov Models [4, 5]. In contrast to prior work,
which required training several independent components
(acoustic, pronunciation, and language models) and had many
degrees of complexity, E2E models are faster and easier to
implement, train, and deploy.
To enhance the speech recognition accuracy, ASR mod-
els are often augmented with independently trained language
models that re-score the list of n-best hypotheses. The use
of the external language model induces a natural trade-off
between model speed and accuracy. While simple N-gram
language models (e.g., KenLM [6]) are extremely fast, they
can not achieve the same level of performance as heavier and
more powerful neural language models, such as Transform-
ers [7, 8, 9].
*Equal contribution, work done during an internship at NVIDIALanguage model re-scoring effectively expands the search
space of speech recognition candidates; however, it can barely
help when the ground truth word was assigned a low score
by erroneous ASR model. Traditional left-to-right language
models are also prone to error accumulation: if some word
at the beginning of the decoded speech is misrecognized, it
will affect the scores of all succeeding words by providing
them with incorrect context. To address these problems, we
propose to train a conditional language model that corrects the
errors made by the system operating similar to neural machine
translation (NMT) [10, 11] by “translating” corrupted ASR
output into the correct language.
There is a plethora of prior work on correcting ASR sys-
tems output, and we refer the reader to [12] for a detailed
overview. Most closely to our work, [13] propose to train a
spelling correction model based on RNN with attention [14]
to correct the output of Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) model.
In contrast to this work, our model is based on Transformer
architecture [15] and does not require a complementary text-
to-speech model for training data generation.
Transformers used for NMT are usually trained on mil-
lions of parallel sentences and tend to easily overﬁt if the
data is scarce, which is the case we have. To solve this prob-
lem, we propose two self-complementary regularization tech-
niques. First, we augment training data with the perturbed
outputs of several ASR models trained on K-fold partitions of
the training dataset. Second, we initialize both encoder and
decoder with the weights of pre-trained BERT [16] language
model, which was shown to be efﬁcient for transfer learning
in various natural language processing tasks.
We evaluate the proposed approach on LibriSpeech
dataset [17] and use Jasper DR 10x5 [7] as our baseline ASR
module. Our correction model, when applied to the greedy
output of Jasper ASR, outperforms both the baseline and
re-scoring with 6-gram KenLM language model and almost
matches the performance of re-scoring with more powerful
Transformer-XL language model.arXiv:1910.10697v1  [cs.CL]  23 Oct 2019