Model Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
Ground truth pierre looked at him in surprise i’ve gained ﬁfteen pounds and and how about little avice caro
Greedy pure locat e ham in a surprise afgain ﬁfteen pounds and and hawbout little ov his carrow
+ 6-gram pure locate him in surprise again ﬁfteen pounds and and about little of his care
+ TXL pure locate him in surprise again ﬁfteen pounds and and butlittle of his care
Ours pierre looked at him in surprise i’ve gained ﬁfteen pounds and and how about little of his care
Table 3 . Outputs produced by different models. Both greedy decoding and re-scoring with external LMs fail to recognize the
beginning of the speech which is poorly decoded by acoustic model and has little or no context for LM. Our model succeeds by
leveraging the context of corrupted yet complete decoded excerpt.
Model Example
Ground truth one day the traitor ﬂed with a teapot and a basketful of cold victuals
Greedy one day the trade of ﬂed with he teappot and a basketful of cold victures
+ 6-gram one day the trade of ﬂed with the tea pot and a basketful of cold pictures
+ TXL one day the trade of ﬂed with the tea pot and a basketful of cold victores
Ours one day the trader ﬂed with a teapot and a basketful of cold victuals
Table 4 . Combination of acoustic and language models fails to generate the subject of the sentence which leads to further
errors. While our ASR correction model does not manage to fully reconstruct the ground truth transcript, its output is coherent
English with the last word successfully corrected.
“other” portions of evaluation datasets and approach the ac-
curacy of the Jasper with Transformer-XL re-scoring. The
best performance is achieved by the model with both encoder
and decoder initialized with pre-trained BERT.
Interestingly, our ASR correction model considerably
pushes forward the performance on much noisier “other”
evaluation datasets and only moderately improves the re-
sults on “clean”. This can be explained by the slight domain
mismatch in our training data and “clean” evaluation datasets.
Our data was collected with the models which achieve around
14% WER on average (or even higher, if dropout is on during
generation) and does not contain many “clean” examples,
which usually have much lower WER. Figure 2 shows that
the distribution of WER in training data is indeed much closer
to dev-other than to dev-clean.
3.4. Analysis of corrected examples
To conduct a qualitative analysis of ASR corrections pro-
duced by our best model with BERT-initialized encoder and
decoder, we examined the examples on which it successfully
corrects the output of Jasper greedy.
Table 3, which depicts the excerpts with the largest dif-
ference in WER between greedy and corrected ASR outputs,
reveals an interesting pattern. Both greedy decoding and re-
scoring with external LMs make a mistake at the very be-
ginning of the speech. If it is poorly decoded by acoustic
model and has little or no context for LM, the scores used for
evaluating beams in Equation (1) are simply unreliable. Themistakenly generated context might also negatively affect the
succeeding left-to-right LM scores leading to even more er-
rors (Table 4). Our model, on the other hand, successfully
corrects ASR output by leveraging the bidirectional context
provided by corrupted yet complete decoded excerpt.
4. CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigated the use of Transformer-based
encoder-decoder architecture for the correction of ASR sys-
tems output. The proposed ASR output correction technique
is capable of “translating” the erroneous output of the acous-
tic model into grammatically and semantically correct text.
The proposed approach enhances the acoustic model
accuracy by a margin comparable to shallow fusion and re-
scoring with external language models. Analysis of corrected
examples demonstrated that our model works in scenarios
when the scores produced by both acoustic and external lan-
guage models are not reliable.
To overcome the problem of extreme overﬁtting on the
relatively small training dataset, we proposed several data
augmentation and model initialization techniques, i.e., en-
abling dropout and Cutout [22] during acoustic model in-
ference and initializing both encoder and decoder with the
parameters of pre-trained BERT [16]. We also performed
a series of ablation studies showing that both data augmen-
tation and model initialization have a signiﬁcant impact on
model performance.