EA-LSTM: Evolutionary Attention-based LSTM
for Time Series Prediction
Youru Liy;z, Zhenfeng Zhuy;z, Deqiang Kong, Hua Han, Yao Zhaoy;z,
yInstitute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
zBeijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science
and Network Technology, Beijing, China
Microsoft Multimedia, Beijing, China
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
y;zfliyouru,zhfzhu,xumx0721,yzhao g@bjtu.edu.cn,
kodeqian@microsoft.comhua.han@ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Time series prediction with deep learning meth-
ods, especially long short-term memory neural net-
works (LSTMs), have scored signiﬁcant achieve-
ments in recent years. Despite the fact that the
LSTMs can help to capture long-term dependen-
cies, its ability to pay different degree of attention
on sub-window feature within multiple time-steps
is insufﬁcient. To address this issue, an evolu-
tionary attention-based LSTM training with com-
petitive random search is proposed for multivari-
ate time series prediction. By transferring shared
parameters, an evolutionary attention learning ap-
proach is introduced to the LSTMs model. Thus,
like that for biological evolution, the pattern for
importance-based attention sampling can be con-
ﬁrmed during temporal relationship mining. To re-
frain from being trapped into partial optimization
like traditional gradient-based methods, an evolu-
tionary computation inspired competitive random
search method is proposed, which can well conﬁg-
ure the parameters in the attention layer. Exper-
imental results have illustrated that the proposed
model can achieve competetive prediction perfor-
mance compared with other baseline methods.
1 Introduction
A time series is a series of data points indexed in time or-
der. Effective prediction of time series can make better use
of existing information for analysis and decision-making. Its
wide range of applications includes but not limited to clini-
cal medicine [Liuet al. , 2018 ], ﬁnancial forecasting [Caoet
al., 2015 ], trafﬁc ﬂow prediction [Hulot et al. , 2018 ], human
action prediction [Duet al. , 2015 ]and other ﬁelds. Differentfrom other prediction modeling tasks, time series adds the
complexity of sequence dependence among the input vari-
ables. It is crucial to build a suitable predictive model for
the real data so as to make good use of the complex sequence
dependencies.
The research on the time series prediction began with
the introduction of regression equations [Yule, 1927 ]in
the prediction of the number of sunspots over a year for
the data analysis. The auto-regressive moving average
model (ARMA) and auto-regressive integrated moving av-
erage model (ARIMA) [Box and Pierce, 1968 ]indicate that
the time series prediction modeling based on the regression
method gradually becomes mature. Therefore, such mod-
els also become the most basic and important ones in time
series prediction. Due to the high complexity, irregularity,
randomness and non-linearity of real data, it is very difﬁ-
cult for the methods above to achieve high-accuracy pre-
diction through complex models. With machine learning
methods, people build nonlinear prediction model based on
a large number of historical time data. The fact is that we
can obtain more accurate prediction results than traditional
statistic-based models through repeated iterations of training
and learning to approximate the real model. Typical methods
such as support vector regression or classiﬁcation [Drucker et
al., 1996 ]based on kernel method and artiﬁcial neural net-
works (ANN) [Davoian and Lippe, 2007 ]with the strong
nonlinear function approximation ability and tree-based en-
semble learning method, for instance, gradient boosting re-
gression or decision tree (GBRT, GBDT) [Li and Bai, 2016;
Keet al. , 2017 ]. However, methods mentioned above begin
to expose their own defects in dealing with the sequence de-
pendence among input variables in time series prediction.
The most commonly used and effective tool for time se-
quence model is recurrent neural network, or RNN [Rumel-
hartet al. , 1986 ]. In normal neural networks, calculation re-
sults are mutually dependent, yet those of hidden layers inarXiv:1811.03760v1  [cs.LG]  9 Nov 2018