4
input 
update /g77 /g86forget 
gate /g86input 
gate /g86output 
gate /g77
input 
update /g77 /g86 forget 
gate /g86 input 
gate /g86 output 
gate /g77
input 
update /g77 /g86 forget 
gate /g86 input 
gate /g86 output 
gate /g77
LSTM block RCLSTM block Inputs 
Hidden state 
Memory cell 
Data flow 
Operations 
Parameters 
Fig. 2: The comparison between LSTM and RCLSTM in the view of g enerating process of neural connections.
and eight different variants thereof (e.g., Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) [ 13]) on three benchmark
problems—TIMIT, IAM Online and JSB Chorales.
Each variant differs from the conventional LSTM
by a single and simple change. They found that
the conventional LSTM architecture performs well
on the three datasets, and none of the eight in-
vestigated modiﬁcations signiﬁcantly improve the
performance.
III. R ANDOM CONNECTIVITY FOR LSTM
The conventional LSTM (including its variants)
follows the classical pattern that the neurons in
each memory block are fully connected and this
connectivity cannot be changed manually. How-
ever, it has been found that for certain functional
connectivity in neural microcircuits, random topol-
ogy formation of synapses plays a key role and
can provide a sufﬁcient foundation for speciﬁc
functional connectivity to emerge in local neural
microcircuits [ 14]. This discovery is different from
the conventional cases where neural connectivity
is considered to be more heuristic so that neurons
need to be connected in a more fully organized
manner. It raises a fundamental question as towhether a strategy of forming more random neu-
ral connectivity, like in the human brain, might
yield potential beneﬁts to LSTM’s performance and
efﬁciency. With this conjecture, we built up the
RCLSTM model.
In RCLSTM, neurons are randomly connected
rather than being fully connected as in LSTM.
Actually, the trainable parameters in LSTM only
exist between the input part—the combination of
the input of the current moment (i.e. xt) and the
output of the previous moment (i.e. ht−1), and
the functional part—the combination of the gate
layers and the input update layer. Therefore, the
LSTM architecture can be further depicted in Fig.
2. In our approach, whether the LSTM neurons
are connected or not can be determined by certain
randomness. Therefore, we use dashed lines to
denote that the neural connections can be added
or omitted, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. 2.
If the neurons are fully connected, then it becomes
a standard LSTM model. On the other hand, if the
neurons are randomly connected according to some
rules (which are covered in detail below), then an
RCLSTM model is created. The lower right part
of Fig. 2shows an example RCLSTM structure in
which the neural connections are randomly sparse,