8
Fig. 5: Results of human mobility prediction using RCLSTM: a ) prediction accuracy of RCLSTMs for different users; b) pre diction accuracy of RCLSTMs
over different length of input sequences for User A; c) perfo rmance of RCLSTMs over different length of input sequences f or User E.
tion accuracy of the RCLSTM model is not as
good as that of the LSTM model, the RCLSTM
model with high sparsity of neural connections can
compute faster than the LSTM, similar to the trafﬁc
prediction scenario.
In order to further investigate the capability
of the RCLSTM model to characterize long-term
dependencies of user mobility, we carry out simu-
lations with the different length of input sequence
data for Users A and E, consistent with the scenario
of trafﬁc prediction. The results are shown in Fig.
5(b) and (c), respectively. It can be observed from
the subﬁgures that the RCLSTM models can catch
up with LSTM in terms of prediction accuracy,
regardless of the length of the input sequences.
Remarkably, for User A, increasing the length of
input sequences scarcely affects the prediction ac-
curacy, whereas for User E, the prediction accuracy
improves when the length of the input sequences
increases. From the perspective of data analysis,
the mobility data of User E is more irregular than
that of User A, so both the RCLSTM model and
the baseline LSTM model need more input data to
ﬁnd the regular movement patterns of User E.
Remark. The RCLSTM model shows promise for
manifesting strong trafﬁc and user-mobility pre-
diction capabilities while reduces the number of
parameters to be trained, which in effect decreases
the computational load and complexity.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we have addressed the importance
of leveraging deep learning for time series predic-
tion. In particular, we have reinvestigated the issuesof trafﬁc prediction and user-mobility forecasting
with deep learning and proposed a new model
named RCLSTM by revolutionarily redesigning the
conventional LSTM model. The basic idea behind
the RCLSTM model is to construct neural networks
by forming and realizing a random sparse graph.
We have checked the effectiveness of the RCLSTM
model by predicting the dynamics of trafﬁc and
user locations through various temporal scales. In
trafﬁc prediction, we have demonstrated that the
RCLSTM model with 1% neural connections re-
duces the computing complexity by 30% compared
with the standard LSTM model. Although the char-
acteristic of sparse neural connections may cause
a degradation of approximately 25% in prediction
accuracy, the RCLSTM model still outperforms
SVR, ARIMA, FFNN, even the LSTM model
with the same number of parameters. In addition,
along with the adjustment of the length of input
sequences and the number of training samples, the
RCLSTM models ﬂuctuate in line with the LSTM
model in terms of prediction accuracy. In summary,
it can be expected the RCLSTM model with lower
computing costs and satisfactory performance will
play an essential role in time series prediction in
the future intelligent telecommunication networks.
REFERENCE
[1] R. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Zhou, G. Ding, Y . Chen, Z. Wang,
and H. Zhang, “Intelligent 5G: When Cellular Networks
Meet Artiﬁcial Intelligence,” IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations , vol. 24, no. 5, Oct 2017, pp. 175–183.
[2] J. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Xu, Y . Wang, G. Xue, X. Zhang,
and D. Yang, “Spatiotemporal Modeling and Prediction
in Cellular Networks: A Big Data Enabled Deep Learn-
ing Approach,” Proc. 36th International Conference on