3
Output 
layer 
Hidden 
layer 
Input 
layer Output 
layer 
Hidden 
layer 
Input 
layer Unfold /g86 /g86 /g86 /g77/g77
forget 
gate input 
gate output 
gate 
input input 
update cell state 
hidden state (a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 1: An illustration of FFNN, RNN and LSTM memory block: (a ) FFNN; (b) RNN; (c) LSTM memory block.
tion, the right-hand side of Fig. 1(b) is the expanded
form of the RNN model, indicating that RNNs
calculate the output of the current moment from the
input of the current moment xtand the hidden state
of the previous moment ht−1. Therefore, RNNs
allow historical input information to be stored in
the network’s internal state, and are thereby capable
of mapping all of the historical input data to the
ﬁnal output. Theoretically, RNNs are competent
to handle such long-range dependencies. However,
in practice, RNNs seem unable to accomplish the
task. This phenomenon has been explored in depth
by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [ 7], who explained
some pretty fundamental reasons why such learning
might be difﬁcult.
Long Short-Term Memory networks, usually just
called “LSTMs”, are a special RNNs that are
suitable for learning long-term dependencies [ 7].
The key part that enhances LSTMs’ capability
to model long-term dependencies is a component
called memory block [ 7]. As illustrated in Fig. 1(c),
the memory block is a recurrently connected subnet
that contains functional modules called the memory
cell and gates. The memory cell is in charge
of remembering the temporal state of the neural
network and the gates formed by multiplicative
units are responsible for controlling the pattern of
information ﬂow. According to the corresponding
practical functionalities, these gates are classiﬁed
as input gates, output gates and forget gates. Input
gates control how much new information ﬂows
into the memory cell, while forget gates control
how much information of the memory cell still
remains in the current memory cell through re-
current connection, and output gates control how
much information is used to compute the output
activation of the memory block and further ﬂows
into the rest of the neural network. Before going
through the details of LSTM, some simple yetuseful activation functions need to be reviewed.
The sigmoid function σ(x) =1
1+e−xand the tanh
function ϕ(x) = 2σ(2x)−1are commonly used
as the activation function in ANNs. The domain
of both functions is the real number ﬁeld, but
the return value for the sigmoid function ranges
from 0 to 1, while the tanh function ranges from
-1 to 1. Fig. 1(c) explains in detail how LSTM
works. The ﬁrst step is to decide what kind of
information will be removed from the memory cell
state, which is implemented by a sigmoid layer
(i.e., the forget gate). The next step is to decide
what new information will be stored in the memory
cell state. This operation can be divided into two
steps. First, a sigmoid layer (i.e., the input gate)
determines what will be updated, and a tanh layer
creates a vector of new candidate values ztthat
can be added to the memory cell state, where the
subscript tdenotes the current moment. Next, these
two parts are combined to trigger an update to the
memory cell state. To update the old memory cell
state ct−1into the new memory cell state ct, we
can ﬁrst multiply the corresponding elements of
ct−1and the output of forget gate layer (i.e. ft),
which is just like the oblivion mechanism in the
human brain, and then add it∗zt, where itdenotes
the output of input gate and ∗denotes element-
wise multiplication. The last step is to decide
what to output, which is realized by element-wise
multiplication between the value obtained from a
tanh function of ctand the output of a sigmoid layer
(i.e., the output gate), ot. Through the cooperation
between the memory cell and the gates, LSTM is
endowed with a powerful ability to predict time
series with long-term dependences.
Since the invention of LSTM, a number of
scholars have proposed several improvements with
respect to its original architecture. Greff et al. [12]
evaluated the aforementioned conventional LSTM