5
unlike the LSTM model. The fundamental differ-
ence between RCLSTM and LSTM is illustrated
in Fig. 2, so let us move to the implementation
strategy of randomly connecting neurons.
First, we attach a probability value to each pair
of neurons that are connected by a dashed line
in the upper part of Fig. 2. The probability val-
ues can obey arbitrary statistical distributions, and
we choose uniform distribution in our simulations
given its computational efﬁciency. The probability
value indicates the tendency that the corresponding
pair of neurons will be connected. Then we assume
all neurons are connected with the same probability
and carefully set a threshold to determine the
percentage of connected neurons. If the probability
values are greater than the threshold, the corre-
sponding pairs of neurons are connected. Other-
wise, they are prohibited from being connected.
This process can be visualized as turning dashed
lines into solid lines, as shown in the right-hand
transformation of Fig. 2. Therefore, the RCLSTM
structure can create some sparsity, considerably
decreasing the total number of involved parameters
to be trained and reducing the computational loads
of the whole RCLSTM network.
IV. N UMERICAL SIMULATIONS FOR TRAFFIC
AND MOBILITY PREDICTION
In this section, we focus on verifying the perfor-
mance of the proposed RCLSTM model on trafﬁc
prediction and user-location forecasting. In partic-
ular, we construct a three-layer RNN whose recur-
rent neurons are all the newly designed RCLSTM
memory blocks (for the sake of simplicity, this
model is called the RCLSTM network in the
following statement). The corresponding expanded
form is described in Fig. 3. Because the purpose of
our simulations is to predict the value at the next
moment given some historical data, the input data
are fromy1toyTwhereTdenotes the length of the
input sequences, and the output of the RCLSTM
network is a prediction of the actual value at the
next moment denoted as ˆyT+1. First of all, we
take advantage of the RCLSTM network to predict
trafﬁc and user mobility, particularly compare the
prediction accuracy of the RCLSTM network with
that of other algorithms or models. Then, we adjust
the number of training data samples and the length
of input sequences to investigate the inﬂuence ofRCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
Unfold 
Fig. 3: The designed RCLSTM network for simulations.
these factors on the prediction accuracy of the
RCLSTM network.
A. Data Description and Processing
We evaluate the model’s performance on trafﬁc
prediction depending upon real trafﬁc data from
a link in the G ´EANT backbone networks [ 9].
G´EANT is a pan-European data source for the
research and education communities. These traf-
ﬁc data are sampled every 15 minute during a
4-month period and the unit for data points is
Kbps. In this study, we selected 10772 trafﬁc
data points from 2005-01-01 00:00AM to 2005-
04-30 00:00AM. The raw data are so uneven in
numerical size that there are about three orders of
magnitude difference between the maximum and
minimum. To reduce the numerical unevenness, we
ﬁrst take the logarithm to base 10 of the raw data,
then carry out a normalization process according
tox−min(x)
max(x)−min(x), where xis the vector after
taking the logarithm of the raw data, min(x)and
max(x)denote the minimum and maximum value
ofx, respectively. Through this process, the raw
data are limited to a range between 0 and 1, which
makes the training phase of ANN-based models
converge faster and effectively avoid the bad local
optimal solution [ 11]. Real-time prediction of data
trafﬁc requires continuous data input and learning.
Hence, we introduce a notion of sliding window,
which indicates a ﬁxed number of previous times-
lots to learn and then predict the current data trafﬁc.
Finally, we split the processed data into two sets
(i.e., a training set and a test set). The training set
is used to train the RCLSTM network, and the test
set is used to evaluate its prediction accuracy.