7
Fig. 4: Results of trafﬁc prediction using RCLSTM network: ( a) RMSE and computing time of RCLSTMs ; (b) predicted trafﬁc d ata and actual trafﬁc data;
(c) RMSE of RCLSTMs over different number of training sample s; (d) RMSE of RCLSTMs over different length of input sequenc es; (e) comparing RCLSTM
with SVR, ARIMA, FFNN and LSTM.
RCLSTM models vary more signiﬁcantly than that
of the LSTM model. Fig. 4(d) gives the related
results and shows that RCLSTM models are less
susceptive to the length of the input sequences than
LSTM model.
Finally, we compare the RCLSTM with three
well-known prediction techniques—SVR, ARIMA,
and FFNN. The hyper-parameters of these algo-
rithms are as follows:
•SVR: The number of input features is 100,
the kernel is a Radial Basis Function (RBF)
and the tolerance for the stopping criterion is
0.001.
•ARIMA(p,d,q): The number of autoregres-
sive terms (i.e. p) is 5, the number of nonsea-
sonal differences needed for stationarity (i.e.
d) is 1, and the number of lagged forecast
errors in the prediction equation (i.e. q) is 0.
•FFNN: The number of input features is 100
and the numbers of neurons in both the ﬁrst
hidden layer and the second hidden layer are
50.
In addition, since the LSTM with a memory cell
size of 30 has almost as many trainable parameters
as the RCLSTM with a memory cell size of 300
and 1% neural connections, we put it into the
comparison list as well. The simulation results areshown in Fig. 4(e), which reveals that LSTM with
a memory cell size of 300 performs much better
than the others, followed by the RCLSTM with the
memory cell size of 300 and 1% neural connec-
tions. Interestingly, the RCLSTM model performs
better than the LSTM with the memory cell size of
30, which is probably due to a degree of overﬁtting
that exists in the latter [ 11].
2) Human Mobility Prediction
The results of user-mobility prediction with the
RCLSTM model are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5(a)
shows the respective prediction accuracy for the
ﬁve users with the RCLSTM model, where the
probability of neural connections obeys a uniform
distribution between 0 and 1. In addition, the size
of the memory cell is 150, the length of input
sequences is 12, and the training samples account
for 90% of the processed data. There is a slight
difference in the prediction results for different
users. For example, Users A and D are both
university students with a part-time job, and thus
they almost follow the same behavioral pattern in
school or work, which results in highly expected
predictability. On the other hand, User E is running
his own business and is more likely to travel a
lot with unﬁxed schedule, consequently having low
expected predictability [ 10]. Although the predic-