6
The other dataset to evaluate the capability of the
RCLSTM model comes from reference [ 10], which
contains the location history of several mobile users
together with manually deﬁned important places for
every person, and is thus used for user-mobility
prediction. The data for every person are taken
from the Android location history service, and
mobile users are asked to mark the important places
that are further constructed as polygons on the
map. The dataset contains four attributes, i.e., date-
time, latitude, longitude, and assigned location ID,
within which the last item is used to map the user’s
location to one of the geographical polygons. These
data are collected in 1-hour intervals from 2015-08-
06 to 2015-11-04. In this article, we use location
data of ﬁve users. First, we encode the location
ID to one–hot code. For example, suppose that in
User A’s trajectory, the number of different location
IDs marked by User A is m. Then we map these
different location IDs to the Numbers 1 to m, and
use them as new location IDs. If the newly current
location ID is i, we construct an m-dimensional
vector where only the element with index iis one
and the others are all zero. After transforming all
the raw data to one-hot vectors, we use the sliding
window to slice the processed data and ﬁnally split
them into training set and test set, which follows
the same procedure as mentioned earlier in the
trafﬁc data processing.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our proposed
RCLSTM model on trafﬁc prediction, Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) is applied to estimate the
prediction accuracy. RMSE measures the squared
root of the mean of the deviation squares, which
quantiﬁes the difference between the predicted
values and the actual ones. The RMSE can be
expressed as RMSE=/radicalBig
1
N/summationtextN
i=1(yi−ˆyi)2, whereyi
is the actual value, ˆyiis the predicted value and N
represents the total number of predicted trafﬁc data.
On the other hand, the evaluation metric for
human mobility prediction is the accuracy level,
which indicates the percentage of the correct loca-
tion predictions. In our study, the accuracy level is
deﬁned as Acc=/summationtextN
i=11(yi=ˆyi)
N, whereyiis the actual
value,ˆyiis the predicted value, Nrepresents the
total number of predicted locations and 1(yi= ˆyi)is the indicator function that equals to 1 if yi= ˆyi
or 0 ifyi/ne}ationslash= ˆyi.
C. Testing Results and Analyses
1) Trafﬁc Prediction
Fig. 4(a) reveals the RMSE and the computing
time under different percentages of neural connec-
tivity in the RCLSTM model (note that 100% con-
nectivity means the fully-connected LSTM model).
Notably, the probability of neural connections
obeys a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. In
addition, the size of the RCLSTM’s memory cell
is set at 300, the ratio between the number of
training samples and the number of test samples is
set at 9:1, and the length of input trafﬁc sequences
is 100. Fig. 4(a) shows that the RMSE of the
RCLSTM model is slightly larger than that of the
LSTM model, but the RCLSTM with very sparse
neural connections (i.e. 1%) reduces the computing
time by around 30% compared with the baseline
LSTM. In addition, the computing time almost
stops increasing when the percentage of neural
connections is larger than 20%, which is because
the method we use for accelerating calculation only
works efﬁciently on extremely sparse matrices. Fig.
4(b) intuitively illustrates the actual and predicted
trafﬁc values. It can be observed from the subﬁgure
that the predicted values can match the variation
trend and features of the actual values very well.
Therefore, the simulation results indicate that the
RCLSTM model can yield acceptable prediction
capability, and effectively decrease the computa-
tional loads and complexity.
Then we investigate how the predictive capa-
bility of the RCLSTM model is inﬂuenced by
the number of training samples and the length of
input trafﬁc sequences. First we train the models
with 90%, 80%, 70% and 60% of the processed
data, respectively, while ﬁxing both the size of the
memory cell (set at 300) and the length of the input
sequences (set at 100), and test the trained models
with the remaining data. Then we vary the length of
the input sequences from 50 to 500 while keeping
the values of the other hyperparameters ﬁxed. The
simulation results are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d).
It can be observed from Fig. 4(c) that RCLSTM
models are more sensitive to the number of training
samples than LSTM, because when the number
of training samples increases, the RMSEs of the