2
a rapidly changing process [ 5]. Support Vector
Regression (SVR) has been successfully applied
for time series prediction, but it also has dis-
advantages like the lack of structured means to
determine some key parameters of the model [ 5].
In recent years, owing to the ﬂexible structure,
deep learning models are increasingly used in time
series prediction [ 6]. Speciﬁcally, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), one of deep learning models,
establish the reputation to cope with time series
by recurrent neural connections. However, for any
standard RNN architecture, the inﬂuence of a given
input on the hidden layers and eventually on the
neural network output would either decay or blow
up exponentially when cycling around recurrent
connections. To tackle this problem, Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) has been revolutionarily
designed by changing the structure of the hidden
neurons in traditional RNN [ 7]. Today, research
and applications of LSTM for time series predic-
tion are proliferating. For example, Wang et al.
[2] used LSTM-based model to predict the next-
moment trafﬁc load in a speciﬁc geometric area
and Alahi et al. [3] predicted the motion dynamics
in crowded scenes based on LSTM.
Generally, without customized hardware and
software acceleration, the LSTM’s computing time
is proportional to the number of parameters. Given
this disappointing characteristic, in this article, we
present an approach to decrease the number of
involved parameters, and thus put forward a new
model that reduces the computational cost. Inspired
by the interesting ﬁnding that Feed Forward Neural
Networks (FFNNs) with sparse neural connections
have a similar or even superior performance in
many experiments compared to the conventional
FFNNs [ 8], we introduce random connectivity to
the conventional LSTM model, thus forming a
new architecture with sparse neural connections,
called the Random Connectivity Long Short-Term
Memory (RCLSTM) model.
Our simulation model is a three-layer stack
RCLSTM neural network with a memory cell size
of 300 per layer. The simulation data comprise traf-
ﬁc data from G ´EANT networks—a pan-European
research network [ 9], and realistic user-trajectory
data [ 10]. The reasons to use the two different
datasets are twofold. First, ANN-based models
like LSTM are sensitive to the dataset and mayyield signiﬁcant performance changes on different
subsets taken from the same database. Therefore, it
would be hard to draw conclusions from one single
dataset for comparing different algorithms. Second,
the prediction of both network trafﬁc and user
mobility is of signiﬁcant importance in the design
and optimization of telecommunication networks.
For these reasons, we take advantage of the two
different datasets. Our simulation results show that
when compared to LSTM, the RCLSTM model
is highly capable of trafﬁc prediction and user-
location forecasting with less than half the neural
connections. Particularly, in the trafﬁc prediction
task, RCLSTM with even 1% neural connections
performs better than ARIMA, SVR, and FFNN,
while reducing the computing time by around 30%
compared with the conventional LSTM. More inter-
estingly, when the length of input trafﬁc sequences
increases from 50 to 500, the prediction error of
RCLSTM remains basically unchanged, whereas
that of LSTM increases by about 10%.
II. A NOVERVIEW OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL
NETWORKS AND LSTM
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) are con-
structed as a class of machine learning models
that can eliminate the drawbacks of the tradi-
tional learning algorithms with rule-based program-
ming [ 11]. ANNs can be classiﬁed into two main
categories—FFNNs and RNNs. FFNNs usually
consist of an input layer, an output layer and hidden
layers (if necessary). Each layer is composed of
a number of neurons and an activation function.
A simple diagram of FFNNs is illustrated in Fig.
1(a). In FFNNs, there is no connection between
the neurons within the same layer, and all neurons
cannot be connected across layers, which means
the information ﬂows in one direction, from the
input layer, through the hidden layers (if any), to
the output layer. FFNNs are widely used in various
ﬁelds like data classiﬁcation, object recognition,
and image processing. However, constrained by
their internal structure, FFNNs are unsuitable for
handling historical dependencies.
RNNs, as another type of ANNs, are similar to
FFNNs in the structure of neural layers, but allow
the connections between the neurons within the
same hidden layer. An illustration of RNNs can be
observed in the left-hand side of Fig. 1(b). In addi-