arXiv:1810.10161v1  [cs.NE]  24 Oct 20181
Deep Learning with Long Short-Term Memory for
Time Series Prediction
Yuxiu Hua, Zhifeng Zhao, Rongpeng Li, Xianfu Chen, Zhiming L iu,
and Honggang Zhang
Abstract —Time series prediction can be generalized as
a process that extracts useful information from historical
records and then determines future values. Learning long-
range dependencies that are embedded in time series
is often an obstacle for most algorithms, whereas Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) solutions, as a speciﬁc
kind of scheme in deep learning, promise to effectively
overcome the problem. In this article, we ﬁrst give a
brief introduction to the structure and forward propa-
gation mechanism of the LSTM model. Then, aiming at
reducing the considerable computing cost of LSTM, we
put forward the Random Connectivity LSTM (RCLSTM)
model and test it by predicting trafﬁc and user mobility
in telecommunication networks. Compared to LSTM,
RCLSTM is formed via stochastic connectivity between
neurons, which achieves a signiﬁcant breakthrough in the
architecture formation of neural networks. In this way,
the RCLSTM model exhibits a certain level of sparsity,
which leads to an appealing decrease in the computational
complexity and makes the RCLSTM model become more
applicable in latency-stringent application scenarios. I n
the ﬁeld of telecommunication networks, the prediction
of trafﬁc series and mobility traces could directly beneﬁt
from this improvement as we further demonstrate that
the prediction accuracy of RCLSTM is comparable to
that of the conventional LSTM no matter how we change
the number of training samples or the length of input
sequences.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The analysis and prediction of time series has
always been the key technique in an array of
practical problems, including weather forecasting,
transportation planning, trafﬁc management, and so
on. In the domain of telecommunications, intelli-
gent mechanisms have already been designed to
Y . Hua, Z. Zhao, R. Li and H. Zhang are with Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310027, China, (email: {21631087, zhaozf,
lirongpeng, honggangzhang }@zju.edu.cn).
X. Chen is with VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
Oulu FI-90571, Finland (email: xianfu.chen@vtt.ﬁ).
Z. Liu is with China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing
100053, China (email: liuzhiming@chinamobile.com).track and analyze a large number of time-dependent
events, such as data trafﬁc, user location, channel
load, and service requests, to mention a few [ 1]. On
the other hand, with the explosive proliferation of
mobile terminals as well as the expansion of mobile
Internet, the Internet of Things (IoT) and cloud
computing, the mobile communication network has
become an indispensable social infrastructure that
is bound up with people’s lives and various areas of
society [ 1]. However, it remains a challenging issue
that how to guarantee the quality of service (QoS)
and the quality of experience regardless of the
dynamics of network trafﬁc and user movements.
One promising solution is to predict the varying
pattern of data trafﬁc and the location at which
a mobile user will likely demand network service
[1]. Accordingly, network operators can reserve
some network resources, and react effectively to
network changes in near real time [ 2]. However,
since misplaced reservation of network resources
and outdated predicted information will not only
fail to support the desired QoS but also likely
degrade the performance of the overall network,
the prediction accuracy and complexity is of vital
importance [ 3].
Basically, the prediction goal of a time series
{y1,y2,...}is to estimate the value at time ibased
on its previous data yi−1,yi−2,.... If we denote
x={yi−k,yi−k+1,...,yi−1},i={k,...,n}, the goal
aims at ﬁnding a function f(x)so thatˆyi=f(x)
is as close to the ground truth yias possible.
Time series analysis and prediction have been
intensively studied for 40 years [ 4]. In statistical
signal processing, the Autoregressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) model has been used
to study time-varying processes. However, one
limitation of ARIMA is its natural tendency to
concentrate on the mean values of the past series
data. Therefore, it remains challenging to capture