Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61751208) and the Advanced Research Program (No. 41412050202) and the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council of the UK (EPSRC) Grant number EP/S000631/1.
Broader Impact
We introduced a framework for meta RL where learning is improved through the addition of an
auxiliary meta-critic which is trained online to maximise learning progress. This technology could
beneﬁt all current and potential future downstream applications of reinforcement learning, where
learning speed and/or asymptotic performance can still be improved – such as in game playing agents
and robot control.
Faster reinforcement learning algorithms such as meta-critic could help to reduce the energy re-
quirements training agents, which can add up to a signiﬁcant environmental cost [ 35]; and bring us
one step closer to enabling learning-based control of physical robots, which is currently rare due to
the sample inefﬁciency of RL algorithms in comparison to the limited robustness of real robots to
physical wear and tear of prolonged operation. Returning to our speciﬁc algorithmic contribution,
introducing learnable reward functions rather than relying solely on manually speciﬁed rewards
introduces a certain additional level of complexity and associated risk above that of conventional
reinforcement learning. If the agent participates in deﬁning its own reward, one might like to be
able to interpret the learned reward function and validate that it is reasonable and will not lead to the
robot learning to perform undesirable behaviours. This suggests that development of explainable AI
techniques suited for reward function analysis could be a good topic for future research.
References
[1]Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom
Schaul, Brendan Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by
gradient descent. In NIPS , 2016.
[2]Yogesh Balaji, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Rama Chellappa. Metareg: Towards domain
generalization using meta-regularization. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[3]Sarah Bechtle, Artem Molchanov, Yevgen Chebotar, Edward Grefenstette, Ludovic Righetti,
Gaurav Sukhatme, and Franziska Meier. Meta learning via learned loss. In arXiv , 2019.
[4]Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang,
and Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. In arXiv , 2016.
[5]Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
reinforcement learning for continuous control. In ICML , 2016.
[6]Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl2:
Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. In arXiv , 2016.
[7]Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adapta-
tion of deep networks. In ICML , 2017.
[8]Luca Franceschi, Paolo Frasconi, Saverio Salzo, Riccardo Grazzi, and Massimilano Pontil.
Bilevel programming for hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. In ICML , 2018.
[9]Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
actor-critic methods. In ICML , 2018.
[10] Josif Grabocka, Randolf Scholz, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. Learning surrogate losses. In arXiv ,
2019.
[11] Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, YuXuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Meta-
reinforcement learning of structured exploration strategies. In NeurIPS , 2018.
10