Machine Learning (2019) 108:971–992 973
prediction problems. The striking feature of AGB is that it enjoys the merits of both
approaches:
(i)Its predictive performance is comparable to that of standard gradient tree boosting;
(ii)It takes advantage of the accelerated descent to output models which are remarkably
much more sparse in their number of components.
Item(ii)is of course a decisive advantage for large-scale learning, when time and storage
issues matter. To make the concept clear, we show in Fig. 1typical test error results by number
of iterations and shrinkage (step size), both for the standard (top) and the accelerated (bottom)algorithms. As is often the case with gradient boosting, smaller values of the shrinkageparameter require a larger number of trees for the optimal model, when the test error isat its minimum. However, if both approaches yield similar results in terms of prediction,we see that the optimal number of iterations is at least one order of magnitude smaller forAGB .
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we brieﬂy recall the mathematical/statistical
context of gradient boosting, and present the principle of the AGB algorithm. Section 3is
devoted to analyzing the results of a battery of experiments on synthetic and real-life datasets. We offer an extensive comparison between the performance of Friedman’s gradient treeboosting and AGB , with a special emphasis put on the inﬂuence of the learning rate on the
size of the optimal models. Section 4summarizes the main results and discusses research
directions for future work. The code used for the simulations and the ﬁgures is available athttps://github.com/lrouviere/AGB .
2 (Accelerated) gradient boosting
2.1 Gradient boosting at a glance
Let Dn={(X1,Y1) ,...,( Xn,Yn)}be a sample of i.i.d. observations, taking values in Rd×
Y. Throughout, Y⊂Ris either a ﬁnite set of labels (for classiﬁcation) or a subset of R(for
regression). The learning task is to construct a predictor F:Rd→Rthat assigns a response
to each possible value of the independent random observation Xn+1. In the context of gradient
boosting, this general problem is addressed by considering a class Fof elementary functions
f:Rd→R(called the weak or base learners), and by minimizing some empirical risk
functional
Cn(F)=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1ψ(F(Xi),Yi) (2)
over the linear combinations of functions in F. Thus, we are looking for an additive solution
of the form Fn=/summationtextT
t=0αtft,w h e r e (α0,...,α T)∈RT+1and each component ftis picked
in the base class F.
The function ψ:R×Y→R+is called the loss. It is assumed to be convex and
continuously differentiable in its ﬁrst argument. It measures the cost incurred by predicting
F(Xi)when the answer is Yi. For example, in the least squares regression problem, ψ(x,y)=
(y−x)2,a n d
Cn(F)=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1(Yi−F(Xi))2.
123