990 Machine Learning (2019) 108:971–992
4 Conclusion and discussion
In this paper, we have proposed an algorithm named Accelerated Gradient Boosting ( AGB ). It
is based on Friedman’s gradient tree boosting algorithm (Friedman 2001 ), and incorporates
the Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent technique (Nesterov 1983 ) to the gradient step.
Extensive numerical experiments were conducted that reach the following conclusion: AGB
achieves a similar level of predictive error as gradient boosting, but uses far less componentsin the output model and is less sensitive to the shrinkage parameter. Our results are bestsummarized by Fig. 6, which offers the most compelling evidence about the beneﬁts of AGB :
the plots on the left show statistically signiﬁcant performance similarities between AGB and
regular gradient tree boosting, while the right clearly show a substantive drop in the numberof iterations required (resulting in sparser models). The code base is made freely available athttps://github.com/lrouviere/AGB .
The present article is based on empirical considerations and cannot, on its own, explain
the reasons for the good performance of the AGB algorithm. This would require a thorough
analysis of the theoretical properties of the combination gradient boosting + Nesterov’sacceleration, taking the point of view of functional optimization. Such an analysis is difﬁcultand goes far beyond the scope of our work. In fact, even for regular gradient boosting, fewtheoretical results are known and much work remains to be done to clarify the mathematicalforces driving the algorithm. Many articles regard boosting with a statistical eye and studythe somewhat idealized problem of empirical risk minimization with a convex loss (e.g.,Blanchard et al. 2003 ; Lugosi and V ayatis 2004 ). These papers essentially concentrate on
the statistical properties of the approach (that is, consistency and rates of convergence as thesample size grows) and often ignore the underlying optimization aspects. Other articles, suchas Bühlmann and Y u ( 2003 ), Zhang and Y u ( 2005 ), Bartlett and Traskin ( 2007 ) take advantage
of the iterative principle of boosting, but mainly focus on regularization via early stopping(that is, stopping the boosting iterations at some point), without paying too much attention tothe optimization side. Notable exceptions are the pioneering notes of Breiman ( 1997 ,1998 ,
1999 ,2000 ,2004 ), together with the paper by Mason et al. ( 2000 ), who envision gradient
boosting as an inﬁnite-dimensional numerical optimization problem and pave the way formore abstract investigations. More recently, Biau and Cadre ( 2017 ) analyze two versions of
gradient boosting and prove their convergence as the number of iterations tends to inﬁnity.Nevertheless, despite all these research efforts, there is to date no sound theory of gradientboosting.
On the other hand, Nesterov’s accelerated descent is provably faster than gradient descent
when the gradient used is accurate (see Bubeck 2015 , Chapter 3). However, when the gradient
is not accurate (e.g., in a stochastic setting), then Nesterov’s descent is prone to accumulatingerror and diverging. This type of situation is analyzed in Devolder et al. ( 2014 ), who prove
that the superiority of fast gradient methods over the classical ones is no longer absolutewhen an inexact oracle is used. Therefore, the beneﬁts of Nesterov’s technique may be lost,or reduced, in some inexact gradient settings. This is of course the case in our boostingproblem, since the gradient direction is highly inexact due to the least squares approximation(5). It is thus theoretically not immediately clear when and how Nesterov’s descent can
really help gradient boosting. Therefore, beyond our empirical ﬁndings, it is essential totackle the problem from a mathematical point of view. With this respect, we note that Jainet al. ( 2018 ) address the issues of instability and error accumulation of fast gradient methods
for the special case of stochastic approximation for the least squares regression problem. Theyshow in particular that acceleration can be made robust to statistical errors by introducing an
123