Algorithm 1: DML-ALA
Input: Training image set, labels, learning rates αandβ,
episode size m, iteration number T, and iteration num-
ber for assessor at each episode K.
Output: Parameters of metric θ, and parameters of asses-
sorφ.
1:foriter= 1,2,···,Tdo
2: Construct an episode of m samples and form two
sets of tuples {T}trand{T}va.
3: Perform one gradient update to θand obtain θ′fol-
lowing ( 10).
4: foriter= 1,2,···,Kdo
5: Update assessor parameters φfollowing ( 12).
6: end for
7: Update metric parameters θwith the updated asses-
sor parameters φ∗following ( 13).
8:end for
9:returnθandφ.
This issue is hard to tackle by designing a loss function,
which would probably be contradictory with ( 2). Instead,
we propose to train an assessor to maximize the generaliza-
tion ability of learned metric. We achieve this by exploiting
the idea of episode-based training [ 42]. At each training it-
eration, we construct an episode by sampling two subsets of
MandNexamples with disjoint labels. We denote them as
the training subset and validation subset. We then form two
sets of tuples {T}trand{T}vafrom the respective subsets.
We design one episode to simulate the procedure of
training and testing. Our goal is to seek a sample assess-
ment strategy to maximize the metric performance on the
validation subset, after utilizing it to update the metric on
thetraining subset. At each iteration, we ﬁrst perform one
gradient update to θusing ( 9) and obtain the updated pa-
rametersθ′:
θ′=θ−α∇θ"
T∈{T}trA(T;φ)L(T;fθ)
=θ−α"
T∈{T}trA(T;φ)∇θL(T;fθ),(10)
whereαis the learning rate of the metric.
We then evaluate the updated model on the validation
subset and employ the validation loss to train the assessor.
More concretely, the meta-training objective of the assessor
can be represented as:
min
φ"
T′∈{T}vaL(T′;fθ′) (11)
= min
φ"
T′∈{T}vaL(T′;fθ−α!
T∈{T}trA(T;φ)∇θL(T;fθ)).
Note that this loss is computed over the metric with the up-
dated parameters θ′which is differentiable w.r.t. φ.Ideally, we want to train the assessor Ato minimize ( 11),
but to improve the efﬁciency we only update it for a ﬁxed
timesK. For each update:
φ←φ−β∇φ"
T′∈{T}vaL(T′;fθ′), (12)
whereβis the meta learning rate of assessor A.
Finally, we update the original metric (i.e., fθ, notfθ′)
once using the updated assessor Aφ∗:
θ←θ−α"
T∈{T}trA(T;φ∗)∇θL(T;fθ), (13)
and use it as the learned metric parameters at this iteration.
We only utilize updated model fθ′to evaluate the gener-
alization ability of the current optimizer (with assessor Aφ)
and discard it after each iteration. The metric is optimized
using ( 13) with the updated assessor Aφ∗, ensuring that the
metric is always trained towards good generalization.
We sample each episode randomly from the training set,
so the optimization of the metric and assessor can be per-
formed using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The met-
ric and assessor are updated alternately at each iteration,
but can be seen as being trained simultaneously across it-
erations throughout the whole process. The metric and as-
sessor are coupled with each other, collaborating to seek a
representation with good discrimination and generalization
ability. Algorithm 1details the proposed DML-ALA.
3.4. Implementation Details
We implemented our method using the Tensorﬂow pack-
age throughout the experiments. For fair comparisons
with most deep metric learning methods, we employed the
GoogLeNet [ 39] model pre-trained on ImageNet ILSVRC
dataset [ 28] followed by a randomly initialized fully con-
nected layer. We set the output embedding size of our
method to 512. We implemented the assessor with a two-
layer LSTM [ 11] model and a fully connected layer, where
there are 64 hidden units in each layer. We normalized all
the images to 256 by 256 as inputs. For training, we per-
formed standard random cropping at 227 by 227 and hor-
izontal random mirror for data augmentation. We set the
base learning rate to 10−4for the CNN, 10−3for the last
fully connected layer, and 4×10−4for the assessor. At
each iteration, we constructed an episode with a training
subset of 100 samples and a validation subset of 20 sam-
ples and updated the assessor for 3 times. We tuned all the
hyperparameters via cross-validation on the training set.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluated the proposed framework in
both image retrieval and clustering tasks. We conducted
2964