Deep Metric Learning via Adaptive Learnable Assessment
Wenzhao Zheng1,2,3, Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
zhengwz18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a deep metric learning via
adaptive learnable assessment (DML-ALA) method for im-
age retrieval and clustering, which aims to learn a sample
assessment strategy to maximize the generalization of the
trained metric. Unlike existing deep metric learning meth-
ods that usually utilize a ﬁxed sampling strategy like hard
negative mining, we propose a sequence-aware learnable
assessor which re-weights each training example to train
the metric towards good generalization. We formulate the
learning of this assessor as a meta-learning problem, where
we employ an episode-based training scheme and update
the assessor at each iteration to adapt to the current model
status. We construct each episode by sampling two subsets
of disjoint labels to simulate the procedure of training and
testing and use the performance of one-gradient-updated
metric on the validation subset as the meta-objective of the
assessor. Experimental results on the widely used CUB-
200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
1. Introduction
Developing an effective metric to measure similarities of
examples is at the core of many computer vision tasks. Gen-
erally, the distance of two points can be represented as the
Euclidean distance in an embedding space, and deep met-
ric learning utilizes deep neural networks [ 15,19,32,39]
to learn discriminative embeddings of images, so that sam-
ples from the same class have similar representations while
samples from different classes have dissimilar representa-
tions. Recently a variety of deep metric learning methods
have been proposed in the literature and demonstrate great
power in various tasks, such as person re-identiﬁcation [ 3,
31,45,57], face recognition [ 16,22,30], image set classiﬁ-
∗Corresponding authorAssessment Metric
Conventional DML
DML-ALATraining
SubsetAssessor MetricWeighted
Loss
Validation
SubsetUpdated
MetricMeta-Loss
Adaptive
AssessorMetricAdaptively
Weighted
LossWeighted
LossUpdate
UpdateUpdate
Meta-UpdateBatch
Figure 1. Flow-chart of our DML-ALA and comparisons with con-
ventional deep metric learning (DML) methods. The proposed
DML-ALA employs a simultaneously trained assessor to perform
sampling instead of a hand-crafted sampling strategy. At each
iteration, the training of our model consists of three stages: 1)
updating the metric once using the weighted loss on the training
subset, 2) training the assessor to maximize the performance of
theupdated metric on the validation subset, and 3) training the
original metric using examples weighted by the trained assessor.
Note that we only use the updated mehtric for the training of the
assessor and discard it after each iteration.
cation [ 23] and image retrieval [ 20,27,36].
Losses in metric learning are usually deﬁned over two or
more examples with a certain class structure called a “tu-
ple”. The number of m-tuples that can be formed from N
examples has O(Nm)complexity, rendering it inefﬁcient
to utilize all of them equally even for datasets of modest
2960