sizes. There have been many studies exploring an efﬁcient
sampling strategy [ 10,14,17,25,30,50]. Most existing
methods utilize a hand-crafted sampling strategy, which is
pre-deﬁned based on some prior knowledge. However, dur-
ing training the model is being updated constantly, and thus
a ﬁxed sampling strategy may not be effective at all stages.
For example, the widely used hard mining strategy mines
hard tuples that affect training the most, but it also ignores
a variety of easy samples that might be helpful at the begin-
ning [ 56]. This raises a natural question: how to choose the
appropriate sampling strategy at different training stages?
In this work, we provide a positive solution to answer
this question. We propose an adaptive learnable assess-
ment (ALA) method which performs sampling adaptively
to maximize the generalization ability of the trained metric,
where the ﬂow-chart is shown in Figure 1. The conventional
hard mining strategy equals re-weighting each tuple by 0or
1according to a criterion regarding its hardness. We ex-
tend it by adopting a soft weighting scheme that generates
weights between 0and1. Considering that inputs for the
training of the metric are a sequence of tuples, we propose
a sequence-aware assessor that is able to incorporate knowl-
edge reﬁned from previous inputs and the current model
status. In addition, we argue that the success of existing
deep metric learning methods has been impeded by over-
ﬁtting, as veriﬁed in [ 43]. Inspired by this, we formulate the
learning of the proposed assessor as a meta-learning prob-
lem with a meta-objective of maximizing the generaliza-
tion. To achieve this, we employ an episode-based training
scheme [ 42] and construct each episode with two subsets of
disjoint labels to simulate the training set and test set parti-
tion. The metric trained in this manner works along with the
assessor to seek the direction of good generalization. Exper-
imental results on the CUB-200-2011 [ 44], Cars196 [ 18],
and Stanford Online Products [ 36] datasets show that the
proposed ALA improves the performance of existing meth-
ods in both image retrieval and clustering tasks.
2. Related Work
Deep Metric Learning: The training of a representative
deep metric learning method involves two essential com-
ponents: sampling and updating. There are two trends of
recent progress regarding loss function and sampling strat-
egy. The ﬁrst trend of works designs different losses to
consider various information buried beneath training sam-
ples [ 2,6,12,30,34,36,47,48,53]. For example, the
triplet loss [ 5,30,46] pushes away the distance of a negative
pair to be larger than that of a positive pair. Sohn [ 34] ex-
tended the triplet loss to an N-pair loss which pushes away
N-1 negatives in an (N+1)-tuple all at once. Ustinova et
al.[40] presented a histogram loss to punish the overlap be-
tween similarity distributions of positive and negative pairs.
The other trend of works aims at exploring for an ef-fective sampling strategy to train the metric. The quality
of samples used in the metric learning process has a cru-
cial inﬂuence not only on the convergence speed of training
but more importantly on the performance of the method.
A widely used approach is the hard negative mining strat-
egy [ 10,14,17,30,54], which essentially under-samples
the training set for false positive samples that provide the
most information. Hard mining may cause a distribu-
tion shift due to the under-sampling [ 52], motivating some
works to consider other sampling frameworks to avoid sam-
pling only the hard ones [ 7,8,10,24,25,37,50,51,55,56].
For example, Wu et al. [50] proposed to select samples
uniformly based on distances. Movshovitz et al. [25] pro-
posed to use proxies to efﬁciently represent a set of samples,
reducing the sampling complexity dramatically. Duan et
al.[8] and Zhao et al. [55] trained a generator to synthesize
hard samples in an adversarial manner. Zheng et al. [56]
utilized linear interpolation to generate hardness-aware syn-
thetics. However, all these methods utilize ﬁxed pre-deﬁned
sampling strategies which assume some prior knowledge,
and thus cannot ﬂexibly adapt to the current model status.
Meta-Learning: Recently deep learning [ 15,19,32,39]
has shown great power and enabled machines to outperform
humans in various tasks. The main issue hindering further
development is the demand for numerous training data and
massive computing resources. As an attempt to address
this issue, meta-learning [ 1,4,9,26,29,33,38,42] aims
to learn a higher-level model (meta-learner) to instruct the
learning process of the original model (learner) to adapt to
new tasks rapidly. For example, Vinyals et al. [42] proposed
an episode-based training strategy to simulate the process
of one-shot learning, which is used to train a matching net-
work to directly map a few labelled samples and an unla-
belled sample to its label. Finn et al. [9] proposed a model-
agnostic meta-learning algorithm to learn a set of initial pa-
rameters enabling a model to adapt to a new task quickly.
Inspired by recent works in meta-learning, we design a
learnable assessor as the meta-learner and utilize it to train
the metric adaptively to maximize the generalization abil-
ity. To achieve this, we employ an episode-based training
scheme [ 42], where we construct each episode to simulate
the procedure of training and testing. Different from most
existing meta-learning methods, we train a meta-learner to
perform sampling, which is shown in [ 50] to have a signiﬁ-
cant effect in deep metric learning.
3. Proposed Approach
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the basic ideas of deep
metric learning and review the conventional hard mining
sampling strategy. Then, we present our adaptive learnable
assessor considering the sequential information of training
examples. Finally, we propose an efﬁcient approach to learn
the assessor simultaneously by maximizing the generaliza-
2961