CNN
LSTMLoss
+TupleConcatenate
Loss
FC Layer
Figure 3. The network architecture of the proposed DML-ALA.
We add a fully connected layer after a CNN network as the met-
ric. The assessor is composed of an LSTM module and a fully
connected layer. The embeddings of a tuple are concatenated and
then taken as inputs of the assessor.
ﬁne the training using assessment strategy Sas:
θ∗= argmin
θN"
i=1Si(TN)L(Ti;fθ), (7)
whereSidenotes the ith output of sample assessment strat-
egySandTidenotes the ith example in the sequence TN.
We argue that SSSincludes a variety of sampling strategies.
For example, we can represent the hard mining strategy as
Sh(TN) ={
TTThard(Ti)}∈SSS.
Most existing methods utilize hand-crafted sampling
strategies, which usually assume some prior knowledge and
cannot adapt to the model at different stages. For exam-
ple, the hard mining strategy may be effective at the begin-
ning, but the number of hard samples decreases as the train-
ing proceeds and little supervision can be further provided.
Also, the under-sampling of the hard mining strategy may
cause a distribution shift, harming the generalization ability.
To address this problem, we propose a sequence-aware
learnable sample assessment strategy, which adaptively
generates a weight for each tuple to best beneﬁt training of
the metric considering knowledge about the current model
status, as shown in Figure 2. In practice, the tuple sequence
TNis usually generated progressively, so we do not see the
whole sequence until the last step. We instead consider a
subset of SSSand deﬁne a learnable assessor Awhich takes
as inputs a tuple Tand a state variable h, and outputs a real
numberw∈(0,1), i.e.,A(T,h;φ) =w, whereφis the
parameters. We also assume that the assessor Adetermines
a state transformation function HA:h$→H(h,T;φ). The
assessorAnaturally induces a sample assessment strategy:
SA(TN) ={A(Ti,hi−1;φi)}∈SSS, (8)
whereTiis theith tuple in the sequence TN,hi−1=
H(hi−2,Ti−1;φi−1)is the state variable at step i−1, and
φiis the parameters of assessor Aat stepi.The state variable hencodes information from previous
states, making the generated weights aware of the order of
TN. It passes knowledge about previous input tuples and
model status through training, enabling the assessor to in-
teract with the metric. The assessor and the transformation
function are also updated throughout training, capable of
adapting to different training stages and model status.
We exploit a long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 11] net-
work to integrate both the assessor and state transformation
function. Having obtained a tuple of embeddings, we ﬁrst
concatenate them into a vector and use it as the input of
the LSTM. At each step, the LSTM network takes in this
concatenated vector and outputs a vector on the basis of a
latent state cell which is simultaneously reﬁned to incor-
porate knowledge learned from this step. We add a fully
connected layer with a sigmoid activation function follow-
ing the LSTM network to map the output vector to a real
numberw∈(0,1)as the assessed weight. The state vari-
able is hidden inside the LSTM module, so in the context of
a sequence TN, we can omit it from the assessor input for
brevity (i.e., w=A(T;φ)). The training using assessor A
can be represented as:
θ∗= argmin
θN"
i=1A(Ti;φ)L(Ti;fθ). (9)
The proposed sequence-aware learnable assessor can
preserve information from previous training process and ex-
ploit it to determine the current strategy. In addition, the
assessor interacts with the metric and updates itself to pro-
duce adaptive weights that can best beneﬁt the following
training process. Figure 3shows the network architecture
of the proposed DML-ALA.
3.3. Adaptive Meta-Training of the Assessor
With a learnable assessor, we adaptively customize the
training of the metric model. However, the learning of such
a assessor is not trivial. Directly minimizing ( 9) with re-
spect toφleads to a trivial solution of A(T;φ∗) = 0,∀T∈
TTT. We present an efﬁcient meta-learning based approach to
simultaneously learn the assessor in the training process by
maximizing the generalization ability of the trained metric,
as shown in Figure 1.
The assessor plays a vital role in the training process. It
acts more like an optimizer for the metric, guiding the train-
ing direction. Furthermore, the assessor itself is learnable.
The learning of the assessor is a learning problem at a higher
level, which we formulate as a meta-learning problem.
The success of existing deep metric learning methods
has been impeded by over-ﬁtting. Real images usually vary
widely in the aspects of background, illumination, pose, etc.
However, intra-class variations are usually discouraged by
the general objective of metric learning ( 2), leading to a
metric with poor generalization ability.
2963