Domain Adaptive Imitation Learning
Kuno Kim1Yihong Gu2Jiaming Song1Shengjia Zhao1Stefano Ermon1
Abstract
We study the question of how to imitate tasks
across domains with discrepancies such as embod-
iment, viewpoint, and dynamics mismatch. Many
prior works require paired, aligned demonstra-
tions and an additional RL step that requires en-
vironment interactions. However, paired, aligned
demonstrations are seldom obtainable and RL
procedures are expensive. We formalize the Do-
main Adaptive Imitation Learning (DAIL) prob-
lem, which is a uniﬁed framework for imitation
learning in the presence of viewpoint, embodi-
ment, and dynamics mismatch. Informally, DAIL
is the process of learning how to perform a task
optimally, given demonstrations of the task in a
distinct domain. We propose a two step approach
to DAIL: alignment followed by adaptation. In
the alignment step we execute a novel unsuper-
vised MDP alignment algorithm, Generative Ad-
versarial MDP Alignment (GAMA), to learn state
and action correspondences from unpaired, un-
aligned demonstrations. In the adaptation step we
leverage the correspondences to zero-shot imitate
tasks across domains. To describe when DAIL
is feasible via alignment and adaptation, we in-
troduce a theory of MDP alignability. We exper-
imentally evaluate GAMA against baselines in
embodiment, viewpoint, and dynamics mismatch
scenarios where aligned demonstrations don’t ex-
ist and show the effectiveness of our approach.
1. Introduction
Humans possess an astonishing ability to recognize latent
structural similarities between behaviors in related but dis-
tinct domains, and learn new skills from cross domain
demonstrations alone. Not only are we capable of learn-
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University. Cor-
respondence to: Kuno Kim <khkim@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).ing from third person observations that have no obvious
correspondence to our internal self representations ( Stadie
et al. ,2017 ;Liu et al. ,2018 ;Sermanet et al. ,2018 ), but
we also are capable of imitating experts with different em-
bodiments ( Gupta et al. ,2017 ;Rizzolatti & Craighero ,
2004 ;Liu et al. ,2020 ) in foreign environments ( Liu et al. ,
2020 ) - e.g an infant is able to imitate visuomotor skills by
watching adults with different biomechanics ( Jones ,2009 )
acting in environments distinct from their playroom. Previ-
ous work in neuroscience ( Marshall & Meltzoff ,2015 ) and
robotics ( Kuniyoshi & Inoue ,1993 ;Kuniyoshi et al. ,1994 )
have recognized the pitfalls of exact behavioral cloning in
the presence of domain discrepancies and posited that the
effectiveness of the human imitation learning mechanism
hinges on the ability to learn structure preserving domain
correspondences. These correspondences enable the learner
to internalize cross domain demonstrations and produce a
reconstruction of the behavior in the self domain. Consider
a young child that has learned to associate (or "align") his
internal body map with the limbs of an adult. When the
adult demonstrates running, the child is able internalize the
demonstration, and reproduce the behavior.
Recently, separate solutions have been proposed for imi-
tation learning across three main types of domain discrep-
ancies: dynamics ( Liu et al. ,2020 ), embodiment ( Gupta
et al.,2017 ), and viewpoint ( Liu et al. ,2018 ;Sermanet et al. ,
2018 ) mismatch. Most works ( Liu et al. ,2018 ;Sermanet
et al.,2018 ;Gupta et al. ,2017 ) require paired, time-aligned
demonstrations to obtain state correspondences and an RL
step involving environment interactions. (see Figure 1a)
Unfortunately, paired, aligned demonstrations are seldom
obtainable and RL procedures are expensive.
In this work we formalize the Domain Adaptive Imitation
Learning (DAIL) problem - a uniﬁed framework for imita-
tion learning across domains with dynamics, embodiment,
and/or viewpoint mismatch. Informally, DAIL is the pro-
cess of learning how to perform a task optimally in a self
domain, given demonstrations of the task in a distinct ex-
pert domain . We propose a two-step approach to DAIL:
alignment followed by adaptation. In the alignment step
we execute a novel unsupervised MDP alignment algorithm,
Generative Adversarial MDP Alignment (GAMA), to learn
state, action maps from unpaired, unaligned demonstra-
tions. In the adaptation step we leverage the learned state,