An Overview of Federated Deep Learning Privacy
Attacks and Defensive Strategies
David Enthoven Zaid Al-Ars
Accelerated Big Data Systems Group
Delft University of Technology, NL
fD.A.Enthoven, Z.Al-Ars g@tudelft.nl
Abstract —With the increased attention and legislation for data-
privacy, collaborative machine learning (ML) algorithms are
being developed to ensure the protection of private data used for
processing. Federated learning (FL) is the most popular of these
methods, which provides privacy preservation by facilitating
collaborative training of a shared model without the need to
exchange any private data with a centralized server. Rather,
an abstraction of the data in the form of a machine learning
model update is sent. Recent studies showed that such model
updates may still very well leak private information and thus
a more structured risk assessment is needed. In this paper, we
analyze existing vulnerabilities of FL and subsequently perform
a literature review of the possible attack methods targeting
FL privacy protection capabilities. These attack methods are
then categorized by a basic taxonomy. Additionally, we provide
a literature study of the most recent defensive strategies and
algorithms for FL aimed to overcome these attacks. These
defensive strategies are categorized by their respective underlying
defense principle. The paper concludes that the application of
a single defensive strategy is not enough to provide adequate
protection to all available attack methods.
Index Terms —Federated learning, privacy protection, attack
methods, defensive strategies
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning algorithms have grown signiﬁcantly in capa-
bilities and popularity in the past decade. Advances in com-
puting performance, increased data availability (and decreased
data-storage costs) and advances in more effective algorithms
have created a surge of new applications using deep learning
algorithms.
For these algorithms to be accurate, generally a large
amount of task-speciﬁc data is needed. Conventionally, this
data is gathered and stored on an accessible centralized server,
which is becoming increasingly cheap to access due to the
increasing bandwidths available for remote data storage and
retrieval.
This centralized data storage, however, introduces two prob-
lems. First, due to the exponential increase of data collectors
in the ﬁeld, the amount of data that is collected is becoming
excessively large, which in turn increases the bandwidth
requirements for communication as well as the computational
requirements needed for processing. Second, devices may
gather data of sensitive nature which is subject to privacy laws
and regulations [1]. Therefore, it is important to manage this
sensitive data in a way that protects privacy. To combat theseproblems alternative ways of decentralized learning have been
proposed, most notably that of federated learning.
FL [2] is a speciﬁc form of distributed learning methods [3]
which relies on the notion that no actual data need to be sent
to a centralized server. Rather, an abstraction in the form of
machine learning models is sent to the server instead. These
models are trained locally on client-side devices with the
clients’ datasets. These updated models are sent back to the
centralized server. Then, the server aggregates these models
into a single model and sends this model back to the clients.
This process is illustrated in Figure 1. As this process happens
multiple times iteratively, all clients jointly train the shared
model. FL claims to have distinct privacy advantages over tra-
ditional centralized data-driven model training approaches as
well as reducing communication bandwidth requirements [2].
These privacy advantages are focused on protecting sensitive
data from external adversaries, but it does not guarantee safety
against internal adversaries such as malicious servers.
FL has been demonstrated to outperform traditional training
methods in certain cases. Researchers demonstrated an imple-
mentation for next word prediction on mobile devices [4], [5]
as well as emoticon prediction [6] among others. Furthermore,
FL has found its use in medical applications as well [7]–[12]
which, due to the sensitive nature of medical data, creates a
need for justiﬁcation of the safety of FL. This safety comes
two-fold: First, FL should protect against adversarial clients.
Second, due to modern information storage legislation (such as
the General Data Protection Regulation or GDPR [1]) private
user data may not be gathered without the users’ consent.
Therefore FL must be shown to be secure against the server
obtaining private user information from the user models.
However, recent research has shown multiple vulnerabilities
in the privacy protection capabilities of FL [13]–[24]. These
attack methods cast a shadow on the applicability of FL for
privacy-sensitive information.
In this paper, we present an overview of attack methods
known to affect FL and provide a basic taxonomy to classify
these methods. Furthermore, we provide a literature review
of defensive strategies against such attack methods which we
categorize by their respective underlying defensive strategy.
This will help researchers to appropriately weigh the capa-
bilities and risks involved in using FL for privacy-sensitive
information.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces thearXiv:2004.04676v1  [cs.CR]  1 Apr 2020