Classes of FL attacks 
Client or 
server-side Black or 
white-box Active or 
passive Attack goals 
Sample  
reconstruction Information  
inference Model  
corruption Runtime 
misclassification Fig. 2. Taxonomy to classify the different types of FL attack methods
E. Attacker goal
Each attack should be classiﬁed by the goal of the adversary.
The attacks presented in this paper fall in one of the following
four adversarial goals.
1. Sample reconstruction aims to objectively reveal what
training data was used by the clients. The success of the
attacker in achieving this goal can be assessed by comparing
the similarity of the reconstruction with the original data. The
ability to launch a reliable sample reconstruction attack is the
most intrusive concerning private information since it reveals
sensitive information in full. If a sample reconstruction attack
can be carried out with relative ease by the server or an
adversary, the system as a whole may not claim to be privacy-
preserving.
2. Information inference attacks aim to learn private infor-
mation more speculatively. This information may consist of:
Inferring class representatives —This type of inference
tries to recreate samples that would not stand out in the
original dataset. When successfully creating such samples
the adversary can learn a lot about the underlying dataset.
Inferring membership (of the sample) —When provided a
sample, membership inference tries to accurately deter-
mine if this sample has been used for the training of the
network.
Inferring data properties —This attack tries to infer meta-
characteristics of the used dataset (e.g. the data consists
of mostly red cars).
Inferring samples/labels —This attack aims to accurately
recreate (rather than reconstruct) training-samples that
were used during the training session and/or associated
labels that were used during training.
3. Model corruption aims to change the model to the
beneﬁt of the attacker. Such attacks can introduce exploitable
backdoors in the model or even make the entire model useless.
Model corruption attacks are generally not assumed to violate
the privacy of participating clients.
4. Runtime misclassiﬁcation attacks aim to trick the model
into making erroneous predictions during runtime. FL is sus-ceptible to these types of attacks similar to non-distributed ML
methods. Generally, runtime misclassiﬁcation attacks do not
violate client privacy directly but may be used to circumvent
ML-based security measures.
III. A TTACK METHODS
Table I lists the attack methods proposed in the literature as
well as their characteristics. In the following, we discuss each
one of these methods, classiﬁed according to their associated
attack goals. Table II illustrates the exploited vulnerabilities
of the hereafter listed attack methods.
A. Attacks targeting reconstruction
1) Loss-function/ReLu exploitation: Sannai [28] describes
a mathematical framework that (given access to a white-box
model) can determine what relation the input has to a given
loss at the output. It relies on the non-smoothness of the ReLu
function and has been argued to work solely on deep neural
networks. Due to the use of ReLu activation on each layer, an
adversary can compute backwards which nodes were activated.
Several polynomials that describe the input-output relation can
be formulated and subsequently, these polynomials are used
to calculate what training samples are consistent with the loss
surface at the output.
The application domain of this attack method is limited
to linear models with incorporated ReLu activation functions.
Furthermore, this method is weak against any form of noise
due to its strict mathematical nature. Unfortunately, no demon-
stration is given of the workings of this attack method.
2) First dense layer attack: Le Trieu et al. [16] showed
mathematically that gradients of a model may in some cases
reveal the training data. This attack relies on the fact that the
gradients of all weights accumulated in a neuron are scaled
linearly to the activation of the prior layer [16], [29]. In the
case that a client has trained on a singular sample, this method
fully reconstructs this trained sample.
This attack method is not applicable to recurrent neural
networks and requires extra algorithms to be useful in for
convolutional networks. Furthermore, as the local dataset