server
model
device
Server-side AS
Client-side AS1 2 3
2 1 3 4Fig. 1. Top: The Federated learning process: A) A model is sent from the
servers to the devices. B) The devices train the model further on their local
dataset. C) The devices send their model back to the server which combines
them into a singular model.
Bottom : The points of vulnerability deﬁning the attack surface (AS) for server-
side and client-side attack methods.
concept of adversarial attacks in the FL context. Section III
presents the FL attack methods already published in the liter-
ature. Then Section IV discusses defensive strategies able to
counteract possible attack methods. Section V outlines related
work already published on the topic. Finally, Section VI ends
with the conclusions.
II. T HREAT MODEL
A. Attack surface
In general, an adversary attacking an FL model has one of
two adversarial goals. First and foremost is to extract private
information from victim clients. A second goal is to purpose-
fully force the model to behave differently than intended. This
can take the form of introducing backdoors, inducing miss-
classiﬁcation or even rendering the model unusable.
Throughout this paper, an adversary is considered to be on
the inside, meaning it could be one of the clients participating
in the FL system or could be the centralized server itself.
This consideration is justiﬁed by the assumption that all
communication between the server and the different clients can
be done with the latest cryptographic security. One of the key
principals for which FL was developed is that the server is not
allowed to have access to any of the private training samples of
the clients. Therefore, the honest-but-curious server model is
considered in the threat model as well. Unless stated otherwise,
the basic form of FL is the one used in the assessment of the
threats.
The attack surface is the summation of exploitable vulner-
abilities in the system. The viable attack surface in FL is
subdivided for the case of a malicious client and malicious
server. The vulnerable points of attack of FL are illustrated in
the bottom part of Figure 1.
The attack surface for a malicious server consists of the
following exploitable points. 1) The ability to adapt the model
sent to all clients and/or ability to determine and regulate the
participating clients. Furthermore, the server can send custom
models to targeted clients. 2) The ability to differentiate the
model updates from clients before aggregation. 3) The server
is knowledgeable of the aggregate model.
The attack surface for malicious clients consists of the
following usable exploits. 1) The client has access to theaggregate model. 2) The ability to manipulate the data on
which the client trains the model, as well as regulating the
training process. 3) The ability to manipulate their gradient
update. 4) The ability to inﬂuence the impact of their model
during aggregation.
There are several ways to characterize FL attacks based
on their source, nature, etc. Figure 2 shows the taxonomy of
the different characteristics we use in this paper to describe
FL attacks. In the following, each one the shown taxonomy
classes is discussed, along with the general vulnerabilities FL
has.
B. Client or server-side attacks
In this paper, all communication between the server and the
clients is assumed to be secure. Only the clients and server
themselves are considered viable points for the execution of
attack methods. Therefore, the system is only considered to be
vulnerable either on the client-side or the server-side. The one
exception to this rule is the man-in-the-middle attack, where
an adversary pretends to be a server to the client or/and a client
to the server and is therefore in-between the communication.
Such an adversary is assumed to have the same threat model
as for server-side vulnerabilities.
C. Black-box or white-box attacks
White-box attacks mean that the adversary has complete
knowledge of the system except for the private data. Black-
box attacks mean that the adversary is limited and is only able
to use the system without any detailed knowledge of the inner
workings of the system.
In the federated averaging algorithm, the clients are assumed
to have a full description of the model and are therefore
vulnerable to white-box attacks. On the server-side, this is also
true but recent studies propose models in which the server has
no knowledge of the model other than its conception [25].
This might force the server-side attacks towards a black-box
scenario.
In some cases, it is possible to extract information about
the systems architecture and thereby force the black-box
towards a more white-box threat model. Method such as GPU-
snooping can be exploited [26] or model extraction for online
services [27].
D. Active or passive attacks
Active attacks imply that the attack method relies on manip-
ulating the system by adapting parameters, communication or
other system-properties to achieve adversarial goals. Because
these types of attack inﬂuence the working system they are
in a general sense detectable. Active attacks may also be
responsible for corruption the system to a point where it is
no longer properly functioning.
Passive attacks imply that the attack method can be per-
formed without the need to adapt any parameters in the system.
Since these attack methods leave no trace of their execution,
they are generally impossible to detect, which makes them a
more dangerous set of attack methods.