TABLE I
FL ATTACK METHODS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS
Attack method AttackerActive/
passiveWhite-box /
Black-boxAttack goal Restricted to
Loss-function/ReLu Server Passive White-box Sample reconstruction Linear net + ReLu
First dense layer Server Passive White-box Sample reconstruction Non-recurrent, small local dataset
DLG/iDLG Server Passive White-box Sample reconstruction Small local dataset
MIA Server Passive Both Inference Linear nets, small input space
mGAN-AI Server Both White-box Inference Requires auxiliary dataset, synthesizable data
GAN Client Active White-box Inference Sparse client-set
Adversarial example Client Passive White-box Misclassiﬁcation Limited practical use
Model poisoning Client Active Both Model corruption, backdoor
grows larger the reconstructions that are to be performed with
this method will become more unreliable. Still, this remains
a very viable attack method due to its ease of use and near-
constant computational cost.
3) DLG/iDLG: A recent algorithm called Deep Leakage
from Gradients (DLG) describes an optimization algorithm
that reproduces the training sample iteratively by optimizing
the input to produce the correct gradients for a client. A slight
variation to this algorithm also proves to be viable for slightly
larger batches of samples [14]. In a follow-up paper, a different
research group proposes improved DLG (iDLG) as a more
efﬁcient and accurate version of DLG [15]. DLG and iDLG are
applicable only when the local dataset of a client is sufﬁciently
small due to the required high computation costs for reliable
results on larger batches.
B. Attacks targeting inference
1) Model inversion attacks (MIA): The model inversion
attack introduced by Fredrikson et al. [17] works on the
premise that the trained linear model is accessible to the
adversary in a black-box fashion. The adversary may only
provide its input and collect the respective output. Also, the
adversary has incomplete information about the input and
complete information about the output. This data is used to
detect correlations between the (still unknown) input variables
and the known output values [17]. It does this rather crudely
by ’brute forcing’ all variations of unknown input-values to
predict the most likely private feature. A practical application
is knowing a victim’s personalized outcome of a model, as
well as some publicly known features such as age, gender,
etc. These features allow the adversary to reasonably predict
the missing data.
A follow-up work presents a new version that has a black-
box and white-box applicability [18]. This white-box attack
works by trying to predict the most likely input for a given
label. This allows the adversary to reconstruct a generalized
input image for a speciﬁc label.
The model inversion attack is only applicable in linear
models. Furthermore, the authors note that it is often quite
easy to come up with models for which this attack method
does not work. A big weakness of this attack is that it iscomputationally infeasible for large input spaces since it in
essence brute-forces all input combinations.
2) mGAN-AI: The multitask GAN for Auxiliary Identiﬁ-
cation (mGAN-AI) attack relies heavily on the training of
GANs to reconstruct accurate approximate training samples.
This method of attack requires the model updates from each
client and an auxiliary dataset. From these updates, a set of
fake input images is generated which result in the same update.
Then a discriminator network tries to ﬁgure out: 1. if these
images are fake or real, 2. to which client these images belong,
and 3. to which category the images belong.
After some training, the mGAN-AI can provide a revealing
reconstruction of training samples belonging to a victim client.
In addition to this passive attack, the authors also describe
an active variant which works in the same way but ensures
that non-clients don not participate. This allows the GAN
to optimize its reproduction capabilities towards a targeted
victim [19]. Demonstrative results show that this technique
is very viable to compromise client-level privacy.
This method of attack is only applicable in cases where
clients have mostly homogeneous data and there is an auxil-
iary dataset available. Since the method relies on generative
adversarial networks, this method is only applicable on data
which can be synthesized.
3) GAN: This attack actively targets a victim client to
release private data by poisoning the shared model in the
adversaries favour. In a simple setting, the adversary uses
the shared model to differentiate the victim’s model update
from which the adversary learns which labels have been used.
Then the adversary uses a generative adversarial network
(GAN) [30] to generate images for one of the labels exclu-
sively used by the victim. The adversary then purposefully
mislabels these images as one of the labels exclusively used
by itself. The gradients of the victim will become steeper as
the generated and subsequently mislabeled images get more
re-presentable as the victim’s images [20].
There is some critique to this attack. Although useful in
a controlled environment, this attack method supposes that
the victim and adversary share at least one shared label and
one exclusive mutual label which is unrealistic as the client
pool gets larger. Additionally, it is infeasible to distinguish