TABLE II
EXPLOITED VULNERABILITIES PER ATTACK . THE VULNERABILITIES ARE ILLUSTRATED IN FIGURE 1
Server Client1) Manipulate
model per client
2) Access to client-
speciﬁc model
3) Access to
aggregate model
1) Access to
aggregate model
2) Train on
adversarial data
3) Manipulate
gradient update
4) Inﬂuence
aggregationAttacksLoss-function/Relu 3 3
First dense layer 3 3
DLG/iDLG 3 3
MIA 3 3
mGAN-AI 3 3 3
GAN 3
Adversarial example 3
Model poisoing 3 3 3
a targeted victim in a practical federated setting due to the
randomness of the selected clients and the degradation of
inﬂuence of the adversary when averaging weights [19].
C. Attacks targeting misclassiﬁcation
Here we discuss only adversarial example attacks as a form
of misclassiﬁcation attacks. Adversarial example attacks aim
to produce samples that will be purposefully misclassiﬁed at
runtime [31], [32]. Federated learning is vulnerable to this
because the deployment of the model means that adversaries
have virtually no restrictions when crafting adversarial exam-
ples. If the intended use of the model is, for example, on-
device authentication (e.g. by means of face recognition) then
adversarial example attacks can be very effective.
D. Attacks targeting model corruption
Here we discuss only model poisoning attacks as a form
of model corruption attacks. Using this attack method, every
client can directly inﬂuence the weights of the shared model
which means that poisoning the shared model becomes trivial.
Model poisoning can be used to introduce a backdoor which
can be leveraged by the adversary [21]–[24].
A speciﬁc attack method designed for FL was demonstrated
by Bagdasaryan et al. [22]. The attack poisons the model
by exploiting the fact that a client can change the entire
shared model by declaring that it has a signiﬁcantly large
amount of samples. This allows a client to change the shared
model in order to insert a backdoor. One example use case is
forcing a shared model to be biased towards an adversarial la-
bel/prediction, such as forcing a word auto-completion model
to suggest a brand name, or to force a model to incorrectly
classify images of a political ﬁgure as inappropriate.
Similar work by Bhagoji et al. [33] demonstrate the viability
of this method further and show how this attack method can be
used in a stealth manner. Furthermore, they demonstrate how
to circumvent byzantine-robust aggregation mechanisms [34],
[35]. These types of aggregation algorithms are designed
speciﬁcally to reduce the inﬂuence of singular clients.A different approach is taken by Fung et al. [24] where,
rather than relying on boosting of sample numbers or gradi-
ents, the adversary is capable of joining and leaving different
federated clients. This type of attack is called a sybil-based
attack [24], [36]. The adversary can then return a multitude of
poisoned models back to the server each iteration.
Closely related to sybil attacks are joint-effort model-
poisoning attacks. Anecdotal evidence suggests a possible
vulnerability for models that train on user input. For example,
a twitter chat-bot developed by Microsoft that learned from
user communication was corrupted by a coordinated effort of
users to post racist and sexist tweets [37].
In addition to model poisoning attacks, there are also data
poisoning attacks. These types of attacks can be successfully
used for adversarial goals such as ﬂipping labels [24], [38].
However, it is noted that for FL all data poisoning attacks are
inferior to model poisoning attacks for the simple reason that
the data is not sent to the server. Therefore, anything that can
be achieved with poisonous data is equally viable by poisoning
the model [13], [33].
IV. D EFENSIVE MEASURES
This section describes various strategies proposed in the
literature for increasing the security of the basic FL algo-
rithm [2]. Defensive measures found in multiple works of liter-
ature are group by their underlying defensive strategy. Table IV
lists the defensive measures that are discussed in this section
and displays their effectiveness against the aforementioned
attack methods. Different strategies will prove more valuable
to thwart different attack methods and generally a combination
of defensive measures is required for optimal defensiveness. In
this table, the vsymbol represents limited effectiveness of the
defensive measure. This means that the attacker needs to per-
form extra steps to achieve its goal reliably or that the attacker
may not presume that the outcome of the attack is reliable
(e.g. very noisy reconstructions). Furthermore, the symbol
represents the cases where the context of implementation is
crucially important for the evaluation of effectiveness. For
example, to assure privacy protection with differential privacy,