Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing •1:3
We thus set out to conduct a rigorous study on domain-specific pretraining and its impact on downstream
applications, using biomedicine as a running example. We show that domain-specific pretraining from scratch
substantially outperforms continual pretraining of generic language models, thus demonstrating that the prevailing
assumption in support of mixed-domain pretraining is not always applicable (Figure 1).
To facilitate this study, we compile a comprehensive biomedical NLP benchmark from publicly-available
datasets, and conduct in-depth comparisons of modeling choices for pretraining and task-specific fine-tuning
by their impact on domain-specific applications. Our experiments show that domain-specific pretraining from
scratch can provide a solid foundation for biomedical NLP, leading to new state-of-the-art performance across a
wide range of tasks. Additionally, we discover that the use of transformer-based models, like BERT, necessitates
rethinking several common practices. For example, BIO tags and more complex variants are the standard label
representation for named entity recognition (NER). However, we find that simply using IO (in or out of entity
mentions) suffices with BERT models, leading to comparable or better performance.
To help accelerate research in biomedical NLP, we have released our state-of-the-art pretrained and task-
specific models for the community, and created a leaderboard featuring our comprehensive benchmark at
https://aka.ms/BLURB.
2 METHODS
2.1 Language Model Pretraining
In this section, we provide a brief overview of neural language model pretraining, using BERT [ 16] as a running
example.
2.1.1 Vocabulary. We assume that the input consists of text spans, such as sentences separated by special
tokens[SEP]. To address the problem of out-of-vocabulary words, neural language models generate a vocabulary
from subword units, using Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) [ 51] or variants such as WordPiece [ 32]. Essentially, the
BPE algorithm tries to greedily identify a small set of subwords that can compactly form all words in the given
corpus. It does this by first shattering all words in the corpus and initializing the vocabulary with characters and
delimiters. It then iteratively augments the vocabulary with a new subword that is most frequent in the corpus
and can be formed by concatenating two existing subwords, until the vocabulary reaches the pre-specified size
(e.g., 30,000 in standard BERT models or 50,000 in RoBERTa [ 39]). In this paper, we use the WordPiece algorithm
which is a BPE variant that uses likelihood based on the unigram language model rather than frequency in
choosing which subwords to concatenate. The text corpus and vocabulary may preserve the case ( cased ) or
convert all characters to lower case ( uncased ).
2.1.2 Model Architecture. State-of-the-art neural language models are generally based on transformer archi-
tectures [ 55], following the recent success of BERT [ 16,39]. The transformer model introduces a multi-layer,
multi-head self-attention mechanism, which has demonstrated superiority in leveraging GPU-based parallel
computation and modeling long-range dependencies in texts, compared to recurrent neural networks, such as
LSTMs [ 22]. The input token sequence is first processed by a lexical encoder, which combines a token embed-
ding, a (token) position embedding and a segment embedding (i.e., which text span the token belongs to) by
element-wise summation. This embedding layer is then passed to multiple layers of transformer modules [ 55].
In each transformer layer, a contextual representation is generated for each token by summing a non-linear
transformation of the representations of all tokens in the prior layer, weighted by the attentions computed using
the given token’s representation in the prior layer as the query. The final layer outputs contextual representations
for all tokens, which combine information from the whole text span.
2.1.3 Self-Supervision. A key innovation in BERT [ 16] is the use of a Masked Language Model (MLM) for
self-supervised pretraining. Traditional language models are typically generative models that predict the next
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.