1:10 •Gu, Tinn, Cheng, et al.
Neural Language Model (e.g., BERT)
Transform Input (e.g., replace entities by dummy tokens)
…𝑲𝑹𝑨𝑺mutation isamediator of𝑻𝒂𝒍𝒂𝒛𝒐𝒑𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒃 resistance ……$𝑮𝑬𝑵𝑬mutation isamediator of$𝑫𝑹𝑼𝑮resistance …Contextual
Representation
PreprocessingFeaturizer (e.g. concatenation of entity vectors)Predict
Fig. 2. A general architecture for task-specific fine-tuning of neural language models, with a relation-extraction example.
Note that the input goes through additional processing such as word-piece tokenization in the neural language model
module.
Given task-specific training data, we can learn the task-specific model parameters and refine the BERT model
parameters by gradient descent using backpropragation.
Prior work on biomedical NLP often adopts different task-specific models and fine-tuning methods, which
makes it difficult to understand the impact of an underlying pretrained language model on task performance. In
this section, we review standard methods and common variants used for each task. In our primary investigation
comparing pretraining strategies, we fix the task-specific model architecture using the standard method identifed
here, to facilitate a head-to-head comparison among the pretrained neural language models. Subsequently, we
start with the same pretrained BERT model, and conduct additional investigation on the impact for the various
choices in the task-specific models. For prior biomedical BERT models, our standard task-specific methods
generally lead to comparable or better performance when compared to their published results.
2.4.1 A General Architecture for Fine-Tuning Neural Language Models. Figure 2 shows a general architecture
of fine-tuning neural language models for downstream applications. An input instance is first processed by
aTransformInput module which performs task-specific transformations such as appending special instance
marker (e.g.,[CLS]) or dummifying entity mentions for relation extraction. The transformed input is then
tokenized using the neural language model’s vocabulary, and fed into the neural language model. Next, the
contextual representation at the top layer is processed by a Featurizer module, and then fed into the Predict
module to generate the final output for a given task.
To facilitate a head-to-head comparison, we apply the same fine-tuning procedure for all BERT models and
tasks. Specifically, we use cross-entropy loss for classification tasks and mean-square error for regression tasks.
We conduct hyperparameter search using the development set based on task-specific metrics. Similar to previous
work, we jointly fine-tune the parameters of the task-specific prediction layer as well as the underlying neural
language model.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.