1:2 •Gu, Tinn, Cheng, et al.
Mixed -Domain Pretraining
Vocab
General
BERT
Biomed
BERT
Vocab
Biomed
BERT
Domain -Specific Pretraining from ScratchText Source
Fig. 1. Two paradigms for neural language model pretraining. Top: The prevailing mixed-domain paradigm assumes that
out-domain text is still helpful and typically initializes domain-specific pretraining with a general-domain language model and
inherits its vocabulary. Bottom: Domain-specific pretraining from scratch derives the vocabulary and conducts pretraining
using solely in-domain text. In this paper, we show that for domains with abundant text such as biomedicine, domain-specific
pretraining from scratch can substantially outperform the conventional mixed-domain approach.
In specialized domains like biomedicine, past work has shown that using in-domain text can provide additional
gains over general-domain language models [ 8,34,45]. However, a prevailing assumption is that out-domain text
is still helpful and previous work typically adopts a mixed-domain approach, e.g., by starting domain-specific
pretraining from an existing general-domain language model (Figure 1 top). In this paper, we question this
assumption. We observe that mixed-domain pretraining such as continual pretraining can be viewed as a form of
transfer learning in itself, where the source domain is general text, such as newswire and the Web, and the target
domain is specialized text such as biomedical papers. Based on the rich literature of multi-task learning and
transfer learning [ 4,13,38,59], successful transfer learning occurs when the target data is scarce and the source
domain is highly relevant to the target one. For domains with abundant unlabeled text such as biomedicine, it is
unclear that domain-specific pretraining can benefit by transfer from general domains. In fact, the majority of
general domain text is substantively different from biomedical text, raising the prospect of negative transfer that
actually hinders the target performance.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.