Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing •1:13
Vocabulary Pretraining Corpus Text Size
BERT Wiki + Books - Wiki + Books 3.3B words / 16GB
RoBERTa Web crawl - Web crawl 160GB
BioBERT Wiki + Books continual pretraining PubMed 4.5B words
SciBERT PMC + CS from scratch PMC + CS 3.2B words
ClinicalBERT Wiki + Books continual pretraining MIMIC 0.5B words / 3.7GB
BlueBERT Wiki + Books continual pretraining PubMed + MIMIC 4.5B words
PubMedBERT PubMed from scratch PubMed 3.1B words / 21GB
Table 5. Summary of pretraining details for the various BERT models used in our experiments. Statistics for prior BERT
models are taken from their publications when available. The size of a text corpus such as PubMed may vary a bit, depending
on downloading time and preprocessing (e.g., filtering out empty or very short abstracts). Both BioBERT and PubMedBERT
also have a version pretrained with additional PMC full text; here we list the standard version pretrained using PubMed only.
biomedical pretraining.7The training takes about 5 days on one DGX-2 machine with 16 V100 GPUs. We find
that the cased version has similar performance to the uncased version in preliminary experiments; thus, we focus
on uncased models in this study. We use whole-word masking (WWM), with a masking rate of 15%. We denote
the resulting BERT model PubMedBERT .
For comparison, we use the public releases of BERT [ 16], RoBERTa [ 39], BioBERT [ 34], SciBERT [ 8], Clinical-
BERT [ 1], and BlueBERT [ 45]. See Table 5 for an overview. BioBERT and BlueBERT conduct continual pretraining
from BERT, whereas ClinicalBERT conducts continual pretraining from BioBERT; thus, they all share the same
vocabulary as BERT. BioBERT comes with two versions. We use BioBERT++ (v1.1), which was trained for a longer
time and performed better. ClinicalBERT also comes with two versions. We use Bio+Clinical BERT.
Prior pretraining work has explored two settings: BERT-BASE with 12 transformer layers and 100 million
parameters; BERT-LARGE with 24 transformer layers and 300 million parameters. Prior work in biomedical
pretraining uses BERT-BASE only. For head-to-head comparison, we also use BERT-BASE in pretraining Pub-
MedBERT. BERT-LARGE appears to yield improved performance in some preliminary experiments. We leave an
in-depth exploration to future work.
For task-specific fine-tuning, we use Adam [ 30] with the standard slanted triangular learning rate schedule
(warm-up in the first 10% of steps and cool-down in the remaining 90% of steps) and a dropout probability of 0.1.
Due to random initialization of the task-specific model and drop out, the performance may vary for different
random seeds, especially for small datasets like BIOSSES, BioASQ, and PubMedQA. We report the average scores
from ten runs for BIOSSES, BioASQ, and PubMedQA, and five runs for the others.
For all datasets, we use the development set for tuning the hyperparameters with the same range: learning rate
(1e-5, 3e-5, 5e-5), batch size (16, 32) and epoch number (2–60). Ideally, we would conduct separate hyperparameter
tuning for each model on each dataset. However, this would incur a prohibitive amount of computation, as we
have to enumerate all combinations of models, datasets and hyperparameters, each of which requires averaging
over multiple runs with different randomization. In practice, we observe that the development performance is not
very sensitive to hyperparameter selection, as long as they are in a ballpark range. Consequently, we focus on
hyperparameter tuning using a subset of representative models such as BERT and BioBERT, and use a common
set of hyperparameters for each dataset that work well for both out-domain and in-domain language models.
7For example, BioBERT started with the standard BERT, which was pretrained using 1M steps with batch size of 256, and ran another 1M
steps in continual pretraining.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.