1:20 •Gu, Tinn, Cheng, et al.
With the advent of BERT models and the self-attention mechanism, the utility of explicit sequential modeling
becomes questionable. The top layer in the BERT model already captures many non-linear dependencies across
the entire text span. Therefore, it’s conceivable that even a linear layer on top can perform competitively. We
find that this is indeed the case for NER and relation extraction, as shown in Table 12. The use of a bidirectional
LSTM (Bi-LSTM) does not lead to any substantial gain compared to linear layer.
We also investigate the tagging scheme used in NER. The standard tagging scheme distinguishes words by their
positions within an entity. For sequential tagging methods such as CRF and LSTM, distinguishing the position
within an entity is potentially advantageous compared to the minimal IO scheme that only distinguishes between
inside and outside of entities. But for BERT models, once again, the utility of more complex tagging schemes is
diminished. We thus conducted a head-to-head comparison of the tagging schemes using three biomedical NER
tasks in BLURB. As we can see in Table 13, the difference is minuscule, suggesting that with self-attention, the
sequential nature of the tags is less essential in NER modeling.
Input text Classification Encoding ChemProt DDI
ENTITY DUMMIFICATION [CLS] 77.24 82.36
ENTITY DUMMIFICATION MENTION 77.22 82.08
ORIGINAL [CLS] 50.52 37.00
ORIGINAL MENTION 75.48 79.42
ENTITY MARKERS [CLS] 77.72 82.22
ENTITY MARKERS MENTION 77.22 82.42
ENTITY MARKERS ENTITY START 77.58 82.18
Table 14. Evaluation of the impact of entity dummification and relation encoding in relation extraction, all using PubMedBERT.
With entity dummification, the entity mentions in question are anonymized using entity type tags such as $DRUG or $GENE.
With entity marker, special tags marking the start and end of an entity are appended to the entity mentions in question.
Relation encoding is derived from the special [CLS]token appended to the beginning of the text or the special entity start
token, or by concatenating the contextual representation of the entity mentions in question.
The use of neural methods also has subtle, but significant, implications for relation extraction. Previously,
relation extraction was generally framed as a classification problem with manually-crafted feature templates. To
prevent overfitting and enhance generalization, the feature templates would typically avoid using the entities in
question. Neural methods do not need hand-crafted features, but rather use the neural encoding of the given
text span, including the entities themselves. This introduces a potential risk that the neural network may simply
memorize the entity combination. This problem is particularly pronounced in self-supervision settings, such as
distant supervision, because the positive instances are derived from entity tuples with known relations. As a
result, it is a common practice to “dummify” entities (i.e., replace an entity with a generic tag such as $DRUG or
$GENE) [24, 58].
This risk remains in the standard supervised setting, such as in the tasks that comprise BLURB. We thus
conducted a systematic evaluation of entity dummification and relation encoding, using two relation extraction
tasks in BLURB.
For entity marking, we consider three variants: dummify the entities in question; use the original text; add start
and end tags to entities in question. For relation encoding, we consider three schemes. In the [CLS]encoding
introduced by the original BERT paper, the special token [CLS]is prepended to the beginning of the text span,
and its contextual representation at the top layer is used as the input in the final classification. Another standard
approach concatenates the BERT encoding of the given entity mentions, each obtained by applying max pooling
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.