Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing •1:5
2.2.2 Domain-Specific Pretraining from Scratch. The mixed-domain pretraining approach makes sense if the
target application domain has little text of its own, and can thereby benefit from pretraining using related domains.
However, this is not the case for biomedicine, which has over thirty million abstracts in PubMed, and adds
over a million each year. We thus hypothesize that domain-specific pretraining from scratch is a better strategy for
biomedical language model pretraining.
Biomedical Term Category BERT SciBERT PubMedBERT (Ours)
diabetes disease ✓ ✓ ✓
leukemia disease ✓ ✓ ✓
lithium drug ✓ ✓ ✓
insulin drug ✓ ✓ ✓
DNA gene ✓ ✓ ✓
promoter gene ✓ ✓ ✓
hypertension disease hyper-tension ✓ ✓
nephropathy disease ne-ph-rop-athy ✓ ✓
lymphoma disease l-ym-ph-oma ✓ ✓
lidocaine drug lid-oca-ine] ✓ ✓
oropharyngeal organ oro-pha-ryn-ge-al or-opharyngeal ✓
cardiomyocyte cell card-iom-yo-cy-te cardiomy-ocyte ✓
chloramphenicol drug ch-lor-amp-hen-ico-l chlor-amp-hen-icol ✓
RecA gene Rec-A Rec-A ✓
acetyltransferase gene ace-ty-lt-ran-sf-eras-e acetyl-transferase ✓
clonidine drug cl-oni-dine clon-idine ✓
naloxone drug na-lo-xon-e nal-oxo-ne ✓
Table 1. Comparison of common biomedical terms in vocabularies used by the standard BERT, SciBERT and PubMedBERT
(ours). A ✓indicates the biomedical term appears in the corresponding vocabulary, otherwise the term will be broken into
word pieces as separated by hyphen. These word pieces often have no biomedical relevance and may hinder learning in
downstream tasks.
A major advantage of domain-specific pretraining from scratch stems from having an in-domain vocabulary.
Table 1 compares the vocabularies used in various pretraining strategies. BERT models using continual pretraining
are stuck with the original vocabulary from the general-domain corpora, which does not contain many common
biomedical terms. Even for SciBERT, which generates its vocabulary partially from biomedical text, the deficiency
compared to a purely biomedical vocabulary is substantial. As a result, standard BERT models are forced to divert
parametrization capacity and training bandwidth to model biomedical terms using fragmented subwords. For
example, naloxone, a common medical term, is divided into four pieces ( [na, ##lo, ##xon, ##e ]) by BERT, and
acetyltransferase is shattered into seven pieces ( [ace, ##ty, ##lt, ##ran, ##sf, ##eras, ##e ]) by BERT.2Both terms
appear in the vocabulary of PubMedBERT.
Another advantage of domain-specific pretraining from scratch is that the language model is trained using
purely in-domain data. For example, SciBERT pretraining has to balance optimizing for biomedical text and
computer science text, the latter of which is unlikely to be beneficial for biomedical applications. Continual
pretraining, on the other hand, may potentially recover from out-domain modeling, though not completely. Aside
from the vocabulary issue mentioned earlier, neural network training uses non-convex optimization, which means
2Prior work also observed similar shattering for clinical words [52].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.