Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing •1:21
to the corresponding token representations. Finally, following prior work, we also consider simply concatenating
the top contextual representation of the entity start tag, if the entity markers are in use [7].
Table 14 shows the results. Simply using the original text indeed exposes the neural methods to significant
overfitting risk. Using [CLS]with the original text is the worst choice, as the relation encoding has a hard time to
distinguish which entities in the text span are in question. Dummification remains the most reliable method,
which works for either relation encoding method. Interestingly, using entity markers leads to slightly better
results in both datasets, as it appears to prevent overfitting while preserving useful entity information. We leave
it to future work to study whether this would generalize to all relation extraction tasks.
4 DISCUSSION
Standard supervised learning requires labeled examples, which are expensive and time-consuming to annotate.
Self-supervision using unlabeled text is thus a long-standing direction for alleviating the annotation bottleneck
using transfer learning. Early methods focused on clustering related words using distributed similarity, such as
Brown Clusters [ 12,36]. With the revival of neural approaches, neural embedding has become the new staple
for transfer learning from unlabeled text. This starts with simple stand-alone word embeddings [ 41,46], and
evolves into more sophisticated pretrained language models, from LSTM in ULMFiT [ 23] and ELMo [ 47] to
transformer-based models in GPT [ 48,49] and BERT [ 16,39]. Their success is fueled by access to large text
corpora, advanced hardware such as GPUs, and a culmination of advances in optimization methods, such as
Adam [ 30] and slanted triangular learning rate [ 23]. Here, transfer learning goes from the pretrained language
models to fine-tuning task-specific models for downstream applications.
As the community ventures beyond the standard newswire and Web domains, and begins to explore high-
value verticals such as biomedicine, a different kind of transfer learning is brought into play by combining text
from various domains in pretraining language models. The prevailing assumption is that such mixed-domain
pretraining is advantageous. In this paper, we show that this type of transfer learning may not be applicable when
there is a sufficient amount of in-domain text, as is the case in biomedicine. In fact, our experiments comparing
clinical BERTs with PubMedBERT on biomedical NLP tasks show that even related text such as clinical notes
may not be helpful, since we already have abundant biomedical text from PubMed. Our results show that we
should distinguish different types of transfer learning and separately assess their utility in various situations.
There are a plethora of biomedical NLP datasets, especially from various shared tasks such as BioCreative [ 3,29,
40,53], BioNLP [ 15,28], SemEval [ 2,9,10,17], and BioASQ [ 42]. The focus has evolved from simple tasks, such
as named entity recognition, to more sophisticated tasks, such as relation extraction and question answering, and
new tasks have been proposed for emerging application scenarios such as evidence-based medical information
extraction [ 44]. However, while comprehensive benchmarks and leaderboards are available for the general
domains (e.g., GLUE [ 57] and SuperGLUE [ 56]), they are still a rarity in biomedical NLP. In this paper, inspired
by prior effort towards this direction [ 45], we create the first leaderboard for biomedical NLP, BLURB — a
comprehensive benchmark containing thirteen datasets for six tasks.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we challenge a prevailing assumption in pretraining neural language models and show that domain-
specific pretraining from scratch can significantly outperform mixed-domain pretraining such as continual
pretraining from a general-domain language model, leading to new state-of-the-art results for a wide range
of biomedical NLP applications. To facilitate this study, we create BLURB, a comprehensive benchmark for
biomedical NLP featuring a diverse set of tasks such as named entity recognition, relation extraction, document
classification, and question answering. To accelerate research in biomedical NLP, we release our state-of-the-art
biomedical BERT models and setup a leaderboard based on BLURB.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.