1:4 •Gu, Tinn, Cheng, et al.
token based on the preceding tokens; for example, n-gram models represent the conditional probability of
the next token by a multinomial of the preceding n-gram, with various smoothing strategies to handle rare
occurrences [ 43]. Masked Language Model instead randomly replaces a subset of tokens by a special token (e.g.,
[MASK]), and asks the language model to predict them. The training objective is the cross-entropy loss between the
original tokens and the predicted ones. In BERT and RoBERTa, 15% of the input tokens are chosen, among which
a random 80% are replaced by [MASK], 10% are left unchanged and 10% are randomly replaced by a token from the
vocabulary. Instead of using a constant masking rate of 15%, a standard approach is to gradually increase it from
5% to 25% with 5% increment for every 20% of training epochs, which makes pretraining more stable [ 37]. The
original BERT algorithm also uses Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) , which determines for a given sentence pair
whether one sentence follows the other in the original text. The utility of NSP has been called into question [ 39],
but we include it in our pretraining experiments to enable a head-to-head comparison with prior BERT models.
2.1.4 Advanced Pretraining Techniques. In the original formulation of BERT [ 16], the masked language model
(MLM) simply selects random subwords to mask. When a word is only partially masked, it is relatively easy to
predict the masked portion given the observed ones. In contrast, whole-word masking (WWM) enforces that the
whole word must be masked if one of its subwords is chosen. This has been adopted as the standard approach
because it forces the language model to capture more contextual semantic dependencies.
In this paper, we also explore adversarial pretraining and its impact on downstream applications. Motivated by
successes in countering adversarial attacks in computer vision, adversarial pretraining introduces perturbations
in the input embedding layer that maximize the adversarial loss, thus forcing the model to not only optimize the
standard training objective (MLM), but also minimize adversarial loss [37].
2.2 Biomedical Language Model Pretraining
In this paper, we will use biomedicine as a running example in our study of domain-specific pretraining. In
other words, biomedical text is considered in-domain, while others are regarded as out-domain. Intuitively, using
in-domain text in pretraining should help with domain-specific applications. Indeed, prior work has shown that
pretraining with PubMed text leads to better performance in biomedical NLP tasks [ 8,34,45]. The main question
is whether pretraining should include text from other domains. The prevailing assumption is that pretraining can
always benefit from more text, including out-domain text. In fact, none of the prior biomedical-related BERT
models have been pretrained using purely biomedical text [ 8,34,45]. Here, we challenge this assumption and
show that domain-specific pretraining from scratch can be superior to mixed-domain pretraining for downstream
applications.
2.2.1 Mixed-Domain Pretraining. The standard approach to pretraining a biomedical BERT model conducts
continual pretraining of a general-domain pretrained model, as exemplified by BioBERT [ 34]. Specifically, this
approach would initialize with the standard BERT model [ 16], pretrained using Wikipedia and BookCorpus.
It then continues the pretraining process with MLM and NSP using biomedical text. In the case of BioBERT,
continual pretraining is conducted using PubMed abstracts and PubMed Central full text articles. BlueBERT [ 45]
uses both PubMed text and de-identified clinical notes from MIMIC-III [26].
Note that in the continual pretraining approach, the vocabulary is the same as the original BERT model, in this
case the one generated from Wikipedia and BookCorpus. While convenient, this is a major disadvantage for this
approach, as the vocabulary is not representative of the target biomedical domain.
Compared to the other biomedical-related pretraining efforts, SciBERT [ 8] is a notable exception as it generates
the vocabulary and pretrains from scratch, using biomedicine and computer science as representatives for scientific
literature. However, from the perspective of biomedical applications, SciBERT still adopts the mixed-domain
pretraining approach, as computer science text is clearly out-domain.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.