Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing •1:11
Task Problem Formulation Modeling Choices
NER Token Classification Tagging Scheme, Classification Layer
PICO Token Classification Tagging Scheme, Classification Layer
Relation Extraction Sequence Classification Entity/Relation Representation, Classification Layer
Sentence Similarity Sequence Regression Sentence Representation, Regression Loss
Document Classification Sequence Classification Document Representation, Classification Layer
Question Answering Sequence Classification Question/Text Representation, Classification Layer
Table 4. Standard NLP tasks and their problem formulations and modeling choices.
2.4.2 Task-Specific Problem Formulation and Modeling Choices. Many NLP applications can be formulated as a
classification or regression task, wherein either individual tokens or sequences are the prediction target. Modeling
choices usually vary in two aspects: the instance representation and the prediction layer. Table 4 presents an
overview of the problem formulation and modeling choices for tasks we consider and detailed descriptions are
provided below. For each task, we highlight the standard modeling choices with an asterisk (*).
NER. Given an input text span (usually a sentence), the NER task seeks to recognize mentions of entities of
interest. It is typically formulated as a sequential labeling task, where each token is assigned a tag to signify
whether it is in an entity mention or not. The modeling choices primarily vary on the tagging scheme and
classification method. BIOis the standard tagging scheme that classifies each token as the beginning of an
entity ( B), inside an entity ( I), or outside ( O). The NER tasks in BLURB are only concerned about one entity type
(in JNLPBA, all the types are merged into one). In the case when there are multiple entity types, the BItags would
be further divided into fine-grained tags for specific types. Prior work has also considered more complex tagging
schemes such as BIOUL , where Ustands for the last word of an entity and Lstands for a single-word entity. We
also consider the simpler IOscheme that only differentiates between in and out of an entity. Classification is
done using a simple linear layer or more sophisticated sequential labeling methods such as LSTM or conditional
random field (CRF) [33].
•TransformInput : returns the input sequence as is.
•Featurizer : returns the BERT encoding of a given token.
•Tagging scheme: BIO*;BIOUL ;IO.
•Classification layer: linear layer*; LSTM; CRF.
PICO. Conceptually, evidence-based medical information extraction is akin to slot filling, as it tries to identify
the PIO elements in an abstract describing a clinical trial. However, it can be formulated as a sequential tagging
task like NER, by classifying tokens belonging to each element. A token may belong to more than one element,
e.g., participant (P) and intervention (I).
•TransformInput : returns the input sequence as is.
•Featurizer : returns the BERT encoding of a given token.
•Tagging scheme: BIO*;BIOUL ;IO.
•Classification layer: linear layer*; LSTM; CRF.
Relation Extraction. Existing work on relation extraction tends to focus on binary relations. Given a pair of
entity mentions in a text span (typically a sentence), the goal is to determine if the text indicates a relation for the
mention pair. There are significant variations in the entity and relation representations. To prevent overfitting
by memorizing the entity pairs, the entity tokens are often augmented with start/end markers or replaced by
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.