1:8 •Gu, Tinn, Cheng, et al.
NCBI-Disease. The Natural Center for Biotechnology Information Disease corpus [ 18] contains 793 PubMed
abstracts with 6892 annotated disease mentions linked to 790 distinct disease entities. We use a pre-processed set
of train, development, test splits generated by Crichton et al. [14].
BC2GM. The Biocreative II Gene Mention corpus [ 53] consists of sentences from PubMed abstracts with
manually labeled gene and alternative gene entities. Following prior work, we focus on the gene entity annotation.
In its original form, BC2GM contains 15000 train and 5000 test sentences. We use a pre-processed version of the
dataset generated by Crichton et al . [14] , which carves out 2500 sentences from the training data for development.
JNLPBA. The Joint Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications shared
task [ 27] is a NER corpus on PubMed abstracts. The entity types are chosen for molecular biology applications:
protein, DNA, RNA, cell line, and cell type. Some of the entity type distinctions are not very meaningful. For
example, a gene mention often refers to both the DNA and gene products such as the RNA and protein. Following
prior work that evaluates on this dataset [ 34], we ignore the type distinction and focus on detecting the entity
mentions. We use the same train, development, and test splits as in Crichton et al. [14].
2.3.2 Evidence-Based Medical Information Extraction (PICO).
EBM PICO. The Evidence-Based Medicine corpus [ 44] contains PubMed abstracts on clinical trials, where each
abstract is annotated with P, I, and O in PICO: Participants (e.g., diabetic patients ), Intervention (e.g., insulin ),
Comparator (e.g., placebo ) and Outcome (e.g., blood glucose levels ). Comparator (C) labels are omitted as
they are standard in clinical trials: placebo for passive control and standard of care for active control. There are
4300, 500, and 200 abstracts in training, development, and test, respectively. The training and development sets
were labeled by Amazon Mechanical Turkers, whereas the test set was labeled by Upwork contributors with prior
medical training. EBM PICO provides labels at the word level for each PIO element. For each of the PIO elements
in an abstract, we tally the F1 score at the word level, and then compute the final score as the average among
PIO elements in the dataset. Occasionally, two PICO elements might overlap with each other (e.g., a participant
span might contain within it an intervention span). In EBM-PICO, about 3% of the PIO words are in the overlap.
Note that the dataset released along with SciBERT appears to remove the overlapping words from the larger
span (e.g., the participant span as mentioned above). We instead use the original dataset [ 44] and their scripts for
preprocessing and evaluation.
2.3.3 Relation Extraction.
ChemProt. The Chemical Protein Interaction corpus [ 31] consists of PubMed abstracts annotated with chemical-
protein interactions between chemical and protein entities. There are 23 interactions organized in a hierar-
chy, with 10 high-level interactions (including NONE ). The vast majority of relation instances in ChemProt are
within single sentences. Following prior work [8, 34], we only consider sentence-level instances. We follow the
ChemProt authors’ suggestions and focus on classifying five high-level interactions — UPREGULATOR(CPR :3),
DOWNREGULATOR(CPR :4),AGONIST(CPR :5),ANTAGONIST(CPR :6),SUBSTRATE(CPR :9)— as well as every-
thing else ( false ). The ChemProt annotation is not exhaustive for all chemical-protein pairs. Following previous
work [34, 45], we expand the training and development sets by assigning a false label for all chemical-protein
pairs that occur in a training or development sentence, but do not have an explicit label in the ChemProt corpus.
Note that prior work uses slightly different label expansion of the test data. To facilitate head-to-head comparison,
we will provide instructions for reproducing the test set in BLURB from the original dataset.
DDI. The Drug-Drug Interaction corpus [ 21] was created to facilitate research on pharmaceutical information
extraction, with a particular focus on pharmacovigilance. It contains sentence-level annotation of drug-drug
interactions on PubMed abstracts. Note that some prior work [ 45,61] discarded 90 training files that the authors
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.