Qualcomm Wear 4100+Lattice CrossLink-NX-40GreenWavesGAP9SynapticsAS-371KneronKL720KneronKL720Qualcomm XR2SnapDragon888Mythic M1108MobileEyeQ5FlexLogixInfer X1Tesla FSDFigure 9: Throughput comparison of different commercial edge processors for NN inference at the edge.
for low-cost and power-efﬁcient embedded devices. For
instance, the STM32 family are the microcontrollers
based on the ARM Cortex-M cores that are also used
for NN inference at the edge. Because some of the
ARM Cortex-M cores do not include dedicated ﬂoating-
point units, the models should ﬁrst be quantized before
deployment. CMSIS-NN [ 136] is a library from ARM
that helps quantizing and deploying NN models onto the
ARM Cortex-M cores. Speciﬁcally, the library leverages
ﬁxed-point quantization [ 113,154,267] with power-of-
two scaling factors so that quantization and dequantization
processes can be carried out efﬁciently with bit shifting
operations. GAP-8 [ 64], a RISC-V SoC (System on Chip)
for edge inference with a dedicated CNN accelerator, is
another example of an edge processor that only supports
integer arithmetic. While programmable general-purpose
processors are widely adopted due to their ﬂexibility,
Google Edge TPU, a purpose-built ASIC chip, is another
emerging solution for running inference at the edge.
Unlike Cloud TPUs that run in Google data centers with
a large amount of computing resources, the Edge TPU is
designed for small and low-power devices, and thereby
it only supports 8-bit arithmetic. NN models must be
quantized using either quantization-aware training or post-
training quantization of TensorFlow.
Figure 9 plots the throughput of different commercial
edge processors that are widely used for NN inferenceat the edge. In the past few years, there has been a
signiﬁcant improvement in the computing power of the
edge processors, and this allows deployment and inference
of costly NN models that were previously available only
on servers. Quantization, combined with efﬁcient low-
precision logic and dedicated deep learning accelerators,
has been one important driving force for the evolution
of such edge processors.
While quantization is an indispensable technique for
a lot of edge processors, it can also bring a remarkable
improvement for non-edge processors, e.g., to meet Ser-
vice Level Agreement (SLA) requirements such as 99th
percentile latency. A good example is provided by the
recent NVIDIA Turing GPUs, and in particular T4 GPUs,
which include the Turing Tensor Cores. Tensor Cores
are specialized execution units designed for efﬁcient low-
precision matrix multiplications.
VI. F UTURE DIRECTIONS FOR RESEARCH IN
QUANTIZATION
Here, we brieﬂy discuss several high level challenges
and opportunities for future research in quantization. This
is broken down into quantization software, hardware and
NN architecture co-design, coupled compression methods,
and quantized training.
Quantization Software: With current methods, it is
straightforward to quantize and deploy different NN
17