series of calibration inputs to compute the typical range
of activations [ 113,267]. Multiple different metrics
have been proposed to ﬁnd the best range, including
minimizing Mean Squared Error (MSE) between original
unquantized weight distribution and the corresponding
quantized values [ 40,221,229,281]. One could also
consider using other metrics such as entropy [ 189],
although MSE is the most common method used. Another
approach is to learn/impose this clipping range during
NN training [ 36,146,276,287]. Notable work here are
LQNets [ 276], PACT [ 36], LSQ [ 56], and LSQ+ [ 15]
which jointly optimizes the clipping range and the weights
in NN during training.
Summary (Dynamic vs Static Quantization). Dy-
namic quantization dynamically computes the clipping
range of each activation and often achieves the highest
accuracy. However, calculating the range of a signal
dynamically is very expensive, and as such, practitioners
most often use static quantization where the clipping
range is ﬁxed for all inputs.
E. Quantization Granularity
In most computer vision tasks, the activation input to
a layer is convolved with many different convolutional
ﬁlters, as illustrated in Figure 3. Each of these convo-
lutional ﬁlters can have a different range of values. As
such, one differentiator for quantization methods is the
granularity of how the clipping range [;]is calculated
for the weights. We categorized them as follows.
a) Layerwise Quantization: In this approach, the
clipping range is determined by considering all of the
weights in convolutional ﬁlters of a layer [ 133], as shown
in the third column of Figure 3. Here one examines the
statistics of the entire parameters in that layer (e.g., min,
max, percentile, etc.), and then uses the same clipping
range for all the convolutional ﬁlters. While this approach
is very simple to implement, it often results in sub-optimal
accuracy, as the range of each convolutional ﬁlter can
be vary a lot. For example, a convolutional kernel that
has relatively narrower range of parameters may lose its
quantization resolution due to another kernel in the same
layer with a wider range.
b) Groupwise Quantization: One could group mul-
tiple different channels inside a layer to calculate the clip-
ping range (of either activations or convolution kernels).
This could be helpful for cases where the distribution
of the parameters across a single convolution/activation
varies a lot. For instance, this approach was found
useful in Q-BERT [ 219] for quantizing Transformer [ 243]
models that consist of fully-connected attention layers.However, this approach inevitably comes with the extra
cost of accounting for different scaling factors.
c) Channelwise Quantization: A popular choice
of the clipping range is to use a ﬁxed value for each
convolutional ﬁlter, independent of other channels [ 105,
113,133,222,276,285], as shown in the last column
of Figure 3. That is to say, each channel is assigned a
dedicated scaling factor. This ensures a better quantization
resolution and often results in higher accuracy.
d) Sub-channelwise Quantization: The previous
approach could be taken to the extreme, where the
clipping range is determined with respect to any groups
of parameters in a convolution or fully-connected layer.
However, this approach could add considerable overhead,
since the different scaling factors need to be taken into
account when processing a single convolution or full-
connected layer. Therefore, groupwise quantization could
establish a good compromise between the quantization
resolution and the computation overhead.
Summary (Quantization Granularity). Channelwise
quantization is currently the standard method used for
quantizing convolutional kernels. It enables the practi-
tioner to adjust the clipping range for each individual ker-
nel with negligible overhead. In contrast, sub-channelwise
quantization may result in signiﬁcant overhead and is not
currently the standard choice (we also refer interested
reader to [ 68] for tradeoffs associated with these design
choices).
F . Non-Uniform Quantization
Some work in the literature has also explored non-
uniform quantization [ 25,38,62,74,79,99,118,125,
153,159,179,189,190,238,248,256,264,266,276,
284], where quantization steps as well as quantization
levels are allowed to be non-uniformly spaced. The formal
deﬁnition of non-uniform quantization is shown in Eq. 6,
whereXirepresents the discrete quantization levels and
ithe quantization steps (thresholds):
Q(r) =Xi;ifr2[i;i+1): (6)
Speciﬁcally, when the value of a real number rfalls in
between the quantization step iandi+1, quantizer
Qprojects it to the corresponding quantization level Xi.
Note that neither Xi’s nor i’s are uniformly spaced.
Non-uniform quantization may achieve higher accuracy
for a ﬁxed bit-width, because one could better capture the
distributions by focusing more on important value regions
or ﬁnding appropriate dynamic ranges. For instance, many
non-uniform quantization methods have been designed for
bell-shaped distributions of the weights and activations
7