Multiplication (FP32)FP32 WeightFP32 Activation FP32Accumulation (FP32)FP32 Activation DequantizeMultiplication (FP32)INT4 WeightINT4 Activation FP32FP32Accumulation (FP32)RequantizeFP32INT4 Activation Multiplication (INT4)INT4 WeightINT4 Activation INT4Accumulation (INT32)INT4 Activation RequantizeINT32Figure 6: Comparison between full-precision inference (Left), inference with simulated quantization (Middle), and
inference with integer-only quantization (Right).
A popular branch of research in ZSQ is to generate
synthetic data similar to the real data from which the
target pre-trained model is trained. The synthetic data is
then used for calibrating and/or ﬁnetuning the quantized
model. An early work in this area [ 28] exploits Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [ 75] for synthetic data
generation. Using the pre-trained model as a discriminator,
it trains the generator so that its outputs can be well
classiﬁed by the discriminator. Then, using the synthetic
data samples collected from the generator, the quantized
model can be ﬁnetuned with knowledge distillation from
the full-precision counterpart (see Section IV-D for more
details). However, this method fails to capture the internal
statistics (e.g., distributions of the intermediate layer
activations) of the real data, as it is generated only using
the ﬁnal outputs of the model. Synthetic data which
does not take the internal statistics into account may
not properly represent the real data distribution [ 85]. To
address this, a number of subsequent efforts use the statis-
tics stored in Batch Normalization (BatchNorm) [ 112],
i.e., channel-wise mean and variance, to generate more
realistic synthetic data. In particular, [ 85] generates data
by directly minimizing the KL divergence of the internal
statistics, and it uses the synthetic data to calibrate and
ﬁnetune the quantized models. Furthermore, ZeroQ [ 24]
shows that the synthetic data can be used for sensitivity
measurement as well as calibration, thereby enabling
mixed-precision post-training quantization without any
access to the training/validation data. ZeroQ also extends
ZSQ to the object detection tasks, as it does not rely
on the output labels when generating data. Both [ 85]
and [ 24] set the input images as trainable parametersand directly perform backpropagation on them until their
internal statistics become similar to those of the real data.
To take a step further, recent research [ 37,90,259] ﬁnds
it effective to train and exploit generative models that
can better capture the real data distribution and generate
more realistic synthetic data.
Summary (ZSQ). Zero Shot (aka data free) quan-
tization performs the entire quantization without any
access to the training/validation data. This is particularly
important for Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
providers who want to accelerate the deployment of a
customer’s workload, without the need to access their
dataset. Moreover, this is important for cases where
security or privacy concerns may limit access to the
training data.
H. Stochastic Quantization
During inference, the quantization scheme is usually
deterministic. However, this is not the only possibility,
and some works have explored stochastic quantization for
quantization aware training as well as reduced precision
training [ 13,79]. The high level intuition has been that the
stochastic quantization may allow a NN to explore more,
as compared to deterministic quantization. One popular
supporting argument has been that small weight updates
may not lead to any weight change, as the rounding
operation may always return the same weights. However,
enabling a stochastic rounding may provide the NN an
opportunity to escape , thereby updating its parameters.
More formally, stochastic quantization maps the ﬂoat-
ing number up or down with a probability associated
11