A. Quantization in Neural Nets
No doubt thousands of papers have been written on
these topics, and one might wonder: how is recent work
on NN quantization different from these earlier works?
Certainly, many of the recently proposed “novel algo-
rithms” have strong connections with (and in some cases
are essentially rediscoveries of) past work in the literature.
However, NNs bring unique challenges and opportunities
to the problem of quantization. First, inference and
training of Neural Nets are both computationally intensive.
So, the efﬁcient representation of numerical values is
particularly important. Second, most current Neural Net
models are heavily over-parameterized, so there is ample
opportunity for reducing bit precision without impacting
accuracy. However, one very important difference is
that NNs are very robust to aggressive quantization and
extreme discretization. The new degree of freedom here
has to do with the number of parameters involved, i.e.,
that we are working with over-parameterized models. This
has direct implications for whether we are solving well-
posed problems, whether we are interested in forward
error or backward error, etc. In the NN applications
driving recent developments in quantization, there is not
a single well-posed or well-conditioned problem that
is being solved. Instead, one is interested in some sort
of forward error metric (based on classiﬁcation quality,
perplexity, etc.), but due to the over-parameterization,
there are many very different models that exactly or
approximately optimize this metric. Thus, it is possible
to have high error/distance between a quantized model
and the original non-quantized model, while still attaining
very good generalization performance. This added degree
of freedom was not present in many of the classical
research, which mostly focused on ﬁnding compression
methods that would not change the signal too much,
or with numerical methods in which there was strong
control on the difference between the “exact” versus
the “discretized” computation. This observation that has
been the main driver for researching novel techniques for
NN quantization. Finally,the layered structure of Neural
Net models offers an additional dimension to explore.
Different layers in a Neural Net have different impact on
the loss function, and this motivates a mixed-precision
approach to quantization.
III. B ASIC CONCEPTS OF QUANTIZATION
In this section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce common
notations and the problem setup in Section III-A , and
then we describe the basic quantization concepts and
methods in Section III-B -III-F . Afterwards, we discuss the
𝑟𝑄
𝑟𝑄Figure 1: Comparison between uniform quantization
(left) and non-uniform quantization (right). Real values in
the continuous domain rare mapped into discrete, lower
precision values in the quantized domain Q, which are
marked with the orange bullets. Note that the distances
between the quantized values (quantization levels) are
the same in uniform quantization, whereas they can vary
in non-uniform quantization.
different ﬁne-tuning methods in Section III-G, followed
by stochastic quantization in Section III-H.
A. Problem Setup and Notations
Assume that the NN has Llayers with learnable pa-
rameters, denoted as fW1;W 2;:::;W Lg, withdenoting
the combination of all such parameters. Without loss of
generality, we focus on the supervised learning problem,
where the nominal goal is to optimize the following
empirical risk minimization function:
L() =1
NNX
i=1l(xi;yi;); (1)
where (x;y)is the input data and the corresponding label,
l(x;y;)is the loss function (e.g., Mean Squared Error
or Cross Entropy loss), and Nis the total number of data
points. Let us also denote the input hidden activations of
theithlayer ashi, and the corresponding output hidden
activation as ai. We assume that we have the trained
model parameters , stored in ﬂoating point precision. In
quantization, the goal is to reduce the precision of both
the parameters ( ), as well as the intermediate activation
maps (i.e.,hi; ai) to low-precision, with minimal impact
on the generalization power/accuracy of the model. To
do this, we need to deﬁne a quantization operator that
maps a ﬂoating point value to a quantized one, which is
described next.
B. Uniform Quantization
We need ﬁrst to deﬁne a function that can quantize
NN weights and activations to a ﬁnite set of values. This
4