[213] further shows that INT4 inference of ResNet50
could bring an additional 50-60% speedup on NVIDIA T4
and RTX, compared to its INT8 counterpart, emphasizing
the importance of using lower-bit precision to maxi-
mize efﬁciency. Recently, [ 267] leverages mix-precision
quantization to achieve 23% speedup for ResNet50, as
compared to INT8 inference without accuracy degrada-
tion, and [ 132] extends INT8-only inference to BERT
model to enable up to 4.0 faster inference than FP32.
While the aforementioned works focus on acceleration
on GPUs, [ 114] also obtained 2.35 and 1.40latency
speedup on Intel Cascade Lake CPU and Raspberry Pi4
(which are both non-GPU architectures), respectively,
through INT8 quantization of various computer vision
models. As a result, as our bibliography attests, the
problem of quantization in NN models has been a highly
active research area.
In this work, we have tried to bring some conceptual
structure to these very diverse efforts. We began with
a discussion of topics common to many applications of
quantization, such as uniform, non-uniform, symmetric,
asymmetric, static, and dynamic quantization. We then
considered quantization issues that are more unique to
the quantization of NNs. These include layerwise, group-
wise, channelwise, and sub-channelwise quantization. We
further considered the inter-relationship between training
and quantization, and we discussed the advantages and
disadvantages of quantization-aware training as compared
to post-training quantization. Further nuancing the discus-
sion of the relationship between quantization and training
is the issue of the availability of data. The extreme case
of this is one in which the data used in training are,
due to a variety of sensible reasons such as privacy, no
longer available. This motivates the problem of zero-shot
quantization.
As we are particularly concerned about efﬁcient NNs
targeted for edge-deployment, we considered problems
that are unique to this environment. These include
quantization techniques that result in parameters rep-
resented by fewer than 8 bits, perhaps as low as binary
values. We also considered the problem of integer-only
quantization, which enables the deployment of NNs on
low-end microprocessors which often lack ﬂoating-point
units.
With this survey and its organization, we hope to have
presented a useful snapshot of the current research in
quantization for Neural Networks and to have given an
intelligent organization to ease the evaluation of future
research in this area.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The UC Berkeley team also acknowledges gracious
support from Samsung (in particular Joseph Hassoun),
Intel corporation, Intel VLAB team, Google TRC team,
and Google Brain (in particular Prof. David Patterson,
Dr. Ed Chi, and Jing Li). Amir Gholami was supported
through through funding from Samsung SAIT. Our
conclusions do not necessarily reﬂect the position or
the policy of our sponsors, and no ofﬁcial endorsement
should be inferred.
REFERENCES
[1]Eirikur Agustsson, Fabian Mentzer, Michael
Tschannen, Lukas Cavigelli, Radu Timofte, Luca
Benini, and Luc Van Gool. Soft-to-hard vector
quantization for end-to-end learning compressible
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00648 ,
2017.
[2]Eirikur Agustsson and Lucas Theis. Universally
quantized neural compression. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 2020.
[3]Sungsoo Ahn, Shell Xu Hu, Andreas Damianou,
Neil D Lawrence, and Zhenwen Dai. Variational
information distillation for knowledge transfer.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
9163–9171, 2019.
[4]Milad Alizadeh, Arash Behboodi, Mart van Baalen,
Christos Louizos, Tijmen Blankevoort, and Max
Welling. Gradient l1 regularization for quantization
robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07520 ,
2020.
[5]Milad Alizadeh, Javier Fernández-Marqués,
Nicholas D Lane, and Yarin Gal. An empirical
study of binary neural networks’ optimisation.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2018.
[6]Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E
Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
[7]Haoli Bai, Wei Zhang, Lu Hou, Lifeng Shang,
Jing Jin, Xin Jiang, Qun Liu, Michael Lyu, and
Irwin King. Binarybert: Pushing the limit of bert
quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15701 ,
2020.
[8]Yu Bai, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Edo Liberty. Prox-
quant: Quantized neural networks via proximal
operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00861 , 2018.
[9]Dana Harry Ballard. An introduction to natural
computation . MIT press, 1999.
19