models to INT8, without losing accuracy. There are
several software packages that can be used to deploy
INT8 quantized models (e.g., Nvidia’s TensorRT, TVM,
etc.), each with good documentation. Furthermore, the
implementations are also quite optimal and one can
easily observe speed up with quantization. However, the
software for lower bit-precision quantization is not widely
available, and sometimes it is non-existent. For instance,
Nvidia’s TensorRT does not currently support sub-INT8
quantization. Moreover, support for INT4 quantization
was only recently added to TVM [ 267]. Recent work has
shown that low precision and mixed-precision quantiza-
tion with INT4/INT8 works in practice [ 51,82,102,108,
187,199,211,239,246,246,249,263,267,286]. Thus,
developing efﬁcient software APIs for lower precision
quantization will have an important impact.
Hardware and NN Architecture Co-Design: As dis-
cussed above, an important difference between classical
work in low-precision quantization and the recent work in
machine learning is the fact that NN parameters may have
very different quantized values but may still generalize
similarly well. For example, with quantization-aware
training, we might converge to a different solution, far
away from the original solution with single precision
parameters, but still get good accuracy. One can take
advantage of this degree of freedom and also adapt the
NN architecture as it is being quantized. For instance,
the recent work of [ 34] shows that changing the width of
the NN architecture could reduce/remove generalization
gap after quantization. One line of future work is to
adapt jointly other architecture parameters, such as depth
or individual kernels, as the model is being quantized.
Another line of future work is to extend this co-design
to hardware architecture. This may be particularly useful
for FPGA deployment, as one can explore many different
possible hardware conﬁgurations (such as different micro-
architectures of multiply-accumulate elements), and then
couple this with the NN architecture and quantization
co-design.
Coupled Compression Methods: As discussed above,
quantization is only one of the methods for efﬁcient
deployment of NNs. Other methods include efﬁcient
NN architecture design, co-design of hardware and
NN architecture, pruning, and knowledge distillation.
Quantization can be coupled with these other approaches.
However, there is currently very little work exploring
what are the optimal combinations of these methods. For
instance, pruning and quantization can be applied together
to a model to reduce its overhead [ 87,152], and it is
important to understand the best combination of struc-tured/unstructured pruning and quantization. Similarly,
another future direction is to study the coupling between
these methods and other approaches described above.
Quantized Training: Perhaps the most important use
of quantization has been to accelerate NN training with
half-precision [ 41,72,79,175]. This has enabled the use
of much faster and more power-efﬁcient reduced-precision
logic for training. However, it has been very difﬁcult
to push this further down to INT8 precision training.
While several interesting works exist in this area [ 10,26,
123,137,173], the proposed methods often require a lot
of hyperparameter tuning, or they only work for a few
NN models on relatively easy learning tasks. The basic
problem is that, with INT8 precision, the training can
become unstable and diverge. Addressing this challenge
can have a high impact on several applications, especially
for training at the edge.
VII. S UMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
As soon as abstract mathematical computations were
adapted to computation on digital computers, the problem
of efﬁcient representation, manipulation, and communi-
cation of the numerical values in those computations
arose. Strongly related to the problem of numerical
representation is the problem of quantization: in what
manner should a set of continuous real-valued numbers
be distributed over a ﬁxed discrete set of numbers
to minimize the number of bits required and also to
maximize the accuracy of the attendant computations?
While these problems are as old as computer science,
these problems are especially relevant to the design
of efﬁcient NN models. There are several reasons for
this. First, NNs are computationally intensive. So, the
efﬁcient representation of numerical values is particularly
important. Second, most current NN models are heavily
over-parameterized. So, there is ample opportunity for
reducing the bit precision without impacting accuracy.
Third, the layered structure of NN models offers an
additional dimension to explore. Thus, different layers in
the NN have different impact on the loss function, and this
motivates interesting approaches such mixed-precision
quantization.
Moving from ﬂoating-point representations to low-
precision ﬁxed integer values represented in eight/four
bits or less holds the potential to reduce the memory
footprint and latency. [ 157] shows that INT8 inference of
popular computer vision models, including ResNet50 [ 88],
VGG-19 [ 224], and inceptionV3 [ 230] using TVM [ 32]
quantization library, can achieve 3.89 , 3.32, and
5.02speedup on NVIDIA GTX 1080, respectively.
18