A Survey of Quantization Methods for Efﬁcient
Neural Network Inference
Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, Kurt Keutzer
University of California, Berkeley
{amirgh, sehoonkim, zhendong, zheweiy, mahoneymw, keutzer}@berkeley.edu
Abstract —As soon as abstract mathematical computa-
tions were adapted to computation on digital computers,
the problem of efﬁcient representation, manipulation, and
communication of the numerical values in those computa-
tions arose. Strongly related to the problem of numerical
representation is the problem of quantization: in what
manner should a set of continuous real-valued numbers be
distributed over a ﬁxed discrete set of numbers to minimize
the number of bits required and also to maximize the
accuracy of the attendant computations? This perennial
problem of quantization is particularly relevant whenever
memory and/or computational resources are severely re-
stricted, and it has come to the forefront in recent years due
to the remarkable performance of Neural Network models
in computer vision, natural language processing, and re-
lated areas. Moving from ﬂoating-point representations to
low-precision ﬁxed integer values represented in four bits
or less holds the potential to reduce the memory footprint
and latency by a factor of 16x; and, in fact, reductions of
4x to 8x are often realized in practice in these applications.
Thus, it is not surprising that quantization has emerged
recently as an important and very active sub-area of
research in the efﬁcient implementation of computations
associated with Neural Networks. In this article, we survey
approaches to the problem of quantizing the numerical
values in deep Neural Network computations, covering the
advantages/disadvantages of current methods. With this
survey and its organization, we hope to have presented a
useful snapshot of the current research in quantization
for Neural Networks and to have given an intelligent
organization to ease the evaluation of future research in
this area.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, we have observed signiﬁcant
improvements in the accuracy of Neural Networks (NNs)
for a wide range of problems, often achieved by highly
over-parameterized models. While the accuracy of these
over-parameterized (and thus very large) NN models has
signiﬁcantly increased, the sheer size of these models
Equal contribution.means that it is not possible to deploy them for many
resource-constrained applications. This creates a problem
for realizing pervasive deep learning, which requires
real-time inference, with low energy consumption and
high accuracy, in resource-constrained environments. This
pervasive deep learning is expected to have a signiﬁcant
impact on a wide range of applications such as real-time
intelligent healthcare monitoring, autonomous driving,
audio analytics, and speech recognition.
Achieving efﬁcient, real-time NNs with optimal ac-
curacy requires rethinking the design, training, and
deployment of NN models [ 71]. There is a large body of
literature that has focused on addressing these issues by
making NN models more efﬁcient (in terms of latency,
memory footprint, and energy consumption, etc.), while
still providing optimal accuracy/generalization trade-offs.
These efforts can be broadly categorized as follows.
a)Designing efﬁcient NN model architectures :
One line of work has focused on optimizing the NN model
architecture in terms of its micro-architecture [ 101,111,
127,167,168,212,253,280] (e.g., kernel types such as
depth-wise convolution or low-rank factorization) as well
as its macro-architecture [ 100,101,104,110,214,233]
(e.g., module types such as residual, or inception). The
classical techniques here mostly found new architecture
modules using manual search, which is not scalable. As
such, a new line of work is to design Automated machine
learning (AutoML) and Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
methods. These aim to ﬁnd in an automated way the right
NN architecture, under given constraints of model size,
depth, and/or width [ 161,194,232,245,252,291]. We
refer interested reader to [ 54] for a recent survey of NAS
methods.
b)Co-designing NN architecture and hardware
together :Another recent line of work has been to adapt
(and co-design) the NN architecture for a particular target
hardware platform. The importance of this is because the
overhead of a NN component (in terms of latency and
energy) is hardware-dependent. For example, hardwarearXiv:2103.13630v3  [cs.CV]  21 Jun 2021