produce negative values.
Summary (QAT). QAT has been shown to work
despite the coarse approximation of STE. However, the
main disadvantage of QAT is the computational cost of
re-training the NN model. This re-training may need
to be performed for several hundred epochs to recover
accuracy, especially for low-bit precision quantization. If
a quantized model is going to be deployed for an extended
period, and if efﬁciency and accuracy are especially
important, then this investment in re-training is likely
to be worth it. However, this is not always the case, as
some models have a relatively short lifetime. Next, we
next discuss an alternative approach that does not have
this overhead.
2) Post-Training Quantization: An alternative to the
expensive QAT method is Post-Training Quantization
(PTQ) which performs the quantization and the adjust-
ments of the weights, without any ﬁne-tuning [ 11,24,40,
60,61,68,69,89,108,142,148,174,182,223,281].
As such, the overhead of PTQ is very low and often
negligible. Unlike QAT, which requires a sufﬁcient
amount of training data for retraining, PTQ has an
additional advantage that it can be applied in situations
where data is limited or unlabeled. However, this often
comes at the cost of lower accuracy as compared to QAT,
especially for low-precision quantization.
For this reason, multiple approaches have been pro-
posed to mitigate the accuracy degradation of PTQ. For
example, [ 11,63] observe inherent bias in the mean and
variance of the weight values following their quantization
and propose bias correction methods; and [ 174,182]
show that equalizing the weight ranges (and implicitly
activation ranges) between different layers or channels
can reduce quantization errors. ACIQ [ 11] analytically
computes the optimal clipping range and the channel-wise
bitwidth setting for PTQ. Although ACIQ can achieve
low accuracy degradation, the channel-wise activation
quantization used in ACIQ is hard to efﬁciently deploy on
hardware. In order to address this, the OMSE method [ 40]
removes channel-wise quantization on activation and
proposes to conduct PTQ by optimizing the L2 distance
between the quantized tensor and the corresponding
ﬂoating point tensor. Furthermore, to better alleviate
the adverse impact of outliers on PTQ, an outlier
channel splitting (OCS) method is proposed in [ 281]
which duplicates and halves the channels containing
outlier values. Another notable work is AdaRound [ 181]
which shows that the naive round-to-nearest method for
quantization can counter-intuitively results in sub-optimal
solutions, and it proposes an adaptive rounding methodthat better reduces the loss. While AdaRound restricts
the changes of the quantized weights to be within 1
from their full-precision counterparts, AdaQuant [ 108]
proposes a more general method that allows the quantized
weights to change as needed. PTQ schemes can be taken
to the extreme, where neither training nor testing data
are utilized during quantization (aka zero-shot scenarios),
which is discussed next.
Summary (PTQ). In PTQ, all the weights and acti-
vations quantization parameters are determined without
any re-training of the NN model. As such, PTQ is a very
fast method for quantizing NN models. However, this
often comes at the cost of lower accuracy as compared
to QAT.
3) Zero-shot Quantization: As discussed so far, in
order to achieve minimal accuracy degradation after
quantization, we need access to the entire of a fraction
of training data. First, we need to know the range of
activations so that we can clip the values and determine
the proper scaling factors (which is usually referred to as
calibration in the literature). Second, quantized models
often require ﬁne-tuning to adjust the model parameters
and recover the accuracy degradation. In many cases,
however, access to the original training data is not possible
during the quantization procedure. This is because the
training dataset is either too large to be distributed,
proprietary (e.g., Google’s JFT-300M), or sensitive due to
security or privacy concerns (e.g., medical data). Several
different methods have been proposed to address this
challenge, which we refer to as zero-shot quantization
(ZSQ). Inspired by [ 182], here we ﬁrst describe two
different levels of zero-shot quantization:
Level 1: No data and no ﬁnetuning (ZSQ + PTQ).
Level 2: No data but requires ﬁnetuning (ZSQ +
QAT).
Level 1 allows faster and easier quantization without
any ﬁnetuning. Finetuning is in general time-consuming
and often requires additional hyperparamenter search.
However, Level 2 usually results in higher accuracy,
as ﬁnetuning helps the quantized model to recover
the accuracy degradation, particularly in ultra-low bit
precision settings [ 85]. The work of [ 182] uses a Level
1 approach that relies on equalizing the weight ranges
and correcting bias errors to make a given NN model
more amenable to quantization without any data or
ﬁnetuning. However, as this method is based on the scale-
equivariance property of (piece-wise) linear activation
functions, it can be sub-optimal for NNs with non-linear
activations, such as BERT [ 46] with GELU [ 94] activation
or MobileNetV3 [100] with swish activation [203].
10