In this approach, each layer is quantized with different
bit precision, as illustrated in Figure 8. One challenge
with this approach is that the search space for choosing
this bit setting is exponential in the number of layers.
Different approaches have been proposed to address this
huge search space.
Selecting this mixed-precision for each layer is essen-
tially a searching problem, and many different methods
have been proposed for it. The recent work of [ 246]
proposed a reinforcement learning (RL) based method to
determine automatically the quantization policy, and the
authors used a hardware simulator to take the hardware
accelerator’s feedback in the RL agent feedback. The
paper [ 254] formulated the mixed-precision conﬁguration
searching problem as a Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
problem and used the Differentiable NAS (DNAS) method
to efﬁciently explore the search space. One disadvantage
of these exploration-based methods [ 246,254] is that they
often require large computational resources, and their
performance is typically sensitive to hyperparameters and
even initialization.
Another class of mixed-precision methods uses periodic
function regularization to train mixed-precision models
by automatically distinguishing different layers and
their varying importance with respect to accuracy while
learning their respective bitwidths [184].
Different than these exploration and regularization-
based approaches, HAWQ [ 51] introduces an automatic
way to ﬁnd the mixed-precision settings based on second-
order sensitivity of the model. It was theoretically shown
that the trace of the second-order operator (i.e., the
Hessian) can be used to measure the sensitivity of a
layer to quantization [ 50], similar to results for pruning
in the seminal work of Optimal Brain Damage [ 139].
In HAWQv2, this method was extended to mixed-
precision activation quantization [ 50], and was shown to
be more than 100x faster than RL based mixed-precision
methods [ 246]. Recently, in HAWQv3, an integer-only,
hardware-aware quantization was introduced [ 267] that
proposed a fast Integer Linear Programming method to
ﬁnd the optimal bit precision for a given application-
speciﬁc constraint (e.g., model size or latency). This work
also addressed the common question about hardware
efﬁciency of mixed-precision quantization by directly
deploying them on T4 GPUs, showing up to 50% speed
up with mixed-precision (INT4/INT8) quantization as
compared to INT8 quantization.
Summary (Mixed-precision Quantization). Mixed-
precision quantization has proved to be an effective and
hardware-efﬁcient method for low-precision quantizationof different NN models. In this approach, the layers of a
NN are grouped into sensitive/insensitive to quantization,
and higher/lower bits are used for each layer. As such,
one can minimize accuracy degradation and still beneﬁt
from reduced memory footprint and faster speed up with
low precision quantization. Recent work [ 267] has also
shown that this approach is hardware-efﬁcient as mixed-
precision is only used across operations/layers.
C. Hardware Aware Quantization
One of the goals of quantization is to improve the
inference latency. However, not all hardware provide
the same speed up after a certain layer/operation is
quantized. In fact, the beneﬁts from quantization is
hardware-dependant, with many factors such as on-chip
memory, bandwidth, and cache hierarchy affecting the
quantization speed up.
It is important to consider this fact for achieving
optimal beneﬁts through hardware-aware quantization [ 87,
91,246,250,254,256,265,267]. In particular, the
work [ 246] uses a reinforcement learning agent to
determine the hardware-aware mixed-precision setting
for quantization, based on a look-up table of latency
with respect to different layers with different bitwidth.
However, this approach uses simulated hardware latency.
To address this the recent work of [ 267] directly deploys
quantized operations in hardware, and measures the
actual deployment latency of each layer for different
quantization bit precisions.
D. Distillation-Assisted Quantization
An interesting line of work in quantization is to
incorporate model distillation to boost quantization accu-
racy [ 126,177,195,267]. Model distillation [ 3,95,150,
177,195,207,268,270,289] is a method in which a
large model with higher accuracy is used as a teacher to
help the training of a compact student model. During the
training of the student model, instead of using just the
ground-truth class labels, model distillation proposes to
leverage the soft probabilities produced by the teacher,
which may contain more information of the input. That is
the overall loss function incorporates both the student loss
and the distillation loss, which is typically formulated as
follows:
L=H(y;(zs)) +H((zt;T);(zs;T)) (10)
In Eq. 10,andare weighting coefﬁcients to tune the
amount of loss from the student model and the distillation
loss,yis the ground-truth class label, His the cross-
entropy loss function, zs/ztare logits generated by the
14