with a dedicated cache hierarchy can execute bandwidth
bound operations much more efﬁciently than hardware
without such cache hierarchy. Similar to NN architecture
design, initial approaches at architecture-hardware co-
design were manual, where an expert would adapt/change
the NN architecture [ 70], followed by using automated
AutoML and/or NAS techniques [22, 23, 100, 252].
c)Pruning :Another approach to reducing the
memory footprint and computational cost of NNs is to
apply pruning. In pruning, neurons with small saliency
(sensitivity) are removed, resulting in a sparse computa-
tional graph. Here, neurons with small saliency are those
whose removal minimally affects the model output/loss
function. Pruning methods can be broadly categorized
into unstructured pruning [ 49,86,139,143,191,257],
and structured pruning [ 91,106,156,166,274,275,279].
With unstructured pruning, one removes neurons with
with small saliency, wherever they occur. With this
approach, one can perform aggressive pruning, removing
most of the NN parameters, with very little impact on
the generalization performance of the model. However,
this approach leads to sparse matrix operations, which
are known to be hard to accelerate, and which are
typically memory-bound [ 21,66]. On the other hand,
with structured pruning, a group of parameters (e.g.,
entire convolutional ﬁlters) is removed. This has the
effect of changing the input and output shapes of layers
and weight matrices, thus still permitting dense matrix
operations. However, aggressive structured pruning often
leads to signiﬁcant accuracy degradation. Training and
inference with high levels of pruning/sparsity, while
maintaining state-of-the-art performance, has remained
an open problem [ 16]. We refer the interested reader
to [66,96,134] for a thorough survey of related work
in pruning/sparsity.
d)Knowledge distillation :Model distillation [ 3,95,
150,177,195,207,269,270] involves training a large
model and then using it as a teacher to train a more com-
pact model. Instead of using “hard” class labels during
the training of the student model, the key idea of model
distillation is to leverage the “soft” probabilities produced
by the teacher, as these probabilities can contain more
information about the input. Despite the large body of
work on distillation, a major challenge here is to achieve a
high compression ratio with distillation alone. Compared
to quantization and pruning, which can maintain the
performance with 4compression (with INT8 and
lower precision), knowledge distillation methods tend to
have non-negligible accuracy degradation with aggressive
compression. However, the combination of knowledgedistillation with prior methods (i.e., quantization and
pruning) has shown great success [195].
e)Quantization :Finally, quantization is an ap-
proach that has shown great and consistent success in
both training and inference of NN models. While the
problems of numerical representation and quantization
are as old as digital computing, Neural Nets offer unique
opportunities for improvement. While this survey on
quantization is mostly focused on inference, we should
emphasize that an important success of quantization has
been in NN training [ 10,35,57,130,247]. In particular,
the breakthroughs of half-precision and mixed-precision
training [ 41,72,79,175] have been the main drivers that
have enabled an order of magnitude higher throughput in
AI accelerators. However, it has proven very difﬁcult to
go below half-precision without signiﬁcant tuning, and
most of the recent quantization research has focused on
inference. This quantization for inference is the focus of
this article.
f)Quantization and Neuroscience :Loosely related
to (and for some a motivation for) NN quantization
is work in neuroscience that suggests that the human
brain stores information in a discrete/quantized form,
rather than in a continuous form [ 171,236,240]. A
popular rationale for this idea is that information stored
in continuous form will inevitably get corrupted by noise
(which is always present in the physical environment,
including our brains, and which can be induced by
thermal, sensory, external, synaptic noise, etc.) [ 27,58].
However, discrete signal representations can be more
robust to such low-level noise. Other reasons, including
the higher generalization power of discrete representa-
tions [ 128,138,242] and their higher efﬁciency under
limited resources [ 241], have also been proposed. We
refer the reader to [ 228] for a thorough review of related
work in neuroscience literature.
The goal of this work is to introduce current methods
and concepts used in quantization and to discuss the
current challenges and opportunities in this line of
research. In doing so, we have tried to discuss most
relevant work. It is not possible to discuss every work in
a ﬁeld as large as NN quantization in the page limit of a
short survey; and there is no doubt that we have missed
some relevant papers. We apologize in advance both to
the readers and the authors of papers that we may have
neglected.
In terms of the structure of this survey, we will ﬁrst
provide a brief history of quantization in Section II,
and then we will introduce basic concepts underlying
quantization in Section III. These basic concepts are
2