(2) Reset gate is used from the model to decide how
much of the past information is forgotten. To calculate
it, we use:
rt¼σWirxtþbirþWhrht−1ðÞþbhr/C0/C1
5ðÞ
(3) Current memory content uses the reset gate to
store the relevant information from the past:
nt¼tanh W inxtþbinþrtWhnht−1ðÞþbhn/C0/C1 /C0/C1
6ðÞ
(4) Final memory at current time step: as the last step,
the network needs to calculate htvector which holds in-
formation for the current unit and passes it down to the
network. In order to do that the update gate is needed.
That is done as follows:
ht¼1−ztðÞ ntþztht−1ðÞ 7ðÞ
Output layers
In output layers, we used two linear layers to apply lin-
ear transformation to the incoming input. The first layer
with input feature size (= GRU hidden size) and output
feature (= fully connected layer size) aims to transform
the output of GRU layers. Then the next linear layer was
applied with input feature size of fully connected layer
size and output size of 1 to generate the output results
of the model. Noted that we set bias = true in this step
to let the layer learn the additive biases.
The next layer applied was dropout, which is an effect-
ive technique for the regularization and prevention of
the co-adaptation of neurons as described in the paper
[32]. The importance of the dropout layer was to en-
hance the predictive performance of our model and pre-
vent the problem of overfitting. In the dropout layer, the
model will randomly deactivate the neurons in a layer
that have a certain probability value. If the dropout value
is tuned to a layer, the neural network will learn differ-
ent, redundant representations, and the training time
will be faster. In this study, the dropout values are floats
ranging from 0 to 1 to evaluate our model.
The last element in the output layers is sigmoid, which
is a non-linear activation. Commonly, sigmoid function
is problematic in RNN and it applies the element-wise
function as follows:
Sigmoid x ðÞ ¼1
1þexp−xðÞ8ðÞ
Assessment of predictive ability
We used five-fold cross-validation to evaluate the per-
formance of ET-GRU and the comparison model. In
each validation, all data randomly divides into five equal
parts. Four-fold set data are taken as train data, the restone-fold is taken as test data. To guarantee the unbiased
comparison, it confirmed that there is no overlap be-
tween train data and test data. Because 5-fold cross-
validation will yield different results each time, we im-
plemented 10 iterations of 5-fold cross-validation and
averaged the results across the 10 iterations. Further-
more, to control for any systematic bias in the cross-
validation set, the independent dataset was used to
evaluate the performance accuracy. We followed the
widely used evaluation criteria in many bioinformatics
studies [ 5,33,34]. Some standard metrics were used,
such as sensitivity (Sen), specificity (Spe), accuracy (Acc)
and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) using the
formula presented in those studies.
Sensitivity ¼1−Nþ
−
Nþ;0≤Sen≤19 ðÞ
Specificity ¼1−N−
þ
N−;0≤Spec≤11 0 ðÞ
Accuracy ¼1−Nþ
−þN−
þ
NþþN−;0≤Acc≤11 1 ðÞ
MCC ¼1−Nþ
−
NþþN−
þ
N−/C18/C19
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þN−
þ−Nþ
−
Nþ/C18/C19
1þNþ
−−N−
þ
N−/C18/C19s ;
−1≤MCC ≤11 2 ðÞ
The relationship between these symbols in Eqs. (9, 10,
11 and 12) are indicated by:
N−
þ¼FP
Nþ
−¼FN
Nþ¼TPþNþ
−
N−¼TNþN−
þ8
>><
>>:13ðÞ
where TP means the true positives and refers to the
number of electron transport proteins that were cor-
rectly predicted by the classifier, TN means true nega-
tives and refers to the number of general proteins that
were correctly predicted by the classifier, FP means false
positives and refers to the number of electron transport
proteins that were incorrectly predicted by the classifier,
and FN means false negative and refers to the number of
general proteins that were incorrectly predicted by the
classifier.
Results
Composition amino acid of electron transport proteins
and general transport proteins
We analyzed the composition of amino acid in electron
transport proteins and general transport proteins by com-
puting the frequency between them. Figure 3illustratesLeet al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2019) 20:377 Page 6 of 12