deep CNN to address this problem with improved
accuracy.
Notwithstanding this, pr evious studies can only be
considered as the first step towards a more profound
understanding of electron transport proteins. Numer-
ous studies have used PSSM profiles to solve the
problem; however, they did not find a solution to in-
put all the PSSM profiles into neural networks. A
new approach is therefore needed to address this
issue. We thus present a new deep learning architec-
ture which uses 1D CNN, GRU, and PSSM profiles to
discriminate electron transport proteins. To our
knowledge, no previous computational biology re-
search has specially incorporated the CNN, GRU, and
PSSM profiles in identifying protein function. The
hybrid of CNN and GRU based recurrent neural
network (RNN) has been presented in some
sequence-based learning tasks, such as protein sec-
ondary prediction [ 20], discovering complex biological
rules to RNA protein-coding potential [ 21], and
quantifying the function of DNA sequences [ 22].
However, they applied this network on original se-
quences, which cannot take advantages of advanced
biological profiles, (i.e. PSSMs). Here we aim to ad-
d r e s st h i si s s u e .
We documented several key contributions of our
study to the field of biology: (1) a new computational
model for identifying electron transport proteins
which exhibited significant improvements beyond that
of previous models, (2) a new deep learning frame-
work constructed from CNN, GRU, and PSSM for
classifying the protein functions with high perform-
ance, in which we can input all the PSSM profiles
into deep neural networks and prevent missing infor-
mation in PSSM profiles, (3) a benchmark dataset for
further study on electron transport protein, and (4) a
study that would provide a better understanding of
the electron transport protein structures to biologists
and researchers through the information collected to
aid in any conduction of future research.
Methodology
Most experiments have been carried out with a 1D
CNN, GRU and PSSM profiles. Figure 2illustrates a
flowchart of the study, and we describe the details of the
proposed approach as follows.
Data collection
In this study, we re-used the benchmark dataset from the
previous study [ 19], which contains 395 electron transport
proteins and 2240 transport proteins. However, to take full
advantage of deep learning, we collected more data from
UniProt release-2018_05 (on 23-May-2018) [ 23] and Gene
Ontology (GO) release-2018-05-01 [ 24], which providehigh quality resources for research on gene products. No-
tice that we only chose the sequences which have been
reviewed by scientists in their published papers. After this
step, we received 12,832 electron transport proteins and
10,814 general transport proteins in all of species. Subse-
quently, BLAST (version 2.2.26) [ 25] was applied to re-
move the redundant sequences with identities that have a
similarity of more than 30%. The data collected also re-
veals that the rest of the proteins can be divided into 1324
electron transport proteins and 4569 general transport
proteins. This step aims to prevent overfitting in our
model. Labelling the proposed issue as a binary classifica-
tion problem, we solved it by using electron transport pro-
teins as the positive data and the general transport
proteins as the negative data. To conduct the experiments,
we needed two sets of data: cross-validation and inde-
pendent datasets. In these two datasets, the independent
dataset contained newly discovered proteins and the
cross-validation dataset contained the rest of the data.
The cross-validation dataset was used for constructing
our model, and the independent dataset was used for
evaluating the performance of the proposed method.
Table 1lists all the detail of the dataset in this study.
Encoding feature sets from the protein sequence
information
In this study, the feature extraction method that is being
applied is PSSM, a matrix represented by all the amino
acid patterns in protein sequences. The matrix is also
used for decoding the evolutionary information of a pro-
tein sequence. PSSM was first presented by Jones [ 1]
and increasingly applied to many bioinformatics applica-
tions with significant improvements [ 26–28]. To gener-
ate the PSSM profiles from FASTA sequences, we used
PSI-BLAST [ 25] to search against non-redundant pro-
tein database for two iterations. The query to produce
the PSSM profile is as follows:
psiblast.exe -num_iterations 2 -db < nr > −in_msa <
fasta_file > −out_ascii_ < pssm_file>.
Numerous studies have attempted to identify the
protein function by using PSSM and the summing
method [ 18,26,29]. This means that they tried to
sum up the same amino acids and convert PSSM pro-
files with a 20*N matrix to a 20*20 matrix. This
method helped them to fix the input length to insert
into neural networks. However, this also raises the big
issue of the loss of information when PSSM profiles
are in order. Therefore, in this study, we attempted
to input all PSSM profiles into deep neural networks
via GRU architectures. We also ensured that the pos-
ition information was not lost and we were able to
preserve this information while sequences of different
lengths remain comparable.Leet al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2019) 20:377 Page 3 of 12