the amino acids which contributed the highest frequency
in two distinct datasets. We realized that there were nu-
merous differences in amino acid frequencies between
those surrounding the electron transport proteins and
those surrounding the general transport proteins. For in-
stance, the amino acid E, I, L, or F (with higher variances)
could be applied for classifying electron transport pro-
teins. Also, we used the standard error bars on the chart
to show the significant differences in the contributions of
these amino acids. If two error bars do not overlap, we
can conclude that the difference between these two data-
sets is statistically significant. In Fig. 3, it is easy to say that
there are significant differences between electron trans-
porters and general transporters in amino acid R, D, Q, E,
I, L, K, F, and S. Thus, these amino acids distributions cer-
tainly possessed an essential role in discriminating elec-
tron transport proteins from general proteins.
Model selection
We have classified the electron transport proteins
using various hyper-parameters i.e., convolutional fea-
ture size, kernel size, fully connected layer size, and
so on. First, we used six filters ranging from 32 to1024 to train the cross-validation and in the consider-
ation of the optimal filter. The fully connected layer
size of 32 achieved the highest performance in dis-
criminating the electron transport proteins with an
accuracy of 93.5 and 92.3% for the cross-validation
and independent datasets, respectively. This point
proved that a bigger filter size did not have a signifi-
cant impact to this problem, and thus we only need
to use the simplest filter size while still be able to
achieve significant results. Comparing these results
with those of the other performances, we also saw
that the result was consistent between cross-
validation and independent datasets. It means that the
hyper-parameters from the cross-validation test can
be used to evaluate the independent test with the
same level of performance. Our model did not run
into the overfitting problem either. Further, we also
examined the performance results of different GRU hid-
den layer sizes. For these experiments, the GRU hidden
layer size of 200 performed better than others. In sum-
mary, Table 2shows all layers with weights and trainable
parameters of our GRU model. Thereafter, we decided to
use these parameters for the rest of the experiments.
Fig. 3 Amino acid composition and variance of amino acid composition in electron transport and general transport proteins. There are numerous
differences between the amino acid frequencies surrounding the electron transport proteins and general transport proteins. For instance, the
amino acid E, I, F, or R could be adopted for classifying electron transport proteinsLeet al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2019) 20:377 Page 7 of 12