present an innovative approach to fill this gap through the
incorporation of 1D convolutional neural network (CNN)
and gated recurrent unit (GRU). We applied our tech-
niques in the prediction of the function of electron trans-
port protein, which is one of the most essential molecule
functions in cellular respiration.
Cellular respiration is the mechanism for creating
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and it aids cells in
obtaining energy from food molecules (i.e. sugar).
Figure 1indicates the process of cellular respiration.
The goal of cellular respiration is to accumulate elec-
trons from organic compounds to create ATP, which
is used to provide energy for most cellular reactions
[7]. An electron transport chain is a pathway to store
and transfer electrons in cellular respiration. It can be
categorized into five protein complexes: complex I, II,
III, IV, and V (ATP Synthase). Each complex consists
of different electron carriers and carries out various
molecular functions [ 8]. Electrons donate to complex
I from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH –a
coenzyme found in all living cells) and sequentially
pass to complex II, III, IV, and V. During the move-
ment, the hydrogen ions, or protons, pump across the
membrane and release water molecules (H2O).
Complex V uses the energy created by the pumping
process to convert phosphorylate adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP) to ATP. Numerous types of electron
transport proteins have been identified in humans
and a series of studies have also indicated that a
functional loss of specific complex in electron trans-
port protein resulted in the complication of manydiseases [ 9–13]. Thus, identification of electron
transport proteins helps biologists better understand
molecular functions and possibly curb the prevalent
issue of human disease. Moreover, it is imperative to
develop some computational techniques to address
the issue.
Recently, there have been some published works on
identifying electron transport proteins through the use
of computational techniques because of their essential
role in cellular respiration, energy production, and hu-
man diseases. For instance, one of the most popular
studies is Transporter Classification Database (TCDB)
[14]. It is a web-accessible, curated and relational data-
base containing the sequence, classification, structural,
functional and evolutionary information about transport
systems including electron transport proteins from a var-
iety of living organisms. Next, Gromiha [ 15] discrimi-
nated the function of electron transport proteins from
membrane proteins using machine learning techniques.
According to Chen [ 16], the transport targets were di-
vided into four types, including electron transporters to
do prediction and analysis. In the experiment, they
analyze this using amino acid composition (AAC), di-
peptide composition (DPC) and PSSM profiles. Mishra
et al. [ 17] also identified electron transport proteins from
transport proteins by using PSSM profiles and biochem-
ical properties. Furthermore, Le et al. [ 18] used radial
basis function networks and biochemical properties in
identifying the electron transport proteins and their
complexes with high accuracy. Le et al. [ 19] also imple-
mented the ET-CNN, which is a web server that used
Fig. 1 The process of cellular respiration. The goal of cellular respiration is to accumulate electrons from organic compounds to create ATP,
which is used to provide energy for most cellular reactionsLeet al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2019) 20:377 Page 2 of 12