models. This is a deep neural network architecture
which had been shown to handle sequential data sig-
nificantly in various fields. Different from traditional
neural network, RNN can take advantage of sequence
information and theoretically, it can utilize the infor-
mation of arbitrary length sequence. It is able to
memorize parts of the inputs and use them to make
accurate predictions. Our d eep neural network struc-
ture was implemented using PyTorch library [ 30]. We
also accelerated the performance via graphic process-
ing unit (GPU) computing and CUDA kernel. The in-
put is a multiplication of sequence length and size of
amino acid vocabulary. The CNN extracts amino acid
information using various filter sizes. To extract the
PSSM information, we first applied a 1D convolution
over an input shape consisting of several input matri-
ces. The convolutional layer takes a sliding window
that is moved in stride across the input, transforming
the values into representative values. During this
process, convolution operation preserves the spatial
relationship between numeric values in the PSSM
profiles by learning useful features using small
squares of input data [ 31]. Each protein was treated
as a separate sample and input to the neural network.
Given an input size (N, C in, L), we can precisely com-
pute the output (N, C out,Lout)b yu s i n gt h ef o l l o w i n g
formula:
out N i;Cout j/C0/C1
¼bias C out j/C0/C1
þXCin−1
k¼0weight C out j;k/C0/C1
/C3input N i;kðÞ 1ðÞ
where * is the valid cross-correlation operator, N is
the batch size, C denotes the number of channels,
and L is the length of the signal sequence. In this
s t u d y ,t h ei n p u ti st h es e q u e n c el e n g t hm u l t i p l i e db y
the size of the amino acid vocabulary (=20). The big
advantage of inputting all the PSSM features into the
neural network is to prevent missing information
from PSSM profiles. We also set the learnable weights
and bias variables of the module of shape. The pool-
ing layer is usually inserted between the convolutional
layers with the aim of reducing the size of matrix
calculations for the next convolutional layer. The op-
eration performed by this layer is also called “down-
sampling ”as it removes certain values leading to less
computational operations and overfitting control while
still preserving the most relevant representative fea-
tures. The pooling layer also takes a sliding window
or a certain region that is moved in stride across the
input matrix transforming the values into representa-
tive values [ 31]. In our study, we performed a 1D
average pooling over an input of several values. Inthis step, we can also calculate the output (N, C, L)
and kernel size k as follows:
out N i;Cj;l/C0/C1
¼1
kXk
m¼0input N i;Cj;stride /C3lþm/C0/C1
2ðÞ
Zero-padding is the process of symmetrically adding
zeros to the input matrix which allows the size of the in-
put to be adjusted to certain requirements. In the model
presented in the current study, zero values were added
at the beginning and end of the matrices. This allowed
us to apply the filter to the border positions of the
matrices. If padding is non-zero, then the input is impli-
citly zero-padded on both sides for padding number of
points. The input shape (N, C, L in) and output shape (N,
C, L out) can be calculated by:
Lout¼Linþ2þpadding −kernel size
strideþ1/C22/C23
3ðÞ
Learning and classification using GRU
After generating feature sets with 1D CNN, we ap-
plied a multi-layer GRU to an input sequence. GRU,
with its so-called update gate and reset gate, is an
improved version of the standard recurrent neural
network (RNN). Because of the problem of “vanishing
gradient ”in the network structure, RNN can only
retrospectively utilize the information on time steps
which are close to it in practical applications. In
order to solve this problem, Long Short Term Mem-
o r y( L S T M )a n dG R Uw e r ep r e s e n t e dw i t hs p e c i a l l y
designed network architecture, which can learn long-
term dependencies information naturally. Basically,
these are two vectors which decide what information
should be passed to the output. The special thing
about them is that they can be trained to keep old or
previous information, without removing information
that is irrelevant to the prediction. The idea behind a
GRU layer is quite similar to that of a LSTM layer, as
are the equations. For each element in the input se-
quence, each layer computes the following function:
(1) Update gate helps the model to determine how
much of the past information (from previous time
steps) needs to be passed along to the future. We cal-
culated the update gate ztfor time step tusing the
formula:
zt¼σWizxtþbizþWhzht−1ðÞþbhz/C0/C1
4ðÞ
where xtis the input at time t,h(t−1)is the hidden state
of the previous layer at time t-1or the initial hidden
state at time 0, σis the sigmoid function, Wis the
weight, and bis the bias.Leet al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2019) 20:377 Page 5 of 12