APREPRINT - JULY 16, 2020
trained on L IBRISPEECH to generate pseudo-labels on the subset of L IBRIVOXdetailed in Section 3. During beam-
search decoding we use a lexicon which is constructed from th e LIBRISPEECH train sets only.
The perplexity difference between the 4-gram LM trained on t he ﬁltered corpus and the 4-gram LM trained on original
LIBRISPEECH LM corpus is small. The word perplexity of each model is shown in Table 1. Beam-search decoding of
a Transformer AM trained on L IBRISPEECH with an LM trained on the ﬁltered corpus results in only a 0.05 % absolute
WER regression on dev-other compared to decoding with an n-gram trained on the full corpus.
4 Decoding
Decoding is designed to select the best transcription by lev eraging both the posteriors of an acoustic model (AM)
and the perplexity of a language model (LM). We perform one-p ass beam-search decoding with a single external LM.
Optionally, to further improve performance, we use stronge r NN-based LMs to rescore the beam.
4.1 Beam-search Decoder
In our experiments, we use lexicon-based and lexicon-free b eam-search decoders following [8, 32] with either n-gram
or GCNN LMs. The lexicon-based decoder, whose search space i s limited to the words in the lexicon, is used for CTC
models with a word-level LM. The lexicon-free decoder is cap able of generating words with arbitrary spelling and is
used for S2S models with a word-piece LM. The decoder takes as input posteriors from an acoustic model, a preﬁx
trie built on a lexicon, and an external LM. We tune the langua ge model weight αand the word insertion penalty βon
validation sets ( dev-clean anddev-other ). The decoder outputs a transcription ˆythat maximizes:
logPAM(ˆy|x)+αlogPLM(ˆy)+β|ˆy|.
To stabilize the Seq2Seq beam search, we introduce an EOS-pe naltyγto hypothesis that have ﬁnished in an end-of-
sentence token. γis tuned together with other hyper-parameters and our exper iments show that this strategy effec-
tively prevents the decoder from early-stopping. To improv e decoding efﬁciency, we also incorporate the thresholding
technique in [20] and strategies mentioned in [54] includin g hypothesis merging, score caching, and batched LM for-
warding. For CTC decoding, following [39], only the blank to ken is considered if its posterior probability is greater
than 0.95.
4.2 Rescoring
After acquiring the transcriptions of the N-best hypotheses from the one-pass beam-search decoder, we use an external
word-level GCNN LM and a Transformer LM to evaluate their log -probabilities, denoted as logP1(ˆy)andlogP2(ˆy)
respectively. We then perform rescoring to reorder the hypo theses according to the following score:
logPAM(ˆy|x)+α1logP1(ˆy)+α2logP2(ˆy)+β|ˆy|,
whereα1,α2,βare hyper-parameters of the rescoring algorithm optimized on the validation set and |ˆy|is the tran-
scription length in characters (including the spaces betwe en words). In order to diversify the hypotheses in the beam,
to increase the probability that the correct transcription is included, we usually relax the threshold in the decoder an d
increase beam size when dumping beam candidates.
5 Experiments
5.1 Technical Details
We use the standard splits for L IBRISPEECH and the standard L IBRISPEECH LM corpus for LM training. Models are
trained using the wav2letter++5toolkit [42]; reproduction steps and pre-trained models ar e open-sourced6.
5.1.1 Acoustic Model Training
All hyper-parameters including model architecture are cro ss-validated on dev-clean anddev-other . Given that we
have a large family of models, for simplicity and clarity, we only report hyper-parameters ranges in which we search
their best values.
5https://github.com/facebookresearch/wav2letter
6https://github.com/facebookresearch/wav2letter
5