APREPRINT - JULY 16, 2020
Table 4: WERs of a Transformer AM when trained with pseudo-la bels generated with a decoder integrating an LM
that contains overlapping text with unlabeled audio versus an LM with no overlap. Results are shown after decoding
with the word 4-gram language model described in Section 2.2 .
MODEL OVERLAP dev-other test-other
TRANS . S2SNO 4.58 4.90
YES 4.51 4.87
TRANS . CTCNO 4.92 5.47
YES 4.80 5.33
on the L IBRISPEECH development sets. Without decoding, the resulting L IBRIVOXpseudo-label-only model achieves
WERs of 2.38% and 5.43% on dev-clean anddev-other respectively, which improves over the L IBRISPEECH -only
baseline’s 2.99% and 7.31%, respectively. The volume, qual ity, and diversity of the generated pseudo-labels alone are
sufﬁcient to generate superior results as compared to a mode l trained only on L IBRISPEECH . The model trained on
LIBRISPEECH and L IBRIVOXpseudo-labels achieves an improved 2.28% and 4.99% on dev-clean anddev-other ,
respectively.
5.4 End-to-End Acoustic Models Learn a Language Model: Remo ving the LM from ASR
In the sections that follow, we show two results. We ﬁrst give a simple experimental framework to demonstrate that
acoustic models trained on speech learn nontrivial languag e models, and that training on additional audio facilitates
learning better acoustic representations. We then show tha t with a large collection of pseudo-labeled audio, well-
trained acoustic models no longer beneﬁt much from decoding with an external language model in most cases.
AMs learning LM: transcribing shufﬂed audio. The language modeling properties of end-to-end acoustic mo dels
are brieﬂy discussed in [4], where an AM trained with CTC is sh own to learn an implicit language model based on its
predicted posteriors for words with multiple spelling vari ants. Still other results show that fusing an LM with an AM
during training can improve performance [46, 7, 52]. These p revious works use RNN-based acoustic models, which
possess inﬁnite receptive ﬁelds and processes most or all of an input utterance during a single forward pass. We show
that modern convolutional architectures have large recept ive ﬁelds and also condition on internal word representatio ns
learned directly from audio.
If an AM learns a robust LM, the acoustic model will less effec tively predict utterances of high underlying word-
perplexity; the model will rely on its acoustic representat ions to predict words without context, providing a good
proxy for the quality of its learned acoustic representatio ns. In the experiments that follow, we introduce a simple
Figure 2: dev-other WERs without decoding across acoustic models and loss funct ions for original and shufﬂed
versions of dev-other across three settings. Each plot uses the following origina l and shufﬂed audio: Left: original
and shufﬂed dev-other audio segmented using ASG. Middle : audio generated by TTS vocoder for the original and
shufﬂed transcriptions from dev-other .Right : original and shufﬂed audio for a subset of dev-other recorded by
the paper’s authors.
ResNet CTCTDS CTCTransf. CTC ResNet S2STDS S2STransf. S2S0204060Word Error Rate
ResNet CTCTDS CTCTransf. CTC ResNet S2STDS S2STransf. S2S10203040
LS original LS + LV original LS shufﬂed LS + LV shufﬂedResNet CTCTDS CTCTransf. CTC ResNet S2STDS S2STransf. S2S51015
8