arXiv:1911.08460v3  [cs.CL]  15 Jul 2020END-TO-ENDASR: FROM SUPERVISED TO SEMI-SUPERVISED
LEARNING WITH MODERN ARCHITECTURES
A P REPRINT
Gabriel Synnaeve∗
Facebook, NYC
gab@fb.comQiantong Xu∗
Facebook, Menlo Park
qiantong@fb.comJacob Kahn∗
Facebook, Menlo Park
jacobkahn@fb.comTatiana Likhomanenko∗
Facebook, Menlo Park
antares@fb.com
Edouard Grave∗
Facebook, Paris
egrave@fb.comVineel Pratap
Facebook, Menlo Park
vineelkpratap@fb.comAnuroop Sriram
Facebook, Menlo Park
anuroops@fb.comVitaliy Liptchinsky
Facebook, Menlo Park
vitaliy888@fb.com
Ronan Collobert∗
Facebook, Menlo Park
locronan@fb.com
July 16, 2020
ABSTRACT
We study pseudo-labeling for the semi-supervised training of ResNet, Time-Depth Separable Con-
vNets, and Transformers for speech recognition, with eithe r CTC or Seq2Seq loss functions. We
perform experiments on the standard L IBRISPEECH dataset, and leverage additional unlabeled data
from L IBRIVOXthrough pseudo-labeling. We show that while Transformer-b ased acoustic models
have superior performance with the supervised dataset alon e, semi-supervision improves all models
across architectures and loss functions and bridges much of the performance gaps between them. In
doing so, we reach a new state-of-the-art for end-to-end aco ustic models decoded with an external
language model in the standard supervised learning setting , and a new absolute state-of-the-art with
semi-supervised training. Finally, we study the effect of l everaging different amounts of unlabeled
audio, propose several ways of evaluating the characterist ics of unlabeled audio which improve
acoustic modeling, and show that acoustic models trained wi th more audio rely less on external
language models.
1 Introduction
End-to-end speech recognition models are simpler to implem ent and train than bootstrapped systems. Even given
recent promising results from these systems, best-results for common benchmarks are still dominated by classical
ASR models; systems requiring force alignment may leave som e performance aside for each training step. We set
out to study end-to-end systems on L IBRISPEECH [37] and, without any algorithmic contribution, see if they can be
made to perform as well as more complex training pipelines. T he difﬁculties involved in properly optimizing acoustic
models with Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) [1 6] or sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) [47] (v.s. cross-
entropy, for instance) combined with more readily-availab le regularization techniques for classical pipelines make
this comparison challenging. Our best acoustic models none theless reach 5.17% WER on test-other , showing that
end-to-end models can compete with traditional pipelines.
As in other domains, self and semi-supervised learning in AS R, where a pretrained network generates and trains
on its own labels, yields improvements [49]. In end-to-end A SR, pseudo-labeling and self-training can be quite
∗Equal contribution.