APREPRINT - JULY 16, 2020
Figure 1: WERs on dev-other across AM architectures and loss functions. Left: WERs of different models trained
on L IBRISPEECH with and without beam-search decoding (”no LM” refers to the greedy decoding). Transformer AM
architectures outperform others by a large margin. Right : WERs of models trained on L IBRIVOX. All models trained
on L IBRIVOXsigniﬁcantly outperform their L IBRISPEECH counterparts. The gap between Transformer AMs and
other models is much smaller with L IBRIVOXdata.
ResNet TDS Tran.4681012Word Error Rate
CTC + no LM S2S + no LM
CTC + ngram S2S + ngram
CTC + GCNN S2S + GCNNResNet TDS Tran.4681012
effective, and its effectiveness is further improved when m ore data is available [25]. In this setting, we train a model
on L IBRISPEECH , then use that model in conjunction with a language model to g enerate pseudo-labels from unlabeled
audio. We show that with this training scheme, our results without an external language model (LM) reach state-of-the-
art results that use an external language model , with 2.28% and 4.88% Word Error Rate (WER) on test-clean and
test-other respectively. With LM beam-search decoding and rescoring, we reach 2.09% and 4.11% WER on the
test set.
While many advances in end-to-end ASR come as the result of ne ural architecture search [41, 55, 6], we additionally
show that simple semi-supervision via pseudo-labeling sig niﬁcantly bridges the performance gap between a variety
of different model architectures and loss functions, as sho wn in Figure 1. In particular, with enough unlabeled audio,
Transformer, ResNet, and depthwise-separable convolutio n-based acoustic models give similar performance with both
CTC and Seq2Seq loss functions, suggesting that new techniq ues in semi-supervision may facilitate equally-signiﬁcan t
gains in ASR performance while being applicable to a multitu de of end-to-end setups.
2 Models
2.1 Acoustic Models
In this section, we present the three families of acoustic mo dels (AMs) studied. All AMs output probability distribu-
tions over tokens. In particular, we use a set of 10k word piec es [44, 29] generated from the SentencePiece toolkit1.
The choice to use a ﬁxed set of 10k word pieces is made for the si mplicity of the comparative study, not the result
of a limitation. Similarly, all AMs take 80-channel log-mel ﬁlterbanks as input, with STFTs computed on Hamming
windows strided by 10ms. This window size is 25ms for Transfo rmer models and 30ms for TDS and ResNet models.
All models are trained end-to-end with either CTC or Seq2Seq loss. Given the huge difference between the amounts
of data, we prepare two sets of architectures: one for traini ng only on labeled L IBRISPEECH and one for unlabeled
LIBRIVOX.
ResNet Acoustic Models. ResNets were ﬁrst introduced in the domain of computer visio n [21] and have since been
successfully applied to speech recognition [53, 43, 31, 50] . ResNets are composed of several blocks of convolutions
(in our case only 1-D convolutions), with skip connections t o reduce the effect of vanishing gradients in deep neural
networks. In particular, our ResNet encoder includes 42 con volutional layers each with a kernel size of 3. The
encoder ﬁrst maps the input to an embedding space of size 1024 using a single convolutional layer with stride 2;12
blocks of three 1-D convolutions each follow. Each of the con volutional layers is followed by ReLU, dropout and
1https://github.com/google/sentencepiece
2