APREPRINT - JULY 16, 2020
LayerNorm [2]. Both the dropout and the number of hidden unit s increases with the depth of the network. Speciﬁc
convolution layers are inserted between ResNet blocks in or der to upsample when the hidden representation size
increases. Our architecture performs signiﬁcant pooling w ith respect to the input ( 16frames in total, equating to
160milliseconds) – in addition to the ﬁrst strided convolution al layer,3max pooling layers (each with stride 2) are
distributed across the depth of the network (after blocks 3,7and10). Nearly identical encoder architectures are used
in front of CTC and Seq2Seq loss functions; the Seq2Seq encod er has its last bottleneck layer removed and lower
dropout in deeper layers. The Seq2Seq self-attention decod er for the ResNet architecture is the same as that used with
the TDS convolutional AM described below. To better ﬁt the un labeled data, we increase the model size by increasing
the number of channels in each convolution layer.
Time-Depth Separable (TDS) Convolution Acoustic Models. We extend the TDS block [20] (which is composed
of one 2-D convolution layer and two fully-connected layers with ReLU, LayerNorm and residual connections in
between), by increasing the number of channels in the featur e maps spanning the two internal fully-connected layers
by a factor F >1, so as to increase model capacity. Following [20], 3sub-sampling layers, i.e. 1-D convolution
layers with stride 2, are adopted to ensure an optimal context size for the encode r. For training with only labeled data,
we have three groups of TDS blocks with F= 3 after each sub-sampling layers. There are 5,6, and10blocks in
each group, containing 10,14, and18channels, respectively. To increase model capacity for unl abeled data, the three
groups of TDS blocks, having fewer 4,5, and6blocks and F= 2in each, are equipped with much larger 16,32, and
48channels. All convolutions in both TDS and sub-sampling lay ers have kernel shapes of 21×1. Identical encoder
architectures are shared between CTC and Seq2Seq.
Our Seq2Seq self-attention decoder performs Rrounds of attention through the same N-layers of RNN-GRU each
with a hidden unit size of 512in conjunction with the same efﬁcient key-value attention a s in [20, 48]:
Sr
t=SOFTMAX(1√
dK⊤Qr−1
t)V, (1)
where[K,V]is512-dimensional encoder activation and Qr
t=g(Qr
t−1,Qr−1
t) +Sr
tis the query vector at time t
in roundr, generated by the GRU g(·). The initial Q0
tis a 512-dimensional token embedding, and the ﬁnal QR
tis
linearly projected to output classes for token classiﬁcati on. In our experiments, NandRare both set to either 2or3
based on validation performance. We use dropout in all TDS bl ocks and GRUs to prevent overﬁtting.
Transformer-Based Acoustic Models. Our transformer-based acoustic models have a small front-e nd:
3(LIBRISPEECH AMs) or6(LIBRIVOXAM) layers of 1-D convolutions each of kernel width 3and respective input
and output sizes (80,Dc),(Dc/2,Dc), [(Dc/2,Dc),(Dc/2,Dc),(Dc/2,Dc),](Dc/2,Dtr×2), withDc= 1024 or
2048 . Each convolution is followed by a GLU activation function [ 12] and are striding by 2each (for 3consecutive
layers), or every other layer (for 6layers). The output of the front-end for all models is thus st rided by8frames (80
ms). After the front-end, each Transformer block has 4attention heads followed by a feedforward network (FFN) wit h
one hidden layer and a ReLU non-linearity. There are two conﬁ gurations of Transformer blocks: one 24layer conﬁgu-
ration (only for the L IBRISPEECH CTC AM) with dimension Dtr= 1024 for the self-attention and 4096 for the FFN,
and one36layer conﬁguration with dimension Dtr= 768 for the self-attention and 3072 for the FFN. Speciﬁcally,
given a sequence of Tvectors of dimension d, the input is represented by the matrix H0∈Rd×T, following exactly
[48]:
Zi=NORM(SELFATTENTION (Hi−1)+Hi−1),
Hi=NORM(FFN(Zi)+Zi),
whereZis the output of the self-attention layer, with a skip connec tion, and His the output of the FFN layer, with
a skip connection. As is standard: our N ORM is LayerNorm, and self-attention is deﬁned as in Eq. 1, but wi th
K=WKH,Q=WQH, andV=WVH. For CTC-trained models, the output of the encoder HLeis followed
by a linear layer to the output classes. For Seq2Seq models, w e have an additional decoder, which is a stack of 6
Transformers with encoding dimension 256 and 4 attention he ads. The probability distribution of the transcription is
factorized as:
p(y1,...,yn) =n/productdisplay
i=1p(yi|y0,...,yi−1,HLe), (2)
wherey0is a special symbol indicating the beginning of the transcri ption. For all layers (encoder and decoder – when
present), we use dropout on the self-attention. We also use l ayer drop [14], dropping entire layers at the FFN level.
2.2 Language Models
In this section, we present external language models (LMs) u sed in beam-search decoding. We consider n-gram LMs
as well as convolutional [12] (GCNN) and Transformer-based LMs. For n-gram and GCNN LMs, we train both
3