(a) Training collection area
 (b) Test route A
 (c) Test route B
Fig. 3: We collect exemplar driving data by driving through the European urban area in 3a. We evaluate the learned driving
policy performance in two urban routes, each approximately 1km in length with multiple intersections. Both routes are dense
urban scenes which broadly fall into a Manhattan-like grid structure, with a mix of road widths. Models tested on each
route are evaluated in both directions: note that route A takes a slightly different route on the return due to safety-driver
visibility at an intersection. The driving environment is comparable to the scene shown in Figure 2.
(a) Steering ( %)
 (b) Speed (km/h)
(c) Time of day (hour)
 (d) Throttle (%)
Fig. 4: We collect training data driving across a European
city (see the heatmap in 3a, showing data density). The data,
as is typical, is imbalanced, with the majority driving straight
(4a), and a signiﬁcant portion stationary (4b).
Disobeyed navigation : e.g., drove straight instead of
turning left,
Failed manoeuvre : e.g., attempted the correct turn, but
failed to complete the manoeuvre,
Dynamic vehicle : e.g., acted poorly with other trafﬁc,
such as not stopping behind a car.
Finally, while these metrics provide quantitative results,
they fail to capture qualitative properties. We therefore pro-
vide some commentary on the models’ observed behaviour.
D. Results
Table III outlines the experimental results. A total of
34:4km of driving was performed under automation, pri-
oritising the SV , MV , and MVF models. We consider the
performance in a static environment ( driving manoeuvres )
independently of the performance following a pace car
(trafﬁc following ).
1) Representation Learning with Computer Vision: Com-
paring the performance of SV to the E2E trained models
(SVE2E, SVE2EFT, and SVE2EPT) suggests that learned
scene understanding is a critical component for a robust
representation for driving. Both fully E2E trained models
(SVE2E, SVE2EPT) perform very poorly.
We attribute this to the fact that our perception model
is signiﬁcantly more robust to the diversity of appearancepresent in real world driving images [36], in part inﬂuenced
by the additional data seen during the initial perception
training phase. In robotics we must consider methods which
prioritise data efﬁciency: we will never have the luxury
of inﬁnite data. For example, here we train on 30 hours
of driving, not nearly sufﬁcient to cover the diversity of
appearance in real world scenes.
We observed that the E2E trained models performed com-
parably to SV when operating in shaded environments, but
poorly in bright sunlight. We attribute this to the appearance
change between our training data and the test environment:
the data was gathered in winter, three months prior to
tests being conducted in spring. Additionally, the ﬁne-tuned
model performs similarly to the baseline: on this basis we
recommend using pretrained perception due to the wider
beneﬁts of interpretability.
2) Improving the learned state: observability and tem-
poral information: Firstly we consider the performance of
multiview models compared to the the singleview baseline.
We see an improvement in driving performance when pro-
viding the model with a more complete view of the scene.
This is apparent when considering the disobeyed navigation
interventions: the SV model systematically fails to take
certain turns. For example, if the side road is narrow, it
tends to drive straight past, ignoring the route. Equally,
the model commonly cuts the near-side kerb while turning.
Both these failure modes are attributable to the fact that the
forward facing camera has no visibility of this part of the
scene. Multiview models tend not to exhibit these failure
modes. Qualitatively, we found the MV models to provide a
much larger buffer around the kerb, however both models
would exhibit the same failure mode of poor positioning
behind parked cars around turns without space to correct. We
attribute this failure mode to the low perception resolution
and rather simple action representation used in this work.
Secondly, we consider the beneﬁt of augmenting the
learned representation with temporal state, describing the
motion present in the scene with optical ﬂow. MVF performs
slightly worse than MV in these metrics. We attribute this
to a lower signal-to-noise ratio given the increased dimen-
sionality, though we consider these to be largely compara-
ble. Where this motion information clearly has beneﬁt is
behaviour with other vehicles (stopping): the model with