Urban Driving with Conditional Imitation Learning
Jeffrey Hawke, Richard Shen, Corina Gurau, Siddharth Sharma, Daniele Reda, Nikolay Nikolov
Przemysław Mazur, Sean Micklethwaite, Nicolas Grifﬁths, Amar Shah, Alex Kendall
Abstract — Hand-crafting generalised decision-making rules
for real-world urban autonomous driving is hard. Alternatively,
learning behaviour from easy-to-collect human driving demon-
strations is appealing. Prior work has studied imitation learning
(IL) for autonomous driving with a number of limitations.
Examples include only performing lane-following rather than
following a user-deﬁned route, only using a single camera view
or heavily cropped frames lacking state observability, only
lateral (steering) control, but not longitudinal (speed) control
and a lack of interaction with trafﬁc. Importantly, the majority
of such systems have been primarily evaluated in simulation - a
simple domain, which lacks real-world complexities. Motivated
by these challenges, we focus on learning representations of se-
mantics, geometry and motion with computer vision for IL from
human driving demonstrations. As our main contribution, we
present an end-to-end conditional imitation learning approach,
combining both lateral and longitudinal control on a real vehicle
for following urban routes with simple trafﬁc. We address
inherent dataset bias by data balancing, training our ﬁnal policy
on approximately 30 hours of demonstrations gathered over six
months. We evaluate our method on an autonomous vehicle by
driving 35km of novel routes in European urban streets.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Driving in complex environments is hard, even for hu-
mans, with complex spatial reasoning capabilities. Urban
roads are frequently highly unstructured: unclear or missing
lane markings, double-parked cars, narrow spaces, unusual
obstacles and other agents who follow the road rules to
widely varying degrees. Driving autonomously in these en-
vironments is an even more difﬁcult robotics challenge.
The state space of the problem is large; coming up with
a driving policy that can drive reasonably well and safely
in a sufﬁciently wide variety of situations remains an open
challenge. Additionally, while the action space is small, a
good driving policy likely requires a combination of high-
level hierarchical reasoning and low-level control.
There are two main established paradigms for solving the
problem of autonomous driving: a traditional engineering-
based approach and a data-driven, machine-learning ap-
proach. The former performs well in structured driving
environments, such as highways or modern suburban devel-
opments, where explicitly addressing different scenarios is
tractable and sufﬁcient for human-like driving [1], [2], [3].
This approach is more mature, and the focus of commercial
efforts today. However, is still unclear if this can scale to
deploying fully autonomous vehicles world-wide, in complex
urban scenarios with wider variation and visual diversity.
In comparison, data driven methods avoid hand-crafted
rules and learns from human driving demonstrations by
The authors are with Wayve, in London, UK. Equal contribution.
research@wayve.aitraining a policy that maps sensor inputs, such as images, to
control commands or a simple motion plan (e.g., steering and
speed). Importantly, such an approach has greater potential
to generalise to the large state space and address variations
such as weather, time of day, lighting, surroundings, type of
roads and behaviour of external agents. The attraction here
is that we have seen learned approaches to many vision tasks
outperform hand-crafted approaches. We expect that it will
also be possible to do so for learned visual control.
Prior works primarily explore the data-driven approach in
the context of imitation learning, but to date address only a
subset of the state space [4], [5] or the action space [6].
In more recent work, [7] learn both steering and speed,
conditioned on a route command (e.g. turn left, go straight,
etc.), but evaluate the method on a small-sized toy vehicle
in structured scenarios with no trafﬁc. Similarly, [6] address
control conditioned on a route with GPS localisation, though
learn only lateral control (steering) for driving empty roads.
Our main contribution is the development of an end-to-end
conditional imitation learning approach, which, to the best
of our knowledge, is the ﬁrst fully learned demonstration
of complete control of a real vehicle, following a user-
prescribed route in complex urban scenarios. Additionally,
we include the ﬁrst examples of a learned driving policy
reacting to other trafﬁc participants. Our method requires
monocular camera images as input and can be conditioned on
a route command (e.g., taking a turn at an intersection) [7],
in order to follow the speciﬁed route.
Importantly, we utilise small amounts of driving data
such that our ﬁnal policy is trained on only 30 hours of
demonstrations collected over six months, yet it generalised
to routes it has not been trained to perform. We train
and evaluate1on European urban streets: a challenging,
unstructured domain in contrast to simulated environments,
or structured motorways and suburban streets.
The novel contributions of this work are:
the ﬁrst end-to-end learned control policy able to drive
an autonomous vehicle in dense urban environments,
a solution to the causal confusion problem, allowing
motion information to be provided to the model for both
lateral and longitudinal control of the vehicle,
demonstration of data efﬁciency, showing that it is
possible to learn a model capable of decision making
in urban trafﬁc with only 30 hours of training data,
comprehensive performance evaluation of end-to-end
deep learning policies driving 35km on public roads.
1A video of the learned system driving a vehicle on urban streets is
available at https://wayve.ai/blog/learned-urban-drivingarXiv:1912.00177v2  [cs.CV]  5 Dec 2019