8
perspective of rationale processes, interpretations can help humans to understand
how a model infers; Or a feature analysis algorithm can help to identify the most
important features that the model uses; Or a tool of investigating the data can
help nd the typical data samples or the most in
uential ones that explain how
the model makes decisions. These algorithms are all included in this paper and
will be discussed in the following section.
3 Interpretation Algorithms: Taxonomy, Algorithm Designs, and
Miscellaneous
This section introduces the interpretation algorithms in recent years, with a pro-
posed taxonomy of three dimensions. For each algorithm, we give a brief introduc-
tion and follow the taxonomy for the categorization. A discussion is also provided
for future works at the end of this section.
3.1 Taxonomy
We categorize the existing interpretation algorithms according to three orthogonal
dimensions: representations of interpretations, targeting model's types for inter-
pretations, and the relation between interpretation algorithms and models. We list
the options in each dimension for a better comparison.
For dierent applications and interpretation requirements, the representations
of interpretation are various:
{ Feature (Importance) . These algorithms aim at estimating the feature
importance/contribution with respect to the nal objective. This includes
the analyses on the dimensions of input raw data and extracted features,
e.g., images, texts, audios etc.; and intermediate features inside models,
e.g., the activations of neural networks; or latent features in GANs.
{ Model Response . Algorithms here generally propose to generate or nd
new examples and see the model's responses, so as to investigate the model
behaviors on certain patterns, prototypes, or discriminative features by
which the model makes decisions.
{ Model Rationale Process . Though deep models are complex, they can be
substituted by interpretable models, to gain insights on the rational process
inside. Algorithms here interpret the deep model by indicating the path that
the model makes decisions.
{ Dataset . Instead of interpreting deep models, algorithms here propose to
explain the data samples in the training set by showing how they aect the
optimization phase of deep models.
Interpretation algorithms cope with dierent types of models:
{ Model-agnostic . Algorithms are included here that completely consider
the models as black boxes and do not investigate the inside of models.
{ Dierentiable model . This subset of algorithms contains only algorithms
that address the interpretations of dierentiable models, especially neural
networks. Note that model-agnostic algorithms also cover this subset.