4
{The diculty of evaluating the model interpretability mainly comes from the
lack of the ground truth . We could not casually annotate \true" interpretations
as annotating image labels because interpretation labels might not exist in
most cases, or it would be out of objectiveness. Furthermore, obtaining human
labeled ground truth for interpretation is labor/time-consuming, which is not
scalable over large datasets.
Even in this complex and dicult situation, several ecient and eective ap-
proaches have been proposed to evaluate the trustworthiness of interpretation
algorithms and model interpretability. The former is mainly based on perturba-
tion evaluations [70, 127, 143] or proxy models [9, 183], while the latter based
on expert ground truths [24] or cross-model explanations [104]. In Section 4, we
comprehensively review the evaluation approaches on both the trustworthiness of
interpretation algorithms and model interpretability.
Overview We describe the organization of this survey paper: We introduce the
key concepts, including the interpretation algorithm, interpretations, model inter-
pretability, and their relations in Section 2. We present the proposed taxonomy for
interpretation algorithms and introduce the algorithms accordingly in Section 3.
Evaluations on the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms and the model
interpretability are introduced in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the connections
between interpretations and other research topics. Finally, we introduce several
open-source libraries for interpretations and related in Section 6.
2 Main Concepts: Interpretations and Interpretability
The fuzziness of main concepts interpretation and interpretability leads to a lot of
confusions and hinders the academic process. In this section, we make our eorts to
clarify these fuzzy research targets and introduce the denitions of interpretations ,
interpretation algorithms and model interpretability , with involving the notion of
trustworthiness .
2.1 Interpretation Algorithms and Trustworthiness
We rst introduce interpretation algorithms. A deep model needs interpretations
because the inference output of the model does not show the reasoning inside. An
interpretation algorithm is thus designed to produce interpretations to explain the
model's decisions and gain insight into its internals of reasoning and rationale. As
mentioned previously, there are no formal nor well-agreed denitions about the
way to interpret a deep model. We, therefore, adopt a very loose denition about
the interpretation: All the outcomes produced by the interpretation algorithms that
help to understand the model are considered as interpretations .
Instead of directly discussing the interpretations, we introduce the categories
of the interpretation algorithms, as they give dierent information to help humans
to understand the deep models. For example, an algorithm obtaining the training
samples' learning diculties helps to inspect the model's training process; An
algorithm computing the feature importance helps to realize the most important