Interpretable Deep Learning 5
features that the model uses to make decisions; An algorithm investigating the
intermediate results of a neural network helps understand the model's decision-
making process. We show a novel taxonomy to fully categorize the existing and
potential algorithms and review the corresponding algorithms in Section 3.
The interpretation can then lead to the discussion that the model is inter-
pretable or not. However, before that discussion, we should guarantee at the rst
step that the interpretation algorithm is trustworthy and the interpretation can
be trusted. The notion of trustworthiness is proposed to cover the most impor-
tant desiderata from the previous review works [29, 107, 122], and can be dened
as follows:
{An interpretation algorithm is trustworthy if it properly reveals the underlying ra-
tionale of a model making decisions.
In this denition, the underlying rationale covers all categories of information that
help to understand the model, e.g., how the model makes decisions, or the reason-
ing behind the model making decisions. The word properly here targets the issue
that the intrinsic underlying rationale behind the model is usually given by an ex-
trinsic algorithm. Extrinsic algorithms may not be part of the targeting model to
be interpreted. That is to say, as an additional module to diagnose the model, the
interpretation algorithm is at risk of giving explanations that are independent of
the the model. A sanity check [3] was performed to inspect several gradient-based
interpretation algorithms by randomizing parts of parameters in the model and
showing the interpretation changes. However, a few algorithms always produce the
same interpretations, despite the signicant changes of the parameters. Trustwor-
thiness is dened to recover the rationale of the model, whether the model makes
the correct decisions or not, instead of yielding information that is independent of
the model. Though the denition of trustworthiness is not mathematically rigor-
ous, the idea behind is clear. There are also several evaluations for assessing the
trustworthiness, which will be introduced in Section 4.1.
Trustworthiness of Dierent Interpretation Algorithms Due to the dierences in rep-
resentation of explanation results and type of models to be interpreted, the amount
of information exposed by interpretation algorithms may be dierent. Trustworthi-
ness is only required for the explained information. It would be easy for achieving
the trustworthiness if one algorithm explains only a bit of information about the
deep model, but this would be rarely useful for any explanation. The trustworthi-
ness is thus an ad hoc requirement with respect to the interpretation algorithm,
and dened to guarantee the information provided by the interpretation algorithm
can be trusted.
Relation to Self-Interpretable Models To complete the discussions of trustworthy in-
terpretation algorithms, we note that many researchers are working on eective
self-interpretable models , to name a few, Capsule Models [73, 142], Neural Addi-
tive Models [5] and CALM [88]. We consider this is a particular case within our
discussion that the self-interpretable models contain both the model and the in-
trinsic interpretation algorithm. To be more accurate, the self-interpretable models
consist of an intrinsic interpretation algorithm. Moreover, if the model makes de-
cisions based on the intrinsic interpretations, then this interpretation component
is without doubt trustworthy.