Interpretable Deep Learning 19
a better user experience [193]. Based on all kinds of information provided by users
explicitly or implicitly, the recommendation system lters and sorts a list of items
of interest in a personalization way.
There are three reasons for explainable recommendation systems. The rst one
is to gain users' trust in the recommendation system. Explanations help to improve
the transparency, persuasiveness and user satisfaction of the recommendation sys-
tem. The second is to facilitate engineers to debug the recommendation algorithm.
Explanations provide analyses how the deep model works, and it would be easy
to locate the bugs with explanations. The rst two arguments are borrowed from
previous reviews [193, 195]. The third is to prevent the privacy and social issues.
The recommendations may be computed based on features that have privacy or
ethical issues. We would not like to have a recommendation system that may lead
to these issues. Explanations can thus be used to expose and prevent this problem.
Classic recommendation methods, including collaborate ltering [19, 72], are
interpretable, while the usages of black-box deep models [39, 40, 63] increases the
opacity of recommendation systems. Recent works on explainable recommendation
systems can be categorized following our proposed taxonomy, and most of them
focus on designing interpretable modules [36, 102, 147, 162]. We refer interested
readers to the survey on explainable recommendation systems [195]3.
3.4.3 Deep Learning Applications to Medical Applications
Deep learning methods have been recently applied on medical domains, especially
on medical imaging analyses [108], such as the classication of Alzheimer's [83],
lung cancer detection [75], tuberculosis diagnosis [136], retinal disease detection [146],
etc. Though researchers show the potentials of using deep learning methods in
helping the diagnostics, the applications in the real-world situations of healthcare,
clinics, hospitals and rehabilitation are very critical, because a single failure would
cause irreparable damages. Explanations for deep learning based methods are more
urged in this eld than in other elds, to gain the trust of physicians, regulators
as well as the patients [154].
Interpretation algorithms proposed in this specic domain have been sur-
veyed [154, 163]. Most of them are aligned with the general ones as reviewed
in this work, because the network architectures are the same and the tasks are
similar. The dierence mainly resides in the data distribution and the domain
expert knowledge. Interpretation algorithms are technically applicable and their
trustworthiness can be evaluated in medical domains. In spite of the advances,
however, currently deep learning based methods have not achieved a signicant
deployment in the clinics still due to the lack of interpretability [154]. This indi-
cates that the new interpretation tools are still required in this domain.
4 Trustworthiness Evaluations of Interpretation Algorithms and Model
Interpretability Evaluations
Previous section focuses on the interpretation algorithms and interpretation re-
sults. This section summarizes the current works in evaluating the trustworthiness
3We also note that whether the usage of deep models improves the recommendation system
is an open discussion [42], but this is out of the scope of this survey.