6
Fully-Interpretable Models We also discuss fully interpretable models here to get a
better understanding about the interpretations and the trustworthiness of interpre-
tation algorithms for black-box deep models. We informally give the denition that
a model is fully interpretable if the model is totally understandable by humans.
The following models are considered as fully interpretable without too much con-
troversy2: a set of limited number of rules; a depth-limited decision tree; a sparse
linear model.
Comparison to Fully and Self Interpretable Models To compare across fully inter-
pretable models, self-interpretable models and black-box deep models, we can see:
(1) fully interpretable models can be totally understood by showing themselves.
(2) Self interpretable ones can provide explanations with an amount of informa-
tion by an intrinsic interpretation algorithm. The interpretation algorithms for
both fully and self interpretation models are trustworthy. (3) For black-box deep
models, it is hard to provide such interpretations and much harder to guarantee
the the interpretation algorithms be trustworthy. Fortunately, the interpretations
may be dierent and do not provide the fully interpretable explanation results.
The trustworthiness only guarantees that the amount of information provided by
the interpretation algorithm is correct.
2.2 Model Interpretability
From industrial demands, the model interpretability is sometimes more important
than other metrics such as accuracy because of safety and social issues in domains
of autonomous driving, healthcare, criminal justice, nancial services and many
others. Though no mathematical denition has been proposed, general agreement
about the expression proposed by [47] has been reached. We reclaim their denition
of model interpretability as follows.
{The model interpretability is the ability (of the model) to explain or to present in
understandable terms to a human.
According to other review works [29, 115], \ the interpretability of a model is higher
if it is easier for a person to reason and trace back why a prediction was made by the
model. Comparatively, a model is more interpretable than another model if the prior's
decisions are easier to understand than the decisions of the latter. "
From the denition of the model interpretability, the expression understandable
to a human is a subjective notion. It is human-centered [47, 94], making it compli-
cated to target this research problem of quantitatively measuring and comparing
the interpretability of various models. Till recently, there are not many metrics for
quantifying the model interpretability, and Section 4.2 will introduce the existing
evaluation approaches on the model interpretability.
We give an intuitive example to show that dierent models may have dierent
interpretability. Take image classication [43, 175] as the task, and a trustworthy
algorithm of analyzing the input-output relations as the interpretation algorithm.
We consider two models, and the produced interpretations locate dierent image
2Without any limits, even a rule-based model may be too complex for a human to under-
stand the model [107, 141]. This is also the motivation of several works that pursue the sparsity
of explanation results [137].