20
of interpretation algorithms, and the deep models' interpretability. To empha-
size, the model interpretability is measured based on trustworthy interpretation
algorithms. Before introducing model interpretability evaluation, we present the
evaluation methods for assuring the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms
in Section 4.1. Then, given a trustworthy interpretation algorithm, in Section 4.2
we present a few evaluation methods for the interpretability of deep models.
4.1 Trustworthiness Evaluations of Interpretation Algorithm
Perturbation-based Evaluations The perturbation-based evaluation of interpretation
algorithms follows the intuition that 
ipping the most salient pixels rst should
lead to high performance decay. Perturbation-based examples can therefore be used
for the trustworthiness evaluations of interpretation algorithms [41, 70, 143, 172].
The main metric MoRF, Most Relevant First, (or LeRF, Least Relevant First,
respectively), calculates the area under the curve (AUC), where the curve is of the
probabilities predicted by the model after removing most relevant features (or least
relevant features respectively). MoRF would drop very quickly at beginning and
LeRF would retain at a high value until the end, if the explanation is trustworthy.
They are usually used together and both have the same objective of evaluating
the trustworthiness of the explanation.
In a dierent view [55, 74] that \without re-training, it is unclear whether the
degradation in model performance comes from the distribution shift or because the fea-
tures that were removed are truly informative" . So Hooker et al. [74] proposed to
remove the most important features, extracted by the interpretation algorithms,
and then retrain the model, to measure the degradation of model performance
and evaluate the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms. We believe that the
prohibitive computation cost added by the retraining step is meaningful for ex-
plaining the learning process (how the features/pixels were learned by a specic
architecture of models), but contributes less to explain one trained model in a
post-hoc way.
Evaluations by Randomizing Parameters There is no need for retraining in some
cases, and we can identify untrustworthy interpretation algorithms by simply ran-
domizing parameters. Adebayo et al. [3] found that even with random weights at
the top layers of the network, a number of saliency map based approaches were still
able to locate the important regions of the input images, and proved that these
methods do not depend on the models. Adebayo et al. [4] summarized the uses of
interpretation algorithms for model debugging, i.e., to detect spurious correlation
artifacts (data contamination), diagnose mislabeled training examples (data con-
tamination), dierentiate between a (partially) re-initialized model and a trained
one (model contamination), and detect out-of-distribution inputs (test-time con-
tamination).
BAM Yang et al. [181] proposed a framework, named Benchmarking Attribution
Methods (BAM), for benchmarking interpretation algorithms through a manually
created dataset where objects are randomly pasted into images, and a set of models
trained on that dataset. BAM carefully generates a semi-natural dataset, where
objects are copied into images of scenes, so each image has an object label and