24
Table 3: List of evaluation methods. There are two categories of evaluations as
introduced in this work: Trustworthiness Evaluations of Interpretation Algorithm
(T.E.I.A) and Model Interpretability Evaluation (M.I.E), with respect to Sec-
tion 4.1 and Section 4.2. Additional notes are added as a description for the spe-
ciality of the evaluation method.
Method Name Category Additional Notes
Perturbation T.E.I.A AUC scores of MoRF, LeRF
Randoming Parameters T.E.I.A Filtering Irrelavant Algorithms
BAM T.E.I.A Based on a semi-natural dataset
Trojaning T.E.I.A Based on a semi-natural dataset
Indelity and Sensitivity T.E.I.A -
Expo Fidelity and Stability T.E.I.A Available only for LIME and variants
Sensitivity to Hyperparameters T.E.I.A -
Network Dissection M.I.E Based on a densely labeled dataset
Pointing Game M.I.E Requires pixel-wise or box-wise labels
Consensus M.I.E Based on cross-model explanations
Through OOD Samples M.I.E Based on OOD datasets
models' predictions are presented to users, and then a new sample is shown to ask
the user if the model can make the correct decisions or not. Another approach based
on decision trees and sets, designs descriptive and multiple-choice questions to test
the user's understanding of the decision boundaries of the classes in the data, in
order to evaluate the interpretability of their proposed Bayesian Decision Lists.
[56] designed the user-study experiments following the idea that interpretability is
the user's ability to predict the model's changes in response to changes in input.
More user studies can be found in [66, 78, 94].
4.4 Concluding Remarks
We summarize the evaluation methods in Table 3. We have to note that assessing
the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms is challenging. While a small num-
ber of algorithms benet from intrinsic properties of deep models, e.g., closed-form
interpretations, the trustworthiness of most algorithms remains to be evaluated.
Despite ltering approaches (such as randomizing the weights [3]) to picking out ir-
relevant interpretation algorithms, reasonable and practical evaluation approaches
for directly assessing the trustworthiness are also reviewed. Given a trustworthy
algorithm, the interpretability can be evaluated between models, to compare the
degree of being understandable. If the algorithm is not trustworthy, it does not
make sense to compare the interpretability of models using unreliable interpre-
tation results. A few model interpretability evaluation methods are introduced,
while more model interpretability evaluations should be explored in the future.
We also note that subjective human-centered user studies are one important eval-
uation tool that can be used for evaluating both interpretation algorithms and
model interpretability, thanks to the 
exibility of designing arbitrary experiments
for various objectives.