Interpretable Deep Learning 3
Interpretation Algorithms and the Taxonomy As there are no formal nor well-agreed
denitions about the way to interpret a deep model, the interpretation algorithms
are usually designed with dierent principles, such as
{To highlight the important parts of input features on which the deep model
mainly relies, using gradients [155], perturbations [55], proxy explainable mod-
els [137] and other methods;
{To investigate the inside of deep models to understand the rationale of how
models make decisions by visualizing the intermediate features [191, 197], or
putting the counterfactual examples to investigate the changes [64];
{To analyze the training data by assessing their individual contributions [91],
estimating their learning diculty [21] or detecting mislabeled samples [128].
This paper reviews the recent interpretation algorithms and proposes a novel tax-
onomy for categorizing the interpretation algorithms. In brief, the proposed tax-
onomy has three orthogonal dimensions { (1) representations of interpretations , e.g.,
the input feature importance or the training samples' in
uences; (2) the type of the
targeting model that the algorithm can be used for , e.g., dierentiable models, mod-
els containing specic architectures or other properties; and (3) relations between
interpretation algorithms and the deep model , e.g., the closed-form expression or the
composition of the model. Recent interpretation algorithms can all be categorized
to the proposed three-dimensional taxonomy, which will be presented in detail in
Section 3.
Evaluations on Trustworthiness of Interpretation Algorithms and Model Interpretability
There are two evaluations: one on the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms,
another on the model interpretability.
From previous reviews and outlooks for the interpretations [29, 47, 81, 107,
144], we summarize the most important desiderata for the interpretation algo-
rithms, i.e., the trustworthiness . The \trustworthiness" here refers to that the
interpretation results are reliable/faithful to arbitrary deep models. That is to say:
The trustworthy interpretation algorithm produces the explanations that loyally
reveal the model's behaviors, instead of giving results that are irrelevant or just
those desired by humans. Incorporating a trustworthy interpretation algorithm,
the evaluations on the model interpretability are then meaningful. In Fig. 1, we
illustrate the connections between these key concepts and further elaborate these
concepts in Section 2.
The trustworthiness of the interpretation algorithms could be assessed by de-
signed evaluation approaches for assuring the uses of interpretations, and the in-
terpretability of deep models could be evaluated and measured for identifying the
most interpretable ones. Both evaluations have challenges remaining, introduced
below.
{Quantifying the utility of trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms is chal-
lenging due to the lack of a proper denition of this quantity and well-dened
metrics. Though trustworthiness can be understood subjectively that the trust-
worthy algorithm produces loyal interpretations to the model, the optimal met-
ric is still under study. Simple metrics such as accuracy, precision, and recall,
are not applicable here.