Interpretable Deep Learning 7
pixels. It is easier to understand if the interpretation aligns with the object parts
in the image, while it is harder to understand if the interpretation locates at the
background or another accompanied object in the image for recognizing the target
object. Although the trustworthy algorithm reveals the rationales of both models,
we prefer the former model because its way of making decisions is more direct to
human understandings.
2.3 Towards Interpretable Deep Learning
This section dened the trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms and the model
interpretability. We emphasize several points that usually confuse the eld with
more explicit remarks.
Interpretation Algorithms, Interpretations and Model Interpretability The notions of
interpretation algorithms, interpretations, and model interpretability should be
distinguished. Only the interpretability among all these expressions is a property of
the model. Interpretation algorithms are designed to analyze the black-box model.
Algorithms must be trustworthy; otherwise, the interpretations do not reveal the
model's internals. Their relations and dierences are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Summary of Desiderata for Interpretations In this section, the proposed desider-
ata is the trustworthiness for interpretation algorithms. Researchers [29, 47, 81,
101, 107, 183] also proposed many other desiderata for interpretations, interpreta-
tion algorithms or interpretability, such as fairness, privacy, reliability, robustness,
causality, trust, delity, faithfulness, transferability, informativeness, transparency,
plausibility, satisfaction, accountability, etc. However, we note that (1) properties,
such as informativeness, plausibility, satisfaction, refer to whether the interpre-
tation is understandable to humans, and are dierent from the trustworthiness
in this paper that refers to algorithms; (2) properties, such as reliability, robust-
ness, trust, delity, faithfulness, transparency, are similar to trustworthiness or
can be comprised by the general denition of trustworthiness; (3) properties, such
as causality, transparency, depend on the underlying rationale in our context; (4)
properties, such as fairness, transferability, privacy, are the standards to constrain
the models; and (5) others (e.g., accountability and traceability) are more re-
lated to holistic evaluations of the systems. There is slight dierence and specic
requirements in various scenarios, but the proposed trustworthiness is only for
interpretation algorithms.
Deep Models for High-Dimensional Data for Scientic Discovery Though the moti-
vation of interpretations and interpretability at the beginning is to help humans
understand the deep models, the interpretations sometimes lead to other valuable
and promising ndings. Deep models may be more ecient than humans to cope
with high-dimensional data. From molecules [84, 133] to black holes [86], from
chemistry [62] to games [152], deep models could be used to solve many prob-
lems. However, without interpretations, the knowledge discovered by deep models
is still unknown for humans, or the scores obtained are not semantic and not
fully understood by humans. Interpretations in these cases could be helpful to nd
new intelligent patterns and discover new scientic theories. For example, from a