Interpretable Deep Learning 25
5 Impact beyond Interpretations
Deep models have many unknown phenomenon and properties, e.g., adversarial
attacks, memorization capacity, generalization ability etc. (Lack of) interpretation
and (low) interpretability are one of them. Interestingly, besides the original mo-
tivations for explaining black-box deep models, interpretations related terms have
been connected to existing ndings about deep models. In this section, we present
two elds that are widely known to be related to interpretations.
5.1 Interpretability, Adversarial Attacks and Robustness
Recent studies on adversarial examples have found positive connections between
model interpretability and adversarial robustness. Two teams [140, 165] rst ob-
served that compared to standard models, adversarially trained models show more
interpretable input gradients. Etmann et al. [50] theoretically proved that the in-
crease in adversarial robustness improves the alignment between input and its
respective input gradient, using the case of a linear binary classier. Zhang et
al. [194] further analyzed how adversarially trained models achieve robustness
from an interpretation perspective, showing that adversarially robust models rely
on fewer texture features and are more shape-biased, which is regarded as coincide
more with the human interpretation. Essentially, the connection between adver-
sarial examples and gradient-based interpretations may come from their common
dependence on the input gradient.
For future works, these observations could (1) motivate new understandings
about how deep models work and (2) explore the connections between interpreta-
tion related terms and other properties of deep models.
5.2 Learning from Interpretations
As containing rich information about the location of discriminative features, in-
terpretation results can also be utilized to guide training strategies such as data
augmentations and regularization approaches, especially for vision tasks. For ex-
ample, Kim et al. [89] proposed to improve Mixup [188] by leveraging the saliency
map [153]. Specically, they aimed to seek an optimal transport that maximizes
the exposed saliency. Zagoruyko et al. [186] imposed the regularizer to encourage
the alignment of saliency maps between the teacher and student networks for eec-
tive knowledge distillation. Wickramanayake et al. [176] also used interpretations
to generate ecient augmented data samples to train the model, for improving
the interpretability and the model performance. Interpretations sometimes can be
used as weak labels in specic tasks. For example, Lai et al. [95] introduced a
saliency-guided learning approach for weakly supervised object detection. Many
weakly object localization and weakly semantic segmentation methods [7, 89, 182]
start from an interpretation, and obtain promising results.
From these works, we believe that the interpretability and model performance
are not two contradictory measures and that they can be improved simultaneously.
Future works could further focus on this direction.