18
sensitivity analysis methods are currently developed, improving the input-output
interpretations can be a good perspective. Moreover, we should note that the
adversarial attacks do not only aim at trained models [30], but the interpreta-
tions [8, 56, 71]. We leave the further investigations for future work.
3.4 Interpretations on Specic Application Domains
We do not explicitly categorize the interpretation algorithms according to their ap-
plication domains because (1) the algorithm used in one specic domain may also
be applicable on a broader scope with little modications, especially for model-
agnostic algorithms; and (2) for model-specic algorithms, the categorization on
the model type generally overlaps with the one on the application domain. For com-
pleteness, we discuss recent works of deep model interpretations in the following
domains: reinforcement learning, recommendation systems, and medical domains.
These applications are slightly dierent from image classication or sentiment
analyses and may require interpretations in a unique form, but most algorithms
introduced previously can be used directly.
3.4.1 Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) Related Domains
Reinforcement learning (RL) [85] is an area of machine learning concerned with
how intelligent agents ought to take actions in an environment in order to max-
imize the notion of cumulative reward. Deep learning methods have recently en-
abled RL to decision-making problems that were previously intractable, such as
playing games [117, 151, 168] and training robots [10, 99, 100]. DRL is also ap-
plicable and shows potentials of application in healthcare, nance and business
management [13, 105], where human security and property safety issues should be
considered, leading to the demands of explainable RL [134].
According to recent surveys [13, 105], DRL methods are generally based on
DNNs to approximate value functions or nd policies. Most methods directly
learn the objectives from raw inputs, especially for visual tasks where the im-
ages are used as inputs for estimating the value functions. For those methods,
input features related interpretation algorithms, such as LIME and SmoothGrad,
have already been explored for explaining DRL methods [15, 65, 80, 135]. However,
as we discussed before, interpretation algorithms may expose dierent amount of
information of the deep models, and in some real-world situations, dierent inter-
pretation algorithms are required. For critical problems concerning human security
and property safety, showing the input-output relations of deep models is some-
times not persuadable for consumers. The rationale inside the deep model may be
required and has not been much investigated yet in this eld.
3.4.2 Recommendation Systems
The recommendation system [139] is a subclass of the information retrieval domain
that seeks to predict the \rating" or \preference" a user would give to an item.
With the growing information available on the Internet, it becomes more and
more dicult to nd the items of interest by users themselves. For many web
applications, the recommendation systems are an essential method for providing