Interpretable Deep Learning 23
between the activated locations with the labeled visual concepts. A neuron is se-
mantic if its mIoU is larger than a threshold. Then the number of semantic neurons
and the ratio are considered as the score for model interpretability.
Pointing Game The Pointing Game [189] measures the model interpretability via
the localization accuracy. This accuracy is equally the true positive rate between
the computed explanation and the annotated object of interest. It is similar to
Network Dissection in the way that the pixel-wise or box-wise labels for visual
concepts are required and the same intersection between explanations and anno-
tations is measured.
Consensus Consensus approach [104] incorporates an ensemble of deep models as
a committee. Consensus rst computes interpretations using a trustworthy inter-
pretation algorithm (e.g., LIME [137], SmoothGrad [155]) for every model in the
committee, then obtains the consensus of interpretation from the entire commit-
tee through voting. Further, Consensus evaluates the interpretability of a model
through matching its interpretation result (of LIME or SmoothGrad) to the con-
sensus, and ranks the matching scores together with other deep models in the
committee, so as to pursue the absolute and relative interpretability evaluation
results. Consensus uses LIME and SmoothGrad to validate its eectiveness, while
Consensus is also compatible with other algorithms that interpret other targets,
such as the rationale process, as long as the voting approach is suitable for the
interpretation algorithm.
Through OOD Samples BAM [181] and Trojaning attacks [37, 68] create datasets
that are dierent from natural distributions, and train the models on such datasets.
Models trained on such datasets are used to verify the trustworthiness of inter-
pretation algorithms because they should suer from the attacks on the datasets.
In another way, one can use the such ideas of out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
to directly evaluate the deep models where the OOD samples were not seen dur-
ing training. [59, 60] generated dierent OOD datasets and tested with classic
deep models and human observers to record the errors that they made on these
datasets. With sophisticated designs of datasets and experiments, they found that
the consistency between humans and deep models is closing. These evaluations
show the interpretability of deep models in a general way, to present that the
visual recognition of models is partially consistent with humans'. This could be
easily extended to the comparison within models.
4.3 Human-Centered/User-Study Evaluations
User studies involving humans are a commonly used method for evaluating the
trustworthiness of interpretation algorithms and model interpretability. We com-
bine these two directions and introduce them here, as the designed user-study
experiments may be capable of performing the two evaluations simultaneously.
An approach to evaluate the algorithm of counterfactual examples [11] was
proposed, where a user-study experiment was used to validate their approaches.
This user-study experiment aims at verifying whether humans can predict the
deep model's decision. Specically, several (clean and counterfactual) samples with