26
6 Open-Source Libraries for Deep Learning Interpretation
To simplify future researches and practical usages, we introduce several open-
source libraries that implement popular interpretation algorithms based on main-
stream deep learning frameworks, such as TF-Explainer4based on Tensor
ow [1],
Captum5based on PyTorch [125] and InterpretDL6based on PaddlePaddle [112].
Note that TF-explainer and Captum mainly include algorithms that target at fea-
tures with gradient-based techniques. Some other popular libraries focus on ma-
chine learning and have not involved deep models, such as interpretml7, AIX3608
etc., and the library LIT9that is for NLP models.
7 Discussions and Conclusions
In this paper, we review the recent research on interpretation algorithms, model
interpretability, and the connections to other deep learning factors.
First of all, to address the research eorts in interpretations, we clarify the
main concepts of interpretation algorithms and model interpretability that were
usually confused, and connect them by introducing the notion of trustworthiness
of interpretation algorithms.
Second, we propose a new taxonomy and elaborate the design of several recent
interpretation algorithms, from dierent perspectives according to the proposed
taxonomy. Our work reviews the recent advances in interpretation algorithms, and
provides a clear categorization, to help future researches to better compare new
algorithms with the most related works, or progress in unexplored directions.
Third, we survey the performance metrics for evaluating the trustworthiness
of interpretation algorithms, to guarantee the appropriate usages of the interpre-
tation results. These metrics can be used to quantitatively compare between the
interpretation algorithms. The proposition of new algorithms can be supported
by comparing these metrics with related works, instead of by providing tenuous
descriptions and qualitative visualizations.
Further, we summarize the current work in evaluating models' interpretabil-
ity given trustworthy interpretation algorithms. Based on these evaluations, more
relations between interpretability and other metrics could be found for deep mod-
els, possibly leading to further understandings about the deep learning. However,
there are not many evaluation methods for measuring the interpretability, though
the existing ones are largely aligned for popular network architectures. Designing
new methods of evaluating models' interpretability could be one of the important
research directions.
Finally, we review and discuss the connections between deep models' inter-
pretations and other factors, such as adversarial robustness and learning from
interpretations. New understandings how deep models could be observed and an-
alyzed. Note that many interpretation algorithms and evaluation approaches are
4https://github.com/sicara/tf-explain
5https://github.com/pytorch/captum
6https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/InterpretDL
7https://github.com/interpretml/interpret
8https://github.com/Trusted-AI/AIX360
9https://github.com/PAIR-code/lit