Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Interpretable Deep Learning: Interpretation,
Interpretability, Trustworthiness, and Beyond
Xuhong Liz, Haoyi Xiongz, Xingjian Liz,
Xuanyu Wux, Xiao Zhang{, Ji Liuz, Jiang
Bianz, Dejing Dou?zk
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Deep neural networks have been well-known for their superb handling
of various machine learning and articial intelligence tasks. However, due to their
over-parameterized black-box nature, it is often dicult to understand the pre-
diction results of deep models. In recent years, many interpretation tools have
been proposed to explain or reveal how deep models make decisions. In this pa-
per, we review this line of research and try to make a comprehensive survey.
Specically, we rst introduce and clarify two basic concepts|interpretations and
interpretability|that people usually get confused about. To address the research
eorts in interpretations, we elaborate the designs of a number of interpretation
algorithms, from dierent perspectives, by proposing a new taxonomy. Then, to
understand the interpretation results, we also survey the performance metrics for
evaluating interpretation algorithms. Further, we summarize the current works in
evaluating models' interpretability using \trustworthy" interpretation algorithms.
Finally, we review and discuss the connections between deep models' interpre-
tations and other factors, such as adversarial robustness and learning from in-
terpretations, and we introduce several open-source libraries for interpretation
algorithms and evaluation approaches.
1 Introduction
Deep learning models [98] have achieved remarkable performance in a variety of
tasks, from visual recognition, natural language processing, reinforcement learning
zBaidu Research, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
E-mail: flixuhong, xionghaoyi, lixingjian, liuji04, bianjiang03, doudejing g@baidu.com
xSchool of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
E-mail: xuanyuwu@seas.upenn.edu
{Department of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
E-mail: xzhang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
kComputer and Information Science Department, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR.
E-mail: dou@cs.uoregon.edu
?Correspondence to Dejing Dou via doudejing@baidu.com and dou@cs.uoregon.edu.arXiv:2103.10689v3  [cs.LG]  15 Jul 2022