A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
and processing, hence the need for data cleaning in data mining. It is
inevitable for noise and outliers to be present in the data. The measure
of the robustness of a clustering algorithm is its ability to detect and
remove possible outliers and noise in the data set.
User-dependent K: Knowing the number of clusters apriori is the most
fundamental problem in cluster analysis. Many existing algorithms
require the number of clusters to be specified as part of the user param-
eters required for running the algorithm. Determining this parameter
apriori is known as automatic clustering, and it has continued to attract
more attention since, in many of the recent algorithms, it is difficult
to decide without prior knowledge. Ability to specify the correct num-
ber of clusters assists in obtaining optimal solutions to the clustering
problems in many applications. The algorithm should determine the
number of clusters based on the data properties. Therefore, clustering
algorithms are considered an optimization problem that can be solved
using metaheuristic algorithms. Metaheuristics algorithms can be used
to discover the number of clusters automatically. They can also be used
to find the identified clusters.
Parameter reliance: Apart from the requirement of specifying the num-
ber of clusters apriori, there are still other algorithm-sensitive parame-
ters that are user-defined for many of the existing clustering algorithms
for users to specify for the proper functioning of such algorithms. This
leaves such clustering algorithms’ performances at the mercy of the
wide range of users’ guesses. Thus, providing practical guidance in
the self-determination of such parameters by the algorithm itself or
incorporating schemes that decrease reliance of algorithms on user-
dependent parameters is a good measure of clustering algorithm’s
performance.
Irregular cluster shape: The ability to discover irregular clusters is an-
other challenge of Clustering algorithms. There are many applications
whose data may not always be formed into clusters with regular shapes.
For applications with such a dataset, an optimal solution to their
clustering problem will be presenting clusters of the natural shape
(regular or irregular). Rather than being confined to some particular
shape, a good cluster algorithm should detect irregular cluster shapes.
Order dependence: Maintaining the order of input patterns in a dataset
is important in achieving correct clusters. Such characteristic is com-
monly in incremental or online (stream) data. Clustering algorithms
for such a dataset may require that their clustering solutions vary
with different orders of the presentation of the input patterns. Such
algorithms must be able to achieve this. A major challenging problem
in incremental learning is a reduced sensitivity or outright insensitivity
to the effects of input patterns.
Visualization : Good presentation of clustering output enhances the
proper interpretation of the presented result and also aids the extraction
of useful information. Good visual representation of clustering output
aids interpretability of the same in the problem domain, thus assisting
users in understanding the results and extracting useful information
from the data.
Mixed data types: Clustering algorithms are expected to be flexible
enough to handle any data type in which the dataset is presented.
This is very important because data obtained from different sources
may be characterized by additional features, such as categorical or
continuous. Some studies have shown that when operators are com-
bined in algorithm design, it tends to poise such algorithms to robustly
handle diversity in data/ population, thereby improving the quality of
results within a short time (Saemi et al., 2018). Leveraging this concept,
designers of clustering algorithms have the opportunity of developing
algorithms capable of handling input with different attributes.6.2 Open issues in clustering algorithms
One of the major challenges in clustering analysis is identifying the
number of clusters apriori. This challenge occurs due to a lack of prior
domain knowledge. It also occurs when a dataset has many dimensions
with different shapes, size, density, and overlapping among groups.
Although effort has been deployed towards handling this problem, it
remains a major challenge. Future studies can explore nature-inspired
algorithms to solve this problem (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016).
José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016) noted that nature-inspired ap-
proaches such as bacterial foraging optimization, firefly optimization,
and gravitational search algorithms could be further considered beyond
non-automatic clustering to automatic clustering problems. Further-
more, the authors revealed that only a few studies thought hybrid
nature-inspired algorithms in their studies. Nature-Inspired techniques
can be hybridized with traditional techniques to design more effi-
cient and faster cluster-based algorithms. Nature-inspired clustering
algorithms should be hybridized through a reasonable combination of
related algorithms in a fashionable and performance enhancement way
that can produce improved results. Moreover, swarm intelligence-based
clustering algorithms have not been fully explored in solving NP-hard
problems in computational biology (Das et al., 2008b). Many more
open issues in clustering analysis exist in the literature, and some of
them are discussed under the sub-headings below.
Computational complexity: Some clustering algorithms have computa-
tional complexity issues, especially when applied to datasets with large
instances and high-dimensional feature space. This problem can be
solved by increasing computational resources production with high-
capacity GPU (Shirkhorshidi et al., 2014). Moreover, exploiting parallel
computing’s advantage may help design patterns to deliver better clus-
tering algorithms. Two separate studies (Shirkhorshidi et al., 2014;
Zerhari et al., 2015) reported that clustering algorithms based on paral-
lel computing appears to be very useful but suffer from the challenge of
complexity as it relates to implementation. MapReduce-based cluster-
ing algorithms are an alternative to parallel computing. MapReduce-
based clustering algorithms are more scalable and faster. They can
considerably deploy clustering algorithms on GPU-based MapReduce
frameworks to achieve better scalability and speed.
In addition to increasing computational resources with high-
capacity such as GPU to tackle computational complexity issues, fur-
ther refinement and enhancement to the clustering algorithm might
reduce complexity. This became necessary considering each clustering
algorithm’s different computational complexity, yet they can achieve
come commendable measure of clustering operation. We opined that
finding an optimal representation of each clustering algorithm without
losing its clustering operation helps minimize complexity while main-
taining or maximizing the quality of clusters derived from its clustering
operation.
Considering computational complexity from the general point of
view of clustering categorizations, the hierarchical clustering method
is known to have the complexity of O(n2), partitioning is O(n), the
grid-based method is O(n), and density based method is O(n log n).
Although each of these methods has a wide range of examples of
clustering algorithms that often may not have the same complexity
as demonstrated by the respective category they belong to, we argue
that finding a minimization mechanism for representing the clustering
algorithm will help reduce complexity. To further support our assertion,
we show the complexity of some clustering algorithms belonging to
the clustering methods (hierarchical, density-based, grid-based, and
partitioned) and how they differ in their complexity compared with
their parent category. The computational complexity of the clustering
algorithms BIRCH is O(n), CURE is O(n2logn), ROCK O(n2+nmmma
+n2logn), is CHAMELEON is O(n2), PAM is O(k(n-k)2), CLARA is
O(k(40 +k)2+k(n-k)), CLARANS is O(kn2), DBSCAN is O(nlogn),
Fuzzy C-means is O(n), K-Means is O(n), STING is O(k), WaveCluster
is O(n), CLIQUE is O(Ck +mk), SOM net is O(n2m), DENCLUE is
22