A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 8. Four Components of whole time series clustering.
feature vectors of lower dimension then apply a conventional clustering
algorithm to extract the feature vectors. The model-based method in-
volves transforming the raw time series into model parameters for each
time series. Then, it applies a conventional clustering algorithm and a
suitable model distance to extract model parameters. Model-based has
scalability problems, and there is performance reduction when clusters
are close to each other (Vlachos et al., 2004; Mitsa, 2009). The four
components of whole time series clustering is depicted in Fig. 8.
Time Series clustering is made up of four major components
(Aghabozorgi et al., 2015):
i. Dimensionality Reduction or Representation Method
ii. Distance Measurement
iii. Clustering Algorithm
iv. Prototype Definition
ii. Streaming Clustering
A data stream is an infinite and fast-changing massive sequence of
multidimensional objects that continuously arrives rapidly over time
(Mansalis et al., 2018). A data stream cannot be stored in memory or
disk due to its infinite nature, so it is besieged with the constraint of a
single pass over the data. Also, there is no control over the order of data
arrival, and random access of objects is not possible. As a result of these
constraints, the conventional clustering algorithms cannot sufficiently
handle data streams’ clustering problems (Gama and Gaber, 2007),
hence the need for streaming clustering algorithms. Mansalis et al.
(2018) identify three major challenges peculiar to streaming clustering
algorithms: the evolving nature of data streams and the number of
clusters and outliers handling. As a result of the evolving nature of data
streams, Streaming clustering algorithms must continuously update ex-
tracted clusters to capture changes in underlying data. It will be highly
restrictive if a fixed number of clusters is assumed for a data stream
since it is infinite. There is a need to configure the number of clusters
over time. Identifying outliers upon arrival of an object in a data stream
is difficult because both the clusters and outliers are developing over
time. Other three problems of data streams that are general to data
processing activities which are still relevant to streaming clustering
include the single pass constraints mentioned earlier, limited processing
time, which require the fast response of processing algorithm, and the
limited memory, which makes working with summary data essential
when data stream processing is concerned.In data streams, window models control the part contributing to
the data mining patterns. Landmark Window model, sliding window
model, Damped window model, and Tilted window model are the
literature’s various window models. Mansalis et al. (2018) provides
more information on the various window models. St streaming cluster-
ing algorithms can follow two major directions during the clustering
process: Online Clustering and Online–Offline clustering. In Online
clustering, the stream clustering problem is viewed as a single pass
clustering challenge.
Hence to maintain the clusters, a general adaptive strategy is
adopted. The single clustering model adopted is maintained and up-
dated as new data objects arrive from the stream. This way, cluster
structure cannot be investigated at different time intervals. Aggarwal
et al. (2003) introduced Online–offline clustering to overcome the
problem in online clustering. The data statistics are maintained online
during the online phase, while the actual clustering is performed on
the statistics based on the user-defined temporal predicates during
the offline phase. Different time windows can be selected for possible
multiple cluster extraction in this method, thus providing flexibility in
data stream exploration. As earlier stated, the infinite nature of the data
stream makes storing the data impossible; hence summarization be-
comes necessary. According to Mansalis et al. (2018), the most common
user summaries for clustering include Cluster features (CF), Micro-
Clusters, Core-micro-clusters, Temporal cluster feature, Prototype array
Grids, Coreset Tree.
Streaming Clustering Algorithm can be categorized into four based
on the existing taxonomy of conventional clustering algorithms. The
partitioning algorithms category produces spherical clusters that do
not handle outliers. Criterion Optimization like the Sum of Squared
Errors is used in the partitioning. Example of such algorithms includes
Clustream (Stream Clustering) (Aggarwal et al., 2003), Stream Frame-
work Algorithm (Guha et al., 2000), StreamKM++ (K-Means clustering
algorithm for data streams) (Ackermann et al., 2012), SWClustering
(Zhou et al., 2008). The density-based category includes HDenStream
(Density-Based Clustering Algorithm for Heterogeneous Data Stream)
(Lin and Lin, 2009), DenStream (Density-Based Clustering over an
Evolving Data Stream with Noise) (Cao et al., 2006), MuDi-Stream
(Multi Density data Stream), rDenStream (Density-Based Clustering
Algorithm with outlier retrospect) (Xiong et al., 2009), HDDStream
(density-based projected clustering algorithm for high dimensional
data streams) (Ntoutsi et al., 2012), SDStream (Density-Based Data
Streams Clustering over Sliding Windows) (Ren and Ma, 2009) and C-
DenStream (a density-based clustering algorithm for data streams that
includes domain information in the form of constraints) Ruiz et al.
(2009). As it is with conventional density-based clustering algorithms,
they can discover clusters of arbitrary shapes and identify outliers. The
third category is the Grid-based category which includes DDStream
(Zhou et al., 2008), DENGRIS (Density-Grid based Clustering Algo-
rithm) Amini et al. (2012), D-Stream (Stream Data Clustering Based on
Grid Density and Attraction) (Chen and Tu, 2007), PKS-Stream (Data
stream Clustering Algorithm based on grid density and index tree PKS
tree) (Ren et al., 2011) and MR-Stream (Density-Based Clustering of
Data Streams at Multiple Resolutions) (Wan et al., 2009). The Model-
based Algorithms are the fourth category that tries to fit a model to
the data. SWEM (An EM-Based Algorithm for Clustering Data Streams
in Sliding Windows) (Dang et al., 2009) is an example.
The Stream framework under the partition category works by break-
ing the data stream into batches of fixed sizes and applying the K-
median clustering algorithm. The problem of memory limitation and
single-pass constraint was adequately dealt with. However, the problem
of noise and data aging persists with the single model being maintained
over the stream, which is inadequate in describing the stream’s whole
evolution. A detailed description of each category and method can be
obtained from the stated references for each technique.
iii. Mode Seeking Clustering Algorithm
17