A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 10. Taxonomy of clustering algorithm application.
A new study proposes a medical-oriented big data clustering algorithm
using an improved immune evolutionary method (evolutionary algo-
rithm and FCM) by applying the clustering algorithm to medical data,
including encoding, constructing fitness function, and selecting genetic
operators (Yu et al., 2020). To unravel patient heterogeneity, Forte
et al. (2019) applied some selected hard and soft clustering algorithms
(based on the expected overlap between sub-phenotypes and the size
of the dataset) to conduct a panorama of clustering analyzes using het-
erogeneous and complex ICU data. In a different study (Venkataramana
et al., 2017), the authors attempted to apply the clustering method
(Fuzzy C-Means and K-Means) to speed up the process of analyzing
patients’ samples in high volume hospitals to aid decide on the stage
of the disease.
7.4 Image processing and segmentation
Clustering methods have been applied to the problem of image
segmentation and image processing. While image processing describes
a situation where a wide range of likely computational operations
is (are) applied to an image for knowledge discovery of image re-
finement, a component of image processing is image segmentation.
Image segmentation can be expressed as exhaustive partitioning of an
input image into regions so that each is considered homogeneous con-
cerning some image property. Chopade and Sheetlani (2017) reported
that studies had employed evolutionary fuzzy clustering methods with
knowledge-based evaluation to handle image segmentation problems.
The approach of the GAs clustering method was applied to the prob-
lem, which was formulated as an optimization so that clustering of
small regions in color feature space was achieved. A study by Saxena
et al. (2017) reported that K-Means had been successfully applied to
image segmentation. The quality of images presented by Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) to visualize objects and living organisms’
internal structures made it a candidate for the segmentation task. This
task can be formulated as a clustering problem from MRI images so that
feature vectors obtained through transformation image measurements
and pixel positions are grouped into several structures. Dhanachan-
dra et al. combined K-Means and subtractive cluster algorithms for
image segmentation. They achieved this by pre-processing the image
using partial stretching enhancement and the hybridized algorithm to
generate the initial centers.
The K-Means algorithm then uses the initial centers to segment
the image before removing unwanted regions using a medial filter
(Dhanachandra et al., 2015). In a similar work (Chena et al., 2015), the
authors applied the use of the DP clustering algorithm. They directly
provided the cluster number of the image based on the decision graphand identified cluster centers to carry out hierarchical segmentation.
In another study (Nameirakpam and Jina, 2015), the authors combined
local histogram equalization and K-Means clustering for image segmen-
tation. Bora and Gupta carried out a similar study using a hard K-Means
clustering algorithm with cosine distance measure while filtering and
analyzing the segmented image with the Sobel filter and watershed
algorithm (Bora and Gupta, 2014).
Gulhane et al. (2012) investigated the association that exists be-
tween the density of data points in the given data set of pixels of an
image using K-Means and M-step differently. Parida (2018) carried out
image segmentation using fuzzy C-means clustering by applying it to
the variance feature image to separate its transitional features (Parida,
2018). An attempt to apply clustering algorithms to the novel Covid-
19 disease was made by the authors in ElazizID et al. (2020). They
carried out image segmentation on COVID-19 Computed Tomography
(CT) images. They proposed a clustering method to improve the density
peaks clustering (DPC) combined with generalized extreme value (GEV)
distribution.
7.5 Information retrieval
The field of information retrieval is focused on finding an effec-
tive computational approach to automate the storage and retrieval
of documents. This information retrieval task has proven relevant
in online search engines and library management systems. A study
(Manning et al., 2009) summarized potential application areas such as
search result clustering, scatter–gather, collection clustering language
modeling, cluster-based retrieval, for the use of clustering methods
the related analysis to the problem of information retrieval. Vries
(2014) used two novel clustering algorithms (TopSig Ktree and EM-
tree) to evaluate document cluster quality for large scale collections
by first performing document clustering in information retrieval. The
authors in Prabhu (2011) designed a technique for information retrieval
using K-Means clustering. Elbattah and Molloy (2017) used K-Means to
support decision-making regarding elderly healthcare in Ireland, with
a particular focus on hip fracture care. Another study (Bellot and El-
Bèze, 2000) applied hierarchical clustering methods to classify a set of
documents retrieved by any information retrieval system. Liu and Croft
performed cluster-based retrieval using K-Means in conjunction with
language models to the task of information retrieval (Liu and Croft,
2004).
7.6 Aviation and automotive systems
Clustering methods have been applied to aviation and automotive-
related issues. Specifically, clustering algorithms have been used to
30