A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
(FC) and finding rare populations. The multimodality stage plays a vital
role in identifying rare subpopulations. When evaluated with synthetic
datasets, the algorithm solves small datasets and can effectively scale
large datasets compared to conventional methods. SWIFT may also be
employed to represent skewed clusters by LDA-based agglomerative
merging, which decreases clusters numbers as it preserves the separate
unimodal populations.
The interaction between the merging and multimodality splitting in
many clusters uses a reasonable heuristic (cluster modality). It is more
reasonable when compared with knee point in entropy plots formally
employed (Lo et al., 2008; Finak et al., 2009). The algorithm advanta-
geous immune response tasks and efficient scaling on large FC datasets.
Moreover, the soft clustering method utilized in SWIFT is essential
for understanding the overlapping clusters compared to the complex
clusters approach like K-Means (Murphy, 1985) or spectral clusters
(Zare et al., 2010). SWIFT has the power to control the tremendously
rare populations. SWIFT is partially synonymous with flowPeaks (Ge
and Sealfon, 2012) since both depend on unimodality criterion. Thus,
flowPeaks focuses on the significant peaks without modality splitting
and leans in missing tiny overlapping clusters. Consequently, one of
the limitations of SWIFT is that it is restricted to a specific clustering
task (Naim et al., 2014).
4.1.3. Some implementations for improving hierarchical clustering
The traditional algorithm has been enhanced over time to over-
come the deficiencies of hierarchical algorithms. One improvement
that takes hierarchical clustering limitation (due to large dataset) into
consideration is the Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering Using
Hierarchies (BIRCH) clustering algorithm (Zhang et al., 1996). Birch
employed the idea of Cluster Features (CF) which is presented as a
triple containing the cluster objects total number n, the linear sum of
attribute values of the cluster objects LS, and the sum of squares of the
attribute’s values of the cluster object SS, CF (n, LS, SS). The CF triple
is a data structure that summarizes the information maintained about
a cluster (Oyelade et al., 2016). CF triple is kept in a tree form, and
only the tuples are kept in the main memory.
BIRCH is reported to be robust to outliers and can achieve O(N)
computational complexity (Nagpal, 2013). The BIRCH algorithm con-
sists of four phases, with phases 2 and 4 being optional (Oyelade et al.,
2016). The scanning of the entire dataset and the construction of the CF
tree is handled in phase 1. The clustering information stored in the CF
Tree is done in such a way as to adequately reflect all the information
in the dataset as much as possible while still accommodating the limita-
tion imposed by the memory space with crowded data points grouped
as fine sub-clusters. During the CF tree formation, outliers are treated
as sparse data points and are removed from the dataset. The generation
of the CF tree in phase 1 ensures no other input–output operation
is required in the subsequent phases, thus reducing the computation
time for the remaining steps. The clustering activity is also reduced to
smaller sub-datasets of each sub-clusters in the entries of leaves of the
CF tree because these are generated through incremental updating of
the CF (Oyelade et al., 2016). The order of leaf entry of the initial tree
construction produces a better data locality, enhancing the clustering
output. BIRCH algorithm is credited with the ability to handle outliers,
large datasets, and a good clustering output that is not affected by
order of input data. The efficiency of BIRCH is, however, dependent
on proper parameter settings. It also has the problem of biases towards
non-spherical clusters due to diameter/radius in controlling the cluster
boundary. Evaluation of BIRCH using both synthetic and real datasets
showed that it returns a better result in computational time complexity,
the robustness of the approach, and cluster quality.
COBWEB is another implementation of the hierarchical cluster-
ing algorithm for categorical data characterized with two major vital
qualities: incremental learning and clusters’ ability to be modeled or
described intrinsically instead of being regarded as a collection of
points. By processing one data point at a time, Cobweb dynamically
builds the hierarchy of clusters instead of the merging or splitting
approach of the agglomerative or divisive methods.
Fig. 3. A partition with 𝑛= 154 and𝑘= 4.
4.2. Partitional clustering algorithm
In a partitional clustering algorithm, data is organized into a nested
sequence of groups without any hierarchical structure (Jain and Dubes,
1988; Jain, 2010). Jain et al. (1999) stated that the partitioning method
is suitable for handling clustering problems in applications involv-
ing large data sets for which the construction of a dendrogram is
computationally prohibitive. Their operation is based on generating
data clusters to recover the existing natural groupings inherent in the
dataset. Fig. 3 illustrates the clustering pattern representation of the
partitional clustering method.
The dataset of 𝑛objects is iteratively partitioned into a pre-
determined knumber of distinct subsets through the process of opti-
mization of a criterion function (Ahmad and Dey, 2007). The squared-
error criterion is the criterion function on which the most commonly
used partitional clustering algorithm is based. The general objective is
to find the partition for which a fixed number of clusters minimizes the
square error. In this case, deviations of the patterns from the centroids
are represented by the error with a view of the patterns as a collection
of𝑘numbered spherically shaped clusters. The target cost function 𝜁
which can be minimized is given in Eq. (1):
𝜁=𝑛∑
𝑖=1‖‖‖𝑑𝑖−𝐶𝑗‖‖‖𝑞(1)
where𝐶𝑗is defined as the center of the 𝑗th cluster and is the center
nearest to the data object 𝑑𝑖, while the variable 𝑛denotes the number
of elements in the data set, and 𝑞is an integer that defines the nature
of the distance function ( 𝑞= 2for Euclidean distance) as discussed in
Ahmad and Dey (2007).
The partitional clustering algorithm starts with an initial dataset
partition and iteratively assigns data points or patterns to clusters to
reduce the square error. A set of K seed points well separated from
each other can be chosen randomly from the pattern matrix to be the
initial partition. Nagpal (2013) noted that good seed points could be
determined if the selected initial points are from existing data objects
and sufficiently distanced from one another. As the number of clusters
increases, the square error tends to reduce, and this minimization can
only be achieved for a fixed number of clusters.
In some algorithms, the square error criterion function in partition
clustering makes the generated K numbered clusters as compact and
separated as possible. It is less computationally demanding than other
criterion functions (Jain and Dubes, 1988). Because square-error-based
algorithms can converge to local minimal, different initial partitions
can produce varying clusters as output, especially if the initial points
9