A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 2
The inclusion and exclusion criteria used.
Inclusion Exclusion
The review focused on the various Clustering methods and algorithms. Articles on general Data Mining techniques were not considered.
Articles that reviewed specific clustering methods and their variants. Articles focusing on the review of the performance of a specific method in a specific
domain were excluded.
Articles on the application of a specific method in a specific domain. Articles that focused on the comparison of various methods in a specific domain were
not considered
Only articles written in the English language were considered. Articles written in other languages were excluded from the review
Only published articles from reputable peer-reviewed journals, conference
proceedings and edited books were considered.Keynote speeches, PowerPoint presentation slides were not considered.
Table 3
Summary of the previous related review on metaheuristic algorithms.
Reference Publication date Remark
Jain et al. (1999) 1999 Areas covered include pattern representation, similarity computation, grouping process, and cluster representations.
Other areas include statistical, fuzzy, neural, evolutionary, and knowledge-based approaches for clustering.
Application areas covered include image segmentation, object recognition, document retrieval and data mining.
Murtagh (1983) 1983 The study presented an in-depth survey of agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithms and discussed efficient
implementations in R and other software environments. Similarly, a review of grid-based clustering focusing on
hierarchical density-based approaches was also presented.
Belkin et al. (2006) 2006 Covered a few classical and evolutionary clustering algorithms with their associated challenges to the identified
practical application areas
José-García and
Gómez-Flores (2016)2016 A total of 65 automatic clustering approaches were reviewed based on single-solution, single-objective, and
multiobjective metaheuristics, whose usage percentages are 3%, 69%, and 28%, respectively.
Saxena et al. (2017) 2017 Presented a comprehensive study on existing clustering methods and developments made at various times. The
similarity and the evaluation criteria, which are the central components of clustering, are also presented in the paper.
Bandaru et al. (2017) 2017 The paper surveyed the different data mining methods that can be applied to extract knowledge about multi-objective
optimization problems from the solutions generated during optimization.
Yang and Wang (2018) 2018 This paper serves as an introductory text and survey for multi-view clustering. Simultaneously, the study summarizes
many multi-view clustering algorithms and provides a taxonomy according to the mechanisms and principles involved.
Hancer et al. (2020) 2020 The paper introduces a comprehensive survey on feature selection approaches for clustering, reflecting on some
advantages/disadvantages of current approaches from different perspectives and identifying promising trends for future
research.
Ezugwu et al. (2020a) 2020 Presented a systematic taxonomical overview and bibliometric analysis of trends and progress in nature-inspired
metaheuristic clustering approaches from the early attempts in the 1990s until today’s novel solutions
Bhattacharjee and Mitra
(2021)2021 The survey presents a comprehensive study of various Density-based clustering algorithms (DBCLAs) over last the two
decades, along with their classification.
This study 2021 Presentation of a comprehensive survey, taxonomy, analysis of state-of-the-art clustering algorithms that have ever
been identified in literature till today’s novel development and their practical applications areas.
cluster to any member of the other cluster. The complete-linkage algo-
rithm clusters are more compact and tightly bound than single-linkage
clustering (Jain and Dubes, 1988).
In calculating the inter-cluster distances, the three proximity as
mentioned earlier measures consider all the points of a pair of clus-
ters. They are regarded as graph methods (Xu and Wunsch, 2005).
Sibson (1973) implemented the single linkage hierarchical clustering
algorithm to produce SLINK, Voorhees (1986) and Defays (1977)
implemented Voorhees’ method and CLINK, which are the implementa-
tions of average link clustering algorithm and complete link clustering
algorithm, respectively. Using the central point for determining prox-
imity measure, other geometrics methods were developed based on the
same idea. These included the median linkage, centroid linkage, and
the minimum variance linkage metrics (Berkhin, 2001; Murtagh, 1983;
Day and Edelsbrunner, 1984). A distance-based proximity measure cap-
tures the inter-cluster closeness while the similarity measures capture
the intra-cluster connectivity.
The hierarchical clustering algorithms can easily handle any simi-
larity measure and flexible level of granularity (Bekhin, 2006, Punit,
2018). As a result of these, it applies to any attribute type. The hierar-
chical clustering methods are plagued with irreversible split or merge
processes such that already formulated clusters cannot be revisited
to reassign wrongly assigned objects. The application of hierarchi-
cal clustering in large-scale data sets is limited because it has high
computational complexity. According to Saxena et al. (2017), most
of the hierarchical clustering has at least a computational complexityof (O(N2). Bekhin (2006) reported that hierarchical clustering algo-
rithms based on linkage metrics suffer from time complexity. Apart
from these, there is also the problem of the vagueness of termination
criteria (Bekhin, 2006) and lack of robustness due to its sensitivity
to noise and outliers. It has also been reported that linkage metrics-
based hierarchical clustering algorithms that use Euclidean distance
tend to form spherical shapes (Bekhin, 2006). Fraley (988), in their
work, observed that ‘‘A drawback of agglomerative methods is that
those that are practical in terms of time efficiency require memory
usage proportional to the square of the number of groups in the initial
partition’’.
4.1.1. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering
In the agglomerative method, clusters are built up from single
objects, which are iteratively merged appropriately into larger clusters
that form the hierarchy’s various levels until the entire object includes
a single cluster or until the stopping criterion is met. The single cluster
forms the root of the hierarchy. Two closest objects (based on the
similarity measure used) are combined to form a cluster during the
merging operation. It requires at most n iterations to complete the
clustering operation since two clusters are merged during one iteration.
Ward’s clustering method implements an agglomerative clustering
algorithm that is not based on the linkage metric implemented by Ward
in 1963 (Ward, 1963). It was based on K-Means’ objective function
with the merger decision dependent on its effect on the objective
5