A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 1
The list of academic databases with their corresponding links.
Academic databases Web ink
ACM digital library http://dl.acm.org/
DBLP http://dblp.uni-trier.de/
IEEE Xplore http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
ISI Web of science http://apps.webofknowledge.com/
ScienceDirect http://www.sciencedirect.com/
Scopus http://www.scopus.com/
SpringerLink http://www.link.springer.com/
Wiley online library http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
2.4. Article Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
There is the need to set up some inclusion and exclusion criteria
to extract only the relevant articles for this review. Articles’ titles,
abstracts, conclusions, and complete content were studied to decide the
articles included or excluded. The criteria used for the exclusion and
inclusion are presented in Table 2.
2.5. Eligibility
All the criteria outlined in Table 2 were used to determine the
eligibility of the selected articles. Duplicates were removed, and many
articles were eliminated based on their title. Some articles were elimi-
nated after a careful study of the abstract and conclusion, while some
were eliminated based on the study of their full content. A total number
of 347 papers were considered eligible and hence used for this review.
3. Comparison with existing survey works
This section presents and discusses the main difference between
the already published review papers and this survey paper. Although
there have been several attempts in the literature to comprehensively
present a systematic review of different clustering techniques with their
trending applications areas, this effort has become almost impossible
because of the evolving nature of the study area and its relevance to
different theoretical and practical fields of study relative to data mining
and knowledge acquisition. For example, Jain et al. (1999) published a
relatively comprehensive overview of pattern clustering methods from
a statistical pattern recognition perspective to provide useful advice
and references to fundamental concepts accessible to the broad research
community of clustering practitioners. Ezugwu et al. (2020a) presented
a corpus of nature-inspired algorithms covering different algorithms,
including stochastic, evolutionary, physical, probabilistic, swarm, im-
mune and neural algorithms often employed for automatic clustering
tasks application. A summary of the previous clustering survey studies
compared to the present work is presented in table form, as illustrated
in Table 3.
Despite researchers’ efforts to bring together a comprehensive list
of both traditional state-of-the-art clustering methods and the new
generation clustering algorithms, only a handful of these survey papers
covered an up-to-date report on vast clustering methods available in the
literature comprehensively. Moreover, other attempted survey works
covered limited classification of clustering algorithms. In the past few
decades, there has been exponential growth in the design and imple-
mentation of new clustering algorithms scattered in the literature. The
previous works mainly focused on either problem-specific clustering
approaches or presented survey works that do not include the most
recently published state-of-the-art clustering algorithms. More so, none
of the earlier works attempted taxonomical analysis of the compre-
hensive list of the clustering algorithms to show the impact of the
algorithms in different domains despite the significance of clustering
analysis techniques in the literature. Table 4 summarizes the previous
survey works with their current citation impact extracted from Google
scholar.4. Taxonomy of clustering algorithms
Several clustering algorithms have been identified and broadly clas-
sified under two categories, namely: the Hierarchical Clustering Al-
gorithm and the Partitional Clustering Algorithm (Xu and Wunsch,
2005; Xu and Tian, 2015; Benabdellah et al., 2019; Adil et al., 2014;
Dafir et al., 2021; Saxena et al., 2017; Nagpal, 2013; Oyelade et al.,
2016; Bindra and Mishra, 2017; Singh and Srivastava, 2020; Djouzi
and Beghdad-Bey, 2019; Ezugwu, 2020a). A hierarchical clustering al-
gorithm is further subdivided into agglomerative and divisive methods,
while the Partitional has four subdivisions: Hard or Crisp clustering
method, Fuzzy method, Mixture, and Square error. Under the Hard or
Crisp, six major categories are identified: the Search-based method, the
Graph-theoretic method, Density-based, Model-based, Sub-space, and
Miscellaneous. The complete taxonomy for these clustering methods is
shown in Fig. 1.
4.1. Hierarchical clustering algorithms
In Hierarchical Clustering algorithms, data objects are partitioned
into levels in a hierarchical format (Btissam, 2015). Clusters are it-
eratively formed in a top-down or bottom-up approach to generate a
dendrogram depicting the formulated clusters’ hierarchical structure
(Saxena et al., 2017). This clustering method allows exploring data on
different levels of granularity (Bekhin, 2006). The bottom-up approach
is termed the agglomerative method, while the top-down approach is
the divisive method. In the agglomerative method, clusters are built up
from single objects that are iteratively merged appropriately into larger
clusters that form the hierarchy’s various levels until the entire object
forms a single cluster or the stopping criterion is met. The reverse is
the case in a divisive method. The cluster containing all the objects is
broken down iteratively appropriately until each object forms a single
cluster or the stopping criterion is met. The merging or splitting is done
based on the similarity or dissimilarity of the cluster elements. Fig. 2
illustrates a dendrogram representation for the hierarchical clustering
method.
In hierarchy clustering, merging or splitting subsets of a point is
done by generalizing the distance between individual points to the
distance between subsets of point. This is determined using a proximity
measure called the linkage metric. Three basic linkage metrics are used
in hierarchical clustering: the single linkage, the average connection,
and the complete linkage (Saxena et al., 2017; Olson, 1995; Jain et al.,
1999; Murtagh, 1985). The hierarchical clustering algorithm uses 𝑁×
𝑁connectivity matrix form, where the linkage metrics used for the
clustering are constructed. The construction of the similarity matrix is
achieved by finding the similarity between each pair of data points.
The linkage criterion is then calculated by finding the pairwise distance
between the clusters. The similarity metric is used to determine the
distance between the sets of the clusters. It is also used in determining
the shape of the clusters.
Single-linkage clustering: The single-linkage clustering is also referred
to as the nearest neighbor or minimum or connectedness method. It
measures the nearest distance from any member of one cluster to any
other cluster member. It measures the similarity between two clusters
by measuring the closest distance between a single element pair. The
single linkage clustering has a chaining effect with the tendency of
producing elongated clusters (Punit, 2018).
Average linkage clustering: The average linkage clustering is also re-
garded as the minimum-variance linkage (Saxena et al., 2017; Jain and
Dubes, 1988). It finds the mean or median of the distances among all
the data points between clusters (Punit, 2018).
Complete linkage: The complete linkage, also known as the maximum or
diameter or farthest neighbor method, determines the distance between
two clusters by measuring the longest distance from any member of one
4