A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
candidate’s behavior generated by MCI, annexing the advantages of
the K-Means algorithm and that of the MCI. K-MCI converges more
quickly with greater clustering accuracy without being trapped in the
local optimum.
iii. ELM K-Means (Extreme Learning Machine K-Means)
In ELM K-Means, the extreme learning machine (ELM) method is
incorporated into the K-Means clustering algorithm (Alshamiri et al.,
2015). The ELM method functions in projecting the dataset into a high
dimensional feature space, and the K-Means algorithm is used to cluster
the dataset using the Euclidean distance in the feature space to measure
the similarity between the objects. The ELM proposed by Huang et al.
(2006) is a new learning algorithm that randomly generates hidden
nodes for single hidden layer feedforward neural networks(SLFNs) and
determines the output weight of the SLFNs analytically. ELM is credited
with a meager computational cost for its operations and has been used
in finding the solution to classification and regression problems.
iv. K-means based multiview clustering methods and K-means
subspace clustering models
The generation of high dimensional data due to the social network’s
rapid development has been a significant challenge to the traditional
K-means clustering generally tagged as the curse of dimensionality.
Redundant features and noises in such data make efficient clustering
of such data very difficult. The K-means based multiview clustering
methods are developed to provide simple and efficient algorithms for
accurately exploring shared information in multiview data. Zheng et al.
(2018) proposed a robust discriminative multiview K-means clustering
with feature selection and group sparsity learning. The proposed algo-
rithm addressed the problem of extreme time consuming and sensitivity
to outliers that is common with clustering of high-dimensional feature
space. It efficiently handles the curse of dimensionality by using group
sparsity constraints for selecting the most important views and the most
relevant features.
In handling high dimensional data of a real-world application, us-
ing eigenvalue decomposition by existing K-means subspace clustering
algorithm to find an approximate solution is less efficient. Moreover,
their loss functions exhibit sensitivity to outliers or suffer small loss
errors (Wang et al., 2019). A new adaptive Multiview subspace cluster-
ing method was recently proposed by Yan et al. (2020) for integrating
heterogeneous data in low-dimensional feature space. Their work ex-
tended K-Means clustering with feature learning capability for handling
high-dimensional data. Wang et al. (2019) developed a fast adaptive
K-means (FAKM) type subspace clustering model embedded with a
mechanism for flexible cluster indicator using an adaptive loss function.
According to Wang et al. the existing methods of combining sub-
space learning with K-means clustering still exhibit some limitations.
These include: no thorough capturing of discriminative information
in low-dimensional subspace, consideration of intrinsic geometric in-
formation is rare, and the vulnerability to noises of the optimizing
procedure of a discrete cluster indicator. They proposed a robust dimen-
sion reduction for clustering with a local adaptive learning algorithm to
address these limitations. The proposed algorithm adaptively explores
the discriminative information by unifying K-means clustering with
local adaptive subspace learning.
4.2.1.7 Miscellaneous clustering techniques i. Time series Clustering
A time series is a sequence of real numbers collected regularly in
time, where each number represents a value. It is the simplest form
of temporal data, which is naturally characterized as high dimensional
and large data size (Chiş et al., 2009a,b; Antunes and Oliveira, 2001;
Warrenliao, 2005; Rani and Sikka, 2012; Lin et al., 2004). Since time-
series data feature changes at a function of time, they are classified
as dynamic data. Each time series is made up of many data points,
but at the same time, they can be seen as a single object. Time-series
clustering is an aspect of temporal data mining research that provides
useful information in various domains (Liao, 2005; Aghabozorgi et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2002; Das et al., 1998).
Fig. 7. Time-series clustering taxonomy (Zolhavarieh et al., 2014).
By clustering time-series data, diverse scientific areas have dis-
covered patterns that data analysts have used to extract valuable in-
formation from complex and massive datasets (Aghabozorgi et al.,
2015). According to Aghabozorgi et al. (2015), Chiş et al. (2009a,b),
time series clustering as an exploratory data mining technique is the
most used approach and has also been a subroutine in more complex
data mining algorithms. The visual image representation of time se-
ries cluster structures helps users quickly understand the clusters, the
anomalies, the structure of the data, and other datasets’ regularities.
Time series clusters have been used in finding answers to numerous
real-world problems such as anomaly, novelty or discord detection
(Keogh et al., 2002; Chan and Mahoney, 2005; Wei et al., 2005; Leng
et al., 2009), recognition of dynamic changes in time series (He et al.,
2011), prediction and recommendation (Sfetsos and Siriopoulos, 2004;
Pavlidis et al., 2006; Ito et al., 2009; Graves and Pedrycz, 2010) and
pattern discovery (Wang et al., 2002; Das et al., 1998). The enormous
size of time series data requires being stored on disks during processing,
resulting in an exponential decrease in the speed of the clustering
process.
Time-series clustering can be classified into three (Aghabozorgi
et al., 2015): the whole time series clustering, the subsequence clus-
tering and the time point clustering. Performing clustering operations
on many individual time series to similar group ones into a cluster is
called the Whole-time series clustering. In this case, each time series
is treated as an object, and the conventional clustering algorithm is
employed. Subsequence clustering entails a clustering set of sliding win-
dow extractions of a single time series intending to find the similarity
and differences among the extracted time windows. According to Chiş
et al. (2009a,b), the subsequence clustering is a standard subroutine
in rule discovery algorithm (Das et al., 1998; Fu et al., 2004; Halkidi
and Vazirgiannis, 2001), indexing, classification algorithm, prediction
algorithm (Ormerod and Mounfield, 2000; Popivanov and Miller, 2002)
and anomaly detection (Steinback et al., 2002). The time point cluster-
ing (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015; Gionis and Mannila, 2003; Ultsch and
Mörchen, 2005; Morchen et al., 2005) involves clustering of time point-
based on the combination of the time point’s temporal proximity and
the similarity of the corresponding values. Fig. 7 presents a time-series
clustering taxonomy.
There are different ways to cluster time series data recorded in the
literature. These includes:
•Customize existing conventional clustering algorithms (Aghabo-
zorgi et al., 2015; Warrenliao, 2005).
•Conversion of time series data into simple objects as input into
conventional clustering algorithms (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015;
Warrenliao, 2005).
•The use of multi resolutions of time series as input of a multi-step
approach (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015)
Three different clustering time series data approaches were identified:
feature-based, model-based, and shape-based approaches. The shape-
based approach employs the conventional clustering methods to match
two time-series shapes by a non-linear stretching and contracting of
the time axes using a distance or similarity measure appropriate for
the time series. The feature-based convert the raw time series into
16