A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
involves a lot of statistical testing (Halkidi et al., 2002; Ezugwu et al.,
2020a). Assuming the clustering problem is defined as thus:
‘‘ Let𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔be the set of parameters associated with a specific clustering
algorithm (e.g. the number of clusters 𝑛𝑐). Among the clustering schemes
𝐶𝑖,𝑖= 1,…,𝑛𝑐,defined by a specific algorithm, for different values of the
parameters in 𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔,choose the one that best fits the data set’’. (Halkidi et al.,
2002; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
The following cases hold:
∙𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔does not contain 𝑛𝑐as a parameter.
The idea here is to tune the parameter over a wide range of values
and run the clustering algorithm, then choose the maximum range for
which𝑛𝑐is constant. Normally, 𝑛𝑐≪ 𝑁 where𝑁is the number of
tuples
∙𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔contains𝑛𝑐as a parameter.
Define a maximum and minimum range first, then run the algorithm
𝑟times over each 𝑛𝑐between the minimum and maximum range, tuning
the parameters during each run. Then plot the best values of the index
obtained against 𝜆. The plot may indicate the best cluster.
7 Trending application areas of clustering algorithms
Clustering algorithms can be applied to different domains. This sec-
tion provides diverse areas that cluster analysis that has been success-
fully utilized. Specifically, we present the applicability of the clustering
algorithms reviewed in Section 4 to the field of medicine, financial
sector, artificial intelligence, aviation sector, marketing and sales sec-
tor, industries and manufacturing context, urban development, privacy
protection, and robotics. Fig. 10 summarizes these fields by presenting
a taxonomy of the applicability of clustering algorithms.
7.1 Web usage
The ever-growing electronic data size originating from web applica-
tions’ proliferation has motivated the exploration of hidden information
from text content. Nirkhi and Hande (2008) presented a summary on
the use of web page rank algorithms (such as Hyperlink Induced Topic
Search, page rank) and web page-based clustering algorithms (such
as Suffix Tree, Vivisimo and Lingo clustering algorithms) (Nirkhi and
Hande, 2008). Similarly, Ivancsy and Kovacs (2006) listed some newer
and relevant approaches to web clustering algorithms, such as Fuzzy
clustering.
The corresponding web server logs information for each user is ac-
cessing a page, including IP address, time of access, file path, browser,
and amount of transferred data. Vast volumes of web server log data
are generated every day, and they can be used for commercial and non-
commercial applications such as designing online shops or providing
users with personalized content in digital libraries. Madhulatha (2015)
supported this claim that clustering algorithms have been used for
library book ordering, document classification, clustering web log data
to discover groups of similar access patterns. Another study proposed
using the KEA-Means algorithm, which combines the keyphrase extrac-
tion algorithm and the K-Means algorithm to generate the number of
web documents clusters from a dataset (Ware and Dhawas, 2012). Lin
et al. applied a novel algorithm named hierarchical clustering (HSClus)
to extract a similarity matrix among pages via in-page and cross-
page link structures. This resulted in clusters that hierarchically groups
densely linked web pages into semantic clusters (Lin et al., 2009).
Tang Rui et al. (2012) carried out an investigative study to discover
the possibilities of applying other nature-inspired-based optimization
algorithms: Fireflies, Cuckoos, Bats, and Wolves for performing cluster-
ing over Web Intelligence data. Sardar and Ansari (2018a) applied the
K-Means algorithm using the MapReduce programming model to the
task of document clustering (Sardar and Ansari, 2018a,b).7.2 Speech processing
Speech is an important communication medium among humans
and even animals as well. Large data sourced from communication
on phone and tele-media platforms may require clustering methods
to discover knowledge. Sonkamble and Doye proposed a clustering
algorithm named Modified K-MeansLBG. They applied it to obtain a
good codebook for vector quantization which is usually used in speech
coding, image coding, speech recognition, speech synthesis and speaker
recognition (Sonkamble and Doye, 2012). Rovetta et al. applied fuzzy
clustering to the task of recognizing emotion from speech signals in
addition to the use of probabilistic, possibilistic and graded-possibilistic
c-means techniques (Rovetta et al., 2019). Neel (2005) used K-Means
and fuzzy K-Means clustering to capture phonetic classification effec-
tively. They used clustering to identify the kinds of phonetic features
to the group and discover automatic clustering efficiency in clustering
speech data. In another study, Bach and Jordan (2006) applied spectral
clustering to the blind one-microphone speech separation problem.
They cast the problem as one of the segmentation of the spectrogram.
Vani and Anusuya (2019) investigated the performances of clustering
techniques (like K-Means, Fuzzy C means, and Kernel Fuzzy C Means
algorithms) for clustering noisy speech signals. Single-space and Multi-
level clustering methods were applied to the speech processing system’s
problem (Räsänen, 2007). Fig. 10 gives the taxonomy of clustering
algorithm applications.
7.3 Medical science: Disease onset and progression
The Healthcare sector is one of the predominant fields of human
endeavor that requires improvement alongside contemporary society’s
development. It is one of the main sectors that generally impact the
members of the public. Presently, clustering analysis has solely de-
pended on the transformation of healthcare services. Clustering algo-
rithm has tremendously contributed to disease diagnosis aspects of
healthcare services such as simplification of the ocular disease detection
process, utilizing retinal blood vessels segmentation (Waheed et al.,
2015), detection of tumors using K-Means clustering algorithm (Patel
et al., 2013), and detection of neovascularization in retina image
by employing multivariate m-Medoids clustering algorithms (Akram
et al., 2013). Besides the diagnosis, medical imaging is another crucial
aspect of medicine that plays a role in inpatient treatment. It assists
the medical research domain in investigating different parts of hu-
man anatomy and understanding the effects of particular illnesses. For
instance, mean shift clustering has been employed in blood oxygen
level-dependent function MRI activation detection (Ai et al., 2014).
Also, semi-supervised clustering has been utilized for brain image
segmentation (Saha et al., 2016). Similarly, fuzzy clustering – a hybrid
approach – has been successfully applied to segment inhomogeneous
medical images (Rastgarpour et al., 2014). Medical image analysis
uses spectral clustering (Kuo et al., 2014). Recent research has been
conducted on genetics and hype found in modern medicine to produce a
personalized treatment system. Thus, clustering analysis has facilitated
such a research process (Datta and Datta, 2003; Aouf et al., 2008;
Oyelade et al., 2016).
In a study (Magoeva et al., 2018), authors investigated the possi-
bility of applying some clustering algorithms (such as DBSCAN and
K-Means) to detect critical patient patients conditions with coronary
syndrome using medical parameter time series. The study successfully
performed a preliminary analysis showing that outlier clustering is
viable for potential outlier classification and analysis. Their results
revealed that the investigated clustering algorithms achieve a moderate
performance in critical patient detection. Another study (Newcomer
et al., 2011) reported using cluster analysis to identify sub-populations
of complex patients who may benefit from targeted care management
strategies. This was achieved by using a massive 2-year cohort of health
maintenance organization members with 2 or more chronic conditions.
29