A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
a ‘9’ shaped path is created around the prey from a depth of 12 m by the
humpback whale and start to swim up towards the surface. The prey is
captured in the second maneuver in three behavioral patterns called:
the coral loop, lobtail and capture loop (Goldbogen et al., 2013).
Nasiri et al. (2018) proposed the Whale Clustering Optimization
Algorithm based on the humpback whales’ foraging behavior for data
clustering. The advantages of WOA, among which include, low number
of parameters and lack of local optimal entrapment, were harnessed in
the proposed clustering algorithm. The main goal was to use the WOA
for a complete search to cluster unlabeled data for better clustering
results using a simple solution. Soppari and Chandra (2020) used an
optimized clustering approach to develop an effective framework for
digital watermarking. They combined Least Favorable-based Whale Op-
timization Algorithm (LF-WOA) with optimized Fuzzy-Cmeans (FCM)
for selecting the initial centroid to identify regions for watermarks
insertion in digital watermarking. More recent literature regarding
the WOA-based clustering algorithm includes (Reddy and Babu, 2019;
Rahnema and Gharehchopogh, 2020; Jadhav and Gomathi, 2018).
iv. Crow search algorithm
The Crow Search Algorithm (CSA) is a population-based metaheuris-
tic optimizer inspired by the intelligent behavior of crows developed
by Askarzadeh (2016). The crows are distributed widely and are con-
sidered among the world’s most intelligent birds. Crows stores excess
food in certain places, which are later retrieved when needed. They are
known to be greedy, following each other to obtain better food sources.
A crow watches and observes the location where other birds hide their
food to steal it. It also takes precautionary steps of moving its own
hiding place to prevent others from stealing its food. If a crow detects
that another one is following it, the crow goes to another position of
the environment to fool the one following it.
Lakshmi et al. (2018) combined CSA with K-means algorithm to
improve the performance of K-means algorithm to achieve global op-
timum clustering solution. The CSAK algorithm was used to find the
optimum solution for the initial centroids for the K-means algorithm.
Balavand et al. (2018) also combined K-means with CSA for automatic
clustering based on data envelopment analysis which measures the
efficiency of the decision making units of the algorithm. In this case,
the CSA carry out the clustering processing using the initial cluster
centers generated by the K-means algorithm. Wu et al. (2015) proposed
a hybrid clustering algorithm based on WOA and CSA, harnessing
the advantages of the two algorithms with respect to their search
strategy. In Anter et al. (2019), the CSA improved the Fast Fuzzy C-
means algorithm for data clustering. The CSA generates the initial
cluster centers for the fuzzy C-means algorithm for a more accurate
cluster result. In the proposed algorithm, generating an optimal cluster
center ensures the FFCM avoids getting stuck in the local minimal and
improves computational performance.
v. Emperor Penguin Optimizer
The Emperor Penguin Optimizer is a bio-inspired metaheuristic
algorithm introduced by Dhiman and Kumar (2018). It mimics the em-
peror penguin’s huddling behavior for successful survival in the depth
of the Antarctic winter. The huddling behavior is made up of four major
steps: the huddle boundary generation, computation of the temperature
around the huddle, calculating the distance and finding the effective
mover. Ragaventhiran and Kavithadevi (2020)) adopted CSA as an
optimizer in their proposed Frequent Pattern Mining in which Affinity
propagation-based clustering is implemented in one of the five pro-
cesses with the main objective of performing preprocessing to remove
data redundancy. Furthermore, the authors validate the performance
of their implemented method with previous approaches for succeeding
metrics that are execution time, response time, load balancing rate, and
scalability. The results obtained in the work revealed that the authors’
proposed map-optimize-reduce mining technique on Hadoop achieved
excellent results compared to existing literature results.
c. Other Algorithms
i. Variable Neighborhood SearchThe Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) is a metaheuristic algo-
rithm that represents a flexible framework for a heuristic building to
find approximate solutions to combinatorial and non-linear continuous
optimization problems. It was proposed by Mladenovic and Hansen in
1997 (Mladenovic and Hansen, 1997). It is characterized by systematic
exploitation of changes of neighborhood, finding the local minimum in
the descent phase while escaping from the corresponding valley. The
neighborhood structures are systematically changed while searching
for an optimal (or near-optimal) solution. According to Brimberg et al.
(2017), it is a proven heuristic framework for finding good solutions
to combinatorial and global optimization problems. Compared with
other metaheuristics, the VNS basic scheme and its variants are simple,
requiring non or few parameters. The reasons for these characteristic
behaviors of VNS are stated by Alguwaizani et al. (2011) as based on
the following properties:
•Relativity of a local optimum to the corresponding neighborhood
structure, that is, a local optimum relative to one neighborhood
structure, is not necessarily a local optimum for another neighbo-
rhood structure.
•Consideration of global optimality with reference to local optimal
in terms of all neighborhood structure. ‘A global optimum is
a local optimum with respect to all neighborhood structures’
(Hansen and Mladenovic, 2018).
•The relative closeness of all or majority of local optimal to one
another. In the words of Alguwaizani et al. (2011) ‘Empirical
evidence shows that all or a large majority of the local optima
are relatively close to each other for many problems.
The VNS increasingly uses complex moves to find the local optimal in
all the neighborhood structures. If the local optima found is poor, sev-
eral neighborhoods are used. An increase in exploitation of the vicinity
of the incumbent solution is also suggested (Hansen and Mladenovic,
2018).
The basic VNS algorithm, as with other metaheuristic algorithms,
starts with a set of randomly generated initial solutions. This is followed
by the random generation of a neighbor of the incumbent solution. This
phase is called the shaking step. After this phase, the moving step is
then performed where the local optimal and the incumbent solution are
compared, and the incumbent solution is updated if the local optimal
solution is better. These two phases are repeated until the maximum
neighborhood number’s termination condition is met.
The VNS and its variants have been used to solve many clustering
problems. Alguwaizani et al. (2011) used VNS to solve the harmonic
means clustering problem and reported that VNS compared favorably
with solutions obtained from Tabu Search TS and Simulated Annealing
SA Heuristics. The capacitated clustering problem was solved using two
VNS based heuristics by Brimberg et al. (2019) and the performance
accessed on benchmark instances from the literature. According to
their report, all VNS procedures outperform the state-of-the-art in the
stated problem. Consoli et al. (2019), Orlov et al. (2018); Mladenovic
and Hansen (1997), Hansen (2005), Hansen and Mladenovic (2018),
Hansen et al. (2009), Rozhnov et al. (2019), Hansen and Mladenovic
(2001), Martins (2020), Carrizosa et al. (2013) are other research
reports on using VNS and its variants for solving clustering problems.
Ros and Guillaume (2019), in related work on neighborhood search,
proposed a clustering method referred to as Munec to address the chal-
lenge of new clustering algorithms in finding an appropriate number of
clusters in complex datasets and demonstrate self-tuning capability and
adaptiveness for input parameters in identifying acceptable solutions.
Their algorithm adopted the nearest neighbor technique in group re-
lated data objects. Nearest neighbor data objects are merged without
constraints at the beginning until the number of groups attains the
maximum (at least two groups). Subsequent merging is then based on
mutual neighbor groups with a similar distance between neighbors.
The experimental tests carried out using two-dimensional datasets
revealed that Munec proved to match a ground truth target highly
14