A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 11. A distribution of application of clustering analysis among the studies summarized in Section 6.1 through 6.14.
challenge in information security settings is identifying which fam-
ily a particular malware belongs to and the signature generation of
anti-virus systems. Malware that contradicts normal data is signifi-
cantly regarded as outliers and, as a result, eliminated from normal
data clusters. However, normal clustering techniques such as x-means
and K-Means and co-clustering algorithms have been successfully em-
ployed for network anomaly detection (Ahmed et al., 2016). Behavioral
malware-clustering has been made possible by exploiting hierarchical
(single-linkage) clustering to secure data from attack (Biggio et al.,
2014). Even though K-Means clustering has succeeded in anomaly-
based intrusion detection, the modified cluster labeling algorithm and
’Opt-Grid Clustering’ are more capable of attaining enhanced perfor-
mance in the high-performance intrusion identification domain (Ishida
et al., 2005). Clustering algorithms have made a tremendous contri-
bution to the domain of computer security. Thus, a data clustering
algorithm can deal extensively with cyber-attacks and simultaneously
improve data privacy and data mining.
As reviewed in the sub-sections above, a summary of the appli-
cations of clustering methods to different domains is presented in
graphical format. Our interest is to visually glance at the most applied
clustering algorithm or methods and distribution of such methods’
application in each domain.
The graph displayed in Fig. 11 shows the distribution of publications
reviewed across the applicability of clustering algorithms. This study
found that image segmentation/processing, medicine, and bioinformat-
ics attract more research interest, applying clustering algorithms or
methods to tackle data object grouping problems. This is followed
by data mining and financial or economic-related application areas.
The findings in this study will give prospective research work im-
petus to investigate the applicability of clustering algorithms to the
anticipated domain and to know the extent and number the clustering
algorithms are applied. This will also allow examining the application
of newer or even hybrid clustering algorithms to a domain of choice
depending on the trend observed, as shown in Fig. 12. Furthermore, in
Fig. 13, we studied and presented how each clustering algorithm has
been applied across domains. This study discovered that while some
clustering algorithms enjoy an extensive range of applicability, others
suffer. This could be pointers to many research opportunities for keen
researchers. For instance, one could investigate a clustering algorithm’s
properties that make it suitable for application and enjoy adoption
by many in a particular domain. This could further reveal possibleimprovements that could be done in that specific clustering algorithm
rather than invest research efforts on a clustering algorithm that may
not be profitable to that particular domain of interest.
To further study the trends indeed applying clustering methods to
different domains of interest, this study plotted a graph of categoriza-
tion of the use of all clustering algorithms in each domain/field. Again,
this was carried out to check the peak and distribution of frequency of
applicability of clustering algorithms in each group. For instance, the
field of financial and economic institutions/systems attracts clustering
algorithms more than other fields of human endeavors. In contrast,
other clustering algorithms are least adopted for some fields. This
leaves a thoughtful researcher with questions about investigating each
domain’s problem’s characteristics versus the properties of the clus-
tering algorithms of interest and how both maps efficiently solve the
problem in the field.
.
8 Concluding remark
Clustering is a powerful data mining and analysis tool used in many
fields, including machine learning, bioinformatics, robotics, pattern
recognition, and image analysis. Identifying the number of clusters
apriori is the most fundamental problem in cluster analysis. Speci-
fying the correct number of clusters apriori can help obtain optimal
solutions to many clustering problems. Because of this, automatic
clustering algorithms are taking over traditional clustering algorithms.
Automated clustering algorithms are designed to perform clustering
without the prior knowledge of data sets. They also can determine
the optimal number of clusters in noisy datasets. This study presents a
comprehensive and up-to-date survey of traditional and state-of-the-art
clustering algorithms. The paper will be beneficial for both practi-
tioners and researchers. It outlines the strengths and weaknesses of
various clustering algorithms. Moreover, it presents many open issues
that interested researchers and practitioners can explore. It also offers
valuable insights into clustering algorithms’ practical applications to
different sectors, including medical science, image processing, robotics,
aviation, automotive, financial systems, and big data mining.
The findings in this study show that the field of bioinformatics,
financial systems and economics, image processing, and segmentation
attracts more research interest than other domains, such as data mining
and object recognition. It also shows that the K-Means algorithm, Fuzzy
34