A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
taxonomy of existing clustering algorithms, debating each algorithm’s
various measures of similarity and evaluation criteria. Nagpal (2013)
carried out a comparative analysis of the different clustering algo-
rithms concerning both the mixed and categorical datasets with the
observation that no clustering algorithm can be adjudged as best for
handling a large dataset of either the mixed or categorical dataset.
Oyelade et al. (2016) examined various clustering algorithms and their
suitability for gene expression data to discover and provide helpful
knowledge that will guarantee stability and a high degree of accuracy
in the area. Jain (2010) summarized well-known clustering methods
with a discussion on critical issues and challenges in the design of
clustering algorithms. Jain et al. (1999) discussed emerging techniques
for non-numeric constraints and large sets of patterns. Ezugwu et al.
(2020a) presented an in-depth and systematic review of nature-inspired
metaheuristic algorithms used for automatic clustering analysis focus-
ing on the metaheuristic algorithms that have been employed to solve
clustering problems over the last three decades.
Obviously, from the literature, there has been a considerable growth
of interdisciplinary interests and dynamics in the application of clus-
tering analysis to different research domains indicating that without a
doubt, much has been achieved regarding clustering with new emerg-
ing research directions in automatic clustering algorithms (Ezugwu
et al., 2020a). However, despite the decades of reported research on
clustering methods and algorithms, the existing literature is remark-
ably segmented. Moreover, applied researchers find it challenging to
acquire systematic information on research progress and advancement
on the subject (Ezugwu, 2020a). Therefore, there is the need for a
comprehensive systematic survey of literature on both the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques that have been applied in
different fields. Hence, the following main research question for this
study has been formulated as follow:
‘‘What are the various state-of-the-art clustering methods and algorithms
discussed in the literature, and in what research domains have they been
applied? ’’.
Towards realizing the answer for the main research question, the
following sub-research questions are formulated:
(a) What are the various traditional and recently proposed clustering
techniques and algorithms in existence today?
(b) What research has been conducted using both the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques to address identified
challenges of clustering ?
(c) In what domains have both the traditional and recently pro-
posed clustering techniques been applied in solving clustering
problems?
(d) How have various similarity measures been employed in tradi-
tional and recently proposed clustering techniques ?
(e) What are the characteristic differences between the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques that have been ap-
plied in different fields?
(f) What are other challenges of clustering problems yet to be explored
by researchers in this research area?
This survey aims to provide an up-to-date comprehensive review of
the different clustering techniques applied to many data mining-related
fields. Retrospectively, we also highlight novel and most recent practi-
cal applications areas of clustering. This survey is intended to provide
a convenient research path for new researchers, furnishing them with a
comprehensive study on the various data clustering techniques and re-
search progression over the years in clustering techniques. This survey
will also help experts develop new algorithms for emerging challenges
in the research area. The main contribution of this survey study is as
follows:
•Provides an up-to-date comprehensive systematic review of the
traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques that have
been applied in different fields.•Provides a concise presentation of concepts, architecture, and
taxonomy of clustering algorithms.
•Presents a discussion on open recent research issues relating to
clustering problems
•Defined possible future research trends and directions regarding
the implementation and application of clustering algorithms in
different research domains.
2. Methodology
This section presents the procedure used in selecting and reviewing
the various clustering methods considered in this survey. In this com-
prehensive review process and methodology, the standard approach
for systematic literature review was adopted and followed to ensure
that the topic of interest is sufficiently covered and reduce bias on
the review work. In this study, the literature review procedure pro-
posed by (Weidt and Silva, 2016) was used in this paper. Moreover,
the work (Thilakaratne et al., 2019) served as a guide. The search
techniques, search keywords, databases, data sources, and the inclusion
and exclusion criteria used in this survey are explained below.
2.1. Keywords
In order to obtain the relevant literature, different keywords were
selected regarding the defined goal of this survey. Initially, several
keywords were formulated but later streamlined to reflect the research
objective. The keywords used in the extraction of articles include:
‘‘Clustering’’, ‘‘non-supervised classification’’, ‘‘Clustering Algorithms’’,
‘‘Clustering Methods’’, ‘‘Evolutionary Clustering Algorithms’’, ‘‘Nature
Inspired Clustering Algorithms’’; ‘‘Data Mining Algorithms’’; ‘‘Cluster-
ing Applications Areas’’; ‘‘Clustering in Data Mining’’. Each of the
various clustering methods from the taxonomy was paired with the
word ‘‘clustering’’ to search for articles solely on the technique. For
example, ‘‘mode seeking clustering’’, ‘‘subspace clustering, etc. The
various application areas discussed were also paired with the term
‘‘Clustering’’ to search for articles that reported clustering activities in
the field and the clustering algorithm employed.
2.2. Searching the articles
Two different rounds of the search were performed. The first round
of searches was carried out from 11th to 28th of November 2020,
while the second round of questioning was conducted between the
7th to 18th of December 2020. More searches were conducted in late
December 2020 through mid-January 2021. During the search, more
related papers were extracted from the citations of the selected relevant
articles.
2.3. Academic databases
The formulated keywords were used in the retrieval of the litera-
ture. Reputable peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and
edited books indexed in different academic databases were targeted in
the study. Table 1 below contains the list of the academic databases
targeted during the search. No specific interval period was stated at
the beginning of the investigation. This enables proper capturing and
in-depth study of existing traditional clustering methods, which served
as a bedrock for the more recent ones. However, in selecting previous
related reviews and clustering applications, the selected articles were
streamlined to the articles published from 1999 to date. This is to
capture updated works on unsupervised classification techniques for
different domains.
3