A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
detect a fault, manage emergencies, and proactive risk management. Li
et al. (2015) investigated the applicability of cluster-based solutions to
detect anomalies regarding flights aiding detection of associated risks
from routine airline operations. They used DBSCAN to achieve a cluster
analysis that successfully detected abnormal flights. Also, multiple
kernel anomaly detection was able to identify operationally significant
anomalies, surpassing the capability of exceedance detection. In a
related study, authors applied trajectory clustering by deriving a frame-
work to monitor aircraft behavior in given airspace (Gariel et al., 2011).
This trajectory clustering method was achieved by using K-Means and
DBSCAN algorithms. Wang and Pham proposed using ANOVA and
Scheffe post hoc with a clustering analysis task to evaluate and improve
service networks operated at airports (Wang and Pham, 2020). A
similar study (Rose et al., 2020) applied the K-Means algorithm with
a combination of 2-D mapping and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) for a cluster post-processing routine which identi-
fies driving factors in each cluster and building a hierarchical structure
of cluster and sub-cluster labels. Mangortey et al. (2020) investigated
the performance of Model-based Clustering, Self-Organizing Tree Algo-
rithm (SOTA), Divisive Analysis (DIANA), Agglomerative Hierarchical,
PAM, CLARA, K-Means clustering algorithms. The algorithms were
used to group similar flights and identify abnormal operations and
anomalies.
7.7 Bioinformatics
The application of clustering methods to bioinformatics can be
grouped into two, namely, (i) the analysis of gene expression data
generated from DNA microarray technologies and (ii) clustering pro-
cesses that directly work on linear deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or
protein sequences (Saxena et al., 2017). Gene expression analysis has
benefited from clustering methods. It enables biologists to identify
patterns within datasets relating to this domain. A huge amount of data
on molecular biology is being generated from different experimenta-
tion in this domain. Such data consists of gene expression features,
consisting of conclusions regarding the amount of the corresponding
gene product and concurrent measurement of the gene expression level
for thousands of genes under hundreds of conditions. Data generated
in this form is often represented in a Data Matrix, in which rows
are genes and columns are different experimental conditions, different
tissues, consecutive time slots, or different patients. Other tasks that
have benefited from clustering algorithms include: identification of
homology; discovering natural structure inherent in gene expression
data; knowing subtypes of cells; understanding gene functions and gene
regulation; and mining useful information from noisy data (Oyelade
et al., 2016; Guzzi et al., 2014).
The authors in Chopade and Sheetlani (2017) disclosed that in
handling microarray data analysis, researchers employed the clustering
method to group thousands of genes by their similarities of expres-
sion levels, thereby supporting the task of analyzing gene expression
profiles. Similarly, it is widely reported that Genetic Convex Cluster-
ing Algorithms (GCCA) has been successfully applied to address the
problem of clustering on an unbounded number of processors. A study
in Sugavaneswaran (2017) stated that clustering algorithms had been
used in gene expression. The genes are analyzed and grouped based on
similarity in profiles using one of the widely used K-Means clustering
algorithms. Lakhani et al. reported that to analyze biological sequences
and group them into similar genes, clustering algorithms like evolution-
ary clustering, hierarchical clustering, K-Means, and bi-clustering have
been successfully applied to the domain (Lakhani et al., 2015). Mishra
et al. also strengthen the fact that the K-Means clustering algorithm
has proven relevant in bioinformatics (Mishra et al., 2015). Research
in Zahoor and Zafar (2020) proposed a warzone-inspired infiltration
tactics-based optimization algorithm (ITO) to classify microarray gene
expression. Nunes (2011), in a Master thesis, proposed time series-
based clustering algorithms for separating and organizing unlabeleddata into different groups whose signals are similar to each other in
biomedical signals (Nunes, 2011). Two variants of the K-Means genetic
algorithm selection process (KGA) were applied to the selection process
in the GA algorithm. These algorithms can be applied to medical
informatics and bioinformatics (Chehouri et al., 2017). In the study (Ko-
rdos and Blachnik, 2019), the authors attempt to overcome a genetic
algorithm’s limitation by applying a fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering
algorithm to reduce the chromosome size and solve the clusters border
problem allowing the clusters to overlap.
7.8 Financial systems and economics
The sensitivity and level of security mechanisms built around the
systems associated with banking and financial institutions require that
the data generated from them be intelligently handled by automated
systems. Cai et al. reported that banking and financial institutes are
widely using clustering methods to capture the natural structure of
data in a quest to improve their customer services and profit margins
(Cai et al., 2010). Dardac and Boitan carried out a study to investigate
the performance clustering analysis on the data from Romania institu-
tions. They aimed to uncover the bank’s risk profile by grouping such
institutions into smaller, homogeneous clusters to assess which credit
institutions have similar patterns according to their risk profile and
profitability (Dardac and Boitan, 2019). In another study, the author
presented research into main cluster-type methodologies for grouping
data to use them in economic fields (Stefan, 2014). The study selected
six macroeconomic indicators necessary to reveal a country’s economic
development and then applied hierarchical-based cluster methods on
some sets of complex and heterogeneous data. In a related study,
Brauksa (2013) applied K-Means for cluster analysis in comparing
socio-economic development of different municipalities. Another study
curated economic data and carried out clustering analysis using K-
clustering and proposed techniques that use similarity measures for
data files with nominal variables (Řezanková, 2014). In a different
consideration of the applicability of clustering methods, authors in
Novaliendry et al. (2015) performed clustering using K-Means to ease
the process of handling extensive data of a systematic, detailed list of
receipts, expenditures, and local spending within a year. An interesting
improved K-Means algorithm based on the historical financial ratios
was applied to analyze indicators related to economic attributes listed
enterprises in Zhejiang province (Qian, 2006). A different study (Boyko
et al., 2020) combined apriori and K-Means clustering algorithms to get
a user behavior analysis template to predict a person location for the
next month.
The banking sector is one of the key thriving sectors at the forefront
of global digitization. However, numerous threats surfaced to hamper
the digital banking initiative’s advancement in digital banking devel-
opment. Thus, clustering analysis can offer a convenient solution to
such threats. One of the big threats expected in the banking sector is
money laundering. The money laundering issue can be resolved by im-
plementing Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
(DBSCAN) clustering in the "Anti Money Laundering Regulatory Appli-
cation System’’. In such a case, DBSCAN is employed for detecting and
reporting suspicious banking transactions. However, the anti-money
laundering regulatory application system has been effectively evaluated
on large financial data where it has successfully detected and prevented
money laundering on likely suspicious transactions (Yang et al., 2014).
Every banking institution must acknowledge the reality of the
threats emanating from customers’ ignorance of basic safe banking tips
like giving out confidential information such as security passwords and
pin to strangers, resulting in huge bank fraud. Banking institutions can
apply clustering analysis to fish out such customers and give extra
warning of being cautious about such activities and the overall notice
provided to all the customers. K-Means++ and K-Means clustering ap-
proaches have recorded tremendous success in appraising cardholders’
share vulnerable to bank scams such as skimming, fishing, fishing, etc.
31