A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 5
Summary of recent work on clustering algorithms.
Clustering methods Study covered Application area Author and year Impact as of 2021
Ratio of Deviation of
Sum-of-squares and Euclid
distanceThe authors designed a cluster validity
evaluation technique based on Ratio of
Deviation of Sum-of-squares and Euclid
distanceArtificial and real-world
datasets, including Iris plants,
Glass dataset, Wine dataset,
Gauss datasets, and shape
datasetsLi et al. (2020) 5
Entropy-based initialization
method for K-Means
algorithmThe authors proposed a technique for
calculating the optimal number of
clusters in a dataset. They also designed
an entropy-based initialization method
for K-Means algorithm.2-dimensional and
3-dimensional image datasetsChowdhury et al. (2020) 5
Depth difference (DeD) for
K-Means algorithmThe authors proposed a novel method
for obtaining the optimal number of
clusters in a dataset, called depth
difference (DeD)2-D synthetic datasets Patil and Baidari (2019) 23
A novel technique called
U-K-Means algorithmThe authors propose an unsupervised
learning procedure for K-Means
clustering algorithm, called U-K-Means
algorithm.Medical dataset, Iris, Seeds,
Australian credit approval,
Flowmeter D, Sonar, Wine,
Horse, and waveformSinaga and Yang (2020) 23
Bisecting K-Means
algorithm and a unique
splitting measureThe authors designed a technique for
automatically determining the number of
clusters for large-scale datasetsDifferent large-scale datasets Safari et al. (2020) –
Fuzzy C–Medoids (FCMd)
algorithmThe authors proposed a fuzzy
clustering-based method for handling
mixed features. The model is based on
the Fuzzy C–Medoids algorithm. They
designed a weighting scheme to
calculate the weight of each attribute in
a dataset.Two simulation studies and
two empirical applications
were performed.D’urso and Massari (2019) 16
Modified K-Means
algorithmThe authors proposed an algorithm for
clustering mixed data, called CLustering
mixed-type data Including COncept
Trees (ClicoT). The algorithm is based
on the principle of Minimum Description
Length (MDL)Synthetic and real-world
datasets including Automobile
and Adult data sets.Behzadi et al. (2020) 3-
K-Means clustering The authors proposed a framework for
handling mixed-type datasets, called
COrrelation-Preserving Embedding
framework (COPE). The framework uses
Autoencoder Vincent et al. (2008) to
learn the representations of categorical
features in mixed-type dataReal-world UCI datasets
including KDD99, Income,
Titanic, and EchoTran et al. (2021) –
k-prototype clustering
algorithmThe authors introduced a mixed-type
data clustering technique for risk
management.Life insurance Yin et al. (2021) –
numerical, and embedded data. The technique also preserves the corre-
lation between numerical and categorical attributes. Extensive experi-
ments were performed on different real-world datasets, and the results
show that the proposed method generates very good representations of
categorical features.
Death benefits are one of the largest items that affect life insurance
companies. Moreover, some life insurance companies do not have a
process of effectively tracking and monitoring death claims. Yin et al.
(2021) introduced a mixed-type data clustering technique for risk man-
agement. They used the technique to examine the difference between
actual and expected death claims. The authors used the k-prototype
clustering method to extract insights from a real-world mixed-type
dataset. The dataset contains policy information on life insurance. They
used gap statistics to obtain optimal clusters from the dataset, and
each cluster had low actual to expected death claims. The method was
evaluated, and results showed that it identified a policy-holder feature,
which can improve decision-making (see Table 5).
6 Discussion and open challenges
Many clustering-based algorithms have been proposed in the lit-
erature, and some of them performed remarkably well. This section
presents a discussion on various issues in clustering analysis. Thediscussion is divided into three sub-sections. The first section presents
a discussion on the performance of existing clustering algorithms. The
second section presents some open issues in clustering algorithms. The
third subsection presents some validation and similarity measures used
in both traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques.
6.1 Performance of clustering algorithms
The performance of clustering algorithms can be categorized using
nine properties (Al-Jabery et al., 2019). These properties form the
major and important criteria for evaluating any clustering algorithm.
The properties are presented and discussed below.
Scalability measures the running time and memory requirements for
executing the clustering algorithm. It is the top priority for a clustering
algorithm because of the ever-increasing data from different big data
mining sources. Linear or near-linear complexity is therefore highly
desirable for all clustering algorithms.
High dimensionality: This measures the algorithm’s ability to handle data
with many features that sometimes may be larger than the number of
objects in the dataset. Identifying relevant features or capturing the
intrinsic dimension is important for describing the real data structure.
Robustness :Dataset is usually not pure because there is a level of con-
tamination introduced at the different stages of measurement, storage,
21