A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
4.2.1.2 Subspace clustering Subspace clustering is an extension of the
traditional clustering algorithm with the primary aim of finding clusters
in different subspaces in which a dataset exists. It is often better to use
the subspaces in which a dataset exists for its description instead of
describing a large dimensional dataset as a whole (Parsons et al., 2004).
This way, the subspace clustering technique helps discover hidden
knowledge in such a sizeable dimensional dataset. Clusters existing in
multiple overlapping subspaces are easily identifiable using subspace
clustering. In subspace clustering, redundant and irrelevant dimen-
sions are removed using feature selection, leaving only the relevant
dimension that the clustering algorithm uses to find the clusters in the
dataset.
The subspace clustering algorithm is categorized into two subsec-
tions using the clustering algorithm search strategies: the top-down
and bottom-up approaches. The bottom-up subspace method uses an
APRORI style approach to leverage density’s downward closure prop-
erty to reduce search space. The density’s downward closure property’s
idea is those dense units exist in k-dimension, then dense units in (k-1)
dimension projections. Based on this, the bottom-up method creates a
histogram for each dimension and selects dimensions whose density is
above a given threshold. Examples of bottom-up subspace clustering
include CLIQUE (Agrawal et al., 1998), ENCLUS (Cheng et al., 1999),
MAFIA (Goil et al., 1999), CBF (Chang and Jin, 2002), CLTree (Cheng
et al., 1999), DOC (Procopiuc et al., 2002).
In the top-down subspace clustering, an initial approximation of the
clusters in the whole feature space with equally weighted dimensions
is first found. In the next step, a weight is assigned for each size in
each cluster using a sampling technique to improve the algorithm’s
performance. Clusters formed using this approach forms partitions of
the given dataset, with each instance of the data object belonging to
exactly one cluster. There is a need to specify the number of clusters
and the subspace’s size ahead of time, which is a bottleneck for the
approach. Parameter tuning must be performed to achieve a meaningful
result. Dealing with outliers in the dataset is another challenge in this
approach. PROCLUS (Aggarwal et al., 1999), ORCLUS (Aggarwal et al.,
2000), FINDIT (Woo and Lee, 2002), COSA Friedman and Meulman, 𝛿-
Clusters (Yang et al., 2002) are examples of clustering methods that use
this subspace clustering approach.
4.2.1.3 Density-based clustering In density-based clustering, dense re-
gions in pattern space separated by low pattern density regions are
viewed as clusters in the pattern space. These regions with high density
called modes are associated with a cluster center, while the objects in
the sparse areas separating the clusters are considered as noise and
outliers (Harshada et al., 2015). The data points are then added to clus-
ters with the closest center. A histogram is constructed by dividing the
pattern space into non-overlapping regions to identify the pattern space
modes. The regions with high-frequency counts form the potential
modes and the histogram structure’s valleys as the boundaries between
the clusters. The major concern in using a histogram to measure the
density function is that the pattern space must be large enough to
identify the sections (Jain and Dubes, 1988). Furthermore, clusters
that are small in size are usually very noisy because they cannot be
adequately defined. In contrast, enormous clusters cannot properly
define the cluster properties because of the member patterns’ varied
properties. It is also difficult to locate the precise values for the peak
and valleys in the histogram.
Several works proposing the general concept for mode identifica-
tion has been reported in the literature (Jain and Dubes, 1988). This
clustering method has been used extensively in engineering, mostly
in remote sensing applications (Wharton, 1983). In some other cases,
clusters are formed based on the data points density within a region.
Data points are added to the cluster until the neighborhood’s density is
less than a given threshold. In this case, a cluster in the neighborhood of
a given radius must contain a minimum number of objects concerning
the specified threshold. Generation of the cluster this way enables
the building of clusters with arbitrary shapes. Outliers or noisy datapoints are naturally eliminated. Examples include Density-Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN), ordering points to
identify the clustering structure (OPTICS), DENsity-based CLUstEring
(DENCLUE). The DBSCAN has a well-defined cluster model with fairly
low complexity (Harshada et al., 2015). OPTICS solved the DBSCAN’s
problem of choosing an appropriate value for the range parameter
producing a hierarchical output similar to linkage clustering (Harshada
et al., 2015).
The use of the spatial index in finding data point’s neighborhood has
been reported as improving the complexity of the model from 𝑂(𝑛2)
to𝑂(𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑛 )compare with other methods (Nagpal, 2013). The density-
based clustering method is reported as resistant to outliers, insensitive
to data object ordering, ability to form arbitrary shape clusters, and no
need for pre-stating the number of clusters (Sanse and Sharma, 2015b).
However, they are not ideal for large data sets due to dimensionality.
The low-density areas as noise make the algorithms based on this
clustering method unable to detect intrinsic cluster structure common
in real-life data. There is also the problem of cluster border detection
because there is the need to have data point’s density drop to show the
demarcation between clusters (Harshada et al., 2015). Fig. 6 presents
the clustering pattern of the density-based clustering method.
4.2.1.4 Model-based clustering In model-based clustering, data are as-
sumed to be generated by an underlying probability distribution or a
model (Fraley and Raftery, 1998). Each component of the distribution
represents a different cluster. The principle is to recover the model and
use it to determine the data points that satisfy the generated model
or the probability functions in building clusters of similar data points.
Model-Based clustering seeks to optimize the fitness of the predefined
model concerning the given data. Since clusters are generated using the
given data point, the total number of clusters present can be automati-
cally generated to identify outliers easily. In Model-based clustering, a
mixture model is used in representing data, and the components of the
model correspond to the different clusters.
Fraley and Raftery (1998) reported two ways for formulating mod-
els for the composition of clusters: the classification likelihood ap-
proach and the mixture likelihood approach. Model parameters can
be found using the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) criterion
(Sanse and Sharma, 2015b) as well as the Bayesian information cri-
terion (BIC) (Fraley and Raftery, 1998; Dasgupta and Raftery, 1998;
Mukerjee et al., 1998). The BIC can also determine between two
clusters the closest to which a data point will be assigned (Campbell
et al., 1997). Data clustering uses two major approaches using this
method: the statistical approach and the neural network approach
(Sanse and Sharma, 2015b). Examples of the Model-Based Clustering
method includes EM (Expectation-Maximization) (Fraley and Raftery,
1998; Dempster et al., 1977; Mclachlan and Krishnan, 1997), COBWEB,
SOM. The Expectation-Maximization algorithm for maximum likeli-
hood can determine the partition. A parametric mixture distribution
for a random vector 𝐴such that𝐴can be written as
𝑓(𝜗)=𝐵∑
𝑏=1𝜋𝑏𝑓𝑏(𝑎|𝜃𝑏)
(2)
where𝜋𝑏>0; such that∑𝐵
𝑏=1𝜋𝑏= 1 are regarded as the mixing
proportions. The 𝑓𝑏(𝑎|𝜃𝑏)is the b thcomponent density with the pa-
rameter vectors of the distribution represented as 𝜗=(𝜋,𝜃1,…,𝜃𝑏)
with (𝜋=𝜋1,…,𝜋𝑏). The𝑓(𝜗)is called the B-component finite mixture
density.𝑓1(𝜃1),𝑓1(𝜃1),𝑓2(𝜃1),…,𝑓𝑏(𝜃1)represent the distribution
components, that is, the clusters of the parametric mixture distribution.
The distribution components are the same type for all the 𝑏. Shekar
et al. (1987) proposed a knowledge-based clustering scheme by intro-
ducing the notion of conceptual cohesiveness as precise enough to be
adopted for semantic grouping of related objects based on cohesion
forest knowledge structure. The authors presented a set of axioms that
should be satisfied to give meaning to the generated clusters.
11