A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 6. (a) Initial dataset (b) Density-based clustering.
4.2.1.5 Search-based clustering Search-based clustering algorithms are
nature-inspired metaheuristic approaches, termed automatic data clus-
tering algorithms. They spontaneously determine the structure and
number of clusters in a dataset without prior information on the
dataset’s attributes values (Aliniya and Mirroshandel, 2019). They
emerge as a solution to the need to provide the traditional clustering
algorithms, a priori information (Agarwal, 2011) on the number of
clusters generated (Ezugwu, 2020a). The need to provide this vital
information usually impose some additional computational burdens or
requirements on the relevant traditional clustering algorithms (Ezugwu,
2020a). Determining the best estimate of cluster number is a fundamen-
tal problem in cluster analysis, and it is tagged ’automatic clustering
problem’ (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016). This problem becomes
more pronounced for real-world data clustering analysis characterized
by high density and dimensionality datasets. The lack of prior domain
knowledge makes it difficult to choose appropriate cluster numbers,
especially in datasets with many dimensionalities with widely varied
cluster shape, size, density and sometimes overlapping. It is a pro-
foundly difficult task to determine the optimal number of clusters for
such data sets, so pre-identifying the number of clusters for a data
clustering algorithm is not easy.
Automatic clustering techniques where such a requirement is not
needed become a better option for real-world data sets with high
density and dimensionality. Automatic clustering algorithms produce
the same results as the traditional clustering technique without sup-
plying any background information concerning the datasets (Aliniya
and Mirroshandel, 2019; Jain and Dubes, 1988; Agrawal et al., 2005;
Ezugwu, 2020a). It has also been found appropriate for handling au-
tomatic identification and classification of unlabeled data points in
real-world datasets, which is evidently difficult and almost impossible
manually. Automatic clustering algorithms have a higher possibility
of obtaining optimal global solutions, unlike the traditional clustering
algorithms that are mostly local search algorithms whose solutions are
influenced by the initial starting points. They cannot guarantee global
optimality except linear and convex optimization (Ezugwu, 2020a).
Aside these, the nature-inspired clustering algorithms have demon-
strated more flexibility in handling clustering problems in various fields
than the traditional clustering algorithms that are mostly problem-
specific and lack continuity (Agarwal et al., 2011). With the main
aim of clustering algorithm as having the ability to generate clusters
that exhibit the characteristics of reduced intracluster distance and
increased inter-cluster distance, the automatic clustering algorithms
treat clustering problems as optimization problems with a focus on the
minimization of the dissimilarity within a cluster and maximization of
dissimilarity between clusters (Ezugwu, 2020a; Kuo et al., 2014).
As an optimization problem, finding an optimal solution for a
clustering problem is classified as NP-hard when the number of clusters
is more than three; that is 𝑘 >3(Falkenauer, 1998). Thus, clusteringtasks for moderately sized problems could be computationally pro-
hibitive. This makes most metaheuristic approaches suitable for finding
solutions to data clustering problems (Kuo et al., 2014), and the meta-
heuristic search algorithms became the most applied techniques for im-
plementing automatic clustering algorithms (José-García and Gómez-
Flores, 2016). Nature-Inspired metaheuristic algorithms are practically
designed to handle high-dimensional and complex real-world problems
(Ezugwu et al., 2020b). Moreover, their higher heuristic search capa-
bility makes them look for the most promising (optimal) solution while
balancing intensification and diversification in the search. Also, while
searching for optimal solutions, they ensure that the generated solution
gets into unpromising regions within the search space are avoided.
These natured inspired metaheuristics algorithms have solved a wide
range of continuous and discrete combinatorial optimization problems,
particularly the GA, DE, PSO, FA and IWO (Ezugwu, 2020b). The
automatic clustering algorithms are superior in performance compared
with the traditional clustering algorithms in terms of convergence speed
and their ability to produce good quality solutions
Some of the nature-inspired algorithms that have been deployed
as search based clustering algorithms include Genetic Algorithm (GA)
(Jain and Dubes, 1988; He and Tan, 2012; Doval et al., 1999), Dif-
ferential Evolution (DE) (Paterlini and Krink, 2006; Suresh et al.,
2009), Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algorithm (ABC) (Kuo et al.,
2014; Su et al., 2012), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) (Izakian et al., 2016; Das and Roy, 2008), Inva-
sive Weed Optimization (IWO) (Chowdhury et al., 2011), Symbiotic
Organisms Search (SOS), Bacterial Evolutionary Algorithm (BEA) (Das
et al., 2009), Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS), Firefly Algorithm
(FA) (Senthilnath et al., 2011) and Tabu Search (TS) Algorithm.
The metaheuristics-based clustering algorithms can be classified
into the Evolutionary and the Swarm intelligence metaheuristics al-
gorithms. The GA and DE come under the Evolutionary group, while
the rest fall under the Swarm intelligence group. These two broad
classes of algorithms have common design steps: the starting point of
random initializing population size, then identifying suitable candidate
individuals representing the choice solution (Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
This is achieved by evaluating the candidate’s members of the initial
generation. The choice solutions are then used to generate a new
population by modifying the individual-specific variation operators.
The second and third steps are repeated iteratively, and an update is
made concerning which candidate individual is best fitted in terms of
the defined objective function of the problem. The best candidate’s
choice is achieved by comparing the current generation solution with
the previous generation solution, and precedence is given to the current
best solution. The subsequent sections will report reviews of different
research involving the application of various nature-inspired algorithms
to clustering problems.
(a.) Evolutionary algorithm
i. Genetic Algorithm-Based Clustering Techniques
12