A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
O(log|D|), and DBCLASD is O(3n2). A careful observation of each
algorithm’s complexity concerning the methods they fall into might
reveal a slight variation, indicating that the algorithms’ enhancement
can reduce complexity while sustaining good and qualitative clustering
results.
Refinement of Clusters: The resulting clusters from a clustering operation
often require further improvement using either the same clustering
algorithm or another clustery algorithm. This refinement aims to ensure
that objects wrongly clustered due to inefficient similarity measures
might be displaced to the cluster where they fit well. Some clustering
methods, such as the divisive method, apply two approaches to the
refinement task of clusters, namely monothetic and polythetic. While
the former split a cluster using only one attribute, the latter split a
cluster using all attributes. We considered that such approaches are
already proof that more techniques can evolve to improve the quality
of clusters. This refinement issue presents itself as necessary regarding
the effect of wrongly classifying objects into clusters in life-threatening
applications. In fact, for improved performance of the applicability of
metaheuristic algorithms, such algorithms’ hybrids may be considered
to achieve optimal performance of the refinement task.
Speed of Convergence: A wide range of metaheuristic algorithms have
inspired nature and human activities to solve optimization problems,
including clustering operations effectively. Since a good convergence
is one of the pointers to the effectiveness and measure of how quali-
tative the resulting clusters from a clustering algorithm is, continuous
research into applying metaheuristic algorithms to clustering problem
is encouraged. In addition to repurposing metaheuristic algorithms
for solving clustering convergence problems, other related clustering
operation problems that may be optimized are the sensitivity of the
initialization phase and multi-objective functions involving both inter-
and intra-cluster measurement and escape from local optima. Most
clustering algorithms suffer from these clustering-related operations
and have presented open issues allowing for further research. We argue
that the effective repurposing of metaheuristic algorithms for solving
these problems has great performance for clustering algorithms. For
instance, variants of the firefly algorithm have been applied to the
problem of initialization and escape from local optima in K-Means
clustering operation (Xie et al., 2019), application of PSO to multi-
objective clustering (Gong et al., 2017). We, however, note that there
are other clustering operations, such as convergence, spatial clustering,
and many more, which are yet to be optimized through the application
of optimization algorithms.
Data dimensionality: Algorithms such as K-Means, Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) clustering, maximum-margin clustering and information-
theoretic clustering cannot be easily applied to problems with high-
dimensional data. This problem can be solved by projecting the original
data onto a low-dimensional subspace and then clustering on the
feature embedding such as sparse codes (Wang et al., 2016).
Effectiveness and scalability: Effectiveness and scalability are two major
challenges that open further research in clustering methods related to
Big Data. The approach of deep learning has been introduced as a
potential solution to this challenge. Also, decreasing the reliance of
algorithms on user-dependent parameters can improve the effectiveness
of clustering algorithms. Future studies can integrate domain-based
requirements into a new single algorithm. Additionally, future research
can develop new clustering algorithms emerging from designing solu-
tions to some fundamental challenges of non-automatic and automatic
clustering. Future research can also design improved algorithms that
deal with newly occurring data without relearning from scratch.
Data object representation: Data object representation is another chal-
lenge with clustering methods. The data objects are not represented in
a suitable format. Moreover, data objects are represented differently
across different application areas. Some data objects are represented
as feature vectors, while some are represented as graphs together witha notion of object similarity (Plant and Böhm, 2009). The differences
in data object representation across different application areas por-
tend a viable research interest. One relevant outcome of finding an
efficient way for representing data in clustering operation is that it
supports clustering algorithms’ performance by reducing computational
complexity. This allows the clustering algorithm to be scalable by
identifying regions or special distribution in data. Some useful regions
to identify are those aspects of the compressible data, regions that
do not need to be swapped out of memory but maintained in main
memory, and regions that are discardable based on noise or irrelevance
to the outcome of clustering operation.
Evaluation measures: The following measures can be used as yard-
sticks to evaluate and compare the performance of different clustering
algorithms: accuracy, algorithm stability, and dataset normalization
(Chaouni et al., 2019). Moreover, there is the need to design algo-
rithmic approaches to compare different clustering methods based on
different validity indices such as internal, stability and biology indices
(Bouveyron et al., 2012). Although Kokate et al. (2018) suggested that
a single algorithm may not satisfy all evaluation measures, starting
with one algorithmic solution may lead to further hybridized or robust
solutions.
Data streams: The peculiarity of clustering makes the clustering process
more demanding than clustering on static data. Kokate et al. (2018),
reported some challenges of clustering methods on data streams. Clus-
tering methods should be robust enough to deal with the existence
of outliers/noise. Moreover, clustering algorithms should be capable
of sharply detecting the change in context and grouping of streaming
data objects to support the analysis of trends in data streams. Further,
the increasing volume of data streams generated from different media
like social networks should improve the computational capability and
memory space optimization of clustering algorithms. More research ef-
forts will be needed to produce adaptive models for clustering evolving
data streams and improving existing context-based adaptive clustering
methods.
Knowledge extraction: Another problem in clustering is knowledge ex-
traction from big datasets. It is caused by increased data sources and
generation (Ezugwu et al., 2020a). This problem poses a big challenge
to the data analyst, as they cannot effectively extract knowledge from
terabytes and petabytes of data. Future studies can design improved
techniques that can overcome the limitation of knowledge extraction
from big datasets, such as distributed clustering and parallel evolu-
tionary algorithm. Moreover, future studies can develop new clustering
methods that can choose between single-objective or multi-objective
optimizations.
Therefore, in the light of the studies mentioned above and discus-
sions, a comprehensive survey paper may be necessary which is focused
on presenting an exhaustive list of clustering algorithms since it is
often reported that it is hard to give a complete list of all clustering
algorithms due to the diversity of information (Xu and Tian, 2015).
6.3 Cluster similarity and validation measures
This section presents the various cluster similarity and validation
measures employed in traditional and recently proposed clustering
techniques. A similar framework structure that briefly discussed most
of the commonly used clustering validation measures was presented in
Ezugwu et al. (2020a).
6.3.1 Clustering similarity measures
Cluster similarity measure gives the degree of closeness or sepa-
ration of characteristics of various data points. The degree of separa-
tion or closeness can be defined explicitly or implicitly, reflecting the
strength of the relationship between data points. All cluster methods
clearly define cluster relationships among data objects that they are
applied on, which plays a significant role in the clustering method’s
23