A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
are not well separated (Nagpal, 2013). According to (Jain and Dubes,
1988), partitional techniques are frequently used in engineering ap-
plications where single partitions are most important and appropriate
for efficient representation and compression of large databases. It has
also been observed that partitional algorithms are preferred in pattern
recognition due to the nature of the available data (Jain, 2010). The
partitional clustering method is a local search technique (Khaled et al.,
1995) and local convergence. Therefore the optimal global solution
cannot be guaranteed (Sanse and Sharma, 2015a).
Partitioned-based clustering is an NP-hard optimization problem
with the standard approach of finding an approximate solution (Har-
shada et al., 2015). Jain et al. (1999) stated that ‘‘the combinatorial
search of the set of possible labelings for an optimum value of a
criterion function is computationally prohibitive’’. As a result, the
typical partitional clustering algorithm runs several times with varying
starting partitions so that the one that gives the best clustering output
of all the runs is chosen as the optimal solution Jain et al. (1999).
One major disadvantage of Partitional Clustering algorithms is the
need for predefined user values for parameter 𝑘, which is usually non-
deterministic (Suganya et al., 2018; Jain et al., 1999). This arbitrary
choice of clusters centroid leads to wrong clustering output (Oyelade
et al., 2016). Clustering Algorithms based on the partitional methods
usually generate clusters of approximately similar sizes because data
objects are permanently assigned to the nearest centroid, which invari-
ably results in incorrect cut borders between clusters (Harshada et al.,
2015). The partitional clustering method has been noted for having
biasedness to spherically shaped clusters and that it is also unable
to handle highly connected clusters and a high-dimensional dataset
(Oyelade et al., 2016).
The partitional Clustering algorithm can be categorized based on the
various techniques adopted in generating the clusters and the nature of
the resultant clusters produced. These include Hard/Crisp Clustering,
Fuzzy clustering, and Mixture Resolving Clustering.
4.2.1. Hard/Crisp CLustering
Each data object belongs to only one cluster in a hard or crisp clus-
tering algorithm. The clustering methods under this category include
Graph-theoretic clustering, Density-based clustering, Model-based clus-
tering, Subspace clustering and Miscellaneous Clustering.
4.2.1.1 Graph-theoretic clustering A Graph structure is a data structure
made up of nodes and edges connecting the nodes. A graph can
model relationships between features of data objects and list important,
relevant features during data analysis. In graph-theoretic clustering,
clusters are represented in graphs (Saxena et al., 2017). The data
objects are represented as nodes that are connected as edges. The edges
reflect the proximities between pairs of data points (Xu and Wunsch,
2005). Nodes are divided into clusters so that the edge density across
clusters is smaller compared to edge density within clusters (Saxena
et al., 2017). Edges whose clustering length (weight) is substantially
larger than the nearby edges’ average is termed inconsistent. Nodes
are grouped into clusters based on the graph topology so that the out-
put clusters are characterized by high intra-connectivity/homogeneity
and low inter-connectivity/homogeneity among the generated clusters.
Representing clusters in graphs is convenient, but it is not robust in
handling outliers.
Graph theory can be used to represent both hierarchical and non-
hierarchical clusters. Graph method that directly deals with connectiv-
ity graphs can be used for linkage metrics-based hierarchical clustering
when the connectivity 𝑁×𝑁matrix is sparse (Jain and Dubes, 1988;
Berkhin, 2001). This clustering method uses some topological prop-
erties in graphs to build clusters from a network of data objects.
Finding the maximally connected subgraphs in a graph structure is the
same as the problem of single linkage hierarchical clustering. In like
manner, finding maximally complete subgraphs in a graph structure
is equivalent to the total linkage hierarchical clustering (Jain and
Dubes, 1988). The k-nearest-neighbor graph model was used to develop
Fig. 4. Initial dataset represented as an undirected graph.
Fig. 5. Resulting clustered subgraphs with cuttings at points a, b, c, d.
Chameleon (an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm) (Xu
and Wunsch, 2005). Using the k-nearest-neighbor graph approach,
Chameleon constructs a sparse graph with each data object representing
a vertex of the graph with an edge existing between pairs of vertices.
The weight of each edge indicates the similarities (distance) between
the corresponding vertices. The k-nearest neighbor graph is partitioned
into several relatively small sub-clusters using a graph partitioning
algorithm in such a way as to minimize the weight of the edges to
be cut. The clustering eliminates edges whose vertices are not within
the k closest points concerning each other and uses an agglomerative
hierarchical clustering algorithm to merge similar sub-clusters.
Another graph representation of hierarchical clustering is the Delau-
nay triangulation graph (DTG) that uses a hypergraph where more than
two vertices are connected to an edge creating the hypergraph structure
(Cherng and Lo, 2001). Zahn’s clustering algorithm (Zahn, 1971) is an
example of graph theory for non-hierarchical clustering. Uneven edges
in minimum spanning trees are detected and discarded in the bid of
connecting components as clusters (Jain and Dubes, 1988). However,
there is a need for the cluster shape’s pre-knowledge to select the proper
heuristic to identify irregular edges. Cluster Identification via Connec-
tivity Kernels (CLICK) is an example of a graph theory-based clustering
algorithm. In CLICK, the minimum weight division is performed on the
graph to generate clusters (Dongkuan, 2015; Sharan and Shamir, 2000).
Specifying suitable parameters and criterion properties lead to some
practical difficulties to be addressed (Jain and Dubes, 1988). According
to Jain and Dubes (1988), ‘‘no theory exists for choosing among the
various properties of graphs to select the best clustering method for a
particular application’’. Figs. 4 and 5 show examples of graph-theoretic
clustering approaches.
10