A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
For nominal attributes, the simple matching in Eq. (20) may be
used.
𝑑(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)=𝑝−𝑚
𝑝(20)
6.3.2 Cluster validation measure
The analogous question in cluster analysis is ‘‘how to evaluate the
goodness of the resulting clusters’’. The resulting cluster is greatly
influenced by each clustering method’s parameters and initial condi-
tions; therefore, evaluating the goodness of the clusters should consider
this range of parameters and constraints. Though cluster validation
is an arduous task, it plays a significant role in avoiding situations
where patterns are found in the presence of noise, comparing clustering
algorithms, comparing two sets of clusters, and comparing two clusters.
Cluster validation criteria are usually internal or external validation
(Bezdek and Pal, 1998). However, a third classification is called relative
validation (Legány et al., 2006).
6.3.2.1 Internal validation criteria The underlying structure of the
dataset plays a significant role in successfully partitioning the dataset.
Practically, the dataset’s underlying structure is usually unknown, and
there is no way of knowing the correct partitioning of the dataset.
The internal validation criteria measure the intra-cluster compactness
and the inter-cluster separation after the dataset partitioning by the
clustering algorithm. There are a variety of standards that have been
proposed, which are outlined below.
Sum of squared error : Sum of squared error (SSE) is one of the most
popular cluster evaluation criteria, and it is defined as follows:
𝑆𝑆𝐸 =𝐾∑
𝑘=1∑
∀𝑥𝑖∈𝐶𝑘‖‖𝑥𝑖−𝜇𝑘‖‖2
(21)
where𝐶𝑘is the set of all instances in the cluster 𝑘and𝜇𝑘is the vector
mean of𝑘. The partition with the lowest SSE is considered the best
(Hamilton, 1994; Tsay, 2005)
Scatter criteria: The scatter criteria (Rokach, 2005; Duda et al., 2001) is
given as follows:
𝑆𝑘=∑
𝑥∈𝐶𝑘(𝑥−𝜇𝑘)(𝑥−𝜇𝑘)𝑇.(22)
Condorcet’s criterion: Condorcet’s criterion is given as follows:
∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘∈𝐶𝑖
𝑥𝑗≠𝑥𝑘𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)+∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝑖;𝑥𝑘∉𝐶𝑖𝑑(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)
(23)
where𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)and𝑑(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘), respectively, are similarity and distance
between the vectors 𝑥𝑗𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑥𝑘.
C-criterion: An extension of Condorcet’s validity index is given in Fortier
and Solomon (1996). The C-criterion is defined as follows:
∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘∈𝐶𝑖
𝑥𝑗≠𝑥𝑘(𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)−𝛾)+∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝑖;𝑥𝑘∉𝐶𝑖(𝛾−𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘))
(24)
where𝛾is a threshold value.
Category utility metric: Given a set of entities, the binary feature set of
sizenis defined as
𝐹={𝑓𝑖},𝑖= 1,2,…,𝑛
and the binary category 𝐶={𝑐,𝑐}is defined as follows:
𝐶𝑈(𝐶,𝐹)=[
𝑝(𝑐)𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)+𝑝(𝑐)𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)]
−𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖), (25)
given that: 𝑝(𝑐)is the prior probability of an entity belonging to
the positive category 𝑐 𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)is the conditional probability of thefeature𝑓𝑖given that it belongs to the positive category 𝑐 𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)is
the conditional probability of the feature 𝑓𝑖given that it belongs to the
positive category 𝑐and𝑝(𝑓𝑖)is the previous probability of the entity
(Corter and Gluck, 1992; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) index: The problem of overfitting
the partitions generated by the clustering algorithm is huge, and BIC
tries to solve it. BIC is a minimization problem (Raftery, 1986) and is
defined as follows:
𝐵𝐼𝐶 = − ln (𝐿)+𝑣𝑙𝑛(𝑛) (26)
where𝑛is the number of entities, 𝐿is the likelihood of the param-
eters to generate the data in the model, and 𝑣is the number of free
parameters in the Gaussian model.
Calinski–Harabasz index: The Calinski–Harabasz validity index measures
the compactness or closeness of the clusters by calculating the distances
between the points in a cluster to their centroids. Likewise, the separa-
tion is calculated by measuring the distance from the centroids to the
global centroid (Calinski and Harabasz, 1974; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
This index is defined as
𝐶𝐻=trace (SB)
trace (Sw).𝑛𝑝− 1
𝑛𝑝−𝑘(27)
where (𝑆𝐵) is the inter-cluster scatter matrix, ( 𝑆𝑤) the intra-cluster
scatter matrix, 𝑛𝑝is the number of entities in a cluster, and 𝑘the
number of clusters.
Davies–Bouldin index (DB): The DB index evaluates the average inter-
cluster similarity between any two clusters and their nearest. This
information is critical to the success of the DB index (Davies and
Bouldin, 1979). For better results, DB is minimized. The Davies–Bouldin
index is defined as follows:
𝐵𝐷=1
𝑐𝑐∑
𝑖=1𝑀𝑎𝑥
𝑖≠𝑗{
𝑑(𝑥𝑖)+𝑑(𝑥𝑗)
𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)}
(28)
where𝑐is the number of clusters, 𝑖,𝑗are cluster labels, 𝑑(𝑥𝑖)and
𝑑(𝑥𝑗)are all entities in clusters 𝑖and𝑗,𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)is the distance between
the cluster centroids.
Silhouette index: The silhouette index requires that information about
the compactness and separation of at least two clusters be known
(Rousseeuw, 1987).
Given a cluster, 𝑋𝑗(𝑗= 1,..𝑐), the index assigns to the 𝑖thentity of
𝑋𝑗the silhouette width, 𝑠(𝑖)=(𝑖= 1,…,𝑚). This value gives a degree
of likelihood of the 𝑖thsample belonging in the cluster 𝑋𝑗. The index
is defined as:
𝑠(𝑖)=(𝑏(𝑖)−𝑎(𝑖))
𝑀𝑎𝑥 {𝑎(𝑖),𝑏(𝑖)}(29)
where𝑎(𝑖) is the average distance between the 𝑖thentity in the cluster
and the remaining entities of cluster 𝑋𝑗;𝑏(𝑖) is the minimum average
distance between the 𝑖th𝑠and all of the entities clustered in 𝑋𝑘(𝑘= 1,
. .𝑐;𝑘≠𝑗).
Dunn index: The Dunn index basically looks for the ratio between the
smallest inter-cluster distance and the largest intra-cluster distance in
a partitioning (Dunn, 1973). The Dunn index is defined as follows:
𝐷𝑢𝑛𝑛 =𝑚𝑖𝑛1≤𝑖≤𝑐⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩min⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)
𝑚𝑎𝑥
1≤𝑘≤𝑐𝑑(𝑋𝑘)⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭(30)
where𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)is the distance between cluster 𝑋𝑖and𝑋𝑗;𝑑(𝑋𝑘)
represents the distance between members of cluster ( 𝑋𝑘) and𝑐is the
number of clusters in the dataset. The Dunn index is a maximization
problem with setbacks that include its time complexity, and it is being
affected by noise in datasets.
NIVA index: The NIVA validation index (Rendon et al., 2008) is defined
as follows:
𝑁𝐼𝑉𝐴 (𝐶)=𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐 (𝐶)
𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑥𝐺 (𝐶)(31)
25