A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
(Alkhasov et al., 2015). Besides the threat of mitigation in the banking
institution, clustering could also provide other vital applications such as
location siting for optimal business extension. Every banking institution
would like to expand the service covering locations to attract more
customers, thereby growing the organizational profit margins. This can
be implemented by installing e-corners and ATMs strategically to cover
important economic locations and create branches at locations with
excessive demand.
We can observe that the location sitting option plays a vital role in
expanding the financial economy. The solution to such a task can be ad-
dressed by applying the generalized density-based clustering algorithm
(GFDBSCAN) cluster algorithm (Kisore and Koteswaraiah, 2017). The
contemporary world is mostly reliant on industrial relationships, and
financial crises are crucial to any nation. Thus, long-term prediction
of failure in the banking sector presents a significant confrontation.
Happily, Fuzzy refinement domain adaptation offers a good answer to
such a challenge (Behbood et al., 2013).
7.9 Robotics
Asmaa & Sadok presented a cluster-based solution to the Multi-
Robot Task Allocation (MRTA) problem (Asmaa and Sadok, 2019). The
authors proposed a clustering algorithm based on a dynamic distributed
PSO technique and called it ACD2PSO. The new clustering algorithm
first groups the robot tasks into clusters using the dynamic distributed
particle swarm optimization (D2PSO) and, after that, allocates the
robots to the clusters using the concept of multiple traveling salesman
problems (MTSP). In another study, Guérin et al. (2018) addressed the
problem of unsupervised robotic sorting (URS) using the combination
of deep CNN feature extraction and standard clustering algorithms
(K-Means, Minibatch K-Means (MBKM), Affinity Propagation, Mean
Shift, Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering, and DBSCAN) to obtain
an industrial robotic system. Using hierarchical clustering, Arslan et al.
(2016) addressed the problem of feedback motion planning and control
to achieve a provably correct, computationally efficient coordinated
multi-robot motion design. Boldt-Christmas and Wong (2015) applied
to shift clustering algorithm that allows for the placement of robotic
agents anywhere within the communicative range. Janati et al. applied
the K-Means clustering algorithm to solve the problem of assigning
tasks to robots for many tasks, and robots can handle their assigned
tasks efficiently and efficiently (Janati et al., 2017).
7.10 Text mining
Text mining applications are essential to research, considering the
ever-growing databases across different platforms. It is widely used
in several sectors such as publishing and media; telecommunications,
energy, and other services industries; information technology sector
and Internet; banks, insurance and financial markets; political insti-
tutions, political analysts, public administration and legal documents;
pharmaceutical and research companies and healthcare (G. & K., 2015).
With this wide range of applicability, clustering analysis has also been
researched and applied to the task of text mining.
The automation of extracting knowledge from text documents ex-
ploits the solutions provided by clustering algorithms to fast-track this
task. In-text documents mining, clusters are built based on themes
from text documents. This is often achieved by first transforming text
documents into high-dimensional feature vectors based on frequency
features. This results in a data matrix that contains rows and columns,
where columns represent the count of one particular term. Further-
more, the processed documents are grouped based on the frequency of
words and similar words in a subset of terms; these subsets are related
to the theme of the documents. This may further reveal some important
knowledge about the documents ranging from knowing the different
themes a document may consist of and how to deduce the category
to which the document may be assigned. Studies have shown that themodified variable string length genetic algorithm (MVGA) has success-
fully applied text clustering (Chopade and Sheetlani, 2017). K-Means
clustering algorithms have also been successfully applied to analyz-
ing news headlines across different portals by using document pre-
processing techniques and creating clusters of similar news headlines
(Lama, 2013).
Using an improved version of K-Means (Tunali et al., 2015) ap-
plied a spherical K-Means (SKM) algorithm named multi-cluster SKM
clustering high dimensional document collections with high perfor-
mance and efficiency. Similarly, Lydia et al. (2018) applied K-Means
to the document clustering process task while calculating the cen-
troid similarity, and cluster similarity was achieved with Euclidean
Distance Similarity. Another study (Kalyanasundaram et al., 2015)
applied K-Means to perform document clustering using supplementary
information and the content for generating clusters with higher purity.
The study in Sathya Priya and Priyadharshini (2012) proposed using
semantic clustering and feature selection method to improve the clus-
tering and feature selection mechanism with semantic relations of the
text documents. Abualigah et al. solved the problem of text clustering
by leveraging nature-inspired clustering-based algorithms, including
Harmony Search (HS) Algorithm, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO) Algorithm, Ant Colony Optimization (ACO),
Krill Herd Algorithm (KHA), Cuckoo Search (CS) Algorithm, Gray Wolf
Optimizer (GWO), and Bat-inspired Algorithm (BA) (Abualigah et al.,
2020).
7.11 Video surveillance
Text-based data may appear to be increasing in size on the internet
and across different automated systems, but sometimes, the amount
of information or knowledge we can discover from them might not
be comparable with video files. A small video file can contain more
information than text documents and other media files such as audio
and images. Asad et al. in Asad et al. (2019) proposed a clustering
algorithm that variation of the Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering
algorithm. The algorithm was designed to cluster face images of hu-
mans. Another study (Auslander et al., 2011) applied the combination
K-Means clustering algorithm and the k-NN Localized 𝑝-value Estimator
(KNN-LPE) to surveillance tasks for detecting threats in the domain of
ground-based maritime video surveillance. Authors in Wu et al. (2015)
formulate static video summarization as a clustering problem by using
a new clustering algorithm (named Video Representation based High-
Density Peaks Search (VRHDPS)) to analyze properties of video and
gather similar frames into the cluster. In another related work on video
surveillance, Damnjanovic et al. applied a spectral clustering algorithm
that detects events from video through two types of summaries: static
and dynamic (Damnjanovic et al., 2008).
7.12 Marketing
Considering the wide range of clustering algorithms available in the
research domain, different studies have applied them to the problem
of analyzing and predicting customers so that services are provided
for them based on their requirements. In addition to this, automating
market segmentation tasks, new product development, and product
positioning have become possible through clustering methods.
Marketers have taken advantage of the automation of customer
recommendation systems for processing reviews from customers. Clus-
tering methods are now being widely applied to this task by using
captured customer reviews and grouping them into reviews with similar
preferences for market analysis. Such analysis provides markets with
means for strategizing on aggressive marketing to beat or outper-
form their market competitors. Clustering algorithms have provided
solutions to aid this process by grouping customers with overlapping
preferences based on product type. K-Means and EM clustering al-
gorithms were used in Hanumanth Sastry and PrasadaBabu (2013)
32