A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 2. A dendrogram representation for hierarchical clustering of data objects 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7..
number of clusters is attained. By contrast with the agglomerative
clustering method, the divisive approach uses the top-down method
whereby the data objects are primarily considered a fused cluster
that progressively divides pending when the cluster number is ac-
quired (Boley, 1998; Savaresi et al., 2002; Chavent et al., 2007). The
standard method of splitting a cluster into two subsets that contains
one or more elements requires the consideration of every likely bi-
partition. Though it is normal to analyze all the likely bipartitions,
whereby each cluster can be split into two sub-cluster, it is evident
that the full enumeration process offers a universal optimum but very
expensive in terms of computation cost. Various divisive clustering
approaches that do not consider all bipartitions have been investigated.
For instance, Karypis and Kumar (2000) proposed a bisecting K-Means
divisive clustering method to attain more accurate results than the
traditional K-Means or agglomerative method. In another study, Zhong
et al. (2008) investigated a novel clustering method called ‘‘reference-
point-based dissimilarity measure’’ (DIVFRP) by combining it with the
divisive clustering method purpose of datasets partition. An improved
particle optimizer (IDPSO) was proposed by Feng et al. (2010) to
determine the closest optimal partition hyperplane for splitting des-
ignated clusters into two smaller chunks. The divisive hierarchical
approach that uses this splitting method is both practical and efficient.
Macnaughton-Smith et al. (1964) and Kaufman and Rousseeuw (2009)
used an average dissimilarity between an object and a set of objects
to investigate the iterative divisive procedure. However, a different
approach that uses a dissimilarity matrix as an input relies on the
optimization criteria that include the partition or bipartition (Guénoche
et al., 1991; Wang et al., 1996).
Divisive clustering can be classified into two primary, monothetic,
or polythetic methods. A divisive cluster is monothetic if combining
a logical characteristic of each one involving one variable is essential
and adequate for cluster membership (Sneath and Sokal, 1973). Mono-
thetic divisive clusters are acquired by employing a single variable in
each splitting by partitioning objects with specific object values from
those without value. Monothetic is usually a variant of the ‘‘associa-
tion analysis method’’ (Williams and Lambert, 1959) and is proposed
for binary data. Various studies have applied monothetic clusters for
problem-solving. For instance, Kim (2009) and Brito and Chavent
(2012) employed a monothetic clustering approach on interval and his-
togram data. Similarly, Kim and Billard (2012) utilized the monothetic
clustering method on multi-modal data. However, those monothetic
approach decreases the number of computations required to identify an
optimum bipartition, such that only 𝑝(𝑛− 1)bipartition is needed for
testing to determine the optimum bipartition instead of every(2𝑛−1− 1)likely bipartitions. The larger the number of objects, the possible bipar-
tition number is further decreased by the monothetic method. Besides,
they offer binary questions that facilitate the interpretation of cluster-
ing structures. On the other hand, the polythetic divisive clustering
approach utilizes all variables concurrently via dissimilarity or distance
values. It does not rely on single variable order but depends entirely
on distance values, and the distance values reflect on all variable
dissimilarity concurrently (Kim and Billard, 2011).
Various divisive clustering is polythetic such that all variables are
considered concurrently in tasks to reveal the two instances’ similarities
(Kim et al., 2017). However, a large variable may lead to a scalability
issue when there is a large variable. In this case, monothetic clustering
that works on a single feature in a time cycle is the best option.
Wang et al. (2014) proposed a modern divisive clustering algorithm
termed ‘Hierarchical grid clustering using data field’ (HGCUDF). In
this approach, hierarchical grids divide and conquer large datasets
in their subset’s hierarchy. However, the clustering regions limit the
search scope, minimizing the data space for producing data fields.
HGCUDF exhibits rapid execution and stability, which improves the
clustering results on a large automated dataset. In another study,
Naim et al. (2014) investigated a model-based clustering technique
for high-dimension datasets. Its operation is divided into three stages:
multi-modal splitting, iterative weighted sampling, and uni-modality
preserving merging to measure the model-based clustering approach of
large high-dimensional datasets. This method of clustering algorithm
solves the problem of small datasets and the effective scaling of the
large datasets when evaluated with synthetic datasets compared with
the conventional methods. It is helpful in immune response jobs and
can tremendously regulate rare populations.
Most of the clustering algorithms in the literature have focused on
binary data. Recently, the clustering of categorical data has attracted
most researchers in finding a solution to the definite data-clustering
problem. Many researchers have proposed different divisive hierarchi-
cal clustering algorithms to combat the problem. For instance, Herawan
et al. (2010) suggested ‘Maximum Dependency of Attributes’ (MDA) for
divisive hierarchical clustering attributes selection. The maximum de-
pendency of attributes is created by relying on attributes dependency in
rough set theory, which measures the dataset’s attributes dependency.
Mazlack et al. (2000) investigated a bi-clustering method for choosing
two-valued attributes by considering multi-valued attributes and a
Total Roughness (TR) approach. They maintained that high total rough-
ness attributes attain optimum performance and are suitable for cluster
splitting. In another study, Parmar et al. (2007) developed a Min–Min-
Roughness (MMR) metric to resolve the uncertainty in the categorical
data clustering process. However, MMR signifies TR’s reverse and does
not yield clustering algorithms with comparative improvement in com-
plexity or accuracy (Herawan and Deris, 2009; Herawan et al., 2010).
Xiong et al. (2009) investigated a divisive method for categorical data
based on ‘‘Multiple Correspondence Analysis’’ (MCA). Similarly, Qin
et al. (2014) implemented information theory-based divisive clustering
for categorical data by employing Mean Gain Ratio (MGR) to choose
clustering attributes and select class equivalents on the cluster attribute
using cluster entropy. Although divisive clustering is appealing based
on computational time, partitioned clusters’ quality is better than a
divisive one.
Naim et al. (2014) proposed a model-based SWIFT (scalable
weighted iterative Flow-Clustering Technique) for high-dimensional
large datasets. The model consists of three stages, namely, multimodal-
ity splitting, iterative weighted sampling, and unimodality preserv-
ing merging for model-based clustering scaling on high-dimensional
datasets are constructed to be effectively scalable to large datasets,
offering a significant enhancement when compared with the current
soft clustering approaches (Lo et al., 2008; Ge and Sealfon, 2012).
These three major SWIFT stages are motivated by two main require-
ments: rare population identification and scalability to large datasets. In
SWIFT, multimodality splitting and weighted iterative sampling iden-
tify rare populations. This algorithm is usually met for Flow Cytometry
8