A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 9. Fuzzy clustering.
can also help discover the intrinsic relationship between a given object
and the clusters where it is a member. Initial clustering algorithms
using this method had problems with initial partition dependence, noise
and outliers (Saxena et al., 2017). Subsequent algorithms based on this
method tried to address these problems (Yager and Filev, 1994; Gath
and Geva, 1989; Bezdek, 2000; Krishnapuram and Keller, 1993).
Fuzzy clustering can suitably handle issues such as understanding
pattern’s ability, mixed-media information, incomplete or noisy data,
and providing faster approximate solutions (Saxena et al., 2017). For
image retrieval, fuzzy clustering algorithms have been used to discover
association rules and functional dependencies among data points. In
line with the fuzzy clustering problems observed by Saxena et al.
(2017), Gath and Geva (1989) reported three major fuzzy clustering
issues: apriori knowledge of the number of clusters is not possible, there
is always the need to state a cluster validity criterion before the optimal
number of clusters can be determined. Also, the cluster’s character and
location are unknown apriori; an initial guess is needed and variability
in clusters’ shape, cluster densities, and the number of data points in
each cluster. The time complexity of this clustering method is also high
(Saxena et al., 2017). It is noteworthy that the fuzzy nature of fuzzy
clusters can be removed by assigning common data to clusters with the
highest degree of membership. The Fuzzy c-means is one of the most
well-known algorithms based on this method (Dunn, 1973; Bezdek,
2013)
In more recent work, Shi et al. (2021) proposed FCM-RDpA com-
bining FCM with a mini-batch gradient descent with regularization,
DropRule and AdaBound (MBGD-RDA), replacing the grid partition
approach in rule initialization of MBGD-RDA with fuzzy c-means to
optimize a fuzzy system for a regression problem effectively. The
algorithm effectively handled higher dimensional regression datasets.
Borlea et al. (2021) introduced a unified form of fuzzy c-means and K-
means as a single configurable algorithm. It was designed to facilitate
the software implementations of FCM and K-means algorithms as one
that can be configured to work as K-means or as FCM. A partitional im-
plementation of the unified form (PIUF) was built on the UF algorithm
for efficient sequential processing of large datasets and ensuring the UF
algorithm’s scalability in handling datasets of any size.
5 Recent work on clustering methods
Cluster validity evaluation is a major problem in the clustering
algorithm. Li et al. (2020) addressed this problem by designing a cluster
validity evaluation technique based on the Ratio of Deviation of Sum-
of-squares and Euclid distance. The technique was evaluated on both
artificial and real-world datasets, and the results show that it candynamically obtain the near-optimal number of clusters. Chowdhury
et al. (2020) introduced another technique for calculating the optimal
number of clusters in a dataset. The authors designed an entropy-
based initialization method, which they claim is better than other
initialization methods of the K-Means algorithm. In the entropy-based
initialization method, initial points are selected based on entropy and
not random. The proposed technique and initialization method was
evaluated on both 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional image datasets,
and experiments show that it produced good results. Patil and Baidari
(2019) proposed another novel method for obtaining the optimal num-
ber of clusters in a dataset, called depth difference (DeD). They used
the Mahalanobis depth function to estimate the centrality of different
data points within a dataset. In the study, a value between 0 and 1 is
assigned to different data points in a dataset, and each value signifies
the centrality or depth of each data point. The maximum depth value
corresponds to the cluster centroid. The average difference between
each depth value and the cluster centroid is estimated and used to
obtain the optimal clusters. The optimal number of clusters is obtained
by maximizing the estimated value of the depth difference.
Sinaga and Yang (2020) noted that the clustering algorithm is not
mainly an unsupervised learning algorithm because it requires the
number of clusters to be defined as apriori. The authors propose an
unsupervised learning procedure for the K-Means clustering algorithm.
The procedure can dynamically calculate the optimal number of clus-
ters without the need for parameter selection or initialization. The
method was evaluated on numerical and real-world datasets, and the
results show that the proposed technique is effective. The clustering
algorithm is very useful for analyzing large-scale datasets. However,
selecting the optimal number of clusters for big data analysis is a major
problem. Safari et al. (2020) designed a technique for automatically de-
termining the number of clusters for large-scale datasets. They used the
Bisecting K-Means algorithm and a unique splitting measure to design
the technique. The technique was evaluated on several datasets, and
results show the algorithm is efficient and decreases the computational
costs.
Most clustering algorithm has been designed to handle datasets
with one data type — either categorical or numerical datatype. How-
ever, many recent real-world applications generate datasets that con-
tain mixed data types. Applying clustering algorithms on mixed-type
datasets is difficult because of the complex relationship between the
numerical and categorical attributes. Some studies proposed methods
that can handle the clustering of datasets with mixed attributes. D’urso
and Massari (2019) proposed a clustering-based method for handling
mixed features. The model is based on the Fuzzy C-Medoids algorithm.
They designed a weighting scheme to calculate each attribute’s weight,
representing each attribute’s importance. They also calculated the dis-
similarity measure for all the attribute types in the dataset. The authors
combined the dissimilarity measures for each attribute and obtained a
distance measure for multiple attributes. The technique was evaluated,
and simulation results show that it can effectively find clusters in
mixed-attributes datasets.
In another study, Behzadi et al. (2020) proposed an algorithm for
clustering mixed data, called CLustering mixed-type data, including
COncept Trees (ClicoT). The algorithm is based on the Minimum De-
scription Length (MDL) principle. The algorithm leverages the natural
conceptual hierarchy that exists between categorical information. The
authors also designed an MDL-based objective function to integrate
categorical and numerical attributes for the proposed algorithm. Ex-
periments on synthetic and real datasets show that the algorithm is
effective and robust to noise. Tran et al. (2021) proposed a framework
for handling mixed-type datasets, called the COrrelation-Preserving
Embedding framework (COPE). The framework uses Autoencoder Vin-
cent et al. (2008) to learn the representations of categorical features
in mixed-type data. The representations were learned by integrat-
ing two sub-networks to capture the relationship between categorical,
20