A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 1. Taxonomy of clustering algorithms.
function. Furthermore, it is considered a general agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering procedure. The criterion for choosing the pair
of clusters to merge at each step is based on the optimal value of
an objective function. This clustering method is most appropriate for
quantitative variables and not binary variables. Gowda and Krishna
(1978) developed a non-parametric hierarchical, agglomerative cluster-
ing algorithm based on the use of a conventional nearest neighbor to
determine the mutual neighborhood value (MNV) and mutual nearest
neighbors (MNN) of a sample point. Their simple, non-deterministic
and non-iterative algorithm requires low storage and can discern non-
spherical and spherical clusters. More so, their method was reported
to have the ability to discern mutually homogeneous clusters and
applications to a wide class of data of arbitrary shape, large size, and
high dimensionality.
The Clustering Using Representative (CURE) implements agglomer-
ative hierarchical clustering algorithms for large databases. It is more
robust to outliers and can identify clusters of different sizes and shapes
but with lesser cluster quality than BIRCH. It has a time complexityof𝑂(𝑁2𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑁)and its performance is good on a 2-dimensional data
set. CURE achieves scalability by using data sampling and partitioning;
clusters with fine granularity are first constructed in partitions. Clusters
are represented by a fixed number of points scattered around it. The
distance between two clusters is generated by finding the minimum
distance between the two clusters’ representative points. The use of
scattered representative points enables CURE to identify clusters of
diverse sizes and shapes. The scattered representative points are shrunk
to the cluster’s geometric centroid as the clustering progresses based on
the user-specified factor. The choice of the input parameters for CURE:
the shrink factor, representative point number, sample size, and the
number of partitions affect the clustering output. CURE was developed
to work with a dataset with numerical attributes (Berkhin, 2001).
4.1.2. Divisive hierarchical clustering
Divisive hierarchical clustering is a reverse of the agglomerative
clustering process that effectively divides every cluster into smaller
chunks beginning with every object in a single cluster until the required
7