A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
view size exceeds three. The kernel-based has the advantage of the
kernel but has high computation complexity. The interpretability of
the multiview subspace method is straightforward, but it suffers from
dependence on initialization parameters. The multi-view graph method
harnesses the spectral graph theory and its advantages. However, it
relies on the constructed affinity. In the multi-task multiview method,
the approach enjoys the advantages inherent in multi-view clustering
and multi-task cluster properties. Nonetheless, the research work in this
area is still relatively new.
v. Deep Learning Clustering
Deep learning clustering methods use deep neural networks to learn
clustering representations (Min et al., 2018). The optimizing objective
of the deep clustering usually refers to as the loss function, has two
parts: the clustering loss L𝑐and the network loss L𝑛. The network
loss𝐿𝑛learns the feasible features and also avoids irrelevant solutions
while the𝐿𝑐fosters the formation of feature points groups or become
discriminatory. The loss function is given as :
𝐿=𝜆𝐿𝑛+(1 −𝜆)𝐿𝑐 (5)
where𝜆∈[0,1]as a hype-parameter balances 𝐿𝑛and𝐿𝑐. The use
of deep neural networks for data clustering makes learning no-linear
mappings possible, transforming data into a more clustering-friendly
representation, eliminating the need for manual feature extraction or
selection.
The similarity methods used in convectional data clustering meth-
ods cause poor performance when clustering high-dimensional data
(Min et al., 2018). Methods of feature transformation and dimensional-
ity reduction have been applied for mapping raw data into new feature
space for generated data that existing classifiers can easily separate.
However, the high complexity of the latent structure of data still poses
a challenge to the existing clustering methods effectiveness. Data can be
transformed into a more clustering-friendly representation using deep
learning algorithms such as deep neural networks (DNN) because of its
inherent highly non-linear transformation characteristic. T deep neural
networks-based clustering methods have proven promises for effective
and efficient clustering of real-world data (Aljalbout et al., 2018).
There are existing novel deep learning-based clustering methods
that combine deep neural networks with clustering methods. According
to Li et al. (2018), the various approaches can be categorized into two:
one, the unified approach that optimizes the clustering objectives and
the deep representation learning, and two, the sequential methods that
apply clustering on the learned DNN representation. Xie et al. (2016)
proposed a deep embedding clustering (DEC) method, which uses deep
neural networks to simultaneously learn feature representations and
cluster assignments. Its operations involve mapping from the data
to a lower-dimensional feature space while iteratively optimizing a
clustering objective. Li et al. (2018) used fully convolutional auto-
encoders for learning image features as a base for a unified clustering
framework for joint image representation and cluster centers learning.
In the same vein, Yang et al. (2017) proposed a joint K-means clustering
approach and dimensionality reduction with the dimensionality reduc-
tion accomplished by learning a deep neural network. Other methods
include DEPICT — deep embedded regularIzed clustering (Dizaji et al.,
2017).), VaDE — variation deep embedding (Jiang et al., 2016),
CCNN-CNN-based joint clustering (Hsu and Lin, 2018) and DTAGnet
— deep learning task-specific and graph-regularized network (Wang
et al., 2016).
Pitchai et al. (2021) proposed brain tumor segmentation using deep
learning and fuzzy K-means for magnetic resonance images. Artificial
neural networks and fuzzy K-means were combined to segment the
tumor locale in their work. In Huang et al. (2021), the hidden rep-
resentation associated with different implicit lower-level attributes is
learned using their proposed robust deep K-means model. Systematic
taxonomy of clustering methods that used deep neural networks was
presented by Aljalbout et al. (2018). Their taxonomy presentation was
based on a comprehensive review of recent work.4.2.2 Mixture Resolving Algorithms
The Mixture Resolving Algorithm or mixture-based algorithm as-
sumes that a set of observed objects emanates from a mixture of
instances from multiple probabilistic clusters. Therefore, a probabilistic
cluster is chosen according to the cluster’s probabilities to generate
each observed object. A sample is then chosen according to the proba-
bility density function of the chosen cluster. The data set is assumed
to be a mixture of a given number of different cluster groups with
varying proportions during clustering. The mixture likelihood-based
approach to clustering is model-based because the specification of each
component density of observation is required in advance. Aitkin and
Rubin (1985) stated that a statistical model to be used must be stated
or known ahead in the clustering of samples from a population. With
this overlapping relationship between the model-based clustering and
mixture-based algorithm, it is possible to conduct estimation analysis
and hypothesis testing of clustering methods based on mixture models
using standard statistical theory. Marriott (1974), in support of this,
had stated that the mixture likelihood-based approach ‘is about the
only clustering technique that is entirely satisfactory from the math-
ematical point of view’. It assumes a well-defined mathematical model,
investigates it by well-established statistical techniques and provides
a test of significance for the results.’. The determination of the most
suitable number of clusters can be easily achieved in a Mixture-based
algorithm because it has a clear probabilistic foundation (Berkhin,
2012). Mclachlan and Basford (1988) stated that providing an effective
clustering of various data sets under various experimental designs is
one of the mixture model’s usefulness. However, the assumptions made
regarding the data distribution are rather strong, and the computation
complexity is high. Moreover, each cluster is viewed as a single simple
distribution, constraining the cluster’s shape (Grira et al., 2005).
4.2.2.1 Expectation maximization The expectation–maximization algo-
rithm is a framework that employs two major steps in approaching the
maximum likelihood of estimates of parameters in a statistical model;
the Expectation Steps and the Maximization Step. In the expectation
step, objects are assigned to clusters based on the probabilistic clusters’
parameters and in the Maximization step, the new clustering or pa-
rameter that maximizes the expected likelihood is found. Given initial
random values for the probabilistic distribution parameters such as
the mean and standard deviation, the E-step and the M-step are then
iteratively conducted until the parameter converges or the change is
sufficiently small. During clustering, each object’s probability belongs
to each distribution is calculated, and the probabilistic distribution
parameters are adjusted to maximize each cluster object’s expected
likelihood in the M-step. Several computations are required for each
iteration of the EM algorithm. The product of the number of data
points and the number of mixture components scaled linearly with
this iterative computation, limiting EM Algorithm’s applicability in
large-scale applications (Verbeek, 2004). The EM algorithm is easy
to implement, and there is no need to set any parameters that will
influence the optimization algorithm (Verbeek, 2004). However, the
found solution is highly sensitive to the initial parameter values with
all local optimization methods.
4.2.3 Fuzzy clustering
Fuzzy clustering is a clustering method based on the Fuzzy set devel-
oped by Zadeh (1965). The clusters are defined in fuzzy sets, with each
pattern simultaneously belonging to more than one cluster, as shown in
Fig. 9. Data points are assigned to two or more clusters with a degree
of membership in the reflecting clusters, thereby building a non-binary
relationship (Ezugwu, 2020a; Saxena et al., 2017). This way, clusters
are allowed to overlap, showing what is regarded as Fuzzy overlap.
Fuzzy overlap reflects the cluster boundaries’ fuzziness enumerating the
number of data points with significant membership in the overlapping
clusters. This clustering method is beneficial for clusters of data points
whose boundaries are ambiguous and not well separated (Kaufman and
Rousseeuw, 1990). The degree of membership assigned to data points
19