A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Mode is a measure of central tendency that returns the value that
occurs most frequently in a data set. The mode can be determined for
qualitative and quantitative attributes, and it is possible that a single
data set can have more than one mode. In mode-seeking clustering
algorithms, estimated density functions generate clusters (Fukunaga
and Hostetler, 1975; Comaniciu and Meer, 2002). These modes are
the local maxima of the probability density functions. Mode-seeking
clustering assigns cluster labels by associating data samples with the
nearest modes (Sasaki et al., 2018). The number of detected modes
automatically forms the number of generated clusters in the mode-
seeking clustering algorithm. According to Duin et al. (2012c), the
mode-seeking clustering can be considered an agglomerative approach
where a density function is estimated for the dataset (running a mean-
shift iteration initialized at every data point) and have each mode
defining one cluster. In the clustering phase, to decide which mode
an object belongs to, the density gradient from that object is followed
until a mode is found. Objects that end up in the same mode belong
to the same cluster. This procedure allows the number of clusters to be
identical to the number of modes (Duin et al., 2012c; Carreira-Perpiñán,
2015). Duin et al. (2012c) discussed two-mode seeking procedures
relative to the non-parametric density estimates used: the mean shift
procedure (that uses the Parzen Kernel for mode seeking (Fukunaga and
Hostetler, 1975; Cheng, 2002)) and the kNN mode seeking procedure
which uses the K-nearest Neighbor estimator (Koontz et al., 1976;
Kittler, 1976; Shaffer et al., 1979). The two procedures have a width
parameter that influences the number of modes in the density estimate,
and the consideration is on the clustering.
The Mean shift clustering is a mode-seeking clustering algorithm
that initially considers all objects of a data set as candidates for cluster
centers which are then updated iteratively towards the nearest mode of
the estimated density by gradient descent. In Myhre et al. (2018), Co-
maniciu and Meer (2002), mode seeking is a prominent density-based
clustering method represented mainly by the Mean shift algorithm. To
some extent, the mode-seeking clustering algorithms do allow capturing
nonlinear clusters because the density can adapt locally to the data. As
stated earlier, the density estimate determines the number of clusters.
Apart from these, it is also robust to outliers because an outlier is
represented by its cluster and, based on its density value, can easily
be thresholded away (Myhre et al., 2018).
The k-NN mode seeking procedure defines a pointer for every
object with the highest density in its neighborhood. The density of
every object is proportional to the distance to its 𝑘th Neighbor. The
pointers are then followed to the object that points to itself because
it represents a mode in the density as the objects with the highest
density in its neighborhood. The k-NN procedure has been reported to
be significantly faster than the mean shift algorithm and can handle
larger datasets (in terms of large numbers of an object and high
dimensions) compared with the Mean shift algorithm, which can handle
large datasets for only low dimensional spaces (Duin et al., 2012a,b).
This is because the mean shift algorithm has problems tracking the
density gradient in high dimensions. From the conclusion (Duin et al.,
2012c), the mode seeking clustering algorithm is presented as the most
natural procedure for cluster analysis, but there is a need for the dataset
to be sufficiently large enough before a good density estimate can be
obtained.iv. Multiview Clustering
The big data paradigm introduced multi-view data in more recent
times, which are data observed from different views or generated from
different sources (Yang and Wang, 2018). Multiview data exhibits its
specific heterogeneous property while holding potential connections
with others. The specific property of a particular view may be associ-
ated with a particular task of knowledge discovery with other different
views containing information that is complementary to it, which may
be exploited. Multiview clustering involves using advanced techniques
that exploit the complementary and consensus information that falls
across the multiple views from where the data is drawn. It provides
a means of discovering the hidden power of knowledge embedded in
such type of data. The early work on multiview clustering includes
reinforcement clustering for multi-type interrelated data (Wang et al.,
2003), two view version of EM-based and agglomerative algorithm
(Bickel and Scheffer, 2004) and multiview version of DBSCAN (Kailing
et al., 2004).
The inherent problem being addressed by multiview clustering is
maximizing the clustering quality within each view while maintaining
clustering consistency across the different views. Other challenges of
multiview clustering include the successful handling of incomplete
multiview data. Incomplete multiview data have some data objects that
have no observation in some of the views or have only part of their
features registered on the view.
Five categories of multiview clustering algorithms were discussed
from the survey work on multiview clustering carried out by Yang
and Wang (2018). These include multi-kernel learning, co-training
style algorithms, multi-view subspace clustering, multi-task multi-view
clustering and multi-view graph clustering. In multi-kernel learning,
predefined kernels that correspond to different views are used. The
kernels are then combined in a linear or non-linear order to improve
clustering performance. The co-training style algorithms use a co-
training strategy to treat multiview data. It uses prior knowledge or
learning knowledge obtained from other views to bootstrap each view’s
clustering. This process is done iteratively with each view’s clustering
results tending towards each other to produce the broadest consensus
that cut across all the views.
The multi-view subspace clustering assumes that all views share a
unified representation. Based on this assumption, this unified represen-
tation that serves as input into a model for clustering is learned from all
the views’ subspace features and used for clustering. The methods under
this category include the subspace learning-based method and the non-
negative matrix factorization-based method. The multi-task multi-view
clustering saddles each view with a single or multiple related tasks. The
inter-task knowledge is transferred among the various views to exploit
the Multiview relationship and the multitasking capability to improve
the performance of the clustering process. The multi-view graph clus-
tering applies a graph clustering algorithm or related algorithm such
as spectra clustering on a sought-out fusion graph that cuts across
all the multiview data views. This category of multiview clustering is
further sub-divided into three methods based on the clustering method
applied. These are the graph-based method, network-based method and
spectral-based method.
The success and effectiveness of multiview clustering are based on
two related principles: the complementary principle and the consensus
principles. These two principles reflect the underlying assumptions em-
ployed in the clustering process and how such algorithms are modeled
and operated. The complementary principle reflects the necessity of
employing multiview for a comprehensive and accurate description of
data objects. In contrast, the consensus principle handles consistency
maximization across multiple distinct views based on the generalization
error analysis proposed by Dasgupta et al. (2002).
According to Yang and Wang (2018), each category of the multiview
algorithm has its pros and cons. For instance, in the co-training style,
the clusters of different views are enhanced interactively through the
information exchange, but the approach becomes intractable when the
18