Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Survey paper
A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms: State-of-the-art machine
learning applications, taxonomy, challenges, and future research prospects
Absalom E. Ezugwua,∗, Abiodun M. Ikotuna, Olaide O. Oyeladea, Laith Abualigahb,c,∗∗,
Jeffery O. Agushakaa, Christopher I. Eked, Andronicus A. Akinyelue
aSchool of Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg Campus, Pietermaritzburg 3201, South Africa
bFaculty of Computer Sciences and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Amman 11953, Jordan
cSchool of Computer Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, 11800, Malaysia
dDepartment of Computer Science, Faculty of Natural Science, Federal University of Lafia, Lafia, Nigeria
eDepartment of Computer Science and Informatics, University of the Free State, 9301 Bloemfontein, South Africa
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Clustering
Clustering algorithms, partitioning
Data mining
Hierarchical clustering
Automatic clustering
K-Means
Optimization algorithms, Machine learning
Unsupervised learning
Supervised learningA B S T R A C T
Clustering is an essential tool in data mining research and applications. It is the subject of active research
in many fields of study, such as computer science, data science, statistics, pattern recognition, artificial
intelligence, and machine learning. Several clustering techniques have been proposed and implemented, and
most of them successfully find excellent quality or optimal clustering results in the domains mentioned earlier.
However, there has been a gradual shift in the choice of clustering methods among domain experts and
practitioners alike, which is precipitated by the fact that most traditional clustering algorithms still depend
on the number of clusters provided a priori. These conventional clustering algorithms cannot effectively
handle real-world data clustering analysis problems where the number of clusters in data objects cannot be
easily identified. Also, they cannot effectively manage problems where the optimal number of clusters for a
high-dimensional dataset cannot be easily determined. Therefore, there is a need for improved, flexible, and
efficient clustering techniques. Recently, a variety of efficient clustering algorithms have been proposed in the
literature, and these algorithms produced good results when evaluated on real-world clustering problems. This
study presents an up-to-date systematic and comprehensive review of traditional and state-of-the-art clustering
techniques for different domains. This survey considers clustering from a more practical perspective. It shows
the outstanding role of clustering in various disciplines, such as education, marketing, medicine, biology,
and bioinformatics. It also discusses the application of clustering to different fields attracting intensive efforts
among the scientific community, such as big data, artificial intelligence, and robotics. This survey paper will
be beneficial for both practitioners and researchers. It will serve as a good reference point for researchers and
practitioners to design improved and efficient state-of-the-art clustering algorithms.
1. Introduction
Clustering (an aspect of data mining) is considered an active method
of grouping data into many collections or clusters according to the
similarities of data points features and characteristics (Jain, 2010;
Abualigah, 2019). Over the past years, dozens of data clustering tech-
niques have been proposed and implemented to solve data clustering
problems (Zhou et al., 2019; Abualigah et al., 2018a,b). In general,
clustering analysis techniques can be divided into two main groups:
hierarchical and partitional (Tan, 2018). Although methods in these
∗Correspondence to: School of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, King Edward Road, Pietermaritzburg,
KwaZulu-Natal 3201, South Africa.
∗∗Corresponding author at: Faculty of Computer Sciences and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Amman 11953, Jordan.
E-mail addresses: Ezugwua@ukzn.ac.za (A.E. Ezugwu), 220078470@stu.ukzn.ac.za (A.M. Ikotun), oyeladeo@ukzn.ac.za (O.O. Oyelade),
laythdyabat@aau.edu.jo (L. Abualigah), 218088307@stu.ukzn.ac.za (J.O. Agushaka), eke.ifeanyi@fulafia.edu.ng (C.I. Eke), AkinyeluAA@ufs.ac.za
(A.A. Akinyelu).two groups have proved to be very effective and efficient, they gen-
erally depend on providing prior knowledge or information of the
exact number of clusters for each dataset to be clustered and analyzed
(Chang et al., 2010). More so, when dealing with real-world datasets,
it is normal not to expect or have any prior information regarding the
number of naturally occurring groups in the data objects (Liu et al.,
2011). Therefore, the concept of automatic data clustering algorithms
is introduced to address this limitation. Automatic clustering algorithms
refer to any clustering techniques used to automatically determine
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.104743
Received 7 December 2021; Received in revised form 16 January 2022; Accepted 3 February 2022
Available online 23 February 2022
0952-1976/ ©2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.