A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
to analyze a steel’s annual sales data to analyze sales volume and
value concerning dependent attributes like products, customers and
quantities sold. In a similar report, the author confirmed that clustering
methods had been applied to finding groups of customers with similar
behavior given a large database of customer data containing their
properties and past buying records (Madhulatha, 2015). Rajagopal
attempted to identify the high-profit, high-value and low-risk cus-
tomers by one of the data mining techniques — customer clustering
(Rajagopal, 2011); Örnek & Subaşıdeveloped a methodology using K-
Means and E-M to identify the characteristics of customers (Örnek
and Subaşı, 2011). A study (M., Hanji, & Hanji, 2014) attempted
to achieve market segmentation of customers by using enhanced K-
Means, which uses similarity measures for efficient segmentation of
two-wheeler market data. In a similar study, Piggott (2015) designed
a new airline-based market segment model with data clustering by
investigating the performances of K-Means, expectation–maximization
(EM), X-means, hierarchical and random clustering.
7.13 Object recognition and character recognition
A wide range of clustering methods and algorithms has been pro-
posed for grouping views of 3D objects for object recognition in range
data. This is made possible by first representing objects in terms of
a library of range images of that object to make it possible to apply
clustering tasks. Some studies, such as Saxena et al. (2017), Chel-
lapilla et al. (2006) and Connell and Jain (1999), identified lexemes in
handwritten text for writer independent handwriting recognition using
clustering algorithms.
7.14 Data mining and big data mining
The increasing volume of data generated daily through different
social media and other systems has necessitated efficient and optimal
knowledge discovery from such huge unprocessed data. Some of these
data-generating media have siloed data, while others have provided
data integration and interoperation frameworks. Clustering methods
have been deployed into such data warehouses to facilitate discovering
knowledge and patterns that are not readily available. Moreover, big
data processing tools like Hadoop are now widely used to support
clustering operations. Data mining systems have also taken advan-
tage of clustering to deploy applications capable of supportive mining
information in detecting money laundry from magnificent banking
data, detecting trends of behavior or responses from among people
groups, and many more. The amount of data generated, collected
and accumulated at industrial companies require effective automated
knowledge discovery solutions. Benabdellah et al. (2018) investigated
the appropriateness of K-Means, agglomerative hierarchical, DBSCAN
and SOM to the problem of sparse datasets originating from industrial
companies.
7.15 Dimensionality reduction
Data reduction has leverage on clustering techniques in reducing
data dimensionality to automatically separate cases from fault cases.
This has invariably supported fault detection procedures in production
and plant systems. Thomas and Romagnoli reported that industries like
chemical plants applied clustering methods to overcome the challenge
of cutting-edge fault detection and diagnosis by applying the clustering
algorithms to the organization of data into groups before training is
possible (Thomas and Romagnoli, 2016). We argue that this challenge
of data reduction before grouping is not limited to chemical plants
alone but several industries needing to perform similar tasks. In Erdog-
mus and Kayaalp (2020), swarm-based, nature-inspired optimization
algorithms, including GA, PSO, biogeography-based, and Gray wolf
optimization algorithms, have been used for clustering iris datasets.
Another study combined K-Means with nature-inspired algorithms totransform high-dimensional time series data onto a lower-dimensional
space by selecting important points in the time series (Fuad, 2017).
Nanda (2014) addressed the problem of efficiently handling large
data related to environmental disaster management by proposing an
enhancement to nature-inspired clustering algorithms by developing
multi-objective and constrained approaches (Nanda, 2014). Sardar and
Ansari (2018a,b) emphasized the need for maximizing the MapRe-
duce programming paradigm for handling clustering challenges in real-
world large dataset clustering through evolving new partition-based
clustering (Sardar and Ansari, 2018a,b).
7.16 Data transfer through network
Nowadays, huge user-generated data are shared online via social
media sites and forums. An effective transmission system is required
to attain high-speed data transmission and prevent setbacks. However,
the application of clustering analysis assists in such a situation. For
instance, DBSCAN, AutoClass algorithm, and K-Means can be used to
group similar traffic detection with transport layer statistics centered
on the application’s unique features as they transmit via a particular
network (Erman et al., 2006). This facilitates data transfer by transfer-
ring a cluster of the same traffic and the network. It is preferred that
sensor data be transmitted via the sensor network to the processing end
be achieved using the lowest energy. In such an instance, hierarchical
clustering has greatly impacted such tasks by significantly decreasing
power consumption (Erman et al., 2006). This can be performed by
classifying wireless sensor networks into clusters.
7.17 Urban development
Contemporary society is speedily accepting Internet of Things (IoT)
technology. Modern society is rapidly adopting smart technology. It
is pertinent that this technology goes beyond electronic devices by
becoming parts of our everyday lives in such settings. As a result, we
must be mindful of positioning our towns, building effective power
supplies, and providing other basic needs. However, a data clustering
algorithm can achieve such tasks effectively. For instance, an Ant clus-
tering technique (K-Means) is a common algorithm that has recorded
success in setting stations to sit firm towns and economic centers
on roads (Meng and Liu, 2007). Moreover, the GFDBSCAN clustering
technique can be employed to decide on the geographic position for es-
tablishing social amenities such as schools, hospitals, banks, electricity,
etc. (Kisore & Koteswaraiah, 2017). For instance, K-Means clustering
has tremendously contributed to pattern identification in online cable-
dissemination supervision (Peng et al., 2013). Similarly, k-medoids
clustering has been successfully employed to diagnose the transformer’s
fault (Zhou et al., 2017). The chaotic population registration procedure
can be lessened by satellite imaging, but its high resolution triggers a
spatial mismatch using ground reference data. However, convolutional
expectation maximization can be employed to deal with such an issue
(Pomente and Aleandri, 2017).
7.18 Privacy protection
Data security and privacy are the most crucial matters requiring
consideration in the current digital globe. Reliable and data sharing
security can be attained by separating data into clusters and presenting
a critical cluster to investigators. The task can be performed by employ-
ing distributed clustering (Erkin et al., 2013) and K-Means clustering
(Vaidya and Clifton, 2003). In addition to shared data security, it is
imperative to secure information publicly available on the web. The
existence of illegal web replication has been discovered in several
cases. As a result, a hybrid of clustering algorithms has been effectively
designed to jointly connect several scam-webs, thereby simplifying
their identification and elimination (Drew and Moore, 2014). Another
33