A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
effectively. More so, under the same input configuration, Munec can
identify clusters of various densities, arbitrary shapes, and a large
amount of noise (Ros and Guillaume, 2019).
ii. Tabu Search Algorithm
The Tabu Search (TS) Algorithm is an optimization problem-solving
higher-level heuristic procedure designed to guide other methods in
escaping the possibility of getting trapped in local optimal (Glover,
1990). It uses a local search procedure guided to avoid local optimal,
rejecting already visited points (kept on the tabu list) in search space
(Batres, 2012). A thorough information search is enabled in tabu search
using a flexible memory structure. This aids the algorithm in strategi-
cally constraining and freeing the search process with varying period
memory functions for intensification and diversification. According to
Glover (1990), ‘‘the form of guidance provided by tabu search is highly
flexible and often motivates the creation of new types of moves and
evaluation criteria to take advantage of its adaptability to different
problem structures and strategic goals’’. TS has been credited with
finding solutions superior to the best solutions of other alternative
methods for various problem settings. Implementing the TS algorithm
is easy, and it can handle additional considerations. For instance, con-
straints that are not included in the original formulation of the problem
are given consideration. TS algorithm was applied to subset clustering
problems by Glover et al. in 1985 with a solution obtained in less
than one minute on a V77 minicomputer (Glover, 1990). As mentioned
earlier, three basic themes can be identified in the development of the
TS algorithm with its core embedded in the short-term memory process:
•Usage of flexible attribute-based memory structure
•An associated control mechanism for employing the memory
structure and
•Incorporation of memory functions of different time spans from
short to long term.
In recent times, there have been several reports on using TS algorithms
to solve various clustering problems. Cao et al. (2015) presented a TS
algorithm for solving cohesive clustering problems in various business
applications. They introduced an objective function for generating as
pure as possible clusters, maximizing the intracluster similarity as
much as possible. They employed the intensification and diversification
strategies of tabu search to enhance the clustering outcome. Sung and
Jin (2000) combined the tabu search algorithm with complimentary
packing and releasing procedures for solving the clustering problem. Lu
et al. (2018) proposed a tabu search-based clustering algorithm and its
parallel implementation on Spark. Their design was adapted to alleviate
the challenges associated with big data applications taking advantage
of the parallel processing based on the Spark framework. They found
the system superior to other similar systems in terms of scalability,
accuracy, and effectiveness. Other TS algorithm applications for solving
clustering problems can be found in Kharrousheh et al. (2011), Xia et al.
(2018), Yaghini and Ghazanfari (2020) and Ibrahim et al. (1994).
4.2.1.6 Square error clustering The square error clustering method is a
partitioning clustering method that assigns data points into a specified
number of clusters based on the sum of square error criterion functions.
The squared differences between each data point and the estimated
center value for each stated group have been divided into the data
point. In cases where the sum of squared error for a group of data
objects is equal to zero, the cluster’s data points are identical (very
close).
The formula for Sum of Square Error is:
𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 =𝑛∑
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)2
(3)
where𝑛represents the number of data points and 𝑥irepresents the 𝑖th
data point in the group and 𝑥is the center object relative to the group.
The k-means clustering algorithm is the best know squared error-based
clustering algorithm (Xu and Wunsch, 2005).
i. K-Means ClusteringThe K-Means clustering algorithm is a centroid-based partitioning
technique in which data objects are distributed into a specified number
of k clusters. The distribution is done through the use of an objective
function which accesses the quality of the partition, ensuring that the
similarities of objects within a cluster (intra-cluster similarity) is higher
compared with objects in another cluster (inter-cluster similarity). K-
Means clustering is a centroid-based technique, and it uses the mean
to represent the centroid of a cluster. The centroid of a cluster is a
measure of the center point of the cluster. Specified 𝑘numbers of data
points/objects are randomly selected from a set of the existing data
points as the representative center for 𝑘clusters. The Euclidean distance
between the remaining data points and each assumed center point is
then iteratively measured. The obtained value assigns the data point
to the cluster with the smallest distance. The intracluster similarity
is improved each time a new data point is given to the cluster by
computing a new mean using the objects previously assigned to the
clusters. The new mean is then used to reassign the data objects. This
procedure is repeated severally until stability is achieved.
The sum of square function for the Euclidean distances produces
compact and well-separated clusters. The K-Means algorithm tries to
minimize the sum of the squared error criterion (Ezugwu, 2020a;
Hartigan and Wong, 1979; MacQueen, 1967). The major problems
identified with K-Means clustering algorithms include the problem of
the initial definition of the number of clusters at the algorithm’s onset.
An efficient and universal method for determining the initial number
of clusters and partition is not found. K-Means algorithm is reported
to be very sensitive to initial centroid selection such that suboptimal
solution may be produced when wrongfully chosen (Punit, 2018). Also,
convergence to global optimum cannot be guaranteed. Using means as
a centroid limits the K-Means algorithm’s application to data objects
with numerical variables (Xu and Wunsch, 2005). Not only these, but
the K-Means algorithm is also sensitive to outliers (objects that are quite
far from the cluster centroid are forced into the cluster, distorting the
cluster’s shape (Saxena et al., 2017). It works on the assumption that
the variance of the distribution of each attribute is spherical and thus
produces a roughly equal number of observations. Moreover, the mem-
ory space requirement is high and the number of iterations to obtain a
stable distribution is unknown. Due to the simplicity of implementation
and low computation complexity (Jain, 2010), the K-Means algorithm
is still popular and widely used today (Ezugwu, 2020a).
Some research work extending K-Means has been reported. For
example, the G-means (Hamerly and Elkan, 2004) and the X-means
algorithms (Pelleg, 2000). The sum of square function for the Euclidean
distances for the K-Means algorithm is given as:
𝑑𝑖𝑘=𝑚∑
𝑗=1(𝑥𝑖𝑗−𝑐𝑘𝑗)2
(4)
where𝑑𝑖𝑘is the Euclidean distance, 𝑥𝑖𝑗is the𝑗th data point for 𝑖th
cluster and 𝑐𝑘𝑗is the centroid for the 𝑗th cluster.
The K-Means is arguably the most popular clustering method but
is plagued with drawbacks such as poor scalability, sensitivity to ini-
tialization and outliers, assumed knowledge of cluster count, and local
production rather than the global optimum. It is noteworthy to mention
that the most recent extensions and improvements on the K-Means seek
to advance the state-of-the-art in addressing these issues.
ii. K-MCI (K-Means modified cohort intelligence) Clustering algorithm
The K-MCI (K-Means modified cohort intelligence) is an efficient
hybrid evolutionary data clustering algorithm that combines the K-
Means algorithm with modified cohort intelligence (Krishnasamy et al.,
2014). Cohort Intelligence(CI) is an optimization algorithm inspired
by the natural and societal tendency of cohort candidates/individuals
learning from one another. It was proposed by Kulkarni et al. (2013).
In cohort intelligence, while observing every other candidate, each
candidate tries to improve their behavior. The MCI is a modified
cohort intelligence with improved accuracy and speed of convergence
of the traditional CI. In K-MCI, the K-Means algorithm enhances the
15