A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Genetic algorithm is a single objective evolutionary computation al-
gorithm that has been used for automatic clustering. Holland developed
the algorithm in the early 1970s (Holland, 1975). Its idea stemmed
from Charles Darwin’s principle of evolution by natural selection. In
genetic algorithms, some fundamental genetic ideas are borrowed and
artificially used in constructing robust search algorithms with minimal
problem information (Sheikh et al., 2008). The search is performed
in large, complex multimodal landscapes providing a near-optimal
solution for the search problem’s stated objectives or fitness function.
In GA-based clustering techniques, the capability of GA is applied to
evolve the proper number of clusters and provide appropriate clustering
(Sheikh et al., 2008).
The search space parameters are represented as strings called chro-
mosomes. A combination of cluster centroids encodes them, and a
collection of them forms the algorithm’s population. At the first genera-
tion, a random population representing different search space solutions
is created at the initial stage. Each chromosome has an objective and
fitness function associated with it which measures the degree of good-
ness of the chromosome. Using the principle of survival of the fittest,
the best fit among existing chromosomes is selected to ‘birth’ the next
generation of chromosomes through the biologically inspired operators:
the crossover and mutation operators. The selection, crossover and
mutation operation are iteratively repeated for a given number of
generations or until a stopping criterion is met (Goldberg, 1989). In GA-
based clustering techniques, the selection operators control the search
direction, while the crossover and mutation operators generate new
regions for search.
Several research efforts in developing GA-based clustering algo-
rithms have been reported in the literature. Krovi (1992) investigated
the potential feasibility of the use of GA for the purpose of cluster-
ing. Krishna and Murty (1999) proposed Genetic K-Means Algorithm
(GKA), a novel hybrid GA to find a globally optimized partition of a
given dataset into a specified number of clusters using the K-Means
algorithm to solve the problem of expensive crossover operations.
The K-Means operators were used as search operators in place of the
crossover. GKA searches faster and converges to the global optimum. It
minimized total within-cluster variation (TWCV) (Krishna and Murty,
1999). The Fast Genetic K-Means Algorithm (FGKA) by Lu et al. (2004a)
is another GA-based clustering algorithm inspired by GKA featuring
several improvements over it. Other GA-based clustering algorithms
include Incremental Genetic K-Means Algorithm (IGKA) (Lu et al.,
2004b), GA-clustering (Maulik and Bandyopadhyay, 2000), Genetically
Guided Algorithm GGA (Hall et al., 1999). The study conducted by the
following authors: Sheikh et al. (2008), José-García and Gómez-Flores
(2016); Ezugwu 2020a provides other references on further works on
GA-based clustering. Based on a different encoding scheme for GA-
based clustering, José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016) discussed four
different categories of automatic clustering based on GA: the Centroid-
based encoding of variable length, the Centroid-based encoding of fixed
length, the Label-based encoding, and the Binary-based encoding.
(b.) Swarm Intelligence Algorithm
i. Ant Colony Optimization Clustering Algorithm
The ACO algorithm is a stochastic metaheuristic for combinatorial
optimization (Dorigo and Stützle, 2004) classified under Swarm Intel-
ligence (SI). SI is a category of artificial intelligence paradigm inspired
by the study of emergent behavior in decentralized, self-organized
systems. SI methods aim to imitate the behavior and apply it in finding
solutions to hard computational problems. They are credited with hav-
ing simple design capability, scalability and robustness. There are other
algorithms based on the natural swarm behavior, such as bee colony,
flocks of birds, and schools of fish. However, the ACO is categorized
under ant-based techniques under SI. The Ant-based clustering methods
are directly modeled on ant’s social behavior (Dorigo and Stützle,
2004). It is the most widely used group of swarm-based clustering
algorithms. There are two major approaches to ant-based clustering:those that directly mimic ants’ behavioral nature and those that are
less directly inspired by nature. The first groups considered gathering
items and occasional sorting activities observed in the nest and brood
care of ants (Deneubourg et al., 1991). The behavior is directly imitated
in the clustering of abstract data where the clustering objective is
implicitly defined. The second group, which is less directly inspired by
nature, handles clustering tasks as an optimization task using the ant-
based optimization method to generate good or near-optimal clusters.
The second group has the advantage of explicit specification of the
objective function, offering a better understanding and prediction of
the clustering performance (Handl and Meyer, 2007). ACO clustering
algorithm falls under this second group. It is inspired by the foraging
behavior of mass recruiting ants. The ants use pheromones to mark
areas of promising forage and potential food sources (Handl and Meyer,
2007; Dorigo and Stützle, 2004; Dorigo et al., 1996). Runkler (2005)
and Saatchi and Hung (2005) carried out some research on the ACO-
based clustering algorithms. An ant-based clustering algorithm was
also presented by Kanade and Hall (2004), which finds the adequate
number of clusters and initializes the fuzzy c means algorithm. Handl
et al. (2006) worked on adaptive time-dependent transporter ant for
clustering.
ii. Particle Swarm Optimization
The PSO is another general-purpose optimization metaheuristic al-
gorithm inspired by the collective behaviors of unsophisticated agents
that interact locally among the neighboring individuals and their en-
vironment to cause more complex valuable behavior for solving opti-
mization problems (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016; Engelbrecht,
2005). Kennedy and Eberhart introduced the PSO as a population-based
search algorithm where individual population members are grouped
into a swarm. During optimization, the swarm of particles moves coop-
eratively in the defined region representing the objective function, with
each particle representing a complete solution. Each particle moves in
response to the influence of forces that attract it to a good position in
the search space which previously has been explored by other swarm
members or itself. According to José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016),
‘‘the particles explore the search space by adjusting their trajectories
iteratively according to self-experience and neighboring particles’’. Sev-
eral particles with randomly assigned velocities are initially placed at
random positions in the search space at the search’s commencement.
Each particle will evaluate the objective function at its position at every
iteration, updating its position, velocity, and memory for its individual
best position (Handl and Knowles, 2007).
Omran first introduced the application of PSO for solving clustering
problems in 2002. The algorithm used a fixed number of clusters,
and then PSO was used in searching for the optimal centroids of the
clusters and each data point assigned to the closest centroid. The work
was further extended in their presentation of the DCPSO — dynamic
clustering approach based on PSO (Omran et al., 2002; José-García
and Gómez-Flores, 2016). Another PSO-based segmentation algorithm
for automatically grouping image pixels into different regions was
proposed by Das et al. (2006). Other researches on PSO based clustering
algorithm can be found in (Qu et al., 2010; Ouadfel et al., 2010; Cura,
2012; Kuo et al., 2012, 2014; Van der Merwe and Engelbrecht, 2003;
Cui et al., 2005; Cui and Potok, 2005; Kanungo et al., 2000). It has been
observed that PSO-based clustering algorithms give excellent results in
quality clustering to find the correct cluster number. The PSO basic
algorithmic form is characterized by extreme simplicity. It is mostly
used to optimize the functions of continuous variables.
iii. Whale Optimization Algorithm
The Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) is a swarm based meta-
heuristic optimization algorithm proposed by Mirjalili and Lewis in
2016 (Mirjalili and Lewis, 2016). The WOA was inspired by the social
behavior of humpback whales with reference to their foraging behavior
termed bubble-net hunting strategy. In hunting school of krill or small
fishes close to the ocean surface, the humpback whales use two maneu-
vers: the ‘upward-spirals’ and the ‘double-loops’. In the first maneuver,
13