Self-Critical Reasoning
for Robust Visual Question Answering
Jialin Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
jialinwu@utexas.eduRaymond J. Mooney
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
mooney@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) deep-learning systems tend to capture superﬁ-
cial statistical correlations in the training data because of strong language priors
and fail to generalize to test data with a signiﬁcantly different question-answer
(QA) distribution [ 1]. To address this issue, we introduce a self-critical training
objective that ensures that visual explanations of correct answers match the most
inﬂuential image regions more than other competitive answer candidates. The
inﬂuential regions are either determined from human visual/textual explanations or
automatically from just signiﬁcant words in the question and answer. We evaluate
our approach on the VQA generalization task using the VQA-CP dataset, achiev-
ing a new state-of-the-art i:e:; 49.5% using textual explanations and 48.5% using
automatically annotated regions.
1 Introduction
Recently, Visual Question Answering (VQA) [ 4] has emerged as a challenging task that requires
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems to compute answers by jointly analyzing both natural language
questions and visual content. The state-of-the-art VQA systems [ 8,2,1,3,12,33,25,29,14,15,21]
achieve high performance when the training and test question-answer (QA) pairs are sampled from the
same distribution. However, most of these systems fail to generalize to test data with a substantially
different QA distribution. In particular, their performance drops catastrophically on the recently
introduced Visual Question Answering under Changing Priors (VQA-CP) [ 1] dataset. The strong
language priors encourage systems to blindly capture superﬁcial statistical correlations in the training
QA pairs and simply output the most common answers, instead of reasoning about the relevant image
regions on which a human would focus. For example, since about 40% of questions that begin with
“what sport” have the answer “tennis”, systems tend to learn to output “tennis” for these questions
regardless of image content.
A number of recent VQA systems [28, 35, 25, 20] learn to not only predict correct answers but also
be “right for the right reasons” [ 23,25]. These systems are trained to encourage the network to focus
on regions in the image that humans have somehow annotated as important (which we will refer to as
“important regions.”). However, many times, the network also focuses on these important regions
even when it produces a wrong answer. Previous approaches do nothing to actively discourage this
phenomenon, which we have found occurs quite frequently.1For example, as shown in Figure 1, we
ask the VQA system, “What is the man eating?”. The baseline system predicts “hot dog” but focuses
on the banana because hot dog appears much more frequently in the training data. What’s worse, this
error is hard to detect when only analyzing the correct answer “banana” that has been successfully
grounded in the image.
1We exam these situations by designing a metric called false sensitivity rate ( FSR ) in Sec. 5.2.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.