or three. These language priors allow VQA systems to take a shortcut when answering questions
by only focusing on the questions without reasoning about the visual content. In order to prevent
this shortcut, VQA v2 [ 4] balances the answer distribution so that there exist at least two similar
images with different answers for each question. Recently, [ 1] introduce a diagnostic reconﬁguration
of the VQA v2 dataset called VQA-CP where the distribution of the QA pairs in the training set
is signiﬁcantly different from those in the test set. Most state-of-the-art VQA systems are found
to highly rely on language priors and experience a catastrophic performance drop on VQA-CP. We
evaluate our approach on VQA-CP in order to demonstrate that it generalizes better and is less
sensitive to distribution changes.
2.3 Improving VQA using Human Explanations
The desired property for VQA systems is to not only infer the correct answers to visual questions
but also base the answer on image regions that a human believes are important, i:e:; right for the
right reasons. The VQA systems that address this issue can be classiﬁed into two categories. The
ﬁrst trend is to build a system whose model is inherently interpretable. For example, GVQA [ 1]
explicitly disentangles the vision and language components by introducing a separate visual concept
veriﬁer and answer cluster classiﬁers. The other trend is to align a systems’ explanation to human
experts’ explanations for the correct answers. [ 35,20] align the internal attention weights over the
image to the human attention maps. The work most related to ours is HINT [ 25], which enforces the
system’s gradient-based importance scores for each detected object to have the same rankings as its
human importance scores. In contrast to prior work, our approach not only encourages the systems to
be sensitive to the important regions identiﬁed by humans, but also decrease the incorrect answers’
sensitivity to these regions.
3 Preliminaries
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce our base Bottom-up Top-down (UpDn) VQA system2[2]. Then, we
describe our method for constructing a proposed object set that covers the most inﬂuential objects on
which a human would focus when answering the question.
3.1 Bottom-Up Top-Down VQA
A large number of previous VQA systems [ 8,5,21] utilize a trainable Top-Down attention mechanism
over convolutional features to recognize relevant image regions. [ 2] introduced complementary
bottom-up attention that ﬁrst detects common objects and attributes so that the top-down attention
can directly model the contribution of higher-level concepts. This UpDn approach is heavily used in
recent work [25, 31, 14, 32, 26] and signiﬁcantly improves VQA performance.
Technically, on the vision side, for each image, UpDn systems ﬁrst extract a visual feature set V=
fvi;:::;vjVjgfor each image whose element viis a feature vector for the i-th detected object. On
the language side, UpDn systems sequentially encode each question Qto produce a question vector
qusing a standard single-layer GRU [ 6] denoted by h,i:e:q=h(Q). Letfdenote the answer
prediction operator that takes both visual features and question features as input and predicts the
conﬁdence for each answer ain the answer candidate set A,i:e:P (ajV;Q) =f(V;q). The VQA
task is framed as a multi-label regression problem with the gold-standard soft scores as targets in
order to be consistent with the evaluation metric. In particular, the standard binary cross entropy loss
Lvqais used to supervise the sigmoid-normalized outputs.
3.2 Proposed Inﬂuential Object Set Construction
Our approach ideally requires identifying important regions that a human considers most critical
in answering the question. However, directly obtaining such a clear set of inﬂuential objects from
either visual or textual explanations is hard, as the visual explanations also highlight the neighbor
objects around the most inﬂuential one, and grounding textual explanations in images is still an active
research ﬁeld. We relax this requirement by identifying a proposed set of inﬂuential objects Ifor
each QA pair. This set may we noisy and contain some irrelevant objects, but we assume that it at
2The key approach used by the VQA-challenge winning entries in the last two years.
3