Hot dog 
    (baseline)>Banana 
(self-critical) Hot dog 
(self-critical)
Human Visual 
    AttentionBanana 
(baseline) <4139
30
20
Pizza   Hot  Donut  Sand
           Dog             wich1312
4
2
Cake   Banana  No  burritoQuestion: What is the man eating?                 Baseline Prediction: Hot Dog (wrong)                                           Our Prediction: Banana (correct)    
Test Answer 
DistributionTraining Answer 
    Distribution
(a) (g)(f)(e)(d)(c)(b)Figure 1: Example of a common answer misleading the prediction even though the VQA system
has the right reasons for the correct answer. Figure (a) shows the important regions extracted from
human visual attention. Figure (b), (e) show the answers’ distribution for the question “What is the
man eating?” in the training and test dataset. Figure (c), (d) show the most inﬂuential region for the
prediction “hot dog” and “banana” using the baseline UpDn VQA system and Figure (f), (g) show the
inﬂuential region for the prediction “hot dog” and “banana” using the VQA system after being trained
with our self-critical objective. The number on the bounding box shows the answer’s sensitivity to
the object.
To address this issue, we present a “self-critical” approach that directly criticizes incorrect answers’
sensitivity to the important regions. First, for each QA, we determine the important region that most
inﬂuences the network’s prediction of the correct answer. We then penalize the network for focusing
on this region when its predicted answer for this question is wrong .
Our self-critical approach is end-to-end trainable and only requires that the base VQA system be
differentiable to the visual content, and thus can be applied to most current state-of-the-art systems.
We investigated three approaches to determining important regions. First, like the previous work
[28,35,25,20], we used regions that humans have explicitly marked as important. However, this
requires a fair bit of extra human effort to provide such detailed annotations. So we also explored
using human textual VQA explanations from the VQA-X [ 18] dataset to determine important objects
which are then grounded to important regions in the image. Finally, we tried determining important
regions by only using objects mentioned in the question or answer and grounding them in the image,
which requires noadditional human annotation of the VQA training data.
We evaluate our approach using the UpDn VQA system [ 2] on the VQA-CP dataset [ 1] and achieve
a new state-of-the-art performance (currently 47.7%): i:e:49.5% overall score with VQA-X [ 18]
textual explanations, 49.1 % with VQA-HAT [ 7] visual explanations and 48.5% using just mentioned
objects in the questions and answers. Our code is available at https://github.com/jialinwu17/
Self_Critical_VQA .
2 Related Work
2.1 Human Explanations for VQA
There are two main kinds of human explanations available for the most popular VQA dataset [ 4],
i:e:; visual and textual explanations. The VQA-HAT dataset [ 7] is a visual explanation dataset that
collects human attention maps by giving human experts blurred images and asking them to determine
where to deblur in order to answer a given visual question. Alternatively, [ 18] presents the VQA-X
dataset that associates a textual explanation with each QA pair, which a human has provided to justify
an answer to a given question. In this work, we utilize both of these kinds of explanations to provide
the important regions.
2.2 Language Priors in VQA
Language priors [ 1,9] in VQA refer to the fact that question types and their answers are highly
correlated. For instance, questions that begin with “How many” are usually answered by either two
2