What utensil is pictured? 
∇"𝑝(𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑘|𝑄,𝒱)Influence StrengthenLossORThere is a fork near the cake.Self Critical LossAnswer Prediction∇"𝑝(𝑘𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑒|𝑄,𝒱)
Knife(0.72)Fork(0.66)
Proposal object setExplaining prediction “fork”Explaining prediction “knife”
Extracting the most influential objectVisual feature set 𝒱Original image
Human visual explanationHuman textual explanation
The most influential objectFigure 2: Model overview. In the left top block, the base UpDn VQA system ﬁrst detects a set
of objects and predicts an answer. We then analyze the correct answer’s sensitivity (Fork) to the
detected objects via visual explanation and extract the most inﬂuential one in the proposal object set
as the most inﬂuential object, which is also further strengthened via the inﬂuence strengthen loss
(left bottom block). Finally, we analyze the competitive incorrect answers’ sensitivities (Knife) to
the most inﬂuential object and criticize the sensitivity until the VQA system answers the question
correctly (right block). The number on a bounding box is the answer’s sensitivity to the given object.
least includes the most relevant object. As previously mentioned, we explore three separate methods
for constructing this proposal set, as described below:
Construction from Visual Explanations . Following HINT [ 25], we use the VQA-HAT dataset
[7] as the visual explanation source. HAT maps contain a total of 59;457image-question pairs,
corresponding to approximately 9% of the VQA-CP training and test set. We also inherit HINT’s
object scoring system that is based on the normalized human attention map energy inside the proposal
box relative to the normalized energy outside the box. We score each detected object from the
bottom-up attention and build the potential object set by selecting the top jIjobjects.
Construction from Textual Explanations . Recently, [ 18] introduced a textual explanation dataset
that annotates 32;886image-question pairs, corresponding to 5% of the entire VQA-CP dataset.
To extract the potential object set, we ﬁrst assign part-of-speech (POS) tags to each word in the
explanation using the spaCy POS tagger [ 11] and extract the nouns in the sentence. Then, we select
the detected objects whose cosine similarity between the Glove embeddings [ 19] of their category
names and any of the extracted nouns’ is greater than 0:6. Finally, we select the jIjobjects with the
highest similarity.
Construction from Questions and Answers . Since the above explanations may not be available in
other datasets, we also consider a simple way to extract the proposal object set from just the training
QA pairs alone. The method is quite similar to the way we construct the potential set from textual
explanations. The only difference is that instead of parsing the explanations, we parse the QA pairs
and extract nouns from them.
4 Approach
In this section, we present our self-critical approach to prevent the most common answer from
dominating the correct answer given the proposal sets of inﬂuential objects. Figure 2 shows an
overview of our approach. Besides the UpDn VQA system (left top block), our approach contains
two other components, we ﬁrst recognize and strengthen the most inﬂuential objects (left bottom
block), and then we criticize incorrect answers that are more highly ranked than the correct answer
and try to make them less sensitive to these key objects (right block). As recent research suggests that
4