Once we start building actual instances of the plans, we will be 
producing unique physical instances or the “Physical Twins”. 
It is at this stage that we are creating the Digital Twin Instances 
(DTIs) of the individual physical products. It is critical that 
we capture this information, because this provides the as-built  
of the individual physical products that we will rely on as 
we make product changes for the rest of the physical twin’s  
lifecycle.
Because we now have an actual physical twin, we no longer 
have a tolerance of the geometry that we want to build. We actu -
ally have a physical measurement of what we did build. We 
will capture what we actually built, the testing we did on that  
specific physical twin, the serial numbers of important assem -
blies and components that have gone into that particular physical  
twin, and the software versions that we have embedded into that 
instance. We still want to couple the information of the DTP 
with that DTI and not duplicate information that we do not need  
to duplicate.
2.1.3 Operations/sustainment phase . When the product is  
completed and put into use, we obviously move into the  
operations/sustainment or usage phase. The DTIs are connected 
to specific physical twins and will remain connected throughout  
the entire life of that physical twin.
We would not only want to capture physical changes to the 
product, but, for complex products, we would like to capture 
behavioral profiles. How did the product perform in actual use 
given the inputs that this system, our product, received? For  
aircraft, what were the various flight profiles, and how did that  
aircraft respond and perform?
It is in this phase that we create our DTA, which is all the prod -
ucts that we did build. Collecting, aggregating, and correlating  
input information with performance output will allow us to 
assess and predict performance. Collecting sufficient infor -
mation about the correlation of certain sensor readings with  
subsequent component failures will allow us to replace compo -
nents when we see that same pattern of sensor readings. If we 
can capture a pattern of component and performance degradation,  
we can feed that into a learning loop for future products.
While the concept of the digital twin encompasses the entire 
product lifecycle, it is these individual product types that line 
up with the phases of the lifecycle. The value of the digital 
twin, especially for complex products, is that it is product cen -
tric rather than functional centric. Information from these prod -
ucts will be populated and consumed over the entire product’s  
life and not siloed in any single function.
2.1.4 Disposal phase . The disposals phase is an often over -
looked part of the product lifecycle. Interest in the disposal 
phase ebbs and flows primarily with the activity of government  
regulation. When there is high government regulation interest, 
the disposal phase gets a great deal of attention. Conversely when 
there is low regulation activity, this phase gets far less attention.  
(Grieves 2006 , pgs. 106-109)However, there are good business reasons to focus on this phase 
and apply the digital twin concepts. It is in this phase that the 
specific physical twin ceases to exist. There is very little reason 
for the digital twin to suffer the same fate. The cost of main -
taining the digital twin after its physical twin has been disposed  
of is close to zero.
There are two primary reasons for the digital twin in the  
disposal phase. First is that the information needed to dispose of 
the physical twin safely and efficiently would have originated 
in the create phase. This may have been years, decades, or even 
up to a century or more before. Information should reside in 
the digital twin and guide the disposer into disassembling and  
safely disposing of the components, especially toxic ones.
The Circular Economy has a goal of recycling as much of a 
product as possible ( Zeiss et al ., 2020 ). Even if the interest is 
not environmental, the capability to recycle the material of prod -
ucts and reuse them in new products generally makes good  
economic sense.
The second reason is that there may be interesting design and  
product features that exist in this product that has reached its  
physical end of life. Without the continuation of the digital  
twin, this information will be lost with the disposal of the  
physical product. The ability to use this information informs  
future designs and saves the expense and time of “reinventing  
the wheel.” Again, information is a replacement for wasted  
physical resources. Losing the information that might prove  
useful for new products is unfortunate and a cost that could  
be avoided.
2.2 The “digital twin exists ONLY after there is a physical 
product” fallacy
There is a fallacy2 that the digital twin does not exist until 
and unless there is a physical product3. Along with a simple 
lack of understanding the digital twin concept, this may be an  
attempt to over specify the “twin” metaphor.
Metaphors are extremely powerful in invoking complex mental  
constructs and even entire mental spaces in humans. Metaphors  
are not simply comparisons, but generative devices that allow 
rich understandings, new perspectives, and generative ideas 
that open up areas of opportunities that had not previously  
been thought of ( Grieves, 2000 ).
The twin metaphor has only two key attributes: duality and 
strong similarity. With respect to this fallacy discussion, there 
is no metaphorical requirement for timeline simultaneity or 
for the precedence of one type of twin before another type of  
twin. That is, there is no requirement that a twin only exists if 
its counterpart exists simultaneously. Nor is there a requirement  
R
2 See for example, the AIAA Digital Twin Position paper ( https://www.aiaa.
org/docs/default-source/uploadedfiles/issues-and-advocacy/policy-papers/  
digital-twin-institute-position-paper-(december-2020).pd f).
3 In fact, Digital Twins are beginning to be proposed for constructs where 
there is not a distinct physical object, such as supply chains, financial  
systems, process systems, logistic systems.
Page 5 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024