that point in time into the future to determine how the product  
would perform given this new T0 current state and environment.
This would allow the IDT to predict future adverse events that 
would occur if the product continued on its current course. 
With the exponential advances of computing power, the IDT 
could run multiple scenarios and use Bayesian probabilities 
to give probabilities of adverse events, allowing the human  
to assess the risk.
The second characteristic of FRS is to prevent human biases 
from tainting and even preventing good decisions. Humans 
have two biases that often lead to disastrous decision. These 
biases are the confirmation bias and the optimism bias  
(Kahneman, 2011 ).
Confirmation bias is the human tendency to only value infor -
mation that confirms the perception that a person already has.  
Optimism bias is the tendency to view optimistic outcomes as 
having a much higher probability than they actually have. Exam -
ples abound of disasters that have resulted from these biases, the 
Tenerife accident discussed above, the Air France 447 accident  
off of Brazil ( Palmer, 2013 ), the BP Gulf Disaster ( Graham  
et al., 2011 ), and many others ( Perrow, 1984 ).
On that basis, the IDT can provide valuable assistance to 
humans. The IDT can process all the data and information avail -
able to it in an accurate and unbiased manner. It can explore a 
wide variety of scenarios by modifying parameters, calculating  
probabilities, and providing humans with estimates of outcomes 
based on current conditions and actions.
7.5 Intelligent digital twins throughout the lifecycle
The digital twin’s value is always driven by use cases. The  
question always needs to be: can the information from the  
digital twin replace wasted physical resources of time, energy, 
and material? If it can, and the cost of collecting, processing,  
storing, and retrieving the information is less than the cost of 
wasting material resources, then the information should be  
created and used.
Figure 8  shows common digital twin use cases organized by 
product lifecycle phase. This is by no means a comprehen -
sive list, but it shows a scope of the usage of digital twins in  
today’s modern product organization.
Our intent is to move as much work from the physical world 
to the virtual world as we can and as makes economic sense.  
Virtual bits will continue get become cheaper at an exponential  
rate. Physical atoms will become more expensive, if only at  
the rate of inflation.
7.5.1 Create phase . The create phase is obviously the most 
important part of product development. It is in this phase 
that we start the life of a new product. Theoretically there is  
nothing that exists at the beginning of this phase. There is no  
digital twin and certainly no physical twin.The reality is that we rarely start from a blank sheet of paper 
for a revolutionary new product. The vast majority of the 
time we start with some components that are already in exist -
ence and that may be repurposed for the new product. A great 
deal of the time we are developing the next generation of a  
previous product.
If as stated previously, we want to create the product  
virtually, test the product virtually, manufacture the product  
virtually, and support and sustain the product virtually, then 
the create phase is about using as much virtual capability as we  
can. It is in this create phase that the IDT, linking AI and M&S,  
can provide tremendous value.
Our first order of business is to create the requirements that 
we want this product to have. These requirements will drive the 
development of the DTP that will provide the foundation for 
the physical products to come. This DTP is defined as all the  
products that we can make, with all its variants.
Once we have our requirements, which in essence is the new 
product system, this forms the basis for our new DTP. We use 
the tools of the Product Lifecycle Management system (PLM) 
that share the characteristics of our IDT. We want this capabil -
ity to be active, online, goal seeking, and anticipatory. We can  
almost think of this as an uber digital twin.
This is where cued availability comes in the play, with an active 
IDT looking to assist the product developers. It is active. As 
a developer works on a new product, from requirements to 
full product design and manufacturing realization, the IDT  
can assist him or her. The IDT can monitor the work and 
present the designer with material that he or she may not even  
know that they need. This requires constant online access.
The IDT can assess shapes and present exemplars of things 
already designed in order to assist. It can look for designs Figure 8.  Digital twin use cases.
Page 13 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024