algorithms to computer-based, self-aware intelligent entities 
(Kurzweil, 2005 ).
I define intelligence as goal seeking while minimizing resources. 
Nature does goal seeking in survival of the fittest. However, 
nature does not minimize resource. Nature attempts to produce 
all possible combinations and allows the environment to select 
the fittest, eliminating all the rest. Nature can take eons of time 
and nearly infinite resources to accomplish this. Humans do  
not have that luxury.
6.1.1 The state of AI . The idea that computers might repli -
cate human intelligence has been around since at least the mid -
dle of the last century. The most famous example of this is 
the Turing test, which was proposed by Alan Turing in 1950 
(Turing, 1950 ). Basically, the test proposes that if a human 
observer cannot tell the difference between another human 
being and a computer by asking a series of questions, the Turing  
Test is passed.
The Turing test has been deemed not rigorous enough. It relies 
on an observer who might rate high on the ability to be deceived, 
so other tests have been proposed. The Winograd Schema 
Challenge ( Levesque et al ., 2012 ) is a test that asks ambigu -
ous questions. This relies on human common sense that the  deep-learning systems of today find difficult if not impossible to 
reproduce.
Take for example the simple statement, “the cat sat on the 
mat, and it yawned.” Ask any human of even a very young age,  
and we will immediately get the correct answer. A computer  
currently finds this kind of question very difficult, requiring  
both extensive ontological and deep learning programming.
In addition, there is a question as to whether we really want 
computers to replicate human intelligence. In fact, there is a 
serious question as to whether computers can replicate human 
intelligence. What often is overlooked is that the human  
brain and computers have very different hardware.
Computer hardware is implemented in digital circuitry. The 
human brain is implemented in interconnected neurons, with 
specialized areas for different mental functions ( Seung, 2012 ). 
A cognitive science area theorizes that the way humans think is 
hugely shaped by its embedded connections with human sensory  
and motor processes ( Ramachandran, 2011 ).
The intent here is not to have a comprehensive discussion of 
what does or does not constitute artificial intelligence, but to  
discuss elements that make a digital twin appear to be intelligent.  
Figure 6.  Moore’s Law – logarithmic plot of transistor density.
Page 9 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024