the results. For an airplane, this could mean that the two planes 
jet engine would be turned on, and the planes sent down 
the physical and virtual runways to take off. This would be  
an internal force.
The observer could also ask that once the planes were flying  
that they be put into a steep dive and see the forces that 
acted upon them. That would be an external force test. If the 
observer could not tell the difference between the physical 
and the virtual performance, then it passed the Grieves Test of  
Performance.
The third test is a test of reflectivity. Reflectivity was defined 
as any change to the physical product would be reflected in 
its digital twin. Again, we have the observer and the physi -
cal twin and digital twin versions. In this particular case, the 
test is that the observer can see no differences between the two  
versions. Using an example of an oil rig, if the observer were 
to compare every valve setting, every gauge, every pump 
serial number, there would be no difference between the 
two versions. If that was the case, then the Grieves Test of  
Reflectivity would be passed. 
These tests were meant to be ideal test. They were always 
meant to be tied to use cases that would provide value to the 
user. It was intended that only those things that provided value 
would be the things that were intended to be tested. If there 
was no value in disassembling a product and determining if the  
physical twin and digital twin versions were identical, then 
that would not be part of the test. If a component of the oil 
rig above was serialized, but there was no interest in track -
ing serial numbers, then the physical twin and digital twin  
versions not being identical would be irrelevant.
So where are we a decade and a half later? The short answer is 
that these test of virtuality are easily passed on a daily basis. A 
decade and half ago, we were close to passing the visual test. 
Today there is no question that the visualization of physical 
products and its digital twins have the fidelity and granularity  
that we need for most use cases.
The behavior and reflectivity tests were proposed before  
Internet of Things (IoT) became so prevalent. Back then, the 
issue for these tests was going to be being able to get the appro -
priate sensoring data in order to maintain the digital twin  
version. Today with our smart products, we routinely get the  
sensoring information that we need in order to pass both 
those tests. Again, we need to remember that this is driven by 
use cases. The value to the user needs to be there in order to 
expend the resources necessary to maintaining the digital twin  
for all these tests.
At this time, I would like to propose a new Grieves Test of  
Virtuality. This is Grieves Test of Prediction. This is a slightly 
different test and much harder. In this test version, the observer 
asks that the digital twin version be moved a certain amount 
of time into the future. The observer then waits that amount of  
time. When that time has elapsed, the observer now  compares the two versions. If the states of the physical twin and 
digital twin are effectively identical, then the Grieves Test of  
Prediction is passed.
6.3 Merging AI with M&S
The natural habitat of AI is in the virtual world. It is much  
better suited in dealing with the information of the virtual world 
than with the tangible structures and environment of the physical  
world. In dealing with the physical world, AI is dependent  
on sensors to capture the physical world state changes in  
context and relies on physical actuators to cause changes in  
tangible structures.
To provide a simple example, a pilot of an airplane sitting on a 
taxiway waiting for take-off can, at a glance, assess the situa -
tion they are in: the state of the runway, the position of other 
aircraft, the state of the engines, the weather conditions, the 
trustworthiness of air control, and numerous other factors. The  
sensoring and programming required to have an AI system 
have all that same information and replace the pilot completely  
is a daunting if not insurmountable task.
That is not to say that AI does not have a role in assisting the 
pilot, even on mundane taxiways. It does. With the informa -
tion and assessments AI can do, it could prevent disasters such 
as the 1977 Tenerife 747 accident that was the result of a tragic 
miscalculation by the pilot ( Weick, 1990 ). The AI would have 
alerted the pilot that a crash was unavoidable in time for the  
takeoff to be aborted.
Where AI is the most at home is in the virtual world of M&S. 
In fact, it acts more like nature than like humans. In the  
virtual world, AI is goal seeking but with a much-relaxed 
requirement to minimize resources. As computing capability  
continues its exponential growth, the capability of simulating  
more and more possible combinations and evaluating their 
outcomes becomes faster and less expensive. Crash testing  
a vehicle physically is an expensive proposition. Crash test -
ing a virtual vehicle gets less and less expensive over time 
because of Moore’s Law. This means that more and more testing  
variations can be done for minimal costs.
7 Intelligent Digital Twins
The digital twin has traditionally had a characteristic of  
passiveness. The digital twin has been described as a reposi -
tory of product information. Information is populated in the 
digital twin and consumed from it. The digital twin could be 
interrogated by its users to use information in order to replace  
wasted physical resources.
The Intelligent Digital Twin (IDT) has these characteristics:
•    Active
•    Online
•    Goal seeking
•    Anticipatory
Page 11 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024