This is where the digital twin differs from Industry 4.0. Indus -
try 4.0 has as its goal the reduction of time from an adverse 
event to its remediation ( Schuh et al ., 2016 ). If we can collect  
sufficient information of our factory equipment, we should 
be able to predict failures and fix them before they occur  
(Nikolopoulos, 2020 ).
The other anticipatory aspect is to be looking for weak  
signals or anomalies. These are signals that are often ignored by 
humans, but an indication that something is going wrong ( Weick 
& Sutcliffe, 2007 ). The IDT would process this information  
taking into account that looking for weak signals is important,  
so that the IDT can detect conditions that will result in failures  
in the future and surface them early.
7.5.3 Operate/sustain . In the operation/sustainment phase, there 
are numerous opportunities for the IDT. The complex products 
of today, modern jet fighters, massive drilling platforms, and 
sophisticated medical devices, are beyond human processing 
capabilities in order to understand exactly what these products 
are doing. The IDT in this phase needs to be active in looking  
for issues of performance, comparing them to the perform -
ance expected, and either adjusting software to compensate 
for the degradation, alerting humans to the issue early on, or 
at least identifying the problem for future generations of the 
product. At a minimum, we want to close the loop between the  
operations/sustainment phase and the creation phase. We do this 
by feeding the data of the actual performance of the product  
to the designers and engineers who create these products.
While the classical digital twin could collect a great deal of this 
information, it was on a periodic basis, with potential long lag 
times between collecting the data and transmitting that infor -
mation to its digital twin. The online aspect means that we  
would be collecting information on a constant basis.
Goal seeking is built in the requirements for the product, so the 
intent of the IDT would be to continually to match the actual 
performance with requirements and make whatever adjust -
ments were required to obtain the required performance. This 
would also mean that the IDT would learn as the product  
matured in life so that it could compensate for degradation. It 
would then feed that information to the Digital Twin Aggregate  
so that it would be propagated to other DTIs.
The emergent aspect of complex systems due to AI being incor -
porated into these products make IDTs critical. The initial 
product designers of these systems are by definition unable to predict all the system responses. The IDT will be needed to  
provide overwatch capability for these emergent systems. As 
the AI changes parameters of the system, these changes need to  
be transmitted to its DTI. At a minimum, the DTI will have a 
record of the changes made to analyze if something goes wrong, 
and the physical twin is damaged or destroyed. In the ideal situ -
ation, the intelligent DTI will predict the adverse condition  
and intervene to prevent it from happening.
8 Conclusions
Digital twins have emerged as a top technological initiative 
in the 21st century. The ability to move work from the physi -
cal world into the virtual world will enable products to be 
faster, better, and cheaper6. The proliferation of products that 
are more complex with emergent capabilities will require the 
information capabilities of digital twins throughout the entire  
product lifecycle. Digital twins exist from the moment there 
is an intended  product since the information about a product  
will always precede its physical manifestation.
Digital twins will need to evolve in order to meet the challenge 
of increasingly complex products. The advances in AI and M&S 
will make possible the Intelligent digital twin. Digital twins 
will move from being an information repository to providing  
constant guidance to their human users.
The characteristics of IDTs are that they are active, online, goal 
seeking, and anticipatory. This will enable IDTs, enabled by the 
exponential increases in computing capability, to apply their 
abilities in moving in time to predict the future by constantly  
performing simulations of possible futures from current  
states. The Front Running Simulations (FRS) of IDTs will  
provide, at a minimum, overwatch of their associated Physical  
Twins and ideally predict adverse condition so as to prevent  
those adverse events from happening.
The movement of work from the physical world to the virtual 
world will be a hallmark of the 21st century. AI and M&S will 
enable Intelligent Digital Twins and will greatly assist humans in 
the work with developing emergent products. Intelligent Digital  
Twins will not replace humans.
Data availability
No data are associated with this article.
R
6 There was a longstanding joke at NASA that went: “Faster, better,  
cheaper – pick two.”
References
 Baldwin WC, Felder WN, Sauser BJ: Taxonomy of increasingly complex 
systems.  Int J Ind Syst Eng.  2011; 9(3): 298–316.  
Publisher Full Text  
 Graham B, Reilly W, Beinecke F, et al. : Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling . National Commission on the BP Deepwater 
Horizon Oil Spill Offshore Drilling - GPO. 2011.  
Reference Sourc e
 Grieves M: Business is war: An investigation into metaphor use in Internet 
Page 15 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024