7.1 Active
A key characteristic of the IDT is that it is active. A tacit 
understanding of the current digital twin is that it is passive. 
It is usually referred to as a repository of product informa -
tion. To obtain that information, users inquire or search for  
information that they need. While predictions are part of the 
current digital twin, it is usually in the framework of users  
initiating the request for specific predictions of their choosing.
The IDT actively assists working with and providing informa -
tion as it is needed. As discussed previously, the intent is to  
not replace humans and human intelligence. It is to augment it.
7.2 Online
Referring back to the digital twin model in Figure 1 , one of 
the three elements is the communication links between the  
digital twin and its environment and the physical twin and its  
environment. The communication goes both ways. We feed 
data from the physical side to the virtual side and information  
goes from the virtual side to the physical side.
The frequency of the communications between the physi -
cal and virtual is rarely mentioned. When it has been, it is tied 
to a particular use case. Air bags deploying require instant  
communication. Maintenance updates could be batched and  
could lag for days.
However, even the instant air bag deployment communication  
is passive. It requires that data be sent from the physical  
airbag system to its digital twin in order for some action to 
occur. The communications between the digital twin and its 
physical counterpart is offline until the physical counterpart  
performs some action.
For the digital twin to be active requires that it be online. What 
this means is that the DT continues to scan the PT and its  
environment. The primary initialization moves from the physi -
cal side of the DT model to the active DT side. Depend -
ing on the phase of the lifecycle, the physical side includes 
the environment, the physical twin, and the humans involved. 
The DT evolves from a passive repository to a proactive  
repository and constant agent assistance. 
7.3 Goal seeking
In the current digital twin model, humans provide all the goal 
seeking. With the IDT, goal seeking is shared between it and 
its human users. This means that a key aspect will be the crea -
tion and articulation of goals throughout the phases of the  
product lifecycle.
There will need to be defined goals for the different phases. For 
the creation phase, the goals are related to developing products  
that meet the defined requirements. In the build phase, the 
goals are producing these products using the minimum 
amount of physical resources, i.e., time, energy, and materials.  
In the operate/sustain phase, the goals are the continued  
operations with minimum downtime and performance that meets the requirements set out in the create phase. The disposal  
phase goals are the safe and effective disposal and recycling.
The intent of the IDT is to assist and augment the human in 
reaching the goals that have always been present. It is not to  
change the goals.
7.4 Anticipatory
The IDT is anticipatory. This is something that humans instinc -
tively do, although sometimes not very successfully. As goal 
seeking/resource minimizing agents, humans attempt to look 
ahead in time and adjust their current actions to obtain their 
future goals. A common example of that is driving. Humans  
continually evaluate the surrounding vehicles and adjust their 
direction and velocity to avoid collisions. That humans do not  
do a wonderful job is evidenced by the frequency of accidents.
The IDT could be of major assistance to humans in at least two 
major areas: performing complex calculations to accurately 
model and simulate physical events and preventing human  
biases from tainting decision making.
I have in previous works discussed this type of capability  
and given it the name of Front Running Simulation (FRS) 
(Grieves, 2019 ). FRS attempts to anticipate the future and run 
out “in front” of the physical twin. FRS is a constant running  
simulation using the digital twin of complex products.
We have discussed the first characteristic of FRS at length in 
the section on M&S. A core characteristic of the digital twin 
is the ability to virtually model and simulate physical events. 
It relies on the previously discussed digital twin’s ability to  
manipulate time.
For the anticipatory IDT, what we would like is the IDT to 
be constantly running simulations of the product as the prod -
uct performs its duties. Figure 7  takes Figure 5  and adds the  
aspect of the physical twin. At every new defined T0, the physical 
twin feeds its new, current state information into the IDT.
The IDT would then run a new simulation, utilizing not only 
the history and current state of this physical twin but also infor -
mation from the Digital Twin Aggregate (DTA) of all products  
in this class. The IDT would run this new simulation from 
Figure 7.  Front Running Simulation (FRS).
Page 12 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024