3 MetaPassageways, Lakeland, FL, USA  
The author's tone is authoritative and reflects an in depth understanding of the subject matter 
and principles covered in the article. There is high fidelity with the current literature on the topic, 
and in each case of author's use of self-citations they are included for brevity and in some 
instances to point out that his own perspective is evolving with the maturity of the digital twin 
domain. The rapid increase in scholarship on the subject of digital twins is evidenced by the 
relatively recent creation of this journal.  
 
I found the author's use of metaphor helpful in communicating abstract concepts and clearly 
reflects the most recent scholarship related to evolution of digital twins to higher levels of 
maturity and complexity. The illustrations, though somewhat dated as modern infographics go, 
are consistent with respect to technical accuracy and alignment with generally accepted academic 
standards for published material in peer-reviewed open access journals.   
 
The citations included accurately reflect the content or arguments made by the author or the 
context of the principles described in the article. However, there were a few minor exceptions that 
the author should consider revising in the publication in order to improve it potential impact with 
respect to its scientific rigor.  
 
Specifically, in section 3, where the author introduces a quote attributed to Pierre Simon, the 
Marquis de Laplace. I could not find any translation of that actual statement in the 1902 version of 
the essay  included as a link in the reference section. A google search included several instances of 
that quote being attributed to "Pierre Simon Laplace", but none met the standard of academic 
credibility expected for a journal article. My suggestion would be to change the statement as 
follows: "The famous mathematician, Pierre Simon de Laplace, has been popularly paraphrased as 
saying 'Give me the positions...' (Laplace, 1902)". Then include a footnote that states this adage is 
most likely a popularization of the statement regarding "an intelligence sufficiently vast to submit 
these data to analysis" (Laplace, 1902, p. 4) in the first edition English translation of the 6th edition 
of PSL's essays published in French during the 19th Century (circa 1814). At a minimum, I suggest 
a correction of the embedded link for this reference to point to the 2nd Edition English Translation 
(1917) or change the reference to the 1st Edition English translation (1902).   
 
In a couple instances in section 6, the author indicates present tense when referring to activity 
occurring in 2020 ("we  have  reached 54 billion...") and in 2021 ("Perform a Google inquiry.. and 
Google returns ...4 billion results"). The actual current google return in 2022 is now over 10 billion, 
further illustrating the author's point, however the way it is worded may imply the article was 
written over the span of several years.  
 
In the case of the 2020 reference mentioned above, the discussion about the impact of Moore's 
law does not account for the fact that there is some debate in academia as to whether Moore's 
Law will still be valid in light of quantum computing innovations. This topic is discussed in the  2021 
IRDS Executive Summary (ieee.org) . I do not think the author overstated transistor capacity, if 
anything it is understated as the scale moves from logarithmic to exponential once quantum 
computing processing power dynamics are factored; according to the International Roadmap for 
Devices and Systems (IRDS) quantum computing capabilities will just begin to make an impact by 
2030 (IRDS, 2021a, p.12). My only suggestion here would be to reference the IRDS 2021 Executive 
Summary report as a way of reinforcing the concept of capacity dynamics so that the so called "Digital Twin  
 Page 22 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024