the inputs, operations, and outputs are readily discernable. 
There is little or no information needed by a simple system. The  
system states are few. A lever and fulcrum constitute a simple  
system.
Complicated systems have those same characteristics. The 
major difference is that there are more components that inter -
act. The inputs, operations, and outputs may not be easily  
discernable, but the system can be broken down into discrete  
subsystems. These subsystems can be readily understood. The 
interface between subsystems are few and simple. There are  
more system states, but again they are easily discernable.
Complicated systems have little if any information as inputs. 
What information is entered into the system is entered by 
physical material changes – flipping a switch, pulling a lever, 
etc. Mechanical systems and complicated systems have a 
high, if not complete, overlap. A watch is an example of a  
complicated system.
There is not very good agreement as to what constitutes  
complexity ( Ledford, 2008 ). While complicated systems are an  
extension of simple systems, complex systems are something 
very different. Complexity seems to come into play when there 
is not a good grasp of the number of states that the system can 
take and/or the number of systems states is too numerable  
to calculate.
Like complicated systems, a key aspect of complex systems 
is that there are numerous components in complex systems.  
However, there are also multiple interface points between  
components and many to many communication channels  
(Mitchell, 2009 ). Complexity is also linked to system behav -
iors with systems having more possible behaviors being more  
complex than systems with less possible behaviors ( Siegenfeld  
& Bar-Yam, 2019 ).
It is also proposed that complexity is all about the informa -
tion processing that differentiates complex systems from  
simple and complicated systems. The information inputs, both 
into the system and within the system drive system complexity  
(Stacey et al ., 2017 ). Sophisticated information processing by  
the system also makes predictions of system states difficult.
Complexity drives the need for the digital twin. While not 
clear cut, at a certain level of possible systems states and infor -
mation exchange and processing, products are considered 
complex. As I have often said, a jet fighter needs a digital  
twin. A paperclip does not.
5 Complex systems and emergent behavior
The complex systems of today are said to have emergent behav -
ior ( Grieves & Vickers, 2017 ). However, that is not entirely 
accurate. Emergent behavior is considered to be behavior that 
the system did not have initially but emerges over time as the 
system operates. The reality is that, in most man-made systems, 
new behavior did not emerge. It has been in the system from  
its inception. What actually has emerged is the understanding  that the system could perform in ways that were not foreseen  
by the product developers.
The requirement that a system have actual emergent behav -
ior occurs under one of two conditions. The first condition is 
common. It involves a human interaction with the system that 
changes something in that system to affect its behavior. How -
ever, if we view the human as external to the system itself, 
then again this is not really emergent behavior. If a human  
interacts with the system in a way that the system design -
ers never anticipated or if the human makes a change to the  
system, then the system would have always acted in that  
manner. The behavior wasn’t so much as emergent as it was a  
deterministic outcome of the human behavior.
Where a system exhibits actual emergent behavior is when deci -
sions are taken, or parameters are adjusted that have not been 
designed into the system. At one end of the spectrum, these  
decisions could be completely random, as in generating random  
numbers to put together different processes. At the other  
end of the spectrum is Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) which in 
effect is to put humanlike intelligence (goal seeking) into the  
system to make better decisions to effect outcomes.
Systems with this kind of randomness will be the actual 
emergent systems. However only systems with AI will have  
emergent behavior that is goal seeking.
6 AI and M&S (Artificial Intelligence and Modeling 
and Simulation)
AI and M&S are two sides of the same digital coin. AI con -
sists of computers replicating only human intelligence. M&S 
consists of computers replicating the rest of the physical uni -
verse, except  for human intelligence. Together AI and M&S 
can provide a form of intelligence for digital twins in a virtual  
world.
Both of these capabilities rely heavily on the advances in  
computing. Since 1970, computing performance which is  
proxied by the number of transistors on a chip has been increas -
ing exponentially as predicted by Moore’s Law ( Moore, 1965 ). 
As shown in the logarithmic graph in Figure 6  computing  
performance has been doubling approximately every 18 
months. In 2020, we have reached 54 billion transistor den -
sity. If we continue to keep at this pace, by 2030 we will reach  
approximately six trillion transistors or an equivalent capability.
It is difficult to comprehend what this level of computing 
capability will mean. However, we can be pretty confident  
that the ideas presented here will not be compute bound.
6.1 AI or Artificial Intelligence
The term Artificial Intelligence or AI was coined in the 1960s 
by John McCarthy of MIT for the initiative of creating “thinking  
computers” ( Moravec, 1988 ). The term AI is in pretty liberal  
use today. Perform a Google inquiry of the term in 2021, and 
Google returns in the neighborhood of 4 billion results. In  
discussion, AI spans the spectrum from expert systems  
Page 8 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024