You have great sections on Fallacies and product lifecycle, PLM issues. This section gives one a full 
view of the DT in all of its phases and hints at applications.  
 
I wrote down this question, as I was reading the article, is the Digital Twin an expression of MBSE? 
And you did answer this nicely around M&S. MBSE is a bigger concept than M&S in my view and 
IDT does fit MBSE, so you should consider this, especially since your emphasis is on systems. 
There is a quick correction needed to include the (M&S) after the words modelling and simulating.  
 
The section on IDT’s is very well done and it is also quite practical. The outcome of risk mitigation 
is important, and I might make that very clear: cost, time, safety, bias, etc., similar to the 
paragraph above.  
 
I did not see all of Table 1 - not sure if it is my computer or the article.  
 
You make such a great case that we finally have an answer for faster, better, cheaper - not just a 
philosophy.   
 
This is a great article and should be indexed with minor revisions.
 
Is the topic of the opinion article discussed accurately in the context of the current 
literature?
Yes
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Yes
Are arguments sufficiently supported by evidence from the published literature?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn balanced and justified on the basis of the presented arguments?
Yes
Competing Interests:  No competing interests were disclosed.
Reviewer Expertise:  System Complexity, Human/Organizational Systems, Lean
I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of 
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.
Reviewer Report  30 May 2022
https://doi.org/10.21956/digitaltwin.18853.r26978
© 2022 Agostinelli S.  This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited.Digital Twin  
 Page 19 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024