1 Introduction
While the concept of Digital Twins (DTs) has existed for over 
a decade and a half ( Marr, 2017 ), it is only over the last few 
years that digital twins have become one of the most critical and 
important technologies for product manufacturers. At the same 
time, products1 continue to become more complex and, with  
the advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI), will also  
exhibit emergent behavior.
Digital twins will need to keep pace. DTs will need to become 
more than information repositories and take on an intelli -
gent role. The premise that digital twins will evolve to include 
“intelligence” has existed for a few years ( Grieves, 2018 ).  
This discussion will define what intelligence means in this con -
text and present the characteristics and capabilities that these  
Intelligent Digital Twins (IDTs) will need to possess.
There still exists confusion as to what a digital twin is. As is 
not unusual for complex concepts, simple definitions do not 
adequately capture the scale and scope of the digital twin  
concepts. Models are much richer and do much better job of  
conveying concepts. This article will provide the latest models and  
their explanations.
2 Digital twins
It is useful to review just what a DT is. The Digital Twin Model 
is a concept that, as shown in Figure 1 , consists of three main 
elements: an actual or intended physical element on the left 
side that currently exists or will exist in the physical world (the  
“Physical Twin”), the virtual or digital counterpart on the right side that exists in the virtual or digital world (“the Digital 
Twin”), and the communication channel of data and information  
between these two elements (the “Digital Thread”).
The Digital Twin Model was first introduced in 2002 without 
a name ( Grieves, 2002 ). As shown in Figure 2 , it was simply  
captioned as the “Ideal for PLM.” PLM stood for Product  
Lifecycle Management and was the concept emerging at the 
time of a product-centric versus a functional-centric (engineer -
ing, manufacturing, support) approach to product development. 
It focused on the information about a product being populated 
and consumed from a logically centralized source across the four 
phases of a product’s lifecycle: create, build, operate/sustain,  
and dispose.
This logically centralized information about the product through -
out its lifecycle was in essence the “Digital Twin.” It received 
its current name in 2010 from John Vickers of NASA ( Piascik 
et al ., 2010 ). However, it remained a high level, undifferenti -
ated model until 2016 when it was divided into types ( Grieves 
& Vickers, 2017 ). These types were associated with the different  
phases of the product lifecycle and are illustrated in Figure 3
Figure 2.  Original digital twin concept. PLM, Product Lifecycle 
Management.
Figure 3.  The four phased product lifecycle. Figure 1.  Digital twin model.1 Terminology can be very fuzzy around the concept of manmade artifacts. I 
have been fairly consistent in my use of “product” over the years to refer to 
tangible artifacts such as airplanes, spacecraft, power generation equip -
ment, medical devices, etc. These products can also be considered systems, 
although all systems are not products. I will use products and systems inter -
changeably with the assumption these systems are products. The use of the 
term “product” is also consistent with the terminology of Product Lifecycle  
Management.
R
Page 3 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024