Intelligence is for our purposes understanding context and 
making predictions in the support of goal seeking while  
minimizing physical resource usage.
It may be that AI does not replicate human intelligence, but 
implements goal seeking and problem solving in ways that do 
not replace humans but augments them. The evidence for this is 
that tasks that computers find trivial, e.g., multiplying two 9-digit  
numbers, is difficult for almost all humans. Tasks that are easy 
for humans, captcha recognition and ambiguous sentences like  
the one above, are difficult for computers ( Tegmark, 2017 ).
However, the good news is that the actual requirement of AI 
for the IDT is not to have human like intelligence. We have 
plenty of humans. It is to augment human intelligence by 
processing massive amounts of data and presenting relevant 
information for consideration. As will be discussed next, the  
digital twin has from its inception proposed that augmenting,  
not replacing, human intelligence was a core characteristic.
6.1.2 Cued availability . From the earliest stages of the  
digital twin concept, it was proposed that digital twins under -
stand context and provide proactive assistance to the users of 
the digital twin. The characteristics of the digital twin from 
its inception were: singularity, correspondence, traceability,  
reflectiveness, and cued availability ( Grieves, 2006 ).
As a brief refresher, singularity means that there is a  
single representation of product information and not duplicate,  
inconsistent versions. Correspondence means that products  
are both physical and virtual. Cohesion means that all repre -
sentations or views of facets of the product information must  
adhere to the laws of physics the same way their atom-based 
physical twin does. Traceability means that the digital twin 
tracks the history of the product through the phases of the  
lifecycle. Reflectiveness means that, as a physical twin changes, 
its DTI changes. All of these characteristics are currently  
part of the digital twin.
What has not been an aspect of the digital twin is the last char -
acteristic, cued availability. This is where the IDT becomes  
relevant. While not the most elegant term, cued availability 
was the concept that the digital twin would provide information  
to the user based on the task that they were doing.
Cued availability is simply being able to have the “right infor -
mation and processes when we need it” ( Grieves, 2006 ). The 
digital twin would be aware of the information of what the 
user was doing and provide additional information based on  
that context.
6.2 M&S or modeling and simulation
With apologies to Alan Turing, the critical requirement is to 
have the computer emulate everything in the universe, except  
human intelligence. If, as noted above, we can fully simulate  
the inanimate universe but only obtain assistance from AI, 
we will obtain tremendous value for products throughout  
the product lifecycle.Modeling and simulation is about representing physical  
products and their behaviors in a digital or virtual environ -
ment. In this context, a model is a static representation of the  
physical product. The current technology allows for this  
model to be a three-dimensional replication that has complete 
fidelity in terms of dimensioning. The behavior is modeled in  
mathematical form, describing the forces acting on the physical  
product and the forces the physical product generates and acts  
upon the environment.
Simulation is dynamic. Simulation adds the component of time 
and describes how the product changes as forces act on it, and 
how the forces the product generates act on the environment. 
Simulation shows the changes in geometry as the mathematical  
behavior model of forces transforms material. A simulation 
of a vehicle crash test shows at a user defined time scale the 
deformation of all components of the automobile as it crashes  
into a barrier.
Simulation relies on two things: an increasing knowledge of 
the physics and/or data that determine the physical environ -
ment and the computing power to calculate the physics at the 
required scale and fidelity. This has meant that there have been 
limitations of the products that could be modelled and simulated.  
A few decades ago, only simple product systems could be 
simulated. With the doubling of Moore’s Law over time,  
today even complex product systems can be simulated.
The question is how do we decide how well we are doing with 
M&S? Over a decade and a half ago, I proposed some Tests 
of Virtuality to answer that question. The Tests of Virtuality  
were modeled on the Turing Test ( Grieves, 2006 , pgs. 18–19).
The original formulation of the Grieves Test of Virtuality had 
three distinct tests: a visual test, a performance test, and a reflec -
tion test. The format of the tests was similar. An observer was 
exposed to the physical and the virtual versions. If he or she  
could not tell the difference between the two versions, then the test 
was passed.
In the visual test, the observer looked at the video screens 
of a product placed in a physical room and the digital twin 
version. The observer could ask for any spatial manipula -
tion to be done. The observer could ask to see the product  
from any angle.
The observer could ask that the product be disassembled and 
look at any individual component. In the example of a car, 
the observer could ask that the doors be opened to look inside 
at the interior or that the hood be opened and to look in the 
engine compartment. If the observer cannot tell the difference  
between the physical version and the digital twin version, then 
Grieves Visual Test is said to be passed.
The behavioral test was a little more difficult. The observer had 
the same two views of the product, the physical and the digital  
twin one. The observer could then ask that forces be generated  
and/or applied to both the physical and virtual and observe 
Page 10 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024