The interest in the ability to predict future events has existed 
for centuries. The famous mathematician, Laplace, said, “Give  
me the positions and velocities of all the particles in the uni -
verse, and I will predict the future” ( Laplace, 1917 )4. However, 
as will be pointed out in a later section, this would apply only to  
the inanimate universe.
In the virtual world, we are under no such time constraint 
and have made great strides in realizing Laplace’s vision. We 
can go back in time via two mechanisms. We can simply run 
our simulations backward from the current time. Simulations 
do not care whether they run forward or backward. The time  
arrow for simulations runs both forward and backward. The  
second mechanism is to have captured the state changes as 
our product has gone through time. We can simply reverse 
those state changes to our current digital twin to reproduce any  
point in the past time.
To move into the future, we simply run our simulations for -
ward. We can pick our increment of time and duration. We can 
set the time as nanoseconds and duration in seconds as we do 
for nuclear explosion simulations or at a little larger time incre -
ments for vehicle crash tests. We can set the time increment in  
years and the duration in decades for determining the durability  
and potential degradation of an airframe.
There are two critical requirements here. The first is that we 
have an understanding of the physics that take place over time 
and second that we have enough computing power in order to 
simulate those physics in the time increment and duration that 
we require. Both these capabilities continue to increase at an  
ever-rapid pace.
Figure 5  illustrates this with the DTP during the create phase. 
T0 represents the point in time when we have a complete dig -
ital twin that could be made into a physical product with full 
functionality. Tx, represent the current time in the product’s  life. Tx+y represents a time in the future of the product’s life.  
We can move back and forth in time from Tx.
Modeling and simulation incorporate the physics and assump -
tions that will drive these simulations. In the create phase, we 
want to virtually create the product, test the product, manufacture  
the product, and sustain and operate the product. We would like 
to model and simulate short periods of time as in a crash test 
and long periods of time as in determining the durability over  
decades of an airframe.
When we get undesirable results, we can step back in time 
with our simulations to see where the deviation between what 
we thought should occur and what actually did occur. We can 
then modify our design so as to obtain the desired system  
outcomes.
The goal in the create phase is to work out all the issues and 
problems with these complex products and only when we get 
it all right, do we want to go and physically make the product.  
The ability to manipulate time is a capability that will allow  
us to better understand our complex systems.
4 Complex systems
We have been referring to complex products or systems, but 
what do we mean when we use that term? In defining what 
a complex system is the first task is to define what we mean 
when we say a system. An accepted definition of the system is  
(Grieves, 2012 )5:
 A system is two or more components that combine together 
to produce from one or more inputs one or more results that  
could not be obtained from the components individually
A system consists of three components: inputs, operations, 
and outputs. Inputs are what drive the system behavior. The 
three main inputs of systems are materials, forces, and infor -
mation. These inputs are processed by the operations of the  
system. The resulting outputs are then used both internally and  
externally to the system.
A taxonomy of systems lists this hierarchy: simple systems,  
complicated systems, system of systems (SoS), complex systems,  
collaborative SoS, adaptive systems, and complex adaptive  
systems ( Baldwin et al ., 2011 ). For purposes of this article, 
we will consider the systems beyond complicated systems as  
the class of complex systems.
Thus, there are three types of systems: simple, complicated, and 
complex. Simple and complicated systems are closely related 
and differ only in the matter of scope. For simple systems,  
Figure 5.  Digital twin in time. M&S, Modeling and Simulation.
R
4 This is the popular version. Laplace’s actual quote is, “Given for one instant 
an intelligence which could comprehend all the forces by which nature is 
animated and the respective situa-tion of the beings who compose it—an 
intelligence sufficiently vast to submit these data to analysis—it would  
embrace in the same formula the movements of the greatest bodies of 
the universe and those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing would be  
uncertain and the future, as the past, would be present to its eyes.”
R
5 Modified from the original to add that the results could not be obtained from 
the components individually. While there are much more detailed descriptions 
of systems and their characte-ristics (see Ackoff, R.L., Towards a System of 
Systems Concepts . Management Science (pre-1986), 1971. 17(11): p. 661,  
this definition suffices for the points we wish to make here.
Page 7 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024