The types are:
•    Digital Twin Prototype (DTP), the prototypical product  
with variants or all the products that can be built
•    Digital Twin Instance (DTI), the individual products  
themselves or all the products that are built
•    Digital Twin Aggregate (DTA), the aggregation of all  
the DTIs or all the products that have been  built
2.1 Digital twin types and the product lifecycle
As Figure 4  shows, the digital twin types are associated  
with the phases of the lifecycle and persistent throughout the 
lifecycle. The digital twin begins at the beginning of a new 
product’s lifecycle and persists throughout the lifecycle, even 
extending beyond the disposal phase when the physical twin no  
longer exists.
2.1.1 Create phase . The product lifecycle begins with the  
create phase and the development of the Digital Twin Prototype 
(DTP). This is the prototypical digital twin. All the products 
that will be built in this generation originate from this source. 
The DTP is all the information that will be needed to build  
this product generation and all its variants.
The information needed here are usually the requirements,  
Computer Aided Design (CAD) models, Bill of Materials 
(BoM), behavioral simulations, embedded software, and any 
and all information that would be needed to fully describe the 
new product. In addition, it would also consist of any informa -
tion needed to build this new product, such as Bill of Process, 
Bill of Manufacturing Systems, quality control information, and  
manufacturing simulations.
It is important to note, the digital twin does not need to be a 
separate information repository. Since it is information, the DTP may contain links to existing repositories of this informa -
tion. Current and future Product Lifecycle Management systems 
may contain most, if not all of these informational constructs.  
However, the important aspect is that this information is  
linked into a product-centric view.
Ideally, more and more of the work will be done in this phase 
with this type of digital twin. Our ability to do so marks a struc -
tural change in innovation regimes. We are rapidly moving 
from a classic industrial innovation regime to a digital inno -
vation regime ( Lyytinen, 2021 ). Bits are cheaper than atoms 
and allow us more resources to innovate. Bits will continue  
to get cheaper as atoms will continue to get more expensive. 
Therefore, we would like to move more and more physical  
work into virtual work, working with the DTP.
The ideal future state is that we would like to design the prod -
uct, test the product, manufacture the product, and support and 
sustain the product all virtually. Once we get it as perfected as 
we can, only then do we actually go out and move around expen -
sive atoms to make it. This is going to get more important as  
our products become systems of greater complexity.
The ability to fully understand the systems and to physically 
test all of the variations has already become an impossible task. 
It is only if we can use the digital twin in this phase will we be 
able to sufficiently understand and test these new complex  
products.
2.1.2 Build phase . When we move into the build phase, physi -
cally producing these products, we still continue to use the 
DTP. If we have done our work in the create phase properly, the 
build phase is a matter of executing on the manufacturing plans  
that we have developed there to realize the physical  
product.
Figure 4.  The digital twin model through the lifecycle. DTP , Digital Twin Prototype; DTI, Digital Twin Instances; DTA, Digital Twin 
Aggregate.
Page 4 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024