3D modeling, simulations, physics, industrial AI, Energy, robotics
I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of 
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.
Reviewer Report  07 June 2022
https://doi.org/10.21956/digitaltwin.18853.r26979
© 2022 Flummerfelt S.  This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited.
Shannon Flummerfelt   
Department of Organizational Leadership, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA  
Great article.  
 
I suggest a fine point of clarification. As I understand, the DT does not really create data - it 
captures that is created via the system and it captures the data that is in the system from AI as an 
IDT. As you described, the IDT is very helpful because it is the data that we cannot see or find 
without IDT, even though it is there. In addition, AI does create additional data, as stated, and 
possibly information based on analyses. In short, the DT is useful, but it remains “flat” without the 
dimensions of AI as the IDT, such as with predictive analytics and recommenders, and reviews 
back in time. You do re-clarify this in the Complex Systems and emergent behavior section, as we 
may think we have randomness, but we simply have insights into presence and don’t realize that is 
all that the data are. This has impacts for the taxonomy of organizational intelligence—data to 
information to knowledge to organizational intelligence. Organizational intelligence is the 
centerpiece outcome in terms of developing and managing systems. As data, there is not a lot that 
is gained in terms of managing systems.  
 
The section on goal seeking is great as the assignment of attributes to the IDT provides clarity. 
Even without a DT, goal seeking is powerful as a human behavior because so much of the ignored, 
misunderstood and missed can be uncovered when goal seeking is enacted. When AI enacts goal 
seeking, the findings of goal seeking likely will be more focused, integrated and systemic, which is 
positive. But there may be concerns about capturing the full system dynamics still even with AI 
depending on the development/aging of AI. As long as we realize there is more data and 
potentially information and knowledge with or without human and/or Artificial Intelligence, then 
we are in the position to accept the metaphor of knowledge that will emerge. Therefore, your 
sentences that state, we will not be compute bound and that we have cued availability with IDT are 
very significant in conjunction with goal seeking.  
In regards to risk mitigation, you have several key points for the IDT: safety, cost, efficiency, 
resource minimizing, intelligence maximizing. You might add these to your chart. Another point 
that struck me to elaborate further is that the DT Disposal benefits are substantial and disposal 
should be a leading argument for DT use as sustainability concerns grow and more regulation and 
social pressure mounts.  
 
Digital Twin  
 Page 18 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024