information for consideration, but never changing goals or replacing humans.  
 
Moreover, conclusions could be considered to include that the proposed digital twin principles, 
definitions and concepts related to the lifecycle management have a wide perspective and multi-
domain validity. Despite the fact PLM is currently the core application of digital twins, I believe the 
present article results in a clear and impactful perspective with a high degree of fidelity for simply 
any kind of digital twin type and purpose (e.g. twins for the AECO sector, healthcare, mobility and 
transportation, energy management, manufacturing and so forth).  
 
In conclusion, this article provides the reader with a rigorous and insightful research contribution 
as well as clear results and conclusions, introducing simple substantial concepts and examples to 
clarify complex principles and driving academia and research to the future of the entire domain.
 
Is the topic of the opinion article discussed accurately in the context of the current 
literature?
Yes
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Yes
Are arguments sufficiently supported by evidence from the published literature?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn balanced and justified on the basis of the presented arguments?
Yes
Competing Interests:  No competing interests were disclosed.
Reviewer Expertise:  Building and Construction Engineering, Digital Twin, Project Management, 
BIM, Energy Management
I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of 
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.
Reviewer Report  27 May 2022
https://doi.org/10.21956/digitaltwin.18853.r26976
© 2022 McNair W.  This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited.
William Randell McNair  
  
1 Stichting USPI-NL, Randstad, The Netherlands  
2 University of South Florida, Muma College of Business, Tampa, FL, USA  
Digital Twin  
 Page 21 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024