that are similar in form and function or even the same as parts 
that have been previously designed and present those designs,  
so they are not re-created. It can continually run analysis on 
designs using the requirements in order to make early deter -
minations of the design meeting the requirements and provide  
early warnings when that is not the case.
The IDT needs to be anticipatory. The IDT can look for inter -
face problems among different designers and engineers, so as 
to eliminate problems of parts not fitting together. It can run 
early simulations of related components to ensure that they are 
interfacing and working the way they are intended. Looking  
at the list of use cases, there are always use cases that would 
benefit by an IDT maintaining the information and providing  
analysis as an early warning to product designers and engineers.
Goal seeking at this stage is driven by the requirements. Our 
goal is to produce a new product that meets the characteris -
tics of the requirements, minimizing the use of resources in 
doing so. We test that by M&S capabilities that check to see 
if the requirements are met as we go through the test phase and  
model and simulate operation / sustainment performance.
In this phase, we not only need to create a product that meets 
the design requirements, but we also need to create a produc -
tion process that will produce a physical representation of 
our digital product. We need to do so efficiently and effec -
tively. This means that we will need a digital twin of the factory  
production process in order to determine that this production 
process will result in the physical product we desire. Again, 
M&S of the factory will allow us to determine that our pro -
duction process will produce the physical twins effectively  
and efficiently.
7.5.2 Build phase . In the build phase, the focus is on  
creating a physical twin that as closely as possible replicates a  
variant of the DTP . It is in this phase that we also want to create  
the DTI of the specific physical twin that we manufacture. We would like this manufacturing process to as closely as possible 
duplicate the M&S manufacturing process that we developed  
in the create phase.
As shown in Table 1 , manufacturing facilities exist on a  
spectrum from simple to complex. On the simple end of the 
spectrum, a single machine may be the manufacturing proc -
ess. It may not need a DT, let alone an IDT. On the complex 
end of the spectrum, where we have a large number of machines  
performing different processes, we need DTs of the machines 
organized in a consistent system.
In the latter case, the IDT that we want to employ is the IDT of 
the factory itself. We want that IDT of the factory to be active 
and online. We want the IDT to be constantly monitoring the 
factory floor for issues that will impact either the productivity  
or the quality of the products that we are manufacturing.
The concept of factory replication is that information about 
our factory is always instantaneously and simultaneously avail -
able to any authorized user ( Grieves, 2014 ). Factory replication 
requires that the IDT be online at all times. The goal seeking  
that we want is producing quality parts as efficiently as  
possible. The IDT, through cued availability, would be  
suggesting improvements in our processes as it determined 
how we actually produce the product versus how we thought we  
were going to produce the product.
The anticipatory aspect comes into play with FRS. By con -
stantly simulating the future state of the factory, we can predict 
issues such as bottlenecks before they occur and take remedial 
action to prevent those issues. With the right information, we can 
do that at this macro level for the factory and at the micro level  
for individual equipment. We want to be able to move 
from periodic maintenance based on MTBF to prognostic  
maintenance based on performance indicators. This 
means that we would fix problems before they occur as  
opposed to performing maintenance on a periodic basis.
Table 1. Levels of manufacturing.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5
Single, independent 
machines with simple 
processes with single 
material source 
performed within the 
machine. Product is 
simple in form with no 
variants or assemblies. 
Only information 
required can be 
visually obtained and 
managed/controlled 
by a supervisor. Single 
location.Multiple, independent 
machines limited in 
number with simple 
processes performed in 
a static, linear fashion. 
Material is limited to a 
few sources. Product 
has limited number of 
variants with simple 
assembly information 
can be tracked on 
simple paper forms 
or single screen apps. 
Single location.Large number of 
machines, both 
independent and 
interdependent, with 
both simple and 
complicated processes. 
Routing of parts is 
dynamic. High volume 
of data. Wide variety of 
material. Single location.Large number of 
machines, both 
independent and 
interdependent, with both 
simple and complicated 
processes. Routing of 
parts is dynamic. There is 
a wide variety of material. 
Multiple locations with 
coordinated material/parts 
flow.Multiple interdependent 
machines geographically 
dispersed both within the 
organization and through 
a supply network with 
complicated processes 
and a wide range of 
materials. Requires 
real-time data exchange 
between machines.
Simple Complicated Complicated Complex Complex
Page 14 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024