Open Peer Review
Current Peer Review Status:  
 
 
 
Version 1
Reviewer Report  20 June 2022
https://doi.org/10.21956/digitaltwin.18853.r26977
© 2022 Moguchaya T.  This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited.
Tatiana Moguchaya  
  
Earth Science Analytics AS, Oslo, Norway  
Now the concept of intelligent Digital Twin is nothing new. Most companies today realize how the 
Digital Twin technology can enable digitalization of business at scale, this fast tracked by the 
recent macro events.. The scope goes however vastly beyond smooth real-time 3D visualization of 
assets and infrastructures. At the end of the day, the only question that needs to be answered is 
whether your Digital Twin is holistic and trustworthy enough to truly represent the industrial 
reality as it actually is at any moment; whether your Digital Twin can help understanding what to 
fix and when. Engaging, thoroughly and insightfully, Dr. Michael Grieves spells the critical role of 
the DT technology and sets out an attractive vision for how these Intelligent Digital Twins (IDTs) 
will evolve and assist in developing and managing complex systems. This article is a must-read for 
everyone who wants to understand and leverage DT technology at scale.  
 
 
Is the topic of the opinion article discussed accurately in the context of the current 
literature?
Yes
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Yes
Are arguments sufficiently supported by evidence from the published literature?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn balanced and justified on the basis of the presented arguments?
Yes
Competing Interests:  No competing interests were disclosed.
Reviewer Expertise:  DataOps, MLOps/AI, cloud storage and computing, quantum computing, DT, 
Digital Twin  
 Page 17 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024