Sofia Agostinelli  
  
1 Department of Astronautics, Electrical and Energy Engineering (DIAEE), Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy  
2 CITERA Research Centre for Territory Construction Restoration and Environment, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy  
The present opinion article reflects the author’s perspective and in depth knowledge on the digital 
twin domain, conceptualizing clear definitions and principles which are extremely valuable in the 
research field and education programmes related to the topic. The introduced digital twin matters 
are evidenced to be ever-evolving over time as increasingly complex products, while the author 
finds new way of perspective and deepens literature.  
 
References including self-citations appear rigorous and authoritative, accurately supporting the 
author even providing the opportunity for functional abstraction of complexity which drives the 
need for the digital twin. Particularly, the entire manuscript lead forward the “twin” metaphor, 
specifying matters for which “there is no requirement that a twin only exists if its counterpart 
exists simultaneously”. The ability to communicate complex scenarios with a clear and rigorous 
scientific approach is what makes this article a deeply inspiring key baseline, as researchers, 
industry experts and students will benefit from the clearly proposed definitions and principles.  
 
Riding on the effectiveness of infographics, the article is well supported by illustrations giving 
concepts a substantial graphical consistency for better understanding and synthetizing, which I’m 
personally very interested in. In this regard, I would like to propose just a minor suggestion in 
order to improve the alignment between text and illustrations, as I’m convinced graphics are 
extremely effective for complex concept definitions. Specifically, figure 4 shows digital twin types 
associated with the phases of the lifecycle as DTP, DTI and DTA. As lifecycle phases (create, build, 
sustain) could be defined and visualized as connected layers in the illustration, the Build layer 
could be more effective if Virtual Space and Physical Space were repeated as description texts in 
the figure, just as they are in the Create and Sustain layers. Alternatively, digital and physical items 
could be grouped or differentiated through colors with an impact to the entire illustration 
resulting in some kind of a more immediate understanding.  
 
Overall, the author is brilliant in evidencing the need of combining Modeling & Simulation with AI 
capabilities in the configuration of intelligent digital twins for prediction domains. The intelligent 
digital twin proposed by the author is oriented to fix problems before they occur, predicting 
adverse conditions as to prevent it from happening.  
 
Also, the author’s perspective about the modern emergence of AI and advanced M&S capabilities 
in lifecycle management is inspiring. It is considered as the hallmark of the 21st century, as 
intended to augment and actively support human intelligence, preventing human biases from 
tainting strategies and providing information as it is needed in complex decision-making as well as 
in the prediction domain.  
 
I definitely agree that the digital transformation is currently making us more and more capable of 
optimally reaching goals that have always been present. I appreciated sections pointing that 
digital twins, AI and M&S provide extraordinary opportunities to improve efficiency and reduce 
wastes by augmenting human intelligence through massive data processing, presenting relevant 
Digital Twin  
 Page 20 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024