Moore more " initiated reader does not get distracted by the potential scaling limitations of 
Moore's Law. A simple footnote may suffice.   
 
There was one minor instance where the link included in the reference section pointed to a review 
of the text rather than the referenced text itself. I have already mentioned the issue with the 
incorrect link for the article's "(Laplace, 1917)" reference on page 15 but this could be mitigated 
easily as suggested above.   
 
Overall, the author does an excellent job articulating the subject matter of this article and makes a 
compelling argument for applying the revised "Grieves Test of Virtuality" to the domain of 
"prediction". I agree that the application of AI coupled with Digital Twin technology in the arena of 
incident prevention is strong use case for greater adoption of Modeling and Simulation with AI. I 
recently attended an interesting presentation at the Connected Worker Summit in Houston 
featuring Nigel Packham, Associate Director of Safety at NASA. He made an impassioned plea for 
industry to leverage AI and Modeling and Simulation technology to prevent the next major 
industrial disaster. He stated that in 1981 the space shuttle program assessed the probabilistic risk 
assessment for loss of crew (LOC) as between 1:1,000 and 1:10,000. By the end of NASA's space 
shuttle program in 2011, more modern analytical tools and data from actual incidents revealed 
that the true probability of LOC was 1:12 ( Packham, 2021 ).  
 
What latent risk is the modern complex industrial facility decision maker missing that could be 
exposed by AI and advanced Modeling and Simulation? The author of this article has proposed a 
viable technique for assessing that value and strengthens the business case for investing in more 
and more testing of assumptions.  
 
In summary, this opinion article entitled "Intelligent digital twins and the development and 
management of complex systems" is impactful in that it provides the reader with concise 
nomenclature, clearly describes complex concepts in understandable terms, employing relevant 
examples and strong academic rigor in the research conducted to support the author's 
conclusions. The author makes the case for full lifecycle management of complex digital twins and 
that supports recent scholarship  on this matter.  
 
I believe the few minor opportunities for improvement identified here in this review can be easily 
mitigated resulting in an influential publication that will certainly be cited by others in this 
research domain for many years to come.
 
Is the topic of the opinion article discussed accurately in the context of the current 
literature?
Yes
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Yes
Are arguments sufficiently supported by evidence from the published literature?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn balanced and justified on the basis of the presented arguments?Digital Twin  
 Page 23 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024