that one type of twin, the physical twin, must exist before there 
is the other type of twin, the digital twin, can also exist. The 
only requirement is that a twin’s counterpart exist at some point 
in the twin’s lifecycle. This means the digital twin can exist 
prior to there being a physical counterpart and can also exist  
after the physical counterpart ceases existence.
The requirement that there must be an actual physical thing 
before there can be a digital twin is simply a wrong perspec -
tive. The key differentiator of whether a digital model and  
associated information is a digital twin is that it is intended  that 
this model become a physical product and that its physical  
counterpart is realized.
It is that intention and the work that goes into the realization of 
that intention that differentiates a digital model from a digital  
twin. If the physical counterpart is never realized, then the  
digital model was never a digital twin. A digital model of a flying  
carpet will never become a digital twin because there is no  
intention, let alone ability, to make it a physical product.
From its inception, the digital twin has always been intended 
to exist in all four phases of the product lifecycle: create, build, 
operate/sustain, and dispose ( Grieves, 2006 ). It is embod -
ied in the saying that “no one goes into a factory, pounds 
on some metal, and hopes an airplane will come out.” A  
tremendous value of the digital twin is that it does exist before  
there is a physical product.
Dispelling these misperceptions of the “twin” metaphor, there 
are five major reasons why the digital twin does not  require a 
physical product before the digital twin exists. These reasons  
are:
•    The DT framework should cover the entire product  
lifecycle
•    The DT is especially valuable during the create phase
•    The DT does exist prior to the physical product –it just  
has a different name
•    The DT regresses to being functionally siloed if there  
is no DT prior to the physical product
•    The DT existing only after there is a physical product  
is conceptually inelegant and piecemeal
The practical reality even for those making a claim that the  
digital twin does not exist prior to there being a physical prod -
uct is that there actually is a digital twin in their organization 
before there is a physical product. This product information  
does exist throughout the entire product lifecycle. In all those 
situations, it simply has a different name. It may be called the 
digital model, the digital design, the digital systems model, 
or some such variation. However, it has most if not all the  
characteristics of the Digital Twin Prototype (DTP).While the digital twin has value across the product lifecycle,  
the DTP is especially valuable in the create phase. It is this 
phase of the lifecycle that work can be moved from the physical 
world into the virtual world. If virtual products can be modelled 
and tested in a virtual environment, replacing physical proto -
types and testing, the potential for a reduction of wasted physical 
resources is substantial. These wasted resources include material,  
energy, and labor time, but also elapsed development  
time.
Even though the create phase may be short in comparison 
to the entire lifecycle of a product that may span decades, 
decisions in this phase have a major impact in determining 
future product costs. Estimates of product cost determination  
during the create phase are as high as 80% ( Iansiti, 1998 ). 
There is an increasing ability to perform virtual testing at a 
fraction of the cost and in less time to replace physical test -
ing. This has the potential to reduce costs, improve quality, and  
reduce time to market.
A major problem with renaming the DTP to something differ -
ent and not having that something in the digital twin framework 
is that it encourages and maintains functional siloing. If this  
different named thing exists in engineering prior to manufactur -
ing having a digital twin of the instance of a physical product,  
then this information will tend not to be shared between  
engineering and manufacturing.
The powerful aspect of the digital twin is that it is product  
centric throughout the entire product lifecycle. Information is  
populated and consumed irrespective of the functional area. 
For the digital twin to exist only after moving to manufacturing 
diminishes greatly its effect. A substantial amount of the infor -
mation for a specific Digital Twin Instance (DTI) is contained  
in the DTP.
Finally, it is inelegant and piecemeal to not have the digital  
twin encompass the entire product lifecycle. As described 
in Section 2 , the intent of the digital twin is to have a frame -
work that persists throughout the entire lifecycle. That has 
been the intent since the origination of the digital twin concept.  
Requiring the digital twin to only exist once there is a physical  
product is inconsistent with that approach. Having different  
types of digital twin, DTP, DTI, and DTA (Digital Twin 
Aggregate), allows us to have a consistent framework, yet  
differentiate how the digital twin manifests itself at different phases  
of product lifecycle.
3 The digital twin and time
One of the least discussed and perhaps most unappreciated 
aspects of the digital twin is its relationship with time. In the 
physical world, we are stuck in the moment. If we want to 
go forward in time, we can. However, we can only do so at the 
pace of each tick of the clock. If we want to go to the past in  
time, we are simply out of luck.
Page 6 of 24Digital Twin 2022, 2:8 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024