International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295community with unique qualities and insights, to improve 
ethical perspectives regarding the interactions between 
humans and interactive autonomous systems. Furthermore, 
I argue that in order for the ethics narrative to have a posi -
tive, constructive effect, it is important that the term “eth -
ics” does not degenerate into dogmatic debates concerning 
human control over technology, but rather becomes further 
established in critical, inter- and transdisciplinary inquiries 
over the roles ascribed to social robots and other autono -
mous systems.
The two different contexts that are connected with one 
another here - the governance context vs. the robotics 
and HRI research context - are characterized by very dif -
ferent epistemologies and practices. In short, autonomous 
systems such as robots as emerging objects of governance 
are vastly different from their understanding as objects of 
robotics research and design. Thus, from the perspective 
of HRI research, an easy way out would be to denounce 
policy-making efforts and maintain a strong distinction 
between these two epistemologies. However, this would 
be a rather simplistic way of approaching the problem that 
does not keep pace with promising trends in other fields. 
Whereas more traditional interpretations of policy-making 
are indeed based on a rather strong distinction between the 
policy-making context and research and engineering con -
texts, there are many new notions of governance that argue 
otherwise. In fact, one trend in policy-making is the notion 
that well-implemented policy can be achieved by develop -
ing a type of governance that identifies and avoids problems 
by design [ 69, 70].
In recent years, these kinds of notions have increasingly 
led to deliberations about types of governance that under -
stand scientific and technical expertise as fields of practice 
that can contribute to the goals of newly developed gover -
nance frameworks [ 71]. For instance, in a paper on what they 
call “integrative expertise”, Michael Poznic and Erik Fisher 
refer to this type of governance as “midstream”, thereby dis -
tinguishing it from “upstream” research prioritization and 
“downstream” technology regulation [ 72]. In doing so, they 
focus on the normative aspects of technical experts’ prac -
tices, thereby establishing the possibility to understand eth -
ics as an integrated component of this midstream domain. 
They argue that this attention to the midstream can help 
with understanding and responding to socio-ethical consid -
erations in the practice of developing novel technologies. In 
the same spirit, I argue here that robotics and HRI as fields 
of research can be seen as very well equipped to develop 
clearer pathways towards further defining the concepts and 
ideas that are currently shaping the narrative of ethical AI 
and robotics governance. Thus, the role of HRI would be one 
that focuses on its own capacities of altering its practices in 
such a way that is focused on the socio-technical integration established as a professional field of research and engineer -
ing during the last half a century, it is this mix of expecta -
tions that makes them important objects of policy discourse. 
More specifically, as Sect. 2 has demonstrated, the increas -
ing interactive capabilities of autonomous systems have 
emerged as an important issue of concern in how current EU 
policy-making on robotics and AI is currently being defined. 
It is in such a context that ethics can function as an impor -
tant tool for anticipating and mitigating potential issues that 
have not yet fully materialized [ 59].
In relation to that, alongside the function of ethical rea -
soning as a multi-purpose toolkit for governing a range of 
different potential impacts of emerging technologies, ethics 
has an important function for managing public trust. Emerg -
ing technologies typically enjoy relatively strong coverage 
in general public discourse drawing on the anticipated tra -
jectories of their technological development [ 60]. As argued 
above, expectations about emerging technologies like 
robotics and AI often involve many questions and uncer -
tainties about the specificities of their (future) impact, lead -
ing to increased general public attention to the impacts of 
such technologies [ 61]. Prominent examples in the case of 
robotics technologies are their general impact on economic 
growth, the impact of potential automation on certain areas 
of the job market, potential gaps in the legal system, effects 
on intimate relationships and so on. From a governance 
perspective, the attention paid to such technology-based 
changes and the generation of socially sustainable narra -
tives around them can aid the process of building general 
public trust in the long run [ 62, 63].
3.3 The Discussion on Implementation
Having elaborated on criticisms of the robotics and AI eth -
ics narrative, as well as its wider embedding in the context 
of emerging technology governance, the next step is to dis -
cuss how this narrative can become strengthened and broad -
ened in order to enhance its actual effects. The growing 
applicability of concepts from the field of robot and AI eth -
ics has already led to increasing reflections on the position 
and possibilities of ethics in general [ 64, 65]. Furthermore, 
in a more general sense, the implementation of ethics is a 
widely discussed topic in different applied ethics contexts 
[66–68]. Here, it should be taken into consideration that the 
role of the ethics narrative in AI and robotics development 
is far from fixed and must be further materialized in order to 
have a proper effect. Different kinds of stakeholders (from 
industry, academia, NGOs, etc.) can still use their resources 
to inform the debate over how this narrative develops and 
gets implemented. I focus on the idea that it is fruitful for 
the general maturity of the ethics narrative to connect the 
governance context with the HRI context, as a professional 
1 31288