International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–12953 From Policy Narratives to Ethical Robotics 
and AI
From the perspective of robot and AI ethics as an up-and-
coming subfield of applied ethics, it is encouraging to see 
how ethical approaches have come to constitute a prominent 
component of policy plans for the governance of autono -
mous systems. This can first of all be seen as a sign that 
policy-makers take the mitigation of their potential impact 
seriously. Moreover, on a broader level, the attention to the 
ethical dimensions of these technologies can be constitutive 
of how the general culture in the EU develops in terms of its 
attitude towards social robots and other interactive autono -
mous systems. As such, the plans and strategies described 
above can be interpreted as a hopeful development that 
could potentially play an important role in initiating large-
scale commitments to developing more pluralist, inclusive, 
equitable robotics and AI development. In short, such calls 
and commitments from a major player like the EU can be 
seen as an incentive for the further establishment of ethical 
governance in the research and development of robots and 
AI.
3.1 Problematizing the Ethics Narrative
In order to take this incentivizing function seriously, it is 
first and foremost important to maintain a critical stance - 
particularly towards the actual implications of the ethics 
narrative, but also with regards to the implementation of the 
policy plans that arise from it. AI and robot ethics might 
indeed have become a prominent component of the policy-
making consensus. This indicates promising intentions, but 
these intentions do not necessarily guarantee effectiveness 
and applicability. Others have already argued that many of 
the ideas to include ethical perspectives in EU policy on 
robotics and AI contain arguments with a rather abstract, 
imprecise character [ 37]. In the same vein, AI and robot eth -
ics have been described as potentially “toothless” [ 38]. It 
has also been argued that ethical approaches could easily 
turn into platitudes if their concepts and content are not con -
tinuously critically discussed [ 39].
Furthermore, there are voices that generally criticize the 
suitability of ethics as a tangible framework for a critical 
discourse on the societal impact of technological develop -
ment. For example, it has been argued that the rise of eth -
ics has hampered proper public debate about the respective 
technologies by crystallizing relevant issues into rigid areas 
of ethical expertise. In this way, the argument goes, ethical 
inquiries and discussions have become the property of the 
intellectual establishment, thereby neutralizing politicized, 
public discourse on the impact of emerging technologies 
[40]. Others have claimed that robot and AI ethics itself has proposals can be seen as an important step in the notion of 
governing artificial agents, since the aim is to develop a har -
monized set of rules that specifically target autonomous sys -
tems, while its explanations explicitly connect EU values 
and fundamental rights to risk assessments of those systems. 
While legal experts and relevant EU committees and bodies 
(e.g. the Parliament’s IMCO and LIBE committees) are cur -
rently assessing the consequences of those developments, 
this already constitutes an important development in the 
worldwide discourse on the regulation of autonomous sys -
tems. At this moment, an important subject of discussion in 
the interpretation of the new proposals are statements about 
standard-setting [ 35]. In this regard, standard-setting bodies 
in the EU are expected to continue to play a central role in 
the coming years.
Finally, the emphasis on ethics has developed such that 
the design and engineering of interactive robots has become 
a topic of concern in terms of fundamental human rights. 
This development is currently an important subject, since, 
for instance, UNESCO adopted the ‘Recommendation on 
the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence’ on 24 November 2021, 
intended as a global standard-setting instrument [ 36]. With 
its relatively strong focus on human rights, the EU has pro -
filed itself geopolitically as the place where robotics and AI 
technologies and their implementation are inherently ethi -
cal and developed in a human-centered manner. In this way, 
autonomous systems are on the way to becoming geopoliti -
cal objects of concern.
To summarize and conclude this overview, first of all, 
with regards to this section’s approach, interpreting eth -
ics reasoning as a narrative emphasizes its role as a central 
component of the policy process surrounding robotics and 
AI. As such, the ethics narrative provides specific discourses 
and solutions that allow the EU policy-making process to 
develop in a specific manner. Second, the ethics narrative 
can be seen as rooted in an emergent definition of autono -
mous systems as a topic of policy concern focused on poten -
tial ethical issues. The potential autonomy of these systems 
is playing an increasingly prominent role in this definition 
of these systems as a policy problem. Third and final, cur -
rent interpretations of the AI Act include several ways in 
which policy ideas about ethical reasoning are becoming 
solidified into regulation, mostly based on identifying risk. 
Simultaneously, ethics is increasingly becoming part of a 
discourse around soft governance, which means that it is 
expected to have an effect on the development and imple -
mentation of robots and other types of autonomous systems.
1 31286