International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295are increasingly addressed in research, which could in turn 
be integrated with critical HRI perspectives [ 115, 116].
The ethics narrative in governance, in turn, largely takes 
a fundamentally critical approach. Even though this might 
not directly benefit governance or innovation strategies, it is 
crucial to maintain an open critical culture at a time of rapid 
technological development. In this regard, the practices of 
robot and AI ethicists on the one hand and HRI researchers 
on the other need to become ever more firmly integrated 
as part of interdisciplinary methodological frameworks. 
When established within the context of HRI research, these 
perspectives can facilitate research on how interaction in 
real-world contexts develops. In this way, more sophisti -
cated concepts can help to create improved policy ideas for 
the EU’s robotics and AI governance by helping us better 
understand the political economy of robotics and AI and the 
different roles ethics can play in changing it for the better.
5 Conclusion
The main point of this paper has been to engage in delib -
erations on the connection between the ethics narrative in 
EU governance and the implementation of ethical notions 
in HRI research. I have done so by providing an overview 
of the integration of this ethics narrative in the EU’s policy 
plans and demonstrating how this narrative provided new 
definitions of policy issues. In the face of emerging imple -
mentation of autonomous social robots, it is likely that ethi -
cal approaches continue to be relevant for discussions of 
issues pivotal to democratic societies, such as human rights 
and democratic values. This paper has argued for an inter -
pretation of EU policies and strategies not just as a way of 
developing new regulations inspired by ethics, but very 
much also as a trigger for and incentive towards develop -
ing more profound ethical approaches in a context of rapid 
and uncertain technological developments in social robot -
ics. As autonomous systems are projected to have a strong 
impact in our society, it is important to see the emergence of 
this narrative as an opportunity for substantial change while 
simultaneously understanding that new ideas will have to 
materialize quickly in order to ensure that our society is able 
to deal with the impact. As argued above, HRI can have an 
important role in solidifying and implementing this narra -
tive and the paper has provided a call to adopt an under -
standing of policy-making and technical expertise that in 
conjunction with one another.
These new ideas can serve as points of departure for 
deliberation on the ethical futures we consider desirable and 
which ones we would prefer to avoid. As such, they can be 
very informative while contributing to the emergence of a 
technological culture that has the ability to simultaneously and innovation (RRI) framework or the Sustainable Devel -
opment Goals (SDGs) [ 107, 108]. In addition to their goal 
of improving the innovation process, these frameworks can 
also actively increase public trust in technologies [ 109].
4.4 Ethical Sociotechnical Systems
Finally, ethics can play a role in the establishment of 
autonomous systems as components and drivers of large-
scale sociotechnical systems. From a philosophical point of 
view, this notion of ethics tends to see ethical approaches 
mostly as a form of critical engagement with wider socio-
cultural developments around robots. Mark Coeckelbergh, 
for instance, proposes a social-relational approach to robot 
ethics which aims to pay attention “to the moral significance 
of how we humans talk about robots, do things with robots, 
and live with robots” [ 110]. Other examples can be found 
in the integrative approach developed by Seibt et al. They 
argue that in HRI and social robotics, the aim has gener -
ally been to “investigat[e] what social robots can do, while 
robo-ethicists and policy-makers deliberate afterwards  what 
social robots ( may or) should  (not) do, relative to the profes -
sional discussion in applied ethics”. Instead, the real ques -
tion should be “what social robotics applications can and 
(may or) should  do” [ 95].
When looking at the current landscape of HRI research, 
the empirical and/or applied nature of the field generally does 
not facilitate the development of concepts referring to such 
macro-level ethics. Nevertheless, there are several research 
trends that can help to further this perspective. First of all, 
one of the most important developments is the realization 
that the rising feasibility of robots taking part in real-world 
scenarios is currently leading to discussions over the meth -
odologies used to conduct HRI research. The limitations of 
current experimental methodologies are being increasingly 
addressed, and several researchers have already argued for 
changes and additions to these mainstream methodologies. 
For instance, Kerstin Dautenhahn writes that HRI meth -
odologies sometimes fail to address “how real people, in 
real-world environments, would interact face to face with 
a real robot” [ 111]. As a part of this development, more 
HRI studies are now incorporating qualitative methods 
[112–114]. These methods can help to study interactions in 
which complex, autonomous robots interact with people in 
unrestricted (or less restricted) contexts. Others have also 
argued that robot ethics and HRI need to jointly develop 
models of analysis that can capture the complexity of inter -
actions by looking at the entire system in which robots are 
to play a facilitating role (e.g. the healthcare system) [ 104]. 
Finally, the entanglements that constitute the (mundane) 
relationships between humans and technological artifacts 
1 31291