International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–12953.2 The Ethics Narrative in a Context of Emerging 
Technology Governance
In order to answer that question, it is useful to first con -
textualize the use of ethical notions in the governance of 
technology. In that regard, the position of robotic and AI 
technologies as emerging technologies needs to be empha -
sized. The general benefit of doing so is that it provides 
better insights into the reasons for governmental interest in 
ethics as a solution in the quest for governance of auton -
omous systems. In the specific context of this paper, it is 
also instrumental for establishing the connection between 
the ethics narrative in policy-making and the integration of 
ethical notions in robotics and HRI research.
First of all, in a policy-making context, the term ‘emerg -
ing technologies’ generally encompasses notions of fast-
paced technological development, with a high level of 
societal and economic impact that governments need to 
manage [ 47, 48]. When understood in such a context, the 
use of ethical approaches as part of public policy decision-
making goes back further than one might expect. In fact, 
the implementation of ethics as a tool for the governance 
of emerging technologies can be traced back to the 1970s 
in the US and the 1980s in the EU [ 49]. In several areas of 
technological development, applied ethics approaches and 
committees have been advanced in response to societal and 
governmental concerns over technoscientific innovations. 
Good examples can be found in the establishment of applied 
ethics approaches in fields like nanotechnology (nanoeth -
ics), data technology (data ethics), biomedical technology 
(bioethics) and so on [ 50–52]. An important reason for 
the implementation of ethical perspectives in the context 
of emerging technologies is the emphasis on the potential 
high stakes, high expectations, and sizable amount of future 
unknowns surrounding these technologies [ 53, 54]. This is 
important for policy-makers because it captures aspirations 
for a more prosperous future on the one hand (e.g. in the 
form of economic growth), while also representing contra -
dictory and contested understandings of what that future 
might entail [ 55].
As is the case with other emerging technologies, robotics 
and AI technologies are often presented in the context of a 
future in which new innovations are expected to have many 
unprecedented properties and abilities with revolutionary 
and transformative potential. Furthermore, the historical 
dimension of such technologies is important to consider in 
this regard. Robots and other automata have captured the 
imagination since ancient times [ 56]. Especially in the last 
century, robotics and AI technologies have become promi -
nent, widely recognized technocultural icons that represent 
many different speculative expectations and imaginations 
[57, 58]. While robotics and AI technologies have become become “big business”, and that this could in fact aid the 
establishment of a rhetoric of “ethics washing” large-scale 
technological developments that harm society [ 41–43]. In 
line with this point, ethicists have argued that a collabora -
tive attitude within a system of technological innovation 
can be counterproductive and that sometimes, more politi -
cized, disruptive strategies should be considered to generate 
change for the better in the long run [ 44].
Finally, an often-heard argument is that the integration 
of ethics perspectives can complicate the process of techno -
logical development. This point goes hand in hand with two 
more general problems, namely the long-standing impasse 
between ethical and economic imperatives when it comes 
to innovation and the general problematization of the idea 
that AI and robotics technologies can be governed at their 
current stage of development. For instance, when it comes 
to ethical considerations regarding AI and robotics, some 
argue that they establish unnecessary hurdles in the current 
race for robotics and AI dominance (e.g., with regards to 
military supremacy) [ 45]. The idea is that if ethical limi -
tations in the EU are much more restrictive than in other 
jurisdictions, competitors worldwide could have an advan -
tage in terms of development speed. Accordingly, it is use -
ful not to disregard this narrative too quickly, but rather to 
consider which new frameworks can be employed to define 
and tackle this problem in a way that enables technologi -
cal development. Luciano Floridi states, for instance, that 
the EU’s normative, human-centered approach is unique 
on the world stage, but must be recognized as quite a dif -
ficult approach. Nevertheless, he also explicitly argues that 
“nobody ever said that doing the right thing was going to be 
cheap and easy” [ 46].
In short, the main issue with the ethics narrative in its 
current form is that the resulting plans and strategies mostly 
involve a top-down approach that is still quite strongly 
based on high-level principles. Even though it seems evi -
dent that the EU is poised to invest in human-centred, ethi -
cal robotics and AI, the pathways towards this goal are still 
rather unclear and are generally up for negotiation, espe -
cially in light of the need for economic and technological 
development. In the remainder of this paper, the main ques -
tion is how the high-level ideas and concepts that have been 
used to establish the narrative of ethical robotics and AI 
governance in the EU can become a meaningful component 
of research and development processes in practice-related 
fields like HRI. That is to say, HRI is explicitly understood 
as a field that can play an important role in the quest for 
more tangible implementations of ethics.
1 31287