International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295European Parliament defining or altering this strategy have 
been included. Important to realize in this case is that even 
though the EU has increasingly started to use the term “AI” 
to refer to its robotics and AI strategy, the focus of the paper 
in general is still on robotic technologies, since the latter 
sections focus on the role of HRI research. The resulting 
insights describe how the EU represents the issues, goals 
and instruments of (future) robotics and AI governance. The 
method was designed to trace the different elements that 
make up the different potential issues, goals and instruments 
of governance.
2.1 Fostering Robotics Development and Managing 
its Economic Impact
In terms of robotics governance, policy-makers’ interest in 
these technologies is certainly not new. In fact, there are sev -
eral regulatory areas in which specific issues with respect to 
robotic technologies have been regulated for many years. 
Furthermore, predecessors to current robotic technologies 
have been around for more than half a century, and as such, 
they have been part of the EU’s economic, industrial, and 
research policies in recent decades. In order to improve the 
competitive situation and foster consolidated approaches to 
technological and economic growth, the EU has made mul -
tiple efforts to develop and support specific strategic initia -
tives. For instance, in 2000, the European Robotics Research 
Network (EURON) was founded in order to encourage and 
promote research, education and technology transfer in the 
field of robotics [ 9]. Interestingly, attempts to include robot 
ethics in robotics policy were also made here, based on Isaac 
Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics and mainly aiming to 
develop a taxonomy of potential ethical issues. Even though 
the content is not yet defined in much detail, many issues are 
already present, such as reliability and predictability, trace -
ability of robot actions as well as issues around safety and 
security [ 10]. Furthermore, in 2005, the European Robot -
ics Platform (EUROP) was founded and functioned as an 
industry-driven initiative to strengthen the EU’s competitive 
position in robotics research and development [ 11].
Furthermore, in terms of economic and societal impact, 
the increasing uptake of robots has long been a topic of 
EU (macro-)economic policy-making. In a range of fore -
sight documents from the last decade, different EU insti -
tutions and bodies have taken up various broader themes 
in relation to robots and their potential impact on society 
[12–15]. Such foresight studies generally maintain a strong 
focus on how new types of (mostly industrial) robots could 
be deployed in the near future, while also paying attention 
to the macroeconomic effects of this increase in automa -
tion. Foresight concerning these topics mostly focus on 
issues like the potential effects of robots on employment, while simultaneously emphasizing the positive potential of 
robotization for economic growth. In this way, a narrative is 
shaped which establishes (industrial) robots as potentially 
problematic in terms of socioeconomic impact, while simul -
taneously mitigating this impact because of the expected 
economic growth, which has the potential to foster a gen -
eral increase in welfare and employment. Furthermore, such 
studies often emphasize topics like potential re-shoring and 
the general strengthening of the EU’s industrial sector as an 
important effect of the increased implementation of robots.
2.2 The Ethics of Autonomous Systems as a Topic of 
Concern
Whereas the impact of robotics innovations has long been 
a theme in different types of governance, the explicit rise in 
attention paid to ethical issues surrounding robotics and AI 
in the EU policy-making context can be seen as more recent 
(even though it has been around for much longer in aca -
demic circles). Attention to ethical themes in this realm of 
EU policy-making was rather marginal before 2015, but has 
since evolved to become much more prominent. An impor -
tant development in that regard are several reports by expert 
bodies of the European Parliament and European Commis -
sion. For instance, in 2016, the European Parliament’s Panel 
for the Future of Science and Technology ( STOA ) issued a 
report titled ‘Ethical Aspects of Cyber-Physical Systems’ 
[16]. This report identifies in detail the impacts of and issues 
with cyber-physical systems in general, while also paying 
substantial attention to various types of robots in a range 
of areas of applications. In terms of what this study under -
stands to be important ethical issues, the most prominent 
are concerns about privacy infringement, questions regard -
ing liability and accountability with respect to autonomous 
machines, safety issues and health issues. Ethical issues 
are thus framed in terms of clearly definable problems that 
require specific legislative solutions.
A pivotal development for the further definition of robots 
and AI as a potential policy problem was when a new consen -
sus started to take shape around potentially unprecedented 
forms of artificial agency. A general trigger moment for the 
discussion regarding the position of interactive robots (and 
other artificial agents) in EU policy-making was the Euro -
pean Parliament resolution of 16 February 2017 entitled 
‘Civil Law Rules on Robotics’ [ 17]. The ideas expressed 
in this resolution had been informed by studies from the 
Parliament’s Scientific Foresight Unit, the European Parlia -
ment Research Service and the Committee on Legal Affairs 
[16, 18]. Generally, in the EP resolution, there is a strong 
focus on the expected impacts of AI and AI-powered robots 
in society, while autonomous features of these systems play 
a central role in the way they are problematized. It is in 
1 31283