International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295to embed ethics itself within such definitions in a formalized 
manner.
4.3 Value-Based Design and Implementation
Another promising path to developing a more mature ethics 
narrative that is gaining traction at the moment concerns the 
proliferation of value-based design and implementation pro -
cesses. This kind of ethics implementation has also gained 
traction in the EU context, for instance through the notion of 
ethics-by-design. In short, the idea here is that deliberation 
on and implementation of values can help ensure a strategy 
in which societal and ethical issues become part and parcel 
of robotics research and development processes, as well as a 
central consideration when implementing robots in existing 
contexts [ 93, 94]. As such, central to this approach are the 
analysis of values and the establishment of new norms in the 
research, design, and development process for social robot -
ics applications [ 95]. From this point of view, responsible 
research and innovation practices are crucial to achieving 
this type of ethics integration.
By making the design, engineering and implementation 
of robotics more focused on values that are important in 
open, democratic societies, innovation processes can like -
wise become more open, responsible, and inclusive [ 96]. 
Examples of such values can be found in more general long-
standing democratic notions like transparency and account -
ability, but often require detailed deliberation in order to 
be properly implemented [ 90, 97, 98]. Many of these top -
ics are currently the subject of discussions and research in 
HRI. This includes discussions about the norms and values 
of roboticists and HRI practitioners themselves, as well as 
the implementation of new norms and values [ 99, 100]. 
Research approaches like Value-Sensitive Design (VSD) 
and Participatory Design (PD) have proven useful here, as 
they generally place a strong emphasis on integrating ethi -
cal principles and values [ 96, 101–104]. Furthermore, stan -
dardization can also play an important role in this context, 
since it can establish design requirements which are use -
ful for establishing new types of societal engagement with 
robotics engineering and design [ 105].
From a governance perspective, these kinds of ethics 
implementations draw attention to the question of how 
research and innovation systems can be modified to estab -
lish responsible, ethical innovation [ 106]. As such, design 
itself becomes acknowledged as a specific mode of ethical 
inquiry. One that is strongly grounded in immediate prac -
tical engagement with ethical issues. In this regard, it is 
also important to note that ethical notions from within HRI 
have become connected to broader value-based innovation 
frameworks in the governance of science and technology. 
Useful examples in this context are the responsible research main rationale being that human dependence on such auto -
mated systems requires their decisions to remain within the 
borders of what is determined to be ethical. When robot eth -
ics as a field began to take shape, this was an important part 
of considerations on how to make ethics a relevant notion 
for robotics development, and it remains an important point 
of consideration in current discussions on the implemen -
tation of ethics in autonomous systems. One of the most 
common examples illustrating the importance of ethics for 
autonomous systems can be found in the trolley problem, 
which is often used to show how autonomous systems (e.g., 
autonomous vehicles) need to be prepared to make deci -
sions of an ethical nature.
In its most strict sense, this kind of research concerns 
autonomous agents that can be considered morally compe -
tent. Thus, with regards to HRI research, the integration of 
ethics and ethical approaches can be achieved by formal -
izing ethical norms so that they can become embedded in 
the automated reasoning of robotic artifacts. It is particu -
larly relevant when the artifacts that have emerged from 
such research are tested in interaction research. In this case, 
social robots as autonomous agents could exhibit behavior 
that can be considered “ethical” [ 84]. There are several case 
studies that discuss and study the direct implementation of 
ethics in this sense as a part of autonomous agents’ behavior 
[85–88]. Other useful studies in this realm analyze human 
norms themselves and the way autonomous agents can 
engage in norm-conforming ways of interacting [ 89]. Fur -
thermore, the notion of trust in technology has been evolv -
ing together with initiatives that implement ethical rules to 
guide the behavior of artificial agents and ensure trustwor -
thy interactions [ 90].
Apart from the research that is needed to further develop 
moral reasoning in robots, this is very much a project where 
moral HRI can help us understand what it means to have 
moral machines and how this affects robotics’ socio-tech -
nical systems [ 91]. In terms of the high-level EU plans, 
this type of ethics involves the ambitious and important 
endeavor to create autonomous machines that can be inher -
ently trustworthy. Because of its direct research focus on 
interactions, as well as its high level of technical expertise, 
HRI has a lot to offer here to help make the very notion 
of the moral, trustworthy robot a success. For instance, an 
important task of HRI research in this context is to under -
stand how humans apply moral norms to (social) robots and 
judge their behavior [ 92]. Findings from such research can 
help to determine how social robots should behave, thus 
contributing to the discussion on meaningful ethical gover -
nance of more sophisticated forms of artificial agency. Thus, 
in this interaction context, it is important to develop elabo -
rate definitions of what constitutes normative behavior and 
1 31290