International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295can become manifested in research and development. Spe -
cifically, I focus on human-robot interaction (HRI) research, 
as a crucial field for studying interactions with embodied 
autonomous systems. In short, the main point of the paper 
is that on the one hand, policy-making narratives can be 
instrumental for achieving systemic changes towards build -
ing more inclusive, trustworthy technologies. However, on 
the other hand, in order to achieve this change there is a 
clear need to invest in further ethics implementation in HRI 
and social robotics research. In this way, the ethics narrative 
can both be deepened and broadened. By developing this 
argument, the paper focuses on the interface between robot 
ethics, robotics governance and HRI research. As such, the 
main underlying challenge of this paper is to draw connec -
tions between two different components: on the one hand, 
the portrayal and understanding of robotics and AI technol -
ogies as (future) objects of EU ethical governance, and on 
the other hand, the implementation of ethical deliberations 
in HRI research.
The outline of the paper is as follows: Sect. 2 provides a 
short overview of current developments regarding the role 
of the ethics narrative in the EU robotics and AI strategy. 
This is done by providing insight into the main themes from 
a range of different policy documents published by the EU 
in recent years. Section 3 provides a critical reflection by 
questioning the ethics narrative’s uptake in policy-making 
discourse, while providing more context regarding its his -
tory in the anticipatory governance of emerging technolo -
gies. Based on that, the main argument of this section is 
developed, namely that it is important to see the ethics nar -
rative as a shared effort between policy-makers and tech -
nical experts (e.g. HRI researchers). Departing from that 
argument, Sect. 4 provides four different pathways that can 
help to establish further ethics implementation in robotics 
and HRI research. To wrap up, the conclusion provides final 
remarks about the further development of ethical approaches 
and their role in shaping the future of a society with interac -
tive autonomous systems.
2 The Ethics Narrative in EU Robotics & AI 
Policy-Making
As indicated above, this paper analyzes the rise of ethics 
in EU policy-making using a narrative approach. First of 
all, this type of analysis posits that these policy-making 
processes develop against a background of ongoing nego -
tiations and disputes [ 2]. In this setting, narratives can be 
considered a driving factor behind the arguments and jus -
tifications used to establish newly developed policy plans. 
Tracing the emergence of a narrative framework is a com -
mon method of analysis in theories of policy change in fields such as political science, public administration and 
governance studies [ 3–5]. As such, it provides insight into 
the way something emerges on the agenda as a distinguish -
able policy problem that can be monitored and controlled 
via policy-making efforts [ 6]. Thus, the conceptualization of 
policy discourses as narratives and their subsequent analy -
sis helps to describe how policy-making on a specific topic 
develops over time, which is also the goal of this section.
Narratives that drive the definition of new policy ideas 
can evolve considerably, especially when policy plans 
develop quickly. In terms of empirical access to these narra -
tives, this can sometimes be a rather fuzzy process charac -
terized by a state of continuous development. Particularly, 
important to consider in this regard is that the directions in 
which the definitions of policy problems and policy ideas 
evolve can be very much influenced by stakeholders in 
the policy-making process, such as lobbyists, (academic) 
experts and so on [ 7, 8]. In other words, EU robotics and 
AI governance in its current state is still in a process of 
configuration. Among other things, this means that many 
specificities of the policies are explicitly understood as not 
yet fully developed. Furthermore, it also means that during 
this process of configuration, certain (potential) characteris -
tics and impacts of current and future autonomous systems 
are becoming defined as specific policy problems. Look -
ing at policy-making in such a manner has consequences 
for this paper: rather than taking statements about ethics at 
face value and analyzing what their consequences are, the 
very notion and use of ethics itself is explicitly analyzed as 
a policy-making narrative that is under development.
The present section provides insight into the rise of ethi -
cal notions in EU robotics and AI policy through a narra -
tive analysis of policy documents, including both foresight 
reports from expert bodies as well as documents that define 
official EU policy and legislation. Whereas the former are 
usually based on expert statements and do not represent an 
official policy position of the European Parliament or Euro -
pean Commission, they have nevertheless been included 
since they provide important insights into the underlying 
argumentation behind the EU’s policy narratives. For the 
first two subsections below, these documents were selected 
by going through the EU document databases using robo* as 
the main search term, while also selectively going through 
results based on the search term automat* in order to make 
sure documents that have a close relation to the topic of 
robotization were not excluded. For the latter two subsec -
tions, it is important to note that policy-making itself shifted 
towards paying increased attention to the impact of large-
scale autonomous systems. An important consequence of 
this was that the EU’s governance plans were increasingly 
defined based on large-scale AI strategy plans. From this 
period, all documents from the European Commission and 
1 31282