International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295through the anticipation of consequences of development 
and implementation.
In general, this way of applying ethics fits quite well with 
most of the existing HRI research and the specific ramifica -
tions of this approach are discussed quite regularly in the 
field. First of all, important attempts have been made to dis -
cuss what the main ethical issues in HRI are, while defin -
ing ethical codes and guidelines based on these discussions 
[73, 74]. Furthermore, even though ethical assessments 
and ethical standards are often portrayed as an endeavor 
that restricts robotics development and innovation, several 
practitioners have argued that increasing attention to eth -
ics now will likely lead to more socially sustainable inno -
vations in the long run [ 75–77]. A crucial argument in this 
regard is that when it comes to interactions between robotic 
systems and their users, the identification of ethical issues 
and implementation of ethical principles, guidelines and/or 
standards is often argued to aid in configuring human-robot 
interactions themselves. For instance, persistent attention to 
principles like non-maleficence or social justice can help to 
increase the acceptance of social robots and other autono -
mous systems, especially in the longer run [ 78]. Further -
more, this has led to important discussions in HRI on the 
assessment of norms and values that require recognition of 
the needs of minorities in autonomous systems [ 79, 80].
Further development and enrichment in order to contrib -
ute to a more profound and effective ethics narrative can 
be considerably advanced through research that explicitly 
engages with existing high-level principles that are cur -
rently discussed in governance. In line with the arguments 
above regarding technological innovation and ethics, it 
can be fruitful to see the ethical governance of interactive 
robots itself as an instance of sociotechnical innovation. 
Because of its focus on empirical analyses of interactions, 
HRI can add substantial insights to the ways in which high-
level notions can become part of ethics assessments in HRI 
practice. Translating such considerations and values into 
implementable rules, standards and guidelines allows them 
to evolve and be tested as components of robotics research. 
Crucial in this context are current advancements in the field 
of ethical standards. Robotics and HRI expertise plays an 
important role in the further development of these ethical 
standards [ 81].
4.2 Moral Competence for Artificial Ethical Agency
Thinking about normative reasoning in artificial agents has 
a rather long history in fields such as logical reasoning and 
other realms of AI and robotics research [ 82, 83]. As has also 
been argued in the EU context, the very prospect of more 
sophisticated automated decision-making systems renders it 
desirable to formalize and implement ethical reasoning - the of the ethics narrative. By translating issues from the realm 
of governance to research areas like HRI, ethical notions 
can move beyond conceptual stages and provide new, more 
precise insights into how the ethical development and use of 
interactive robots can be achieved.
4 Manifesting the Ethics Narrative in HRI 
Research
Up until this point, the EU governance context was 
described as the main locus of change, whereas the social 
robotics and HRI research contexts were mostly mentioned 
as a crucial component in that development. In this section, 
however, the focus will shift to the latter. As has been made 
clear above, an important future prospect that has sparked 
the EU’s focus on anticipatory AI and robot regulation is the 
emergence of new generations of AI-equipped robots with 
unprecedented interactive capabilities. The ramifications of 
these developments have also become an important point of 
discussion in robotics and HRI research, since they allow 
many more (unexpected) factors to affect the interactions 
between robots and humans. With this in mind, the sub -
sections below explore the different ways in which ethics 
and ethical notions in the EU ethics narrative are currently 
(a) already being discussed and studied in HRI research, 
including prominent examples from the literature; and (b) 
how these efforts can be further developed and enriched in 
order to contribute to a more profound and effective ethics 
narrative on a midstream level.
4.1 Ethical Assessment
One of the most common, straightforward forms of imple -
menting ethics in research and development processes 
across the board is to discern and define potential ethical 
issues. This also plays a major role in the EU governance 
plans, since a central aim of these plans is to stimulate the 
development of autonomous systems that serve societal 
needs, while simultaneously avoiding or mitigating ethical 
issues. Furthermore, the ethical risk assessment procedures 
that are part of the AI Act will likely be strongly grounded 
in this type of ethics implementation. An important way to 
achieve this kind of ethics consideration is through the insti -
tutionalization of ethical assessments in the form of commit -
tees that review certain decisions and establish a consensus 
on specific technologies based on expert review procedures. 
Apart from that, this type of ethics integration is generally 
concerned with the ways in which ethical principles, guide -
lines and standards can be employed by researchers and 
other practitioners. Ethical assessment procedures in such 
contexts often include elements of prediction and foresight 
1 31289