International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295regard that ‘[g]iven the major impact that AI can have on our 
society and the need to build trust, it is vital that European 
AI is grounded in our values and fundamental rights such as 
human dignity and privacy protection’ [ 30]. Also important 
with regards to values and fundamental rights is a report by 
the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) called ‘Get -
ting the future right – Artificial intelligence and fundamen -
tal rights’ [ 31]. While this report focuses on AI technologies 
in general, it does provide important arguments and ideas in 
the search for ways to grapple with the human rights impli -
cations of new forms of automated decision-making.
2.4 Establishing a Common Strategy and 
Regulatory Framework
In April 2021, an updated version of the coordinated 
plan was communicated, entitled ‘Fostering a European 
approach to Artificial Intelligence’ [ 32]. In this longer ver -
sion of the coordinated plan, the perceived need for trust -
worthy technology plays an important role in the way policy 
ideas are developed. Here as well, the ethical guidelines of 
the AI HLEG serve as an important inspiration. In general, 
the argument is that in order to achieve worldwide strategic 
leadership in AI and robotics, attention to trustworthiness 
and human-centeredness can be a key element that distin -
guishes the EU strategy from other global players, while 
further solidifying its status as a global regulatory power 
(for more context on this topic, see [ 33]).
Furthermore, also in April 2021, the European Commis -
sion came up with an important proposal for a legal frame -
work by providing the draft for an ‘AI Act’, which is short 
for ‘Regulation on Artificial Intelligence’ [ 34]. This act lays 
down quite specific rules for the development, implementa -
tion and use of AI systems and can be seen as a major out -
come of the activities and plans listed above. Furthermore, 
as is always important in an EU context, it aims for a harmo -
nized European approach consisting of governance systems 
at the level of the Member States as well as cooperation 
mechanisms on the level of EU governance. Moreover, 
the terms ‘trust’ and ‘trustworthy’ are mentioned multiple 
times in this AI Act and the different explanatory documents 
attached to it. Interestingly, these ideas are also central to 
aspirations regarding the EU’s future as a worldwide leader 
in the development of ethical robots.
Particularly interesting in relation to the process of build -
ing trust through ethical frameworks is the use of risk-based 
approaches in the AI Act. Risk plays a central role in these 
proposals, since the idea is to have different rules for dif -
ferent risk levels of AI-powered technologies. In this way, 
ethical risk assessment can become a way of enforcing ethi -
cal reasoning, with distinctions made between unaccept -
able risk, high risk and low or minimal risk. Overall, such Considerations on the Policy and Investment Recommenda -
tions’ was provided [ 25].
In the spirit of developing a socially sustainable, EU-
wide strategy for robotics and AI research and development, 
the ‘Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence’ was put for -
ward in April 2018 [ 26]. It contains the initial version of a 
coordinated plan on the EU level. Its content is quite closely 
related to the ideas the AI HLEG put forward, since the lat -
ter’s deliverables were supposed to serve as a foundation 
for the further evolution of the EU’s approach. Furthermore, 
the plan represents an important moment in terms of deeper 
EU integration on autonomous systems, since it implied 
that most EU member states would collaborate on a com -
mon strategy and approach. While several member states 
were already working on national approaches, this was a 
step that could have important consequences for the future 
of a harmonized policy (i.e. common policy across the EU) 
on autonomous systems in the EU. In this regard, another 
important communication document concerning such a 
strategy was ‘Building Trust in Human-Centric Artificial 
Intelligence’ in April 2019 [ 27]. As the title suggests, the 
document’s main aim is to further elaborate the European 
Commission’s focus on the development and implementa -
tion of trustworthy robotics and AI. Furthermore, the Euro -
pean Parliament drafted another important resolution with 
roughly the same theme, namely to establish a “comprehen -
sive European industrial policy on artificial intelligence and 
robotics” [ 28]. This resolution emphasizes the importance 
of AI and robotics as technologies that can support society, 
while outlining how this can be achieved through research 
and development and industrial policy. Also in this resolu -
tion, substantial attention is paid to potential new legal and 
regulatory frameworks, as well as ethics as a type of soft 
governance - for instance, in the form of standards as well as 
ethics-by-design frameworks. This goes hand in hand with 
a stronger focus on a use of ethics that is less focused on 
defining ethical issues, but more on it becoming an inherent 
part of engineering, design and implementation processes.
The work of the Juncker Commission has been continued 
under the current V on der Leyen Commission (installed in 
November 2019). Ursula von der Leyen states that a main 
goal of her new Commission is to set the standard and 
thus ‘put forward legislation for a coordinated European 
approach on the human and ethical implications of Artifi -
cial Intelligence’. She writes this in the political guidelines 
for the Commission under her leadership, entitled ‘A Union 
that Strives for More: My Agenda for Europe’ [ 29]. Further -
more, a white paper entitled ‘On Artificial Intelligence - A 
European approach to excellence and trust’ was published 
by the European Commission in 2020 [ 30]. This white paper 
establishes a connection between a strong focus on building 
trust and the attachment to ‘European values’. It states in this 
1 31285