International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295the European Commission (Juncker Commission) and 
its affiliated institutions also started to explicitly focus on 
robotics and AI as policy issues that required both dedicated 
policies as well as a consolidated strategy for technological 
research and development [ 20, 21]. Within a few years, the 
process of trust-building and the role of ethics in this process 
became important components of policy ideas with respect 
to an anticipatory governance and development strategy 
for robotics and AI. The Commission generally focused on 
those issues under the banner of AI technology, but robots 
were part and parcel of the considerations. This can partially 
be explained by the increased hype and buzzwords around 
AI technology that arose around that time.
An important development in the further establishment 
of a dedicated strategy on robotics and AI was in June 2018, 
when the European Commission established the indepen -
dent High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI 
HLEG). This group consisted of 52 experts from a range of 
different backgrounds. The group’s mission was to advise 
the European Commission concerning the potentials and 
challenges of autonomous systems and support the imple -
mentation of a new EU strategy on robotics and AI. Soci -
etal issues were evidently considered a prominent topic 
not only in the group’s mission but also in its composition, 
since quite a number of members were recognized experts 
in areas related to such issues.
2.3 Towards a Coordinated EU Robotics & AI 
Strategy
After its establishment, the AI HLEG published several 
deliverables, the most important of which was the ‘Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’ published in 2019. The doc -
ument provides four ethical principles (respect for human 
autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness, explicability) that 
form the foundation of trustworthy robotics and AI. Further -
more, it lists seven key requirements (human agency and 
oversight, technical robustness and safety, privacy and data 
governance, transparency, diversity, non-discrimination 
and fairness, environmental and societal well-being, and 
accountability) for the realization of trustworthy AI [ 22]. An 
important key argument in this deliverable is that trust in 
robotics and AI can be built through regulation, legislation 
and standardization efforts, while also emphasizing a need 
to pay increased attention to topics like participation and 
inclusivity. Partly based on the key requirements from the 
first deliverable, a second deliverable was published, called 
‘Policy and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy 
AI’ [ 23]. The group also provided an ‘Assessment List for 
Trustworthy AI’, which included a web-based version of 
the assessment list [ 24]. Finally, a deliverable on ‘Sectoral this context that the use of ethical approaches is mentioned 
abundantly and with respect to numerous applications. First 
of all, ethical principles are mentioned as constitutive com -
ponents of guidelines that restrict both the development 
and use of (AI-powered) robots. This is seen as relevant 
for a range of different ethical issues, such as preventing 
potential harm to humans, protection of human liberty as 
well as privacy, and the risk of manipulation. Interestingly, 
the resolution also maintains an emphasis on issues related 
to accessibility and equity, such as ensuring right to care 
or general access to technological progress in the form of 
robotics. The resolution also envisions an important role for 
ethical committees that assess robotics and AI research. In 
the resolution itself, these ethical principles are listed, along 
with other principles and objectives, such as research and 
innovation goals, standardization, safety and security.
Furthermore, to provide more insight into the Parlia -
ment’s line of argumentation, it is worth considering one 
short, but widely debated paragraph in this resolution. This 
paragraph caused a considerable stir, as it expressed the 
possibility of establishing forms of ‘electronic personality’ 
while arguing for ‘creating a specific legal status for robots 
in the long run, so that at least the most sophisticated auton -
omous robots could be established as having the status of 
electronic persons responsible for making good any dam -
age they may cause, and possibly applying electronic per -
sonality to cases where robots make autonomous decisions 
or otherwise interact with third parties independently’ [ 17]. 
This quote demonstrates how the Parliament anticipates 
that technological developments could lead to a situation 
in which new types of autonomous robots become engaged 
in (social) interactions. According to the proposal, this 
will impact the legal interpretation of autonomous robots’ 
actions and liability and render the notion of electronic per -
sonhood necessary in order to deal with the legal ramifica -
tions. This paragraph caused quite a controversy: in 2018, 
an open letter was published by 156 AI and robotics experts 
from different European countries, rejecting the recommen -
dation of a legal status for robots [ 19]. They mainly argued 
that the proposal overestimates actual technical develop -
ments in robotics, while also arguing that such a status for 
robots would be inappropriate from a legal and ethical point 
of view.
Apart from the discussion over the legal (and moral) 
status of autonomous systems, the resolution by the Euro -
pean Parliament marked an important moment for how such 
systems in general and interactive robots more specifically 
became defined in the EU’s agenda: as a specific policy 
problem that requires substantial attention to ethical issues 
that stretch beyond existing boundaries between humans and 
machines, especially in terms of the ethical consequences of 
potential robot autonomy. Roughly around the same time, 
1 31284