International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-023-00982-6
governance of robotics and AI. A prominent example in this 
context is the European Union (EU), where the anticipatory 
governance of robotics and AI has been on the agenda for 
almost a decade. In recent years, the European Commission 
has expressed its aspirations to maintain a strong empha -
sis on ethical approaches in its policy-making and strategy 
development around robotics and AI technologies. The 
EU’s stance is currently characterized by an emphasis on the 
need to build trust in autonomous systems while promoting 
a human-centred technology development trajectory that is 
grounded in ethical reasoning. As such, the EU has gener -
ally occupied a leading role in the worldwide discussion on 
the governance of autonomous systems in general [ 1].
The aim of this paper is to provide critical but construc -
tive insight into the current discursive frame within which 
EU robotics and AI policy-making plays out in terms of this 
ethics narrative. While scrutinizing how this narrative has 
emerged in EU robotics and AI policy-making, the paper 
looks critically at the ways in which the EU’s policy plans 1 Introduction
Autonomous systems with interactive capabilities are cur -
rently encountering a wide range of expectations regard -
ing their anticipated future impact. Examples can be found 
in expressions of both excitement and fear about these 
systems’ autonomy, their potentially deceptive anthropo -
morphism, their impact on privacy and so on. As a result 
of these expectations, there are currently many concerns 
about the potential socially disruptive impacts of increas -
ing interaction between humans and autonomous systems. 
In order to mitigate these concerns, there have been grow -
ing deliberations on the use of ethical approaches in the 
 
Jesse de Pagter
jesse.de.pagter@tuwien.ac.at
1 Institute for Management Science, TU Wien, 
Theresianumgasse 27, Vienna, AustriaAbstract
In recent years, the European Union has made considerable efforts to develop dedicated strategies and policies for the 
governance of robotics and AI. An important component of the EU’s approach is its emphasis on the need to mitigate the 
potential societal impacts of the expected rise in the interactive capacities of autonomous systems. In the quest to define 
and implement new policies addressing this issue, ethical notions have taken an increasingly central position. This paper 
presents a concise overview of the integration of this ethics narrative in the EU’s policy plans. It demonstrates how the 
ethics narrative aids the definition of policy issues and the establishment of new policy ideas. Crucially, in this context, 
robotics and AI are explicitly understood as emerging technologies. This implies many ambiguities about their actual 
future impact, which in turn results in uncertainty regarding effective implementation of policies that draw on the ethics 
narrative. In an effort to develop clearer pathways towards the further development of ethical notions in AI and robotics 
governance, this paper understands human-robot interaction (HRI) research as a field that can play an important role in 
the implementation of ethics. Four different complementary pathways towards ethics integration in (HRI) research are 
proposed, namely: providing insights for the improvement of ethical assessment, further research into the moral compe -
tence of artificial agents, engage in value-based design and implementation of robots, and participation in discussions on 
building ethical sociotechnical systems around robots.
Keywords  European Union · Human-Robot Interaction · Robot and AI Ethics · Robotics and AI Governance · Trust in 
RobotsAccepted: 15 February 2023 / Published online: 7 March 2023
© The Author(s) 2023From EU Robotics and AI Governance to HRI Research: Implementing 
the Ethics Narrative
Jesse de Pagter1
1 3