Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
reward landscape can be well-described by a model ﬁt using few examples, which also explains
the good performance of Bayesian optimization. On the left of Figure 2 we vary the number of
inner-loop policy optimization rounds with observations from the model-based environment, where
using 0 rounds corresponds to performing standard PPO. Since the surrogate model is of sufﬁcient
accuracy already at the beginning (right plot), performing more inner policy optimization rounds
increases performance and enables DyNA PPO to generate high-quality sequences using very few
evaluations of f(x).
4.2 O PTIMIZATION OF TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR BINDING SITES
Figure 3: Comparison of methods on optimization transcription factor binding sites. Left: maximum
cumulative reward f(x)as a function of samples. Right: fraction of local optima found. DyNA PPO optimizes
f(x)faster and ﬁnds more optima than PPO and baseline methods. Results are shown for one representative
transcription factor target (SIX6 REF R1).
DyNA PPO PPO BO-GP DbAs RegEvol FBGAN Random
Cumulative maximum 6.4 5.8 5.0 3.7 3.7 2.2 1.3
Fraction optima found 6.8 5.6 5.4 3.3 3.3 2.5 1.0
Mean hamming distance 5.6 5.4 4.0 2.5 1.0 2.5 7.0
Table 1: Mean rank of methods across transcription factor binding targets. Mean rank of
methods across all 41 hold-out transcription factor targets. Ranks were computed within each target
using the average of metrics across optimization rounds, and then averaged across target. The higher
the rank the better. 7 is the maximum rank. DyNA PPO outperforms the other methods on both
optimization of f(x)and its ability to identify multiple well-separated local optima.
Transcription factors are protein sequences that bind to DNA sequences and regulate their activ-
ity. Barrera et al. (2016) measured the binding afﬁnity of numerous transcription factors against all
possible length-8 DNA sequences ( V= 4). The resulting dataset deﬁnes 158 different discrete opti-
mization tasks, where the goal of each task is to ﬁnd a DNA sequence of length eight that maximizes
the afﬁnity towards one of the transcription factors. It is well suited for in-silico benchmarking since
(i) it is exhaustive and thereby does not require estimating missing f(x)and (ii) the distinct local
optima of all tasks are known and can be used to quantify exploration (see Appendix B.2 for details).
The optimization methods are given a budget of 10rounds with a batch size of B= 100 sequences.
The search space size is 48. We use one task (CRX REF R1) for optimizing the hyper-parameters of
all methods, and test performance on 41 heterogeneous hold-out tasks.
Figure 3 plots the performance of methods on a single representative binding target (SIX REF R1)
as a function of the total number of sequences measured so far. We ﬁnd that DyNA PPO and
PPO outperform all other methods in terms of both the cumulative maximum f(x)found as well
as the fraction of local optima discovered. We also ﬁnd that the diversity of proposed sequences
quantiﬁed by the fraction of global optima found is high compared to other generative approaches.
This shows that our method continues to explore the search space by proposing novel sequences
instead of converging to a single sequence or a handful of sequences–a desired property as discussed
8