Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
4.3 O PTIMIZATION OF ANTI-MICROBIAL PEPTIDES
Next, we seek to design antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). AMPs are relatively short (8 - 75 amino
acids) protein sequences ( jVj= 20 amino acids), which are promising candidates against multi-
resistant pathogens due to their wide range of antimicrobial activities. We use the dataset proposed
by Witten & Witten (2019), which contains 6,760 unique AMP sequences and their antimicrobial ac-
tivity towards multiple pathogens. We follow Witten & Witten (2019) for preprocessing the dataset
and generating non-AMP sequences as negative training samples. Unlike the transcription factor
binding site dataset, we do not have wet-lab experiments for every sequence in the search space.
Therefore, we ﬁt random forest classiﬁers to predict if a sequence is antimicrobial towards a certain
pathogen in the dataset (see Section B.3), and use the predicted probability as the functional mea-
surementf(x)to optimize. Given the high accuracy of the classiﬁers (cross-validated AUC 0:94and
0:99), we expect that the reward landscape of f(x)is of realistic difﬁculty. We perform 8 rounds
with a batch size 250 and restrict the sequence length to at most 50characters (search space size
2050).
Figure 6: Comparison of methods on the AMP design task. Left: Model-based training using DyNA PPO
and model-free PPO clearly outperform the other methods in terms of the maximum cumulative reward. Right:
The mean pairwise hamming distance between sequences proposed at each round, which is lower for DyNA
PPO and PPO but does not converge to zero due to the density-based exploration bonus (Figure 11).
Figure 6 compares methods on C. alibicani. We ﬁnd that model-based optimization using DyNA
PPO enables ﬁnding high reward sequences in early rounds, though model-free PPO slightly sur-
passes the performance of DyNA PPO later on. Both DyNA PPO and PPO considerably outperform
the other methods in terms of the maximum f(x)found. The density based exploration bonus
prevents PPO and DyNA PPO from generating non-unique sequences (Figure 11). Stopping model-
based training as soon as the model uncertainty increased by a certain factor prevents DyNA PPO
from converging to a sub-optimal solution when performing many model-based optimization rounds
(Figure 12,13).
5 C ONCLUSION
We have shown that RL is an attractive alternative to existing methods for designing DNA and
protein sequences. We have proposed DyNA PPO, a model-based extension of PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017) with automatic model selection that improves sample efﬁciency, and incorporates a
reward function that promotes exploration by penalizing identical sequences. By approximating an
expensive wet-lab experiment with a surrogate model, we can perform many rounds of optimization
in simulation. While this work has been focused on showing the beneﬁt of DyNA PPO for biological
sequence design, we believe that the large-batch, low-round optimization setting described here
may well be of general interest, and that model-based RL may be applicable in other scientiﬁc and
economic domain.
10