Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Random : Guessing sequences uniformly at random.
We quantify optimization performance by the cumulative maximum reward f(x)for sequences pro-
posed up to a given round, and we use the area under the cumulative maximum reward curve to
summarize one optimization trajectory as a single number. We quantify sequence diversity (Sec-
tion 2.4) in terms of the mean pairwise hamming distance between the sequences proposed at each
round. For problems with known optima, we also report the fraction of global optima found. We
replicate experiments with 50 random seeds.
4.1 O PTIMIZATION OF PROTEIN CONTACT ISING MODELS
Figure 1: Comparison of methods on optimizing the energy of protein contact Ising models . Left: the cu-
mulative maximum reward depending on the number of rounds for one selected protein target (1A3N). Right:
the mean cumulative maximum relative to Random for alternative protein targets. Since f(x)can be well-
approximated by a model trained on few examples, model-based training (DyNA PPO) results in a clear im-
provement over model-free training (PPO).
Figure 2: Analysis of the performance of DyNA PPO on the Ising model. Left: Performance of DyNA
PPO depending on the number of inner policy optimization rounds using the surrogate model. Using 0 rounds
corresponds to PPO training. Since the surrogate model is sufﬁciently accurate, it is useful to perform many
inner loop optimization rounds before querying f(x)again. Right: the R2of the surrogate model. Since it is
always above the threshold for model-based training (0.5; dashed line), it is always used for training.
We ﬁrst consider synthetic black-box optimization problems based on the 3D structure of naturally-
occurring proteins. Ising models ﬁt on sets of evolutionary-related protein sequences have been
shown to be accurate predictors for proteins’ 3D structure (Shakhnovich & Gutin, 1993; Weigt et al.,
2009; Marks et al., 2011; Sułkowska et al., 2012). We consider the inverse problem: given a protein,
we seek to ﬁnd the amino acid sequence that minimizes the energy of the Ising model parameterized
by its structure. Optimizers are given a budget of 10 rounds with batch size 1000 and we consider
sequences of length 50(search space size 2050). The functional form of the energy function is given
in Appendix B.1.
On the left of Figure 1 we consider the optimization trajectory for a representative protein and on the
right we compare the best f(x)found for each method across a range of proteins. We ﬁnd that DyNA
PPO considerably outperforms the other methods. We expect that this is because this synthetic
7