Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A.6 PPO AND DYNA PPO
We used the PPO implementation of the TF-Agents RL library (Guadarrama et al., 2018). After
each round, we trained trained the agent on the collected batch of sequences for a relatively high
number of steps (about 72) since it resulted in a performance increase compared with performing
only a single training step. We used the adaptive KL trust region penalty, which performed slightly
better than importance ratio clipping in our experiments Schulman et al. (2017). We used a policy
and value network with one fully connected layer and 128 hidden units. Both networks take the
current position and the Wlast generated characters as input, which we padded at the beginning
of the sequence. We set the context window Wto the minimum of the total sequence length and
50. As hyper-parameters, we tuned the learning rate, number of training steps, adaptive KL target,
and entropy regularization. For DyNA PPO, we also tuned the maximum number of model-based
optimization rounds M(see Section 2.3).
A.7 A UTOMATED MODEL SELECTION
Automatic model selection optimizes the hyper-parameters of a set of candidate models by random-
ized search, and evaluates each hyper-parameter conﬁguration by ﬁve-fold cross-validation using
theR2score. To account for randomness in the R2score between models due to different cross-
validation splits, we used the same split for evaluating each of the models per round. We considered
the following candidate models (implemented in Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011)) and corre-
sponding hyper-parameters:
KNeighborsRegressor: n neighbors
BayesianRidge: alpha 1, alpha 2, lambda 1, lamdba 2
RandomForestRegressor: max depth, max features, n estimators
ExtraTreesRegressor: max depth, max features, n estimators
GradientBoostingRegressor: learning rate, max depth, n estimators
GaussianProcessRegressor: with RBF, RationalQuadratic, and Matern kernel
We also considered an ensemble of 10 neural networks with two convolutional layers and one fully
connected layer, and optimized the learning rate and number of training epochs.
B D ATASET DETAILS
B.1 P ROTEIN CONTACT ISING MODELS
Given a protein from the Protein Data Bank (Berman et al., 2003), we compute the energy E(x)for
sequencexasE(x) =P
ii(xi) +P
ijCij(xi;xj), wherexirefers to the character in the i-th
position of sequence x.Cijis an indicator for whether the Catoms of the residues at positions iand
jare separated by less than 6 Angstroms when the protein folds. (xi;xj)is a widely-used ‘pair
potential’ based on co-occurence probabilities derived from the structures of real-world proteins
(Miyazawa & Jernigan, 1996). The same 20 x 20 table of pair potentials is used at all positions in
the sequence, and thus the difference in energy functions across proteins is dictated only by their
differing contact map structure. We set the local term i(xi)to zero. In future work, it would be
interesting to consider non-zero local terms.
Our experiments consider a set of qualitatively-different proteins listed at the bottom-right of Fig-
ure 1. We identify the local optima using the same procedure as in Section B.2, except without
accounting for reverse complements.
B.2 T RANSCRIPTION FACTOR BINDING SITE DATASET
We used the dataset described by Barrera et al. (2016), and min-max normalized binding afﬁnities
between zero and one. To reduce computational costs, we only considered the ﬁrst replicate (REF
R1) of each wild type transcription factor in the dataset, which resulted in 41 optimization targets
that we used for comparing optimizers as described in Section 4.2. We extracted local optima for
16