Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
model (Brookes & Listgarten, 2018). In Brookes et al. (2019b), p(x)is further restricted to stay
close to a prior distribution over sequences.
An alternative approach for optimizing the above expectation is RL. While RL has been used for
generating natural text (Bahdanau et al., 2016), small molecules (Zhou et al., 2019), and RNA se-
quences that fold into a particular structure (Runge et al., 2018), we are not aware of applications of
RL to optimizing DNA and protein sequences.
DyNA PPO is related to existing work on model-based RL for sample efﬁcient control (Deisenroth
& Rasmussen, 2011; Kurutach et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2019; Janner et al., 2019),
with the key difference that the state transition function is known and the reward function is unknown
in our work, whereas most existing model-based RL approaches seek to model the state-transition
function and consider the reward function as known.
Prior work on sequence generation incorporates non-differentiable rewards, like BLEU in machine
translation, via weighted maximum likelihood (MLE). Norouzi et al. (2016) introduce reward aug-
mented MLE, while Bahdanau et al. (2016) ﬁne tune an MLE-pretrained model using actor-critic
methods. Reinforcement learning has also been applied to solving combinatorial optimization prob-
lems (Bello et al., 2016; Bengio et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2017; Kool et al., 2018). In this setting
sample complexity is less important because evaluating f(x)only involves a fast software program.
Recent work has proposed generative models of protein structures (Sabban & Markovsky, 2019) or
generative models of amino acids conditional on protein structure (Ingraham et al., 2019). Such
methods are outside of the scope of this paper’s experiments, since they could only be used in
experimental settings where protein structures, which are expensive to measure, are available.
Finally, DNA and protein design differs from small molecule design (Grifﬁths & Hern ´andez-Lobato,
2017; Kusner et al., 2017; G ´omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; Sanchez-Lengeling &
Aspuru-Guzik, 2018; Korovina et al., 2019) in the following points: (i) the number of sequences
measured in parallel in the lab is typically higher (hundred or thousands vs. dozens) due to the
maturity of DNA synthesis and sequencing technology, (ii) the search space is a set of sequences
instead of molecular graphs, which require specialized network architectures for both discriminative
and generative models, and (iii) molecules must be optimized subject to the constraint that there is a
set of reactions to synthesize them, whereas practically all DNA or protein sequences are synthesiz-
able.
4 E XPERIMENTS
In the next three sections, we compare DyNA PPO to existing methods on three in-silico optimiza-
tion problems that we designed in collaboration with life scientists to faithfully simulate the behavior
of real wet-lab experiments, which would be cost prohibitive for a comprehensive methodological
evaluation. Along the way, we present ablation experiments to help to better understand the behavior
of DyNA PPO.
We compare the performance of model-free policy optimization ( PPO ) and model-based optimiza-
tion ( DyNA PPO ) with the following methods that we discussed in Section 3. Further details for
each method can be found in Appendix A:
RegEvolution : Local search based on regularized evolution (Real et al., 2019), which has
performed well on other black-box optimization tasks and can be seen as an instance of
directed evolution.
DbAs : Cross-entropy optimization using variational autoencoders (Brookes & Listgarten,
2018).
FBGAN : Cross entropy optimization using generative adversarial networks (Gupta & Zou,
2018).
Bayesopt GP : Bayesian optimization using a Gaussian process regressor and activation
maximization as acquisition function solver.
Bayesopt ENN Bayesian optimization using an ensemble of neural network regressors and
activation maximization as acquisition function solver.
6