Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
rounds with a distance of less than away fromx, where the weight decays linearly with the dis-
tance. This reward penalizes proposing similar sequences multiple times, where the strength of the
penalty is controlled by . As a result, the policy learns not to generate related sequences and hence
explores the search space more effectively. We used the edit distance as distance metric and tuned
the distance radius , where setting >0improved exploration on high-dimensional problems (see
Figure 11). We also considered an alternative penalty based on the nearest neighbor distance of the
proposed sequence to past sequences, which we found to be less effective (see Figure 9).
3 R ELATED WORK
Recently, machine learning approaches have been shown to be effective in optimizing real-world
DNA and protein sequences (Wang et al., 2019; Chhibbar & Joshi, 2019; de Jongh et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2019; Sample et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019). Existing methods for biological sequence design
fall into three broad categories: evolutionary search, optimization using discriminative models (e.g.
Bayesian optimization), and optimization using generative models (e.g. the cross entropy method).
Evolutionary approaches perform direct local search in the space of sequences. They include the
aforementioned directed evolution and derivatives with application-speciﬁc mutation and recombi-
nation steps. Evolutionary approaches are appealing since they are simple and can easily incorporate
human intuition into the design process, but generally suffer from low sample efﬁciency.
Optimization methods based on discriminative models alternate between two steps: (i) using the
data that have been collected so far to ﬁt a regressor f0(x)to approximate f(x), and (ii) using f0(x)
to deﬁne an acquisition function that is optimized to select the next batch of sequences. Recently,
such an approach was used to optimize the binding afﬁnity of IgG antibodies (Liu et al., 2019),
where a neural network ensemble was used for f0(x). In general, optimizing the acquisition func-
tion is a non-trivial combinatorial optimization problem. Liu et al. (2019) employed activation
maximization , where gradient-based optimization is performed on a continuous relaxation of the
discrete search space. However, this requires f0(x)to be differentiable and optimization of a con-
tinuous relaxation is vulnerable to leaving the data manifold (cf. deep dream (Mordvintsev et al.,
2015)).
Bayesian optimization deﬁnes an acquisition function such as the expected improvement (Mockus
et al., 2014) based on the uncertainty of f0(x), which enables balancing exploration and exploita-
tion (overview provided in Shahriari et al. (2015)). Gaussian processes (GPs) are commonly used for
Bayesian black-box optimization since they provide calibrated uncertainty estimates. Unfortunately,
GPs are hard to scale to large, high-dimensional datasets and are sensitive to the choice of hyper-
parameters. In response, recent work has performed continuous black-box optimization in the latent
space of a deep generative model (G ´omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). However, this approach requires
a pre-trained model such as a variational autoencoder to obtain the latent embeddings. Our model-
based reinforcement learning approach is similar to these approaches in that we train a reinforcement
learning policy to optimize a model f0(x). However, our policy is also trained directly on observa-
tions off(x)and is able to resort to model-free training by automatically identifying if the model
f0(x)is too inaccurate to be used as surrogate of f(x). Janner et al. (2019) investigated conditions
in which an estimate of model generalization (their analysis uses validation accuracy) could justify
model usage in such model-based policy optimization settings. Hashimoto et al. (2018) proposed
using a cascade of classiﬁers, one per round, to guide sampling progressively better candidates.
Optimization methods based on generative models seek to learn a distribution p(x)parameterized
bythat maximizes the expected value of f(x):ExP(x)[f(x)]:We note that this is the same
form as variational optimization objectives, which allow the use of parameter-space evolutionary
strategies (Staines & Barber, 2013; Wierstra et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2017). Variants of the
cross entropy method (De Boer et al., 2005; Brookes et al., 2019a) optimize , by alternating two
steps: (i) sampling xp(x)and evaluating f(x), and (ii) updating to maximize this expecta-
tion. Methods differ in how step (ii) is performed. For example, hillclimb-MLE (Neil et al., 2018)
performs maximum-likelihood training on the top k sequences from step (i). Similarly, Feedback
GAN (FBGAN) uses samples whose target function value f(x)exceeds a ﬁxed threshold for train-
ing a generative adversarial network (Gupta & Zou, 2018). Design by Adaptive Sampling (DbAs)
performs weighted MLE of variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014), where a sample’s
weight corresponds to the probability that f(x)is greater than a quantile cutoff under an noise
5