Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Std threshold = 1.0Std threshold = 0.5No Std threshold
Figure 12: Analysis of model accuracy during model based training on the AMP problem. Shown are
the mean absolute error (top row) and model uncertainty (bottom row; standard deviation) depending on the
number of inner model-based optimization rounds m(x-axis; see Algorithm 1) and outer optimization rounds
n(colors). Columns correspond to different thresholds for stopping model optimization (see Section 2.3).
Without threshold (right column), the model error and model uncertainty increase rapidly after only a few inner
optimization rounds. The model uncertainty is strongly correlated with the model error ( R2= 0:87), and can
be hence used as proxy for the unknown model error. Stopping model-based optimization as soon the the model
uncertainty increases by a factor of 0.5 (left column) upper-bounds the model error and prevents DyNA PPO
from performing policy updates with inaccurate model predictions.
Figure 13: Optimization performance on the AMP problem depending on the uncertainty threshold for
stopping model-based optimization and the maximum number model optimization rounds M. Without
threshold (Inf; red line), DyNA PPO converges to a sub-optimal solution, in particular when the maximum
number of model-based optimization rounds M is high. A threshold of 0.5 prevents a performance decrease
due to inaccuracy of the model (see Figure 12).
G C OMPARISON OF CROSS -VALIDATION SPLITTING STRATEGIES
We used the k-fold cross-validation tools in scikit-learn for performing model selection. After pub-
lication of the paper, we discovered that the default behavior in sklearn.model selection.KFold is to
not shufﬂe the input data but to slice them into chunks based on the input ordering.
When we switched to using random cross-validation folds, we found that the predictive accuracy
of models was considerably higher than when using folds based on the data order. This led to dif-
ferent models being selected, which led to a slight decrease in black-box optimization performance
compared to when not shufﬂing the input data (Figure 15).
Our data was sorted in the order in which it appeared in the optimization rounds. Hence, k-fold
cross-validation without shufﬂing corresponds to splitting the data approximately by rounds, which
favorably selects models that generalize across rounds. This is desired since samples in the same
22