Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR BIO -
LOGICAL SEQUENCE DESIGN
Christof Angermueller
Google Research
fchristofag@google.comDavid Dohan
Google Research
fddohang@google.com
David Belanger
Google Research
fdbelangerg@google.comRamya Deshpande
Caltech
frdeshpang@caltech.edu
Kevin Murphy
Google Research
fkpmurphyg@google.comLucy Colwell
Google Research
University of Cambridge
flcolwellg@google.com
ABSTRACT
The ability to design biological structures such as DNA or proteins would have
considerable medical and industrial impact. Doing so presents a challenging
black-box optimization problem characterized by the large-batch, low round set-
ting due to the need for labor-intensive wet lab evaluations. In response, we pro-
pose using reinforcement learning (RL) based on proximal-policy optimization
(PPO) for biological sequence design. RL provides a ﬂexible framework for opti-
mization generative sequence models to achieve speciﬁc criteria, such as diversity
among the high-quality sequences discovered. We propose a model-based vari-
ant of PPO, DyNA PPO, to improve sample efﬁciency, where the policy for a new
round is trained ofﬂine using a simulator ﬁt on functional measurements from prior
rounds. To accommodate the growing number of observations across rounds, the
simulator model is automatically selected at each round from a pool of diverse
models of varying capacity. On the tasks of designing DNA transcription factor
binding sites, designing antimicrobial proteins, and optimizing the energy of Ising
models based on protein structure, we ﬁnd that DyNA PPO performs signiﬁcantly
better than existing methods in settings in which modeling is feasible, while still
not performing worse in situations in which a reliable model cannot be learned.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Driven by real-world obstacles in health and disease requiring new drugs, treatments, and assays,
the goal of biological sequence design is to identify new discrete sequences xwhich optimize some
oracle, typically an experimentally-measured functional property f(x). This is a difﬁcult black-box
optimization problem over a combinatorially large search space in which function evaluation relies
on slow and expensive wet-lab experiments. The setting induces unusual constraints in black-box
optimization and reinforcement learning: large synchronous batches with few rounds total.
The current gold standard for biomolecular design is directed evolution , which was recently rec-
ognized with a Nobel prize (Arnold, 1998) and is a form of randomized local search. Despite its
impact, directed evolution is sample inefﬁcient and relies on greedy hillclimbing to the optimal se-
quences. Recent work has demonstrated that machine-learning-guided optimization (Section 3) can
ﬁnd better sequences faster.
Work done as an intern at Google.
1