evidence for a growing awareness of the urgent need for ethical principles for 
robotics and AI . But, while an important and necessary  foundation,  principles are not 
practice. Ethical standards are the next important step toward ethical governance in 
robotics and AI2. 
 
Ethical risk assessment  
Almost  certainly the world’s first explicit ethical standard in robotics is BS 8611  Guide 
to the Ethical Design and Application of Robots and Robotic Systems3, which was 
published in April 2016. Incorporating the EPSRC principles of robotics4, BS8611 is 
not a code of practice, but instead guidance on how  designers can undertake an 
ethical risk assessment  of their robot or system, and mitigate any ethical risks so 
identified. At its heart is a set of 20 distinct ethical hazards and risks, grouped under 
four categories: so cietal, application, commercial & financial, and environmental. 
Advice on measures to mitigate the impact of each risk is given, along with 
suggestions on how such measures might be verified or validated . The societal 
hazards include, for e xample, loss of trust, deception, infringements of privacy and 
confidentiality, addiction, and loss of employment. The idea of ethical risk 
assessment is of course not new – it is essentially what research ethics committees 
do – but a method for assessing robots for ethical risks is a powerful new addition to 
the ethical roboticist’s toolkit.  
 
In April 2016 , the IEEE Standards Association launc hed a global initiative on the 
Ethics of Aut onomous and Intelligent Systems5. The significance of this initiative 
cannot be overstated;  coming  from a professional  body with the standing and reach  
of the IEEE Standards Association it marks a watershed in the emergence of ethical 
standards. And it is a radical step. As I’ve argued above  all standards are – even if 
not explicitly – based on ethical principles. But for a respected standards body to 
launch an initiative which explicitly aims to address the deep  ethical challenges that 
face the whole of autonomous and intelligent systems  – from driverless car autopilots 
to medical diagnosis AIs, drones to deep learning, and care robots to chat bots – is 
both ambitious  and unprecedented.  
 
Humanity first  
The IEEE initiative position s human well -being  as its central tenet6. This is a bold and 
political stance since it  explicitly  seeks to reposition robotics and AI as technologies 
for improving the human condition  rather than simply  vehicles  for economic growth.  
The initiative’s mission is “to ensure every stakeholder involv ed in the design and 
development of autonomous and intelligent systems is educated, trained, and 
empowered to prioritize ethical considerations so that these technologies are 
advanced for the benefit of humanity”.  
 
The first major output from the IEEE Sta ndards Association’s global ethics initiative is 
a discussion document called Ethically Aligned Design  (EAD)7, developed through  an 
iterative process which invited public feedback.  The published second edition  of EAD 
sets out more than 100 eth ical issues a nd recommendations, and a third edition will 
be launched early in 2019.  The work of  more than 1000  volunteers across  thirteen  
committees, EAD covers: general (ethical) principles; how to embed values into 
autonomous intelligent systems; methods to guide et hical design ; safety and