systems based on artificial neural networks ( deep learning systems), or systems that 
are continually learning.  
 
There are two reasons transparency is so important.  
 
First, because modern robots and AI s are designed to work with or alongside  
humans, who need to be able to understand what they are doing and why. If we take 
an assisted living robot as an example transparency (or to be precise , explainability ) 
means the user can understand what the robot might do in different circumstances. 
An elderly person might be very unsure about robots, so it is important that her robot 
is helpful, predictable – never does an ything that frightens her – and above all safe. It 
should be easy for her to learn what the r obot does and why,  in different 
circumstances. An explainer system that allows her to ask the robot “why did you just 
do that ?” and receive a simple natural langua ge explanation would be very helpful in 
providing this kind of transparency. A higher level of transparency  would be the 
ability to ask questions like “what would you do if I fell down? ” or “what would you do 
if I forget to take my medicine? ” This allows her to build a mental  model of how the 
robot will behave in different situations.  
 
And second, because robots and AIs can and do go wrong. If physical robots go 
wrong they can cause physical harm or injury.  Real world trials of driverless cars 
have already resulted in several fatalities9. Even a software AI can cause harm. A 
medical diagnosis AI might, for instance, give the wrong diagnosis, or a biased  credit 
scoring AI might cause someone’s loan application to be wrongly rejected. Without 
transparency , discovering what went wrong is extremely difficult and may – in some 
cases – be impossible. The ability to find out what went wrong and why is not  only 
important to accident investigators, it might also be important to establish who is 
responsible, for in surance purposes, or in a court of law. And following high profile 
accidents wider society needs the reassurance of knowing that problems have been 
found and fixed.  
 
Transparency and explainability measured  
But transparency is not one thing. Clearly an elderly relative does  not require the 
same level of understanding of a care robot as the engineer who repairs it. The 
P7001 working group has defined  five distinct groups of stakeholders  (the 
beneficiaries of the standard): users , safety certifiers or agencie s, accident 
investigators , lawyers or expert witness , and the wider public . For each of these 
stakeholder groups , P7001 is setting out  measurable, testable levels of transparency 
so that autonomous systems can be objectively assessed and levels of compliance 
determined, in a range that defines minimum levels up to the highest achievable 
standards of transparency.  
 
Of course , the way in which transparency is provided is very different for each group. 
Safety certification agencies need access to technical details of how the system 
works, together with verified test results. Accident investigators will need access to 
data logs of exactly wh at happened prior to and during an accident, most likely 
provided by something akin to an aircraft flight data recorder10. Lawyers and expert 
witnesses will need access to the reports of safety certifiers and accident