investigators, along with evidence of the developer or manufacturer’s quality 
management processes. And wider society need s accessible documentary -type 
science communication to explain autonomous systems and how they work.  P7001 
will provide system designers with a toolkit for self -assessing t ransparency, and 
recommendations for how to achieve greater  transparency  and explainability . 
 
Outlook  
How might these new ethical standards be applied when, like m ost standards , they 
are voluntary?  First, standards which relate to safety (and especially s afety -critical 
systems), can be mandated by licensing authorities , so that compliance with those 
standards becomes a de facto  requirement of obtaining a  licence to operate that 
system; for the P7000 series candidates might include P7001 and P7009. Second, in 
a competitive market, compliance with ethical standards can be used to gain market 
advantage – especially among ethically aware consumers. Third, the re is growing 
pressure from professional bodies for the ir members to behave ethically. E merging 
professional codes of ethical conduct such as the recently published ACM11 and 
IEEE12 code s of ethics and professional conduct  are very encouraging; i n turn , those 
professionals  are increasingly likely to exert internal pressure on their employers to 
adopt ethical standards . And fourth,  soft governance  plays an important role in the 
adoption of new standards: by requiring compliance with standards as a condition of 
awarding procurement contracts governments can and do influence and direct the 
adoption of standards – across an entire supply chain – without explicit regulation. 
For data - or privacy -critical applications, a number of the P7000 standards  
(P7002/3/4/5/ 12 and 13 , for instance ) could find application this way.  
 
While some argue over the pace and level of impact of robotics and AI (on jobs, for 
instance), most agree that increasingly capable intelligent systems create significant 
ethical challenges , as well as great promise. Th is new generation of ethical 
standards takes a powerful first step  toward  addressing those challenges. Standards, 
like open science13, are a trust technology . Without ethical standards , it is hard to see 
how robots and AIs will  be trusted  and widely accepted, and without that acceptance 
their great promise will not be realised.  
 
Alan Winfield is Professor of Robot Ethics  at the Bristol Robotics Laboratory, UWE 
Bristol, and visiting professor  at the University of York. He chairs IEEE Standards 
Working Group P7001.  
e-mail: Alan.Winfield@brl.ac.uk  
 
The views expressed in this article are those of the author only, and do not represent 
the opinions of any organisation mentioned, or with which I am affiliated.  
 
 
References  
 
1. http://alanwinfield.blogspot.com/2017/12/a -round -up-of-robotics -and-ai-
ethics.html  
2. Winfield, A. F. & Jirotka, M. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A  376, 20180085 (2018); 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2018.0085