Ethical standards in Robotics and AI  
A new generation of ethical standards in robotics and artificial intelligence is emerging  as a 
direct response to a growing awareness of the ethical, legal and societal impact of the fields . 
But what exactly are these ethical standards and h ow do they differ from conventional 
standards ? 
 
Alan Winfield  
 
Standards are a vital part of the infrastructure of the modern world : invisible , but no 
less important than roads, airports and telephone networks. It  is hard  to think of any 
aspect of everyday life untouched by standards. The International Organization for 
Standardisation (ISO)  – just one of several standards bodies – lists a total of 22,482 
published standards. Take the simple act of bru shing your teeth in the  morning:  there 
are standards for your toothbrush (both manual ISO 20126 and electric ISO 20127), 
your toothpast e and its packaging ( ISO 11609) , and the quality of your  tap water 
(ISO 5667 -5). Although it might seem odd to w ax lyrical on standards, they  do 
represent a truly remarkable body of work – drafted by countless expert volunteers – 
with a n extraordinary impact on individual and societal health and safety . 
 
All standards embody  a principle and often it is an ethical principle  or value . Safety 
standar ds are founded on the general principle th at products and systems should do 
no harm – that they should be safe; ISO 13482 , for instance, sets out safety 
requirements for personal care r obots . Quality management standard s, such as  ISO 
9001 , describe  how things should be done, and can be thought of as expressing the 
principle that shared best practice leads to improved qualit y. And technical 
standards, like IEEE 802.11  (better  known as WiFi), can be thought of as embodying 
the benefits of interoperability. Even the basic idea of standards as codifying shared 
ways of doing thing s can be thought of as expressing the values of cooperation and 
harmonisation. All standards can therefore be thought of as implicit  ethical standards.  
 
We can define an explicit  ethical standard as one that addresses clearly articulated 
ethical  concerns, and seeks – through its application – to, at best remove, hopefully 
reduce, or at the very least highlight the potential for unethical impacts or their 
consequences.  
 
What are the ethical principles which underpin these new ethical standards? An 
informal survey1 in December  2017  listed  a total of ten  different sets of ethical 
principles for robotics and AI . The earliest (1950) are Asimov’s laws of robotics : 
important because they established the principle that robots should be governed by 
princip les. Very recently we have seen a proliferation of principles;  of the ten sets 
surveyed seven were published  in 2017.  
 
Perhaps not surprisingly t hese ethical principles have much in common . In summary : 
robots and artificial intelligences (AIs) should do no harm, while being free of bias 
and deception ; respect human rights and freedoms, including dignity and privacy, 
while promoting well -being ; and be transparent and dependable while ensuring that 
the locus of responsibility and accountability re mains with their human designers or 
operators. Just as  interesting is the  increasing frequency of their publication: clear