beneficence of artificial general intelligence and artificial superintelligence; personal 
data and individual access control; reframing autonomous weapons systems; 
economics and humanitarian issues; law; affective computing; classi cal ethics in AI; 
policy; mixed -reality, and well -being.  
 
Each EAD committee was additionally tasked with identifying, recommending and 
promoting new candidate standards, and – to date – a total of 14 new IEEE 
standards working groups have started work on drafting so called  human  standards  
(Box 1) .  
 
// start Box 1  
Box 1: IEEE P7000 series h uman standards  in development   
P7000  – Model Process for Addressing Ethical Concerns During System Design  
P7001  – Transparency of Autonomous Systems  
P7002  – Data Privacy Process  
P7003  – Algorithmic Bias Considerations  
P7004  – Standard for Child and Student Data Governance  
P7005  – Standard for Transparent Employer Data Governance  
P7006  – Standard for Personal Data Artificial Intelligence (AI) Agent  
P7007  – Ontological Standard  for Ethically Driven Robotics and Automation Systems  
P7008  – Standard for Ethically Driven Nudging for Robotic, Intelligent and 
Autonomous Systems  
P7009 – Standard for Fail -Safe Design of Autonomous and Semi -Autonomous 
Systems  
P7010  – Wellbeing Metrics Standard for Ethical Artificial Intelligence and 
Autonomous Systems  
P7011  – Standard for the Process of Identifying and Rating the Trustworthiness of 
News Sources  
P7012  – Standard for Machine Readable Personal Privacy Terms  
P7013  – Inclusion and Application Standards for Automated Facial Analysis 
Technology  
// end Box 1  
 
The importance of transparency  and explainability  
Consider P7001 as a  case study.  One of the general princ iples8 of EAD asks “how 
can we ensure that autonomous and intelligent systems are transparent? ”, and 
recommends a new standard for transparency. P7001 Transparency in Autonomous 
Systems was i nitiated as a direct response.  IEEE P7001 directly addresses  the 
straightforward ethical principle that it should always be possible to find out why an 
autonomous system made a particular decision.  
 
A robot or AI is transparent if it is possible to find out why it behaves in a certain way. 
We might for instance want to discover why it made a particular decision, especially if 
that decision caused an accident – or for the less serious reason that the robot or 
AI’s behavio ur is puzzling. Transparency is not intrinsic to robots and AIs, but must 
be designed for , and  it is a  property which autonomous systems might have more or 
less of . And full transparency might be very challenging to provide , for instance in