Graph Contextualized Self-Attention Network for Session-based Recommendation
Chengfeng Xu1;2, Pengpeng Zhao1;2;3 , Yanchi Liu4, Victor S. Sheng5,
Jiajie Xu1, Fuzhen Zhuang3, Junhua Fang1andXiaofang Zhou6;2
1Institute of AI, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2Zhejiang Lab, China
3Key Lab of IIP of CAS, Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing, China
4Rutgers University, New Jersey, USA
5The University of Central Arkansas, Conway, USA
6The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Abstract
Session-based recommendation, which aims to pre-
dict the user’s immediate next action based on
anonymous sessions, is a key task in many online
services (e:g:; e-commerce, media streaming). Re-
cently, Self-Attention Network (SAN) has achieved
signiﬁcant success in various sequence modeling
tasks without using either recurrent or convolution-
al network. However, SAN lacks local dependen-
cies that exist over adjacent items and limits its ca-
pacity for learning contextualized representation-
s of items in sequences. In this paper, we pro-
pose a graph contextualized self-attention model
(GC-SAN), which utilizes both graph neural net-
work and self-attention mechanism, for session-
based recommendation. In GC-SAN, we dynam-
ically construct a graph structure for session se-
quences and capture rich local dependencies vi-
a graph neural network (GNN). Then each ses-
sion learns long-range dependencies by applying
the self-attention mechanism. Finally, each session
is represented as a linear combination of the global
preference and the current interest of that session.
Extensive experiments on two real-world dataset-
s show that GC-SAN outperforms state-of-the-art
methods consistently.
1 Introduction
Recommender systems play an important role in helping user-
s alleviate the problem of information overload and select
interesting contents in many applications domains, e:g:; e-
commerce, music, and social media. Most of existing rec-
ommender systems are based on user historical interactions.
However, in many application scenarios, user identiﬁcation
may be unknown and there are only user historical actions
during an ongoing session. To solve this problem, session-
based recommendation is proposed to predict the next action
(e:g:; click on an item) that a user may take based on the se-
quence of the user’s previous behaviors in the current session.
Pengpeng Zhao is the corresponding author. And his email is
ppzhao@suda.edu.cn.Due to its highly practical value, many kinds of approach-
es for session-based recommendation have been proposed.
Markov Chain (MC) is a classic example, which assumes
that the next action is based on the previous ones [Rendle
et al., 2010 ]. With such a strong assumption, an indepen-
dent combination of the past interactions may limit the ac-
curacy of recommendation. Recent studies have highlighted
the importance of using recurrent neural network (RNN) in
session-based recommender systems and obtained promising
results [Zhao et al., 2019 ]. For instance, Hidasi et al. [Hidasi
et al., 2016 ]proposed to model short-term preferences with
GRU (a variant of RNN), and then an improved version [Tan
et al., 2016 ]is proposed to further boost its recommendation
performance. Recently, NARM [Liet al., 2017 ]is designed
to capture the user’s sequential pattern and main purpose si-
multaneously by employing a global and local RNN. Howev-
er, the existing methods usually model single-way transitions
between consecutive items and neglect complex transitions
among the entire session sequence.
More recently, a new sequential model, Transformer
[Vaswani et al., 2017 ], has achieved state-of-the-art perfor-
mance and efﬁciency in various translation tasks. Instead
of using recurrence or convolution, Transformer utilizes an
encoder-decoder structure composed of stacked self-attention
network to draw global dependencies between input and out-
put. Self-attention, as a special attention mechanism, has
been widely used to model the sequential data and achieved
remarkable results in many applications, e:g:; machine trans-
lation [Vaswani et al., 2017 ], sentiment analysis [Linet al. ,
2017 ], and sequential recommendation [Kang and McAuley,
2018; Zhou et al., 2018 ]. The success of the Transformer
model can be attributed to its self-attention network, which
takes full account of all signals with a weighted averaging
operation. Despite its success, such an operation dispers-
es the distribution of attention, which results in lacking lo-
cal dependencies over adjacent items and limiting its capac-
ity for learning contextualized representations of items [Li-
uet al., 2019 ]. While the local contextual information of
adjacent items has been shown that it can enhance the a-
bility of modeling dependencies among neural representa-
tions, especially for the attention models [Yang et al., 2018;
Liuet al., 2019 ].Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
3940