In this work, we propose to strengthen self-attention net-
work through graph neural network (GNN). On the one
hand, the strength of self-attention is to capture long-range
dependencies by explicitly attending to all the positions. On
the other hand, GNN is capable of providing rich local con-
textual information by encoding edge or node attribute fea-
tures [Battaglia et al., 2018 ]. Speciﬁcally, we introduce
a graph contextual self-attention network, named GC-SAN,
for session-based recommendation, which beneﬁts from the
complementary strengths of GNN and self-attention. We
ﬁrst construct a directed graph from all historical session se-
quences. Based on the session graph, GC-SAN is able to
capture transitions of neighbor items and generate the latent
vectors for all nodes involved in the graph correspondingly.
Then we apply the self-attention mechanism to model long-
range dependencies regardless of the distance, where session
embedding vectors are composed by the latent vectors of all
nodes in the graph. Finally, we use the linear weighted sum
of the user’s global interests and his/her local interests in that
session as the embedding vector to predict the probability of
clicking on the next item.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as fol-
lows.
To improve the representation of session sequences, we
present a novel graph contextual self-attention model
based on graph neural network (GC-SAN). GC-SAN u-
tilizes the complementarity between self-attention net-
work and graph neural network to enhance the recom-
mendation performance.
Graph neural network is used to model local graph-
structured dependencies of separated session sequences,
while multi-layer self-attention network is designed to
obtain contextualized non-local representations.
We conduct extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets. Our experimental results show the effective-
ness and superiority of GC-SAN, comparing with the
state-of-the-art methods via comprehensive analysis.
2 Related Work
Session-based recommendation is a typical application of rec-
ommender systems based on implicit feedback, where user-
s’ identiﬁcations are unknown, and no explicit preferences
(e:g:; ratings) but only positive observations (e:g:; purchas-
es or clicks) are provided [Heet al., 2016 ]. These positive
observations are usually in the form of sequential data ob-
tained by passively tracking users’ records over a sequence
of time. In this setting, classical CF methods (e:g:; matrix
factorization) break down because no user proﬁle can be con-
structed from anonymous history interactions. A natural solu-
tion to this problem is the item-to-item recommendation ap-
proaches [Heet al., 2018 ]. In the session-based setting, an
item-to-item similarity matrix is pre-computed for the avail-
able session data using simple item co-occurrence (frequent)
patterns [Bonnin and Jannach, 2015 ]. Sarwar et al. [Sarwar
et al., 2001 ]analyzed different item-based recommendation
generation techniques and compared their results with basic
k-nearest neighbor approaches. Moreover, to model the se-
quence relationship between two adjacent actions, Rendle etal.[Rendle et al., 2010 ]proposed to combine the power of M-
F and Markov Chain (MC) for next-basket recommendation.
Though these methods are proved to be effective and widely
employed, they only take into account the most recent click
of the session, ignoring the global information of the whole
click sequence.
Recently, researchers turn to neural networks and
attention-based models for session-based recommender sys-
tem. For instance, Hidasi et al. [Hidasi et al., 2016 ]were
among the ﬁrst to explore Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) as
a special form of RNN for the prediction of the next action
in a session, and later an improved version [Tanet al., 2016 ]
is proposed to boost its recommendation performance further.
Nowadays, Graph Neural Network (GNN) has been proposed
to learn the representation for graph structured data [Scarselli
et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2019 ]in the form of RNN, which
is broadly applied for the different tasks, e.g., image classiﬁ-
cation [Marino et al., 2017 ], script event prediction [Liet al.,
2018 ]and recommender systems [Wuet al., 2018 ].
On the other hand, several attention-based mechanisms
have been introduced across various applications, e:g:natural
language processing and computer vision. Standard vanil-
la attention mechanism has been incorporated into recom-
mender systems [Liet al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018 ]. More
recently, Vaswani et al. [Vaswani et al., 2017 ]proposed to
model the dependencies between words based entirely on
self-attention without any recurrence or convolution, which
has achieved state-of-the-art performance on machine transla-
tion task. Based on the simple and parallelized self-attention
mechanism, Kang et al. [Kang and McAuley, 2018 ]proposed
a self-attention based sequential model, which outperforms
MC/RNN/RNN-based sequential recommendation methods.
Huang et al. [Huang et al., 2018 ]proposed a uniﬁed con-
textual self-attention network at feature level to capture the
polysemy of heterogeneous user behaviors for sequential rec-
ommendation.
Most existing sequential recommendation models utilize
the self-attention mechanism to capture distant item-item
transitions in a sequence and have achieved state-of-the-art
performance. However, it is still challenging for establishing
complex contextual information between adjacent items. In
this paper, we strengthen the self-attention network through
graph neural network and meanwhile maintain the model’s
simplicity and ﬂexibility. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst attempt to complement SAN and GNN for session-
based recommendation, in which the ﬁrst one can model the
global item-item information of a session and the latter is ca-
pable of learning local contextual information by encoding
attribute features of constructing graphs.
3 Graph Contextualized Self-Attention
Network
In this section, we introduce the proposed contextualized self-
attention recommendation model based on graph neural net-
work (GC-SAN). We ﬁrst formulate the problem of session-
based recommendation, and then describe the architecture of
our model in detail (As shown in Figure 1).Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
3941