AdaShare 
(Ours) 
Task1- 
Specific 
Shared Task2- 
Specific 
Skipped Input Outputs MTL Architectures 
Traditional 
Hard- parameter 
Sharing 
Seg
SN
Seg
SN
Soft-parameter 
Sharing Seg
SNFigure 1: A conceptual overview of our approach . Consider a deep multi-task learning scenario with two
tasks such as Semantic Segmentation (Seg) and Surface Normal Prediction (SN). Traditional hard-parameter
sharing uses the same initial layers and splits the network into task-speciﬁc branches at an adhoc point (designed
manually). On the other hand, Soft-parameter sharing shares features via a set of task-speciﬁc networks, which
does not scale well as the number of tasks increases. In contrast, we propose AdaShare , a novel efﬁcient sharing
scheme that learns separate execution paths for different tasks through a task-speciﬁc policy applied to a single
multi-task network. Here, we show an example task-speciﬁc policy learned using AdaShare for the two tasks.
wish to obtain the best utilization of a single network by exploring efﬁcient knowledge sharing across
multiple tasks. Speciﬁcally, we ask the following question: Can we determine which layers in the
network should be shared across which tasks and which layers should be task-speciﬁc to achieve the
best accuracy/memory footprint trade-off for scalable and efﬁcient multi-task learning?
To this end, we propose AdaShare , a novel and differentiable approach for efﬁcient multi-task
learning that learns the feature sharing pattern to achieve the best recognition accuracy, while
restricting the memory footprint as much as possible. Our main idea is to learn the sharing pattern
through a task-speciﬁc policy that selectively chooses which layers to execute for a given task in
the multi-task network. In other words, we aim to obtain a single network for multi-task learning
that supports separate execution paths for different tasks, as illustrated in Figure 1. As decisions
to form these task-speciﬁc execution paths are discrete and non-differentiable, we rely on Gumbel
Softmax Sampling [ 25,35] to learn them jointly with the network parameters through standard
back-propagation, without using reinforcement learning (RL) [ 46,62] or any additional policy
network [ 1,17]. We design the loss to achieve both competitive performance and resource efﬁciency
required for multi-task learning. Additionally, we also present a simple yet effective training strategy
inspired by the idea of curriculum learning [ 4], to facilitate the joint optimization of task-speciﬁc
policies and network weights. Our results show that AdaShare outperforms state-of-the-art approaches,
whilst being more parameter efﬁcient and therefore scaling more elegantly with the number of tasks.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:
We propose a novel and differentiable approach for adaptively determining the feature sharing
pattern across multiple tasks ( what layers to share across which tasks ) in deep multi-task learning.
We learn the feature sharing pattern jointly with the network weights using standard back-
propagation through Gumbel Softmax Sampling, making it highly efﬁcient. We also introduce two
new loss terms for learning a compact multi-task network with effective knowledge sharing across
tasks and a curriculum learning strategy to beneﬁt the optimization.
We conduct extensive experiments on several MTL benchmarks (NYU v2 [ 40], CityScapes [ 11],
Tiny-Taskonomy [ 68], DomainNet [ 42], and text classiﬁcation datasets [ 8]) with variable number
of tasks to demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach over state-of-the-art methods.
2 Related Work
Multi-Task Learning. Multi-task learning has been studied from multiple perspectives [ 7,56,47].
Early methods have studied feature sharing among tasks using shallow classiﬁcation models [ 30,24,
66,69,41]. In the context of deep neural networks, it is typically performed with either hard or soft
2