Broader Impact
Our research improves the capacity of deep neural networks to solve many tasks at once in a more
efﬁcient manner. It enables the use of smaller networks to support more tasks, while performing
knowledge transfer between related tasks to improve their accuracy. For example, we showed that
our proposed approach can solve ﬁve computer vision tasks (semantic segmentation, surface normal
prediction, depth prediction, keypoint detection and edge estimation) with 80% fewer parameters
while achieving the same performance as the standard approach.
Our approach can thus have a positive impact on applications that require multiple tasks such
as computer vision for robotics. Potential applications could be in assistive robots, autonomous
navigation, robotic picking and packaging, rescue and emergency robotics and AR/VR systems.
Our research can reduce the memory and power consumption of such systems and enable them to
be deployed for longer periods of time and become smaller and more agile. The lessened power
consumption could have a high impact on the environment as AI systems become more prevalent.
Negative impacts of our research are difﬁcult to predict, however, it shares many of the pitfalls
associated with deep learning models. These include susceptibility to adversarial attacks and data
poisoning, dataset bias, and lack of interpretablity. Other risks associated with deployment of
computer vision systems include privacy violations when images are captured without consent, or
used to track individuals for proﬁt, or increased automation resulting in job losses. While we believe
that these issues should be mitigated, they are beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore, we should
be cautious of the result of failure of the system which could impact the performance/user experience
of the high-level AI systems relied on our research.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by DARPA Contract No. FA8750-19-C-1001, NSF and IBM. It reﬂects the
opinions and conclusions of its authors, but not necessarily the funding agents.
References
[1]Chanho Ahn, Eunwoo Kim, and Songhwai Oh. Deep elastic networks with model selection for multi-task
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019.
[2]Emmanuel Bengio, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. Conditional computation in neural
networks for faster models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06297 , 2015.
[3]Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through
stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 , 2013.
[4]Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning , 2009.
[5]Hakan Bilen and Andrea Vedaldi. Integrated perception with recurrent multi-task neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , 2016.
[6]Felix JS Bragman, Ryutaro Tanno, Sebastien Ourselin, Daniel C Alexander, and Jorge Cardoso. Stochastic
ﬁlter groups for multi-task cnns: Learning specialist and generalist convolution kernels. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019.
[7] R. Caruana. Multi-task learning. Machine Learning Journal , 1997.
[8]Junkun Chen, Kaiyu Chen, Xinchi Chen, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Exploring shared structures
and hierarchies for multiple nlp tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07658 , 2018.
[9]Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille. Deeplab:
Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 2017.
[10] Alexis Conneau, Holger Schwenk, Loïc Barrault, and Yann Lecun. Very deep convolutional networks for
text classiﬁcation. In European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics EACL’17 , 2017.
10