FedScale: Benchmarking Model and System Performance of Federated
Learning at Scale
Fan Lai1Yinwei Dai1Sanjay S. Singapuram1Jiachen Liu1Xiangfeng Zhu1 2Harsha V . Madhyastha1
Mosharaf Chowdhury1
Abstract
We present FedScale, a federated learning (FL)
benchmarking suite with realistic datasets and a
scalable runtime to enable reproducible FL re-
search. FedScale datasets encompass a wide
range of critical FL tasks, ranging from image
classiﬁcation and object detection to language
modeling and speech recognition. Each dataset
comes with a uniﬁed evaluation protocol using
real-world data splits and evaluation metrics. To
reproduce realistic FL behavior, FedScale con-
tains a scalable and extensible runtime. It pro-
vides high-level APIs to implement FL algo-
rithms, deploy them at scale across diverse hard-
ware and software backends, and evaluate them at
scale, all with minimal developer efforts. We com-
bine the two to perform systematic benchmark-
ing experiments and highlight potential opportu-
nities for heterogeneity-aware co-optimizations
in FL. FedScale is open-source and actively main-
tained by contributors from different institutions
athttp://fedscale.ai . We welcome feed-
back and contributions from the community.
1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning
(ML) setting where a logically centralized coordinator or-
chestrates many distributed clients (e.g., smartphones or lap-
tops) to collaboratively train or evaluate a model (Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2021b) (Figure 1). It enables
model training and evaluation on end-user data, while cir-
cumventing high cost and privacy risks in gathering the raw
data from clients, with applications across diverse ML tasks.
In the presence of heterogeneous execution speeds of client
1Department of Computer Science, University of Michigan
2Department of Computer Science, University of Washington. Cor-
respondence to: Fan Lai <fanlai@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).
Available?Selected?Drop out or miss deadline?TrainingAggregationInternetSelectionYNNYNClient Selection
AggregationExecution
Round iRound  i+1
ServerClient device① Devices check-in with server; then      server selects a subset of clients② Model and configuration are sent       to selected devices①②③③ On-device training is performed; then model       update is reported back if training succeeds④
④ Server aggregates updates into the global       model; then training moves to next roundFigure 1. Standard FL protocol.
devices as well as non-IID data distributions, existing ef-
forts have focused on optimizing different aspects of FL:
(1)System efﬁciency : reducing computation load (e.g., using
smaller models (Sandler et al., 2018)) or communication
trafﬁc (e.g., local SGD (McMahan et al., 2017)) to achieve
shorter round duration; (2) Statistical efﬁciency : designing
data heterogeneity-aware algorithms (e.g., client clustering
(Ghosh et al., 2020b)) to obtain better training accuracy with
fewer training rounds; (3) Privacy and security : develop-
ing reliable strategies (e.g., differentially private training
(Kairouz et al., 2021a)) to make FL more privacy-preserving
and robust to potential attacks.
A comprehensive benchmark to evaluate an FL solution
must investigate its behavior under the practical FL setting
with (1) data heterogeneity and (2) device heterogeneity
under (3) heterogeneous connectivity and (4) availability
conditions at (5) multiple scales on a (6) broad variety of
ML tasks . While the ﬁrst two aspects are oft-mentioned in
the literature (Li et al., 2020), realistic network connectivity
and the availability of client devices can affect both types of
heterogeneity (e.g., distribution drift (Eichner et al., 2019)),
impairing model convergence. Similarly, evaluation at a
large scale can expose an algorithm’s robustness, as practical
FL deployment often runs across thousands of concurrent
participants out of millions of clients (Yang et al., 2018).
Overlooking any one aspect can mislead FL evaluation (§2).
Unfortunately, existing FL benchmarks often fall short
across multiple dimensions (Table 1). First, they are limited
in the versatility of data for various real-world FL appli-