FedScale: Benchmarking Model and System Performance of Federated Learning at Scale
Features LEAF TFF FedML Flower FedScale
Heter. Client Dataset 
 7
 
 4
Heter. System Speed 7 7 
 
 4
Client Availability 7 7 7 7 4
Scalable Platform 7 4 
 4 4
Real FL Runtime 7 7 7 7 4
Flexible APIs 7 4 4 4 4
Table 1. Comparing FedScale with existing FL benchmarks and
libraries.
implies limited support.
cations. Indeed, even though they may have quite a few
datasets and FL training tasks (e.g., LEAF (Caldas et al.,
2019)), their datasets often contain synthetically generated
partitions derived from conventional datasets (e.g., CIFAR)
and do not represent realistic characteristics. This is be-
cause these benchmarks are mostly borrowed from tradi-
tional ML benchmarks (e.g., MLPerf (Mattson et al., 2020))
or designed for simulated FL environments like TensorFlow
Federated (TFF) (tff) or PySyft (pys). Second, existing
benchmarks often overlook system speed, connectivity, and
availability of the clients (e.g., FedML (He et al., 2020) and
Flower (Beutel et al., 2021)). This discourages FL efforts
from considering system efﬁciency and leads to overly op-
timistic statistical performance (§2). Third, their datasets
are primarily small-scale, because their experimental envi-
ronments are unable to emulate large-scale FL deployments.
While real FL often involves thousands of participants in
each training round (Kairouz et al., 2021b; Yang et al., 2018),
most existing benchmarking platforms can merely support
the training of tens of participants per round. Finally, most
of them lack user-friendly APIs for automated integration,
resulting in great engineering efforts for benchmarking at
scale. We attach a detailed comparison of existing bench-
marks against FedScale in Appendix C.
Contributions We introduce an FL benchmark and ac-
companying runtime, FedScale, to enable comprehensive
and standardized FL evaluations:
•To the best of our knowledge, FedScale presents the
most comprehensive collection of FL datasets for eval-
uating different aspects of real FL deployments. It cur-
rently has 20 realistic FL datasets with small, medium,
and large scales for a wide variety of task categories,
such as image classiﬁcation, object detection, word pre-
diction, speech recognition, and reinforcement learning.
To account for practical client behaviors, we include real-
world measurements of mobile devices and associate
each client with their computation and communication
speeds, as well as the availability status over time.
•We present an automated evaluation platform, FedScale
Runtime, to simplify and standardize FL evaluation in
0 500 1000 1500
Training Rounds30456075Accuracy (%)W/ Sys. Trace
W/o Sys. Trace(a) Impact of system trace.
0 500 1000 1500
Training Rounds30456075Accuracy (%) 20 Clients/Round
100 Clients/Round (b) Impact of scale.
Figure 2. Existing benchmarks can be misleading. We train Shuf-
ﬂeNet on OpenImage classiﬁcation (Detailed setup in Section 5).
more realistic settings. FedScale Runtime provides a
mobile backend to enable on-device FL evaluation and
a cluster backend to benchmark various practical FL
metrics (e.g., real client round duration) on GPUs/CPUs
using real FL statistical and system datasets. The cluster
backend can efﬁciently train thousands of clients in each
round on a handful of GPUs. FedScale Runtime is also
extensible, allowing easy deployment of new algorithms
and ideas with ﬂexible APIs.
•We perform systematic experiments to show how Fed-
Scale facilitates comprehensive FL benchmarking and
highlight the pressing need for co-optimizing system
and statistical efﬁciency, especially in tackling system
stragglers, accuracy bias, and device energy trade-offs.
2. Background
Existing efforts toward practical FL To tackle heteroge-
neous client data, FedProx (Li et al., 2020), FedYoGi (Reddi
et al., 2020) and Scaffold (Karimireddy et al., 2020) intro-
duce adaptive client/server optimizations that use control
variates to account for the ‘drift’ in model updates. In-
stead of training a single global model, some efforts enforce
guided client selection (Lai et al., 2021), train a mixture
of models (Shi et al., 2021; Fallah et al., 2020), or clus-
ter clients over training (Ghosh et al., 2020a); To tackle
the scarce and heterogeneous device resource (Lai et al.,
2020), FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) reduces communi-
cation cost by performing multiple local SGD steps, while
some works compress the model update by ﬁltering out
or quantizing unimportant parameters (Rothchild et al.,
2020; Karimireddy et al., 2019); After realizing the pri-
vacy risk in FL (Geiping et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020),
DP-SGD (Geyer et al., 2017) enhances the privacy by em-
ploying differential privacy, and DP-FTRL (Kairouz et al.,
2021a) applies the tree aggregation to add noise to the sum
of mini-batch gradients. These FL efforts often navigate
accuracy-computation-privacy trade-offs. As such, a realis-
tic FL setting is crucial for comprehensive evaluations.