FedScale: Benchmarking Model and System Performance of Federated Learning at Scale
101102
Compute Latency (ms)0.000.020.04Density
(a) Compute capacity.
103104105
Network bandwidth (kbps)0.00.51.0Density×10−4 (b) Network capacity.
Figure 4. Heterogeneous client system speed.
0 24 48 72 96 120
Timeline (h)01020Percent. of Clients (%)Available clients
(a) Inter-device availability.
0100 200 300 400 500
Duration of Avail. (min)0.0000.0050.010Density (b) Intra-device availability.
Figure 5. Client availability is dynamic.
Different scales across diverse task categories To ac-
commodate diverse scenarios in practical FL, FedScale in-
cludes small-, medium-, and large-scale datasets across a
wide range of tasks, from hundreds to millions of clients.
Some datasets can be applied in different tasks, as we en-
rich their use case by deriving different metadata from the
same raw data. For example, the raw OpenImage dataset
can be used for object detection, and we extract each object
therein and generate a new dataset for image classiﬁcation.
Moreover, we provide APIs for the developer to customize
their dataset (e.g., enforcing new data distribution or taking
a subset of clients for evaluations with a smaller scale).
3.2. Client System Behavior Dataset
Client device system speed is heterogeneous We formu-
late the system trace of different clients using AI Bench-
mark (Ignatov et al.) and MobiPerf Measurements (mob)
on mobiles. AI Benchmark provides the training and in-
ference speed of diverse models (e.g., MobileNet) across
a wide range of device models (e.g., Huawei P40 and
Samsung Galaxy S20), while MobiPerf has collected the
available cloud-to-edge network throughput of over 100k
world-wide mobile clients. As speciﬁed in real FL deploy-
ments (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018), we focus
on mobile devices that have larger than 2GB RAM and
connect with WiFi; Figure 4 reports that their compute and
network capacity can exhibit order-of-magnitude difference.
As such, how to orchestrate scarce resources and mitigatestragglers are paramount.
Client device availability is dynamic We incorporate
a large-scale user behavior dataset spanning across 136k
users (Yang et al., 2021) to emulate the behaviors of clients.
It includes 180 million trace items of client devices (e.g.,
battery charge or screen lock) over a week. We follow the
real FL setting, which considers the device in charging to be
available (Bonawitz et al., 2019) and observe great dynam-
ics in their availability: (i) the number of available clients
reports diurnal variation (Figure 5(a)). This conﬁrms the
cyclic patterns in the client data, which can deteriorate the
statistical performance of FL (Eichner et al., 2019). (ii)
the duration of each available slot is not long-lasting (Fig-
ure 5(b)). This highlights the need of handling failures (e.g.,
clients become ofﬂine) during training, as the round duration
(also a few minutes) is comparable to that of each available
slot. This, however, is largely overlooked in the literature.
4. FedScale Runtime: Evaluation Platform
Existing FL evaluation platforms are poor at reproducing
practical, large-scale FL deployment scenarios. Worse, they
often lack user-friendly APIs and require signiﬁcant de-
veloper efforts to introduce new plugins. We introduce,
FedScale Runtime, an automated, extensible, and easily-
deployable evaluation platform equipped with mobile and
cluster backends, to simplify and standardize FL evaluation
under realistic settings.
4.1. FedScale Runtime: Mobile Backend
FedScale Runtime deploys a mobile backend to enable on-
device FL evaluation on smartphones. The ﬁrst principle
in building our mobile backend is to minimize any engi-
neering effort for the developer (e.g., without reinventing
their Python code) to benchmark FL on mobiles. To this
end, FedScale mobile backend (Singapuram et al., 2022) is
built atop the Termux app (ter), an Android terminal that
supports Linux environment.
from fedscale.core.client import Client
class Mobile_Client(Client):
def train(self,client_data,model,conf):
for local_step in range(conf.local_steps):
optimizer.zero_grad()
...
loss.backward()
optimizer.step()
# Results will be sent to cloud aggregator via gRPC
return gradient_update
Figure 6. Training on mobile client.
Figure 6 shows a snippet of code running on FedScale mo-
bile backend. By integrating with Termux, FedScale Run-
time allows the developer to run an unmodiﬁed version