FedScale: Benchmarking Model and System Performance of Federated Learning at Scale
A. Experiment Setup
Scalability Evaluations We evaluate the scalability of
FedScale Runtime, FedML (GitHub commit@2ee0517 ) and
Flower (v0.17.0 atop Ray v1.9.2) using a cluster with 10
GPU nodes. Each GPU node has a P100 GPU with 12GB
GPU memory and 192GB RAM. We train the ShufﬂeNet-
V2 model on the OpenImage dataset. We set the minibatch
size of each participant to 32, and the number of local steps
Kto 20, which takes around 2800MB GPU memory for
each model training. As such, we allow each GPU node to
run 4 processes in benchmarking these three frameworks.
Evaluation Setup Applications and models used in our
evaluations are widely used on mobile devices. We set the
minibatch size of each participant to 32, and the number of
local stepsKto 20. We cherry-pick the hyper-parameters
with grid search, ending up with an initial learning rate 0.04
for CV tasks and 5e-5 for NLP tasks. The learning rate
decays by 0.98 every 10 training rounds. These settings are
consistent with the literature. More details about the input
dataset are available in Appendix B.
B. Introduction of FedScale Datasets
FedScale currently has 20 realistic federated datasets across
a wide range of scales and task categories (Table 5). Here,
we provide the description of some representative datasets.
Google Speech Commands. A speech recognition
dataset (Warden, 2018) with over ten thousand clips of
one-second-long duration. Each clip contains one of the
35 common words (e.g., digits zero to nine, "Yes", "No",
"Up", "Down") spoken by thousands of different people.
OpenImage. OpenImage (ope) is a vision dataset col-
lected from Flickr, an image and video hosting service.
It contains a total of 16M bounding boxes for 600 object
classes (e.g., Microwave oven). We clean up the dataset
according to the provided indices of clients.
Reddit and StackOverﬂow. Reddit (red) (StackOverﬂow
(sta)) consists of comments from the Reddit (StackOverﬂow)
website. It has been widely used for language modeling
tasks, and we consider each user as a client. In this dataset,
we restrict to the 30k most frequently used words, and rep-
resent each sentence as a sequence of indices corresponding
to these 30k frequently used words.
VLOG. VLOG (Fouhey et al., 2018) is a video dataset
collected from YouTube. It contains more than 10k Lifestyle
Vlogs, videos that people purportedly record to show their
lives, from more than 4k actors. This dataset is aimed
at understanding everyday human interaction and containslabels for scene classiﬁcation, hand-state prediction, and
hand detection tasks.
LibriTTS. LibriTTS (Zen et al., 2019) is a large-scale
text-to-speech dataset. It is derived from audiobooks in Lib-
riV ox project. There are 585 hours of read English speech
from 2456 speakers at a 24kHz sampling rate.
Taobao. Taobao Dataset (tao) is a dataset of click rate
prediction about display Ad, which is displayed on the web-
site of Taobao. It is composed of 1,140,000 users ad dis-
play/click logs for 8 days, which are randomly sampled
from the website of Taobao.
Waymo Motion. Waymo Motion (Ettinger et al., 2021) is
composed of 103,354 segments each containing 20 seconds
of object tracks at 10Hz and map data for the area covered
by the segment. These segments are further broken into 9
second scenarios, and we consider each scenario as a client.
Puffer Streaming. Puffer is a Stanford University re-
search study about using machine learning (e.g., rein-
forcement learning (Mao et al., 2017)) to improve video-
streaming algorithms: the kind of algorithms used by
services such as YouTube, Netﬂix, and Twitch. Puffer
dataset (Yan et al., 2020) consists of 15.4M sequences of
network throughput on edge clients over time.
C. Comparison with Existing FL Benchmarks
In this section, we compare FedScale with existing FL
benchmarks in more details.
Data Heterogeneity Existing benchmarks for FL are
mostly limited in the variety of realistic datasets for real-
world FL applications. Even they have various datasets
(e.g., LEAF (Caldas et al., 2019)) and FedEval (Chai et al.,
2020)), their datasets are mostly synthetically derived from
conventional datasets (e.g., CIFAR) and limited to quite a
few FL tasks. These statistical client datasets can not repre-
sent realistic characteristics and are inefﬁcient to benchmark
various real FL applications. Instead, FedScale provides 20
comprehensive realistic datasets for a wide variety of tasks
and across small, medium, and large scales, which can also
be used in data analysis to motivate more FL designs.
System Heterogeneity The practical FL statistical per-
formance also depends on the system heterogeneity (e.g.,
internet bandwidth (Lai et al., 2018) and client availability),
which has inspired lots of optimizations for FL system ef-
ﬁciency. However, existing FL benchmarks have largely
overlooked the system behaviors of FL clients, which can
produce misleading evaluations, and discourage the bench-
marking of system efforts. To emulate the heterogeneous