Filter pruning is to remove redundant convolution ﬁlters from pre-trained deep neural networks for
generating compact models with lower memory usage and computational costs. Given a CNN fwith
Llayers, ﬁlters in the l-th convolutional layer is denoted as Wl=fwl
1;wl
2;;wl
Mlg, in which
Mlis the number of ﬁlters in the l-th layer.wl
i2RClkkis a ﬁlter with Clinput channels and
kernel sizek. A general objective function of the ﬁlter pruning task [ 20,10] for thel-th layer can be
formulated as:
min
WlE(X;Wl;Y); s:t:jjWljj0l; (1)
whereXis the input data and Yis the ground-truth labels, E(;)is the loss function related to the
given task ( e.g., cross-entropy loss for image classiﬁcation), jjjj 0is`0-norm representing the number
of non-zero elements and lis the desired number of preserved ﬁlters for the l-th layer.
Filters themselves have no explicit relationship with the data, but features produced by ﬁlters with
the given input data under the supervision of labels can well reveal the importance of the ﬁlters in
the network. In contrast with the direct investigation over the network ﬁlters in Eq. (1), we focus on
features produced by ﬁlters in the pre-trained network. Eq. (1) can thus be reformulated as:
min
AlE(Al;Y); s:t:jjAljj0l; (2)
whereAl=fl(X;W1:l)is the feature in the l-th layer. Thus, the purpose of ﬁlter pruning is
equivalent to exploring redundant features produced by the original heavy network. The key of a
feature selection procedure is to accurately discover the association between features Aland ground-
truth labelsY, and preserve features that are critical to the prediction. The ﬁlters corresponding to
those selected features are then the more important ones and should be preserved after pruning.
Deriving the features that are truly related to the example labels through Eq. (2) is a nontrivial task,
as there could be many annoying factors that affect our judgment, e.g., interdependence between
features, the ﬂuctuation of input data and those factors accompanied with speciﬁc pruning methods.
To reduce the disturbance of irrelevant factors, we set up a scientiﬁc control. Taking the real features
produced by the network ﬁlters as the treatment group for excavating redundancy, we generate their
knockoff counterparts as the control group, so as to minimize the effect of irrelevant factors. Knockoff
counterparts are deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 Given the real feature Al, the knockoff counterpart ~Alis deﬁned as a random feature
with the same shape of Al, which satisﬁes the following two properties, i.e., exchangeability and
independence [1]:
[Al;~Al]dis:= [Al;~Al]swap (~S); (3)
~Al
j=YjAl; (4)
for all ~Sf1;2;;dg, wheredis:=denotes equation on distribution, Ydenotes the corresponding
labels anddis the number of elements in Al.[;]denotes concatenating two features and the
[Al;~Al]swap (~S)is to swap the j-th element inAlwith that in ~Alfor eachj2~S.
As shown in Eq. (3), swapping the corresponding elements between the real feature and its knockoff
does not change the joint distribution. The knockoff counterparts always behave similar to real
features, and hence are equally affected by those potential irrelevant factors. Whereas, the knockoff
feature is conditionally independent with the corresponding label given real feature (Eq. (4)), con-
taining no information about ground-truth labels. Thus, the only difference between them is that
real features may have an association with labels while knockoffs do not. Through comparing the
effects of real features and their knockoff counterparts in the network, we can then minimize the
disturbance of irrelevant factors and force the selection procedure to only focus on the association
between features and predictions, which leads to a more reliable way to determine the importance of
ﬁlters.
3 Approach
In this section, we introduce how to construct effective knockoff counterparts and then illustrate the
proposed reliable network ﬁlter pruning algorithm.
3