Knockoff Data
Real Data
Learning with Scientific Control 𝛼2𝑙
𝛼3𝑙𝛽𝑙+  𝛽𝑙= 1 
𝛽1𝑙
𝛽2𝑙
𝛽3𝑙 𝛽1𝑙
 𝛽2𝑙
 𝛽3𝑙Filter
Desired Compact NetworkScale
Redundancy
Discovered RedundancyFigure 1: Diagram of the proposed ﬁlter pruning method with scientiﬁc control (SCOP). The real data
and their knockoffs are simultaneously inputted to the pre-trained network. The knockoff features
are seen as the control group to help discover redundancy in real features. Filters with large scaling
factors for knockoff features but small factors for real features should be pruned.
The most important component for ﬁlter pruning is how to deﬁne the importance of ﬁlters, and
unimportant ﬁlters can be removed without affecting the performance of pre-trained networks. For
example, a typical hypothesis is ‘smaller-norm-less-important’ and ﬁlters with smaller norms will
be pruned [ 20,9]. Besides, He et al. [10] believed that ﬁlters closest to the ‘geometric median’
are redundant and should be pruned. Considering the input data, Molchanov et al. [27] estimated
the association between ﬁlters and the ﬁnal loss with Taylor expansion and preserved ﬁlters with
close association. From an optimization viewpoint, Zhuo et al. [46] introduced a cogradient descent
algorithm to make neural networks sparse, which provided the ﬁrst attempt to decouple the hidden
variables related to pruning masks and kernels. Instead of directly discarding partial ﬁlters, Tang et
al.[33] proposed to develop new compact ﬁlters via reﬁning information from all the original ﬁlters.
However, massive potential factors are inevitably introduced when developing a speciﬁc hypothesis
to measure the importance of ﬁlters, which may disturb the pruning procedure. For example, the
dependence between different channels may mislead norm based methods as some features/ﬁlters
containing no useful information but have large norms. For some data-driven methods, the importance
ranking of ﬁlters may be sensitive to slight changes of input data, which incurs unstable pruning
results. Actually, more potential factors are accompanied by speciﬁc pruning methods and also
depend on different scenarios, it is challenging to enumerate and analyze them singly when designing
a pruning method.
In this paper, we propose a reliable network pruning method by setting up a scientiﬁc control for
reducing the disturbance of all the potential irrelevant factors simultaneously. Knockoff features,
having a similar distribution with real features but independent with ground-truth labels, are used as
the control group to help excavate redundant ﬁlters. Speciﬁcally, knockoff data are ﬁrst generated
and then fed to the given network together with the real training dataset. We theoretically prove
that the intermediate features from knockoff data can still be seen as the knockoff counterparts of
features from real data. The two groups of features are mixed with learnable scaling factors and then
used for the next layer during training. Filters with larger scaling factors for knockoffs should be
pruned, as shown in Figure 1. Experimental results on benchmark models and datasets illustrate the
effectiveness of the proposed ﬁlter pruning method under the scientiﬁc control rules. The models
obtained by our approach can achieve higher performance with similar compression/acceleration
ratios compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
2 Preliminaries and Motivation
In this section, we ﬁrstly revisit ﬁlter pruning in deep neural networks in the perspective of feature
selection, and then illustrate the motivation of utilizing the generated knockoffs as the scientiﬁc
control group for excavating redundancy in pre-trained networks.
2