coincide with those of real features (‘blue’). More visualization results are shown in the supplementary
material.
(a) Real data and features (b) Knockoff data and features
 (c) Frequency distribution histogram
Figure 3: Features of real data in ImageNet and their knockoffs. From top to bottom are input images,
features in shallow layers and features in the deep layers. In (c), feature distributions of real data and
knockoffs are marked in ‘blue’ and ‘orange’, respectively.
5 Conclusion
This paper proposes a novel network pruning method via scientiﬁc control (SCOP), which improves
the reliability of neural network pruning by introducing knockoff features as the control group.
Knockoff features are generated with the similar distribution to that of real features but contain no
information about ground-truth labels, which reduces the disturbance of potential irrelevant factors.
In the pruning phase, the importance of each ﬁlter is calculated according to the competition results
of the two groups of features. In particular, ﬁlters that pay more attention to knockoff samples
rather than real data will be removed for obtaining compact neural networks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method can obtain better results over the state-of-the-art methods.
For example, our method can reduce 57.8% parameters and 60.2% FLOPs of ResNet-101 with only
0.01% top-1 accuracy loss on ImageNet. In the future, we plan to research the design of scientiﬁc
control in more deep learning problems, such as neural architecture search.
Broader Impact
Network pruning is an effective model compression strategy to accelerate the inference of deep
neural networks and reduce their memory requirement. It greatly promotes the deployment of deep
neural networks on the massive edge devices such as mobile phones and wearable gadgets [ 24].
Even on a cheap device with limited computer capability, powerful models can still work well with
the proposed pruning method. It lowers the barrier of the application of artiﬁcial intelligence and
provides convenience to our works and lives.
Funding Disclosure
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61876007
and Australian Research Council under Project DE-180101438.
References
[1]Emmanuel Candes, Yingying Fan, Lucas Janson, and Jinchi Lv. Panning for gold:‘model-x’knockoffs
for high dimensional controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology) , 80(3):551–577, 2018.
[2]Hanting Chen, Yunhe Wang, Han Shu, Yehui Tang, Chunjing Xu, Boxin Shi, Chao Xu, Qi Tian, and Chang
Xu. Frequency domain compact 3d convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2020.
9