Active Safety System for Semi-Autonomous Teleoperated Vehicles
Smit Saparia1, Andreas Schimpe2and Laura Ferranti3
Abstract — Autonomous cars can reduce road trafﬁc accidents
and provide a safer mode of transport. However, key technical
challenges, such as safe navigation in complex urban environ-
ments, need to be addressed before deploying these vehicles on
the market. Teleoperation can help smooth the transition from
human operated to fully autonomous vehicles since it still has
human in the loop providing the scope of fallback on driver.
This paper presents an Active Safety System (ASS) approach for
teleoperated driving. The proposed approach helps the operator
ensure the safety of the vehicle in complex environments,
that is, avoid collisions with static or dynamic obstacles. Our
ASS relies on a model predictive control (MPC) formulation
to control both the lateral and longitudinal dynamics of the
vehicle. By exploiting the ability of the MPC framework to deal
with constraints, our ASS restricts the controller’s authority
to intervene for lateral correction of the human operator’s
commands, avoiding counter-intuitive driving experience for
the human operator. Further, we design a visual feedback
to enhance the operator’s trust over the ASS. In addition,
we propose an MPC’s prediction horizon data based novel
predictive display to mitigate the effects of large latency in
the teleoperation system. We tested the performance of the
proposed approach on a high-ﬁdelity vehicle simulator in the
presence of dynamic obstacles and latency.
©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.I. INTRODUCTION
From the introduction of the seat belt to Automatic
Emergency Braking (AEB) systems, vehicles have become
increasingly safer. Despite the technological improvements,
more than 25 thousand fatalities due to road accidents were
reported just in the EU in 2017 [1]. These reports also
highlighted that95 % of the fatalities were caused by
human errors. Fully autonomous vehicles might present the
solution to reduce such accidents by removing the human
from the loop. Fully autonomous vehicles, however, may still
fail in trafﬁc situation a human could easily handle, such as
parking places or pedestrian crossing areas. To smooth the
transition from human-driven vehicles to fully autonomous
vehicles, teleoperated driving can play a fundamental role.
In Teleoperated Driving (ToD), a human operator drives
the vehicle from a workstation equipped with steering wheel
and gas/brake pedals. The generated control commands are
transmitted to the vehicle via a mobile network for execution.
1S. Saparia was with the Institute for Automotive Technology at the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany and Department of
Cognitive Robotics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
smit.saparia at outlook.com
2A. Schimpe is with the Institute for Automotive Technology at the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85748 Garching bei München,
Germany. andreas.schimpe at tum.de.
3L. Ferranti is with Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands l.ferranti at
tudelft.nl. Her work is supported by the NWO VENI grant (n.
18165).
Fig. 1: System architecture for Teleoperated Driving showing
major components in the closed loop.
The operator can view the vehicle’s environment on the
monitors as captured by vehicle’s cameras. This transmission
of signals via the mobile network introduces latency. As
Fig. 1 shows, there are two types of latency to consider,
that are, actuator latency and glass latency . The actuator
latency is the time taken by the signals to travel from
the input devices at workstation to the actuators on the
vehicle via the mobile network. The glass latency is the time
taken by camera information to travel from camera on the
vehicle to the monitors at the workstation via the mobile
network. These latency deﬁnitions account for the time spent
by signals at various stages in hardware as well as in the
network.
ToD has several challenges, such as large latency, complete
connection loss, or reduced situation awareness. Large la-
tency in the network can lead to unstable real time control of
the vehicle [2]. To mitigate the effects of latency, techniques
like predictive display can be employed. In worst cases, a
complete connection loss poses a threat to make teleopera-
tion useless and dangerous at the same time. Nevertheless,
strategies like redundant mobile networks are deployed to
overcome such an issue [3]. Another challenge in ToD is
reduced situational awareness. It becomes difﬁcult to judge
velocity and location of the obstacles and this problem ag-
gravates in the peripheral region of the view. In tight driving
scenarios, the chances of collision increase and hence a driver
assistance system to help avoid collision proves beneﬁcial as
shown in [4]. As Fig. 1 shows, the human operator generates
steering and velocity commands that are then manipulated
by the controller to generate safe collision free control inputs
for the vehicle. Since human operator (from the workstation)
and the system (with the ﬁnal authority) control the vehicle,
it can be stated as a case of uncoupled shared control [5].
To mitigate the issue of conﬂict of control interest between
human operator and the system, a feedback is necessary toarXiv:2106.14554v1  [cs.RO]  28 Jun 2021