communicate the intent of the system to the human operator.
A. Contributions
To address the above challenges, this paper presents an
active safety system for collision avoidance using Model
Predictive Control (MPC) in a shared control framework
speciﬁcally for a teleoperated road vehicle, building on
the approach presented in [4]. First, we propose a driver
assistance system (Sec. II), based on MPC, for a teleoperated
semi-autonomous road vehicle. The primary objective is to
track the input references as generated by the human operator
and intervene when deemed necessary to avoid collision
with static or dynamic obstacles. As compared to [4], the
approach presented in this paper controls both, the longitu-
dinal and lateral dynamics of the vehicle. In addition, our
design introduces a restriction on the controller’s authority
to override human operator to improve the operator trust on
the automation. Furthermore, we introduce potential ﬁelds
in the MPC formulation to efﬁciently achieve a collision
free manoeuvre. Second, we propose a visual feedback (Sec.
III) to communicate system’s intent and enhance trust in
the human operator over the system to mitigate conﬂict
of control interest. Third, we propose an MPC data-based
predictive display technique (Sec. IV) to mitigate effects of
high latency in a teleoperation setup. Finally, the proposed
approach is validated using a high-ﬁdelity vehicle simulator
with the simulated human operator (Sec. V).
B. Related Work
Our work spans across different areas. For this reason,
this section provides an overview of the relevant literature on
shared control, obstacle avoidance, visual feedback and pre-
dictive display with a main focus on MPC-based approaches.
Shared Control: Several shared control approaches have
been proposed in the literature, such as model-based cou-
pled shared control, model-based uncoupled shared control,
model-free uncoupled shared control (as deﬁned in [5]).
In uncoupled shared control, automation has ﬁnal authority
to implement the input to the vehicle unlike in coupled
shared control. A model-based shared control models the
shared control behaviour, mostly using a driver model. A
model-based coupled shared control approach is followed
in [6], where human driver and steering system models are
incorporated into a lateral controller design. Modelling the
driver requires actual driving tests as shown in [7] and the
driver model becomes speciﬁc to a particular driving style.
A model-free uncoupled shared control approach is fol-
lowed in [8], where a ﬁnal steering command as a weighted
combination of driver and automation input according to
a tailored threat metric is computed. Tuning of this threat
metric is not trivial and only lateral control was showcased in
this work. Finally, a model-based uncoupled shared control
approach is followed in [9], [10] and [4]. In [9], a model
predictive contouring control (MPCC) framework is used
for automation where center of the lane is considered as
a reference path. Another optimization problem considers
driver inputs and a decaying function is used to compute aweighted combination of driver and automation inputs. This
approach considers both lateral and longitudinal control, but
cannot be used for the case of teleoperation where availabil-
ity of information of lane center via perception module is
not reliable. The authors in [10] and [4] directly incorporate
driver’s steer commands into the objective function of MPC
for only lateral control, where the objective is to match the
driver inputs.
Obstacle Avoidance: Obstacles and ego vehicle can be
directly modelled in the constraints of the MPC formulation
asgeometrical shapes , based on which a collision free
criterion can be incorporated into the problem formulation
of controller, as proposed, for example, in [11] and [12] in
the context of fully autonomous vehicles. Reactive methods,
such as potential ﬁelds, can also be incorporated in the
MPC formulation instead of explicitly modelling obstacles
in the constraints. The authors of [13] represented crossable
and non-crossable obstacles with different potential ﬁelds.
The authors of [4] modelled the obstacles as higher-order
ellipses and formulated a potential function such that the
front vehicle corners are pushed away from the obstacles.
This potential function is incorporated into the objective
of the MPC problem formulation. The advantage of using
potential function over spatial constraint is that the size of
the optimization problem does not grow with the number of
obstacles in the scenario [9], [11]. Therefore, the solution
time of the problem is not expected to increase with the
increase in the number of obstacles.
Visual Feedback: A feedback is necessary for the con-
troller to communicate its intent to the human driver. A haptic
feedback on steering wheel is used in [14], to assist human
operator in challenging situations and helps prevent collision
of teleoperated vehicle. However, haptic feedback on steering
wheel can be used only for lateral control. The authors in [15]
showcased the beneﬁt of having visual feedback along with
haptic shared control for obstacle avoidance. Haptic feedback
on steering wheel cannot communicate future vehicle state
that might affect current driver inputs. This is supposedly
compensated by a visual feedback. Monitors in teleopera-
tion can be used to illustrate future vehicle positions. This
advantage is exploited in this work.
Predictive Display: As presented in [16], predictive
display can be used to predict ego vehicle position, to com-
pensate for the delay in signal transmission. This involves
projecting the predicted vehicle position images on the video
stream. However, these techniques assume constant vehicle
velocity and road wheel angle in the predictions.
II. SHARED CONTROL APPROACH
A. Prediction Model
The teleoperated vehicle is expected to be driven at slow
speeds with moderate driving. Hence, the prediction model
chosen in this approach for the MPC is the following