0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (s)0123Velocity (m/s)Velocity in m/s
ASS
Baseline
Reference(a) Velocity
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (s)-100102030RWA (deg)RWA in deg
ASS
Baseline
Reference
(b) RWA 
Fig. 5: Longitudinal velocity and RWA of the ego vehicle
in the overtake scenario.
This behavior is reﬂected in the velocity and RWA results
in Fig. 5, which compares our method (blue lines) with the
baseline controller (red lines). The velocity plot in Fig. 5a
highlights the contribution of our ASS on the control of
the vehicle. As the ﬁgure shows, our system reduces the
vehicle velocity to prevent collisions, in contrast with the
constant reference signal provided by the operator. As Fig. 5b
highlights, our ASS avoids collision by correcting the RWA
at time 40 s, where the RWA differs from reference RWA.
Thus, longitudinal and lateral control capabilities of the ASS
are highlighted here. The vehicle with Baseline controller
fails to stop after encountering the oncoming obstacle and
collides with it since it does not have any longitudinal
control capability. The end of its trajectory represents the
point where the vehicle leaves the road boundary and hence
the simulation gets aborted by CarMaker. This highlights
the drawback of not having longitudinal control capability.
In addition to this, the RWA plot in Fig. 5b also shows a
large deviation of RWA from reference RWA. This steering
behaviour is highly counter-intuitive to what the human
operator wishes to do, potentially raising trust issues over
the system. In comparison to this, even though the ASS
steering proﬁle is showing considerable deviation from the
reference RWA, it remains well around the range of reference
and follows the reference back again. This highlights the
importance of restricting the controller’s authority to deviate
from the reference RWA by using the constraint (6h).
B. Predictive Display
The predictive display is expected to nullify the effect of
latency and produce results equivalent to that for no latency
in system. Fig. 6 compares the performance of our ASS with
our proposed predictive display (dashed purple line) with the
baseline approach [16] (solid light blue line) and our ASS
without predictive display (solid red line). The performance
of our method with no latency is used as a benchmark. In
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
X (m)-54-53-52-51-50-49-48-47Y (m)Trajectory Driven
Reference Trajectory
NO Latency
Lat, No Pred Disp
Lat, Baseline Pred Disp
Lat, MPC Pred DispFig. 6: Trajectory of the CoM of the ego vehicle driving
through closely placed obstacles with latency.
addition, the stationary obstacles are represented by higher
order ellipse (brown) and they are inﬂated by the radius
of the ego circle as represented by the large ellipses (red).
The reference trajectory (green dashed line) is purposefully
designed for a collision with obstacles. In this simulation, we
consider a total round trip latency of 500 ms . The trajectory
driven by the CoM of the ego vehicle for both the cases with
predictive displays (Baseline and MPC data-based) overlap
the trajectory with no latency in the system. This proves
that both predictive display techniques equally nullify the
effect of latency. Nevertheless, the advantage of the proposed
MPC-data-based predictive display method over the baseline
method lies in the fact that it does not assume constant
velocity and RWA for predicting vehicle position. It also
removes extra calculation step of predicting vehicle position
using a bicycle model as done in [16].
It should be noted that, even in the absence of any latency
mitigation technique, the vehicle trajectory stays collision
free, verifying that the controller is efﬁcient to avoid collision
even with delayed (outdated) reference inputs.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presented an ASS approach for teleoperated
vehicles based on model predictive control. The ASS controls
both the lateral and longitudinal vehicle’s dynamics allowing
the vehicle to perform a large range of maneuvers and avoid
collision by both braking and steering intervention. Collision
avoidance is achieved by using artiﬁcial potential ﬁelds in the
MPC controller. Our ASS also has an added restriction on
the controller’s authority to prevent large deviations from the
human operator’s RWA inputs. In addition, we proposed a
visual feedback in the form of graphical presentation on the
monitors of workstation. Finally, to mitigate the effects of
large latency in a teleoperation setup, we proposed a novel
MPC data-based predictive display method. We tested our
approach by using a high ﬁdelity vehicle model for plant and
a realistic environment. The simulation results highlighted
the advantages of our ASS for teleoperation compared to
existing baselines. Future work includes experimental vali-
dation of the proposed work.