Evolution IterationsFigure 3: Evolution of the weights deciding our ﬁnal loss function. Each square represents a λm,tand how it changes
over the evolutionary search. The weight symbols are as follows: the ﬁrst letter is representation modality (R=RGB,
A=Audio, F=Flow, G=Grey), The tasks are S=Shufﬂe, C=colorize, A=Audio align, P=Future prediction, B=backward detec-
tion, D=Distill, E=Embed. The numbers indicate the layer the distillation loss is applied.
3.1.1 Distillation
Distillation was introduced to train smaller networks by
matching representation of deeper ones [ 16], or for gen-
erally transferring knowledge from pre-trained networks.
Here, we use distillation to ‘infuse’ representations of dif-
ferent modalities into the main, RGB network. Note that we
distill representations jointly while training. The distilla-
tion losses learn features by transferring information across
modalities. More speciﬁcally, our formulation allows for
the distillation of audio, optical ﬂow and temporal informa-
tion into a single, RGB-based convolutional neural network.
The distillation loss is the L2difference between the ac-
tivations of a layer in the main network Miand a layer in
another network Li. Such constraint encourages the activa-
tions of the main network to match the activations of the
other network, infusing other features into the main net-
work.
Ld(Li,Mi) =||Li−Mi||2 (2)
Distillation has previously been used for combining net-
works such as ensembles [ 16] or learning to predict optical
ﬂow features from RGB [ 38], here we are extending its us-
age for multi-modal representation learning from unlabeled
video data. While in principle distillation can happen across
all modalities, we do distillation only into the RGB stream,
so as to obtain a ﬁnal single-tower efﬁcient representation
for learning subsequent tasks. Using the learned weights for
the RGB network, we can then extract representations for a
set of videos.
3.2. Evolving an unsupervised loss function
Our representation learning is governed by the weight
coefﬁcients of the loss in Equation 1, and they need to be ap-
propriately determined. The weighting supposedly reﬂects
the importance or relevance of each task and modality to
the main task; for example the optical ﬂow modality may
be important for tracking, whereas audio may give more
information for temporal segmentation of videos in certain
settings.3.2.1 Unsupervised loss construction
Instead of manually constructing a loss function, we evolve
the loss function by taking advantage of well-established
evolutionary algorithms, e.g., [ 13]. More speciﬁcally, our
search space consists of all the weights of the loss function,
both task weights and distillation weights. Each λm,tor
λdis constrained to be in [0,1]. Our evolutionary algorithm
maintains a pool (i.e., population) of individuals where each
individual is a set of weight values that compose the ﬁnal
loss function.
3.2.2 Unsupervised Zipf distribution matching
The evolutionary algorithm requires evaluation of the loss
function (i.e., ﬁtness measure) at each round to optimize the
loss weight coefﬁcients. We propose a new, unsupervised
method for this. In order to measure the ﬁtness of each in-
dividual (i.e., the set of weights to combine the tasks and
modalities to form the ﬁnal loss), we apply a k-means clus-
tering on the representation learned with the correspond-
ing loss function, and analyze the cluster distributions. We
ﬁrst train the network using a smaller subset (100k) of unla-
beled, random YouTube videos for 10,000 iterations (using
the corresponding loss function). We then use a subset of
random YouTube videos and similarly extract representa-
tionsxRGB=ERGB(I). Given these representations, we
can then cluster them into kclusters.
k-means clustering can be viewed as a Gaussian Mix-
ture Model with ﬁxed variances and we calculate probabili-
ties of each feature vector belonging to a cluster, which re-
duces to computing the distance. Speciﬁcally, for the cluster
centroids {c1,c2,...ck}whereci∈ RD(aD-dimensional
vector), we can compute the probability of a feature vector
x∈ RDbelonging to a cluster cias:
p(x|ci) =1√
2σ2πexp/parenleftbigg
−(x−ci)2
2σ2/parenrightbigg
(3)
Since we are (naively) assuming all clusters have the same
variance (for simplicity, let 2σ2= 1) and an equal prior
136