Evolving Losses for Unsupervised Video Representation Learning
AJ Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, Michael S. Ryoo
Research at Google
{ajpiergi,anelia,mryoo }@google.com
Abstract
We present a new method to learn video representations
from large-scale unlabeled video data. Ideally, this rep-
resentation will be generic and transferable, directly us-
able for new tasks such as action recognition and zero or
few-shot learning. We formulate unsupervised representa-
tion learning as a multi-modal, multi-task learning prob-
lem, where the representations are shared across different
modalities via distillation. Further, we introduce the con-
cept of loss function evolution by using an evolutionary
search algorithm to automatically ﬁnd optimal combina-
tion of loss functions capturing many (self-supervised) tasks
and modalities. Thirdly, we propose an unsupervised rep-
resentation evaluation metric using distribution matching
to a large unlabeled dataset as a prior constraint, based
on Zipf’s law. This unsupervised constraint, which is not
guided by any labeling, produces similar results to weakly-
supervised, task-speciﬁc ones. The proposed unsupervised
representation learning results in a single RGB network and
outperforms previous methods. Notably, it is also more ef-
fective than several label-based methods (e.g., ImageNet),
with the exception of large, fully labeled video datasets.
1. Introduction
Video representation learning is an important problem
which beneﬁts high-level perception tasks including action
recognition and video object detection [ 40,6,41]. It has
many key applications, such as web-video retrieval, robot
perception, and smart homes and cities. However, learn-
ing visual representations generally requires a large num-
ber of labeled training examples. This is even more so for
videos, as videos are higher-dimensional input than images
and video CNNs have more learnable parameters than 2D
ones. Simultaneously, videos are more expensive to collect
and annotate than images, as they require additional, and
often ambiguous, temporal annotations [ 34]. Additionally,
in rare event detection, very few examples may be available
to begin with. Thus, obtaining a good video representation
without relying on domain speciﬁc, annotated video sam-
Representation space 
from unlabeled data
Future PredictionReconstruction
Frame Order Detection
=
=Multiple 
self-supervised tasks
...
In order
Out of order
...
Action/event 
clustersVideo CNNFigure 1: Overview of our unsupervised representation
learning framework. The objective is to obtain a good rep-
resentation (blue outlined box) from a set of self-supervised
tasks. We use an evolutionary algorithm to automatically
ﬁnd the optimal combination of tasks and power law distri-
bution matching to ‘supervise’ the clustering and guide the
evolution. No labeling or supervision is needed.
ples, has signiﬁcant impact on real-world scenarios where
large-scale video data curation and labeling is prohibitive.
In this paper, we present a new, principled method for
unsupervised learning of video representations from unla-
beled video data. It is based on the observation that the
optimized combination of multiple self-supervised tasks1,
which are additionally encouraged by multi-modal distil-
lation, is often sufﬁcient to learn good feature representa-
tions. Importantly, we demonstrate that such combination
could be found without per-class or per-video labeling by
instead matching the representation statistics to a general
power distribution of video classes, e.g., Zipf’s law [ 50].
Our approach is to train the network so that its in-
termediate representations reﬂect not just information di-
rectly obtained from its own input modality (e.g., RGB im-
age) but also information from different modalities (e.g.,
1In this work we use unsupervised and self-supervised interchangeably.
1
133