...
...
Task 1 Task 2 Task N...Task 1 Task 2 Task N
...Task 1 Task 2 Task N
Optical Flow RGBAudio
Distillation
Losses
EaudioxRxFxAλ1,1L1,1λ1,2L1,2λ1,NL1,Nλ2,1L2,1λ2,2L2,2λ2,NL2,NλM,1LM,1λM,2LM,2λM,NLM,N...
...λdFigure 2: The multi-task, multi-modal, unsupervised representation learning framework. Each modality is trained to opti-
mize a set of tasks. Distillation regularization loss terms ‘infuse’ each modality’s information into the main RGB network
(drawn center). We evolve the loss function to automatically ﬁnd the weights for each task and distillation location, via an
unsupervised objective. The goal is to obtain representation from a single RGB network that transfers to recognition tasks.
grayscale, optical ﬂow, and audio). The idea is that synchro-
nized multi-modal data sources should beneﬁt representa-
tion learning of each other as they correspond to the same
content. This is done by the introduction of ‘distillation’
[16] losses between multiple streams of networks. The dis-
tillation losses, as well as the self-supervised tasks, do not
rely on human annotation or supervision. As a result, our
approach is formulated as a multi-modal, multi-task unsu-
pervised learning, where the tasks include single-modality
tasks like frame ordering as well as multi-modality tasks
like video-audio alignment.
However, combining multiple different self-supervised
task losses and distillation losses for unlabeled representa-
tion learning is a challenging problem, as certain tasks and
modalities are more relevant to the ﬁnal task than others
and different loss functions have different scales. Thus, we
newly introduce the concept of using an evolutionary algo-
rithm to obtain a better multi-modal, multi-task loss func-
tion that appropriately combines all the losses to train the
network. AutoML has successfully been applied to archi-
tecture search [ 25] and data augmentation [ 8]. Here we ex-
tend this concept to unsupervised learning by automatically
ﬁnding the weighting of self-supervised tasks for video rep-
resentation learning. The ‘ﬁtness’ of this evolution could
naturally be measured with task speciﬁc labels (e.g., ac-
curacy). However, we instead propose a purely unsuper-
vised alternative based on power law distribution matching
between the datasets, by using KL divergence constraints.
These constraints do not require any labeled data, enabling
fully unsupervised and unlabeled learning.Our goal is to ﬁnd video feature representations, based
on a single RGB network, that can seamlessly improve su-
pervised or unsupervised tasks without additional annota-
tions. The main contributions are:
•Formulation of unsupervised learning as multi-modal,
multi-task learning, including distillation tasks to transfer
features across modalities into a single-stream network.
Once learned, it allows for faster representation compu-
tation while still capturing multi-modal features.
•Evolutionary search for a loss function that automatically
combines self-supervised and distillation tasks that are
beneﬁcial for unsupervised representation learning.
•Introduction of an unsupervised representation evalua-
tion metric based on power law distribution matching,
which requires no labels and performs similarly to the
label-guided one.
This work makes the surprising ﬁnding that large
amounts of unlabeled data, combined with self-supervised
tasks and the power law distribution matching, produces
very powerful feature representations which are only ri-
valed by large datasets with very extensive data labeling:
Our feature representations (obtained with zero labels) out-
perform ImageNet pre-training, and pre-training on small
and medium-size labeled video datasets; it is only outper-
formed by Kinetics pre-training with full annotations based
on human labeling of more than 200,000 videos. Further,
the proposed representations outperform Kinetics training,
when ﬁne-tuned with Kinetics labels. We refer to the model
as‘ELo’ , as it is based on evolving unsupervised losses.
134