over all clusters, we can use Bayes rules to rewrite as:
p(ci|x) =p(ci)p(x|ci)
/summationtextk
jp(cj)p(x|cj)=exp−(x−ci)2
2σ2/summationtextk
j=1exp−(x−cj)2
2σ2
=exp−(x−ci)2
/summationtextk
j=1exp−(x−cj)2(4)
which we note is the standard softmax function applied to
the squared distances from a feature xto a cluster center ci.
As observed in many large activity recognition datasets,
like A V A [ 14] and Kinetics [ 20], the activity classes of
videos follow a Zipf distribution. We can use this as a prior
constraint on the distribution of the videos in these clusters.
Speciﬁcally, given the above probability of each video be-
longing to each cluster, and the Zipf distribution, we com-
pute the prior probability of each class as q(ci) =1/is
Hk,s
whereHis thekth harmonic number and sis some real
constant. We then let p(ci) =1
N/summationtext
x∈Vp(ci|x), the average
over all videos in the set. Using these two probability func-
tions representing the classes/clusters, we can minimize the
KL divergence:
KL(p||q) =k/summationdisplay
i=1p(ci)log/parenleftbiggp(ci)
q(ci)/parenrightbigg
(5)
By using this as a ﬁtness metric, it poses a prior con-
straint over the distribution of (learned) video representa-
tions in clusters to follow the Zipf distribution. Note that
this method requires no labeled data and is fully unsuper-
vised. We refer to this entirely unsupervised method as
‘ELo’.
Weakly-supervised baseline: As an upper-bound and an
alternative to our approach, we use a handful of class la-
bels to evaluate the clustering (which is referred to as ELo-
weak). This is done for the sake of comparison and is
also a good alternative to align the ﬁnal loss to a down-
stream video classiﬁcation task. A subset of HMDB is used,
andk-means clustering is applied to the output representa-
tion of the RGB stream. The clusters are used for nearest-
neighbors classiﬁcation and the accuracy is the ﬁtness of
the individual. Due to randomness in k-means clustering,
in both settings, we run this processes 20 times and average
ﬁtness across all trials.
3.2.3 Loss evolution
As is typical with evolution approaches, the evolution of
the loss is driven by mutations. Since our search space con-
sists of continuous values in [0,1], we compare two differ-
ent evolutionary strategies: tournament selection [ 13] and
CMA-ES [ 15]. For the tournament selection search, we
mutate an individual loss function by randomly picking one
Aligned 
AudioRGB1
0
Misaligned
AudioFigure 4: Example of the multi-modal alignment tasks. The
networks take input of temporally aligned RGB and Audio
(or other modalities) and a sample from one modality that
is temporally different. The network is trained to predict if
a pair is temporally aligned or not.
weight and assigning new value in uniformly sampled from
[0,1]. For CMA-ES, at each iteration, all the components
are changed based on the ﬁtness of all the individuals in
the evolution pool. For tournament selection, we evolve the
loss function for 2000 rounds, generating and evaluating
2000 different loss functions and we use 250 rounds with
CMA-ES, ﬁnding much faster convergence. Fig. 3shows
an example how our weights evolve over the rounds and
Table 4compares the performance of different search meth-
ods. Since everything is differentiable, we could learn these
weights also with gradient descent, however, we leave this
for future exploration as taking the derivative of the entire
network w.r.t. to task weights is non-trivial.
3.3. Self­supervised tasks
Many tasks have been designed for unsupervised learn-
ing. We describe brieﬂy the tasks we employ for our rep-
resentation learning. Importantly, we allow many possible
tasks and let the evolved loss function automatically dis-
cover which tasks are important and the optimal relative
weightings. We also use tasks like DeepCluster [ 5] and lo-
cal aggregation [ 49].
Reconstruction and prediction tasks: Given the repre-
sentation for a modality, xm, we use a decoder CNN to gen-
erate the output. As the reconstruction is only used as a su-
pervision signal, we do not need to generate extremely high
quality reconstructions. Thus, we use a small, cheap de-
coder with only 6 convolutional layers, saving both memory
and training time. Once the unsupervised learning is com-
plete, we discard the decoders. Further, following previous
work [ 38], our decoders have no temporal convolution, forc-
ing the representations to contain all needed temporal infor-
mation, which is desirable for video understanding. Each
modality (e.g., RGB, optical ﬂow, and audio) will be recon-
structed. We also use several cross-modality transfer tasks:
RGB to Flow, Flow to RGB, etc.
137