2. Related Work
Unsupervised Video Representation Learning: Ob-
taining labeled video data is expensive, and unlabeled video
data is plentiful, and there have been many methods pro-
posed for self-supervised learning of video representations.
Some tasks take advantage of the temporal structure in
videos, such as predicting if frames appear in order, re-
verse order, shufﬂed, color-consistency across frames, etc.
[12,26,30,24,31,47,19,21,45,46,42]. Other work has
explored using the spatial structure present in images, such
as predicting relative spatial location of image patches [ 28]
or tracking patches over time [ 44], showing promising re-
sults. Reconstruction or prediction of future frames[ 37], or
time-contrastive learning[ 18,33] to obtain representations
has also been successful. Constrastive losses are also com-
mon [ 39]. Learning representations taking advantage of au-
dio and video features has been explored by predicting if
an audio clip is from a video [ 2] or if audio and video are
temporally aligned [ 29,7,22,3].
Multi-task self-supervised learning has also shown
promising results [ 10,32,48], where tasks are assumed
to have equal weights and are not multi-modal. Gener-
ating weak labels using k-means clustering on CNN fea-
tures [ 4,5] or using clustering with meta-learning [ 17] has
also been explored. In this paper, we propose a generalized
approach to unsupervised representation learning, allowing
for multi-modal inputs and automatic discovery of the tasks
that beneﬁt recognition performance.
Activity Recognition: Activity recognition is a active
area of vision research, with a variety of methods pro-
posed [ 43,40,35,11]. With the introduction of large ac-
tivity recognition datasets (e.g., Kinetics and Moments in
Time [ 20,27]), much more accurate deep video CNNs are
possible [ 6]. We here show that they can be further im-
proved by unsupervised representation learning.
3. Method
We formulate unsupervised video representation learn-
ing as a combination of multi-task, multi-modal learning.
The objective is not only to take advantage of multiple self-
supervised tasks for the learning of a (good) representation
space, but also to do so across multiple modalities. The idea
is that models from synchronized multi-modal data, sharing
the same semantic content, will beneﬁt the representation
learning of each other. We encourage that via introducing
‘distillation’ losses. At the same time, each modality may
have multiple self-supervised tasks with their corresponding
losses. Fig. 2illustrates the multi-task, multi-modal formu-
lation with multiple losses and distillation, Section 3.1has
the details.
To facilitate multi-task, multi-modal learning, impor-
tantly, we introduce the new concept of automatically evolv-
ingthe main loss function. Certain tasks and modalities aremore relevant to the ﬁnal task so the representation needs
to focus on those more than the others. The idea is to com-
putationally search for how different multi-task and distil-
lation losses should be combined, instead of constructing
a loss function by trial-and-error. We discuss this more in
Section 3.2.
One key technical question is how one can guide the evo-
lution without a pre-deﬁned task or a ﬁtness function. We
propose an unsupervised method to evaluate each loss func-
tion, based on matching of the power law distribution of
activity classes (Section 3.2.2 ).
3.1. Unsupervised multi­modal learning
We construct a CNN for each modality. Each network is
trained using several tasks not requiring labeled video data,
and the information from each modality is combined using
distillation [ 16] (Fig. 2). More speciﬁcally, we take advan-
tage of multiple self-supervised tasks, such as frame recon-
struction, future frame prediction, and frame temporal or-
dering (Section 3.3discusses them in detail). Each of these
tasks will yield an unsupervised loss for training. Learning
with multiple self-supervised tasks makes our representa-
tions more generic, as they need to generalize to many tasks
and are more transferable to unseen tasks.
For each modality, mand its input Im, we build an em-
bedding network, Em, which generates an embedded rep-
resentation of the input: xm=Em(Im).xmis the fea-
ture representation for modality m. Our embedding net-
works are (2+1)D ResNet-50 models, which take advantage
of both 2D spatial convolutions and 1D temporal convolu-
tions to represent videos; they provide state-of-the-art per-
formance on video understanding tasks. As mentioned, for
each modality, we consider several learning tasks, for ex-
ample, frame reconstruction. Each of the tasks per modality
has its own loss function. Lm,tis the loss from task tand
modality mand{t1,t2...,tNm}is the set of tasks for the
modality.
Further, to better take advantage of the multi-modal rep-
resentations, we use distillation to ‘infuse’ the other modal-
ities into the RGB network at different locations. Our ﬁnal
objective is to train a single RGB network that provides a
strong representation for video understanding. Our formu-
lation allows the RGB network to learn representations from
various tasks and modalities.
We combine the multi-task losses for unsupervised train-
ing, and per each modality, by a weighted sum, and we
further combine it with a number of distillation losses Ld
which fuse or synchronize the multiple modalities:
L=/summationdisplay
m/summationdisplay
tλm,tLm,t+/summationdisplay
dλdLd (1)
whereλm,tandλdare the weights of the losses. The
weighted sum Lis the loss we use to train the entire model.
135