(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
For reasons like these, one should be wary of Floridi’s explicit rejection of ‘solution-  
less’ types of ethics that do not provide ‘acceptable recommendations’ because 
that unduly limits the kind of practices human beings can engage in in response to  
the excessive influence of technologies on their lives (Floridi, 2018 , p. 7). Accept -
ing such restrictive definitions of ‘digital ethics’ “(…) is to allow the existing social 
formation to dictate the terms on which it can be criticized, and to allow it to impose 
a theoretically unwarranted burden of positive proof on any potential critic” (Geuss, 
2008 , p. 96). Moreover, the idea that it is always worthwhile to try to implement 
and translate ethics as answer to the ethical question in commercial practices should 
be reformulated as a question in itself rather than as aim everyone should strive 
towards.48 Acting politically, then, is a collective and potentially contentious activ -
ity. While I do not deny that some forms of ethics can also be characterized as such, 
I suggest that labeling such practices as ‘politics’ rather than ‘ethics’ makes them 
less susceptible to be washed away in the PR machinery of the tech sector. Doing 
so, secondly, also emphasizes their practical, bottom-up character, which lastly also 
invites non-academics to the discussion. You do not have to be an expert in Kant, 
Bentham, or Aristotle to be able to participate in AI politics.
For these reasons, I argue, quite unoriginally, for a strengthening of forms of ‘data 
politics’ to tip the scale in favor of more practice and politics-oriented forms of (aca -
demic) research, as a means to even out the excessive focus on ethics in its princi -
ple and theory-casted form.49 For the individual ‘ethicists’ herself, this reorientation 
will amount to transforming from an ‘universal intellectual,’ interested in “society 
as a whole and what is ‘just and true for all,’” to a ‘specific intellectual’ analyzing 
“games of truth, relations of power and ethics in the practical systems in which he 
or she is engaged, their historical formation and possibilities of modification.”50 The 
move from theory to practice at the level of the practice of AI/digital ethics , I argue, 
is thus accompanied by a move from universality to specificity at the level of the 
individual researcher . ‘Ethicists,’ whether in academia or elsewhere, should ask for 
new business cards, replace ‘ethical’ by ‘politics,’ and their guidelines with an in-
depth analysis and a good story or two.
9  Outro
I want to end this essay with two comments. First, an important question my argu -
ment touched upon was concerned with the meaning of ethical–political judgments, 
and how this is reflected in academic products. I argued for a certain reflexivity con -
cerning the establishment and embeddedness of the theories, guidelines, and recom -
mendations produced by ethicists and philosophers. It matters how questions and 
48 Linnet Taylor and Lina Dencik rhetorically ask whether ethics should always be integrated (Taylor & 
Dencik, 2020 , p. 9).
49 Academic ‘unoriginality’ thus does not amount to political irrelevance.
50 The distinction is Foucault’s and is explained here by James Tully. See Tully ( 2008 , p. 103). Foucault 
talks about it here (Foucault, 1994 ).Page18of23 9