(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
accountable, or transparent), but also has implications for how the process of decision-
making, and hence the ‘decision,’ should be understood.
The thread connecting these different ‘turns to practice’ seems to be the idea that 
sociotechnical assemblages cannot be understood, governed, and criticized with -
out a proper grasp of their functioning in practice, and that such a grasp cannot be 
attained from a distance, or ‘in theory’.41 Just like Bernard Williams worried about 
the ‘limits’ of philosophy that reduces the ethical question to one of rights and duties 
(Williams, 2010 ), we should worry about attempts to reduce good tech development 
to one of the translation and implementation of moral truths.
7  From Principles to Exemplars
In the epigraph above, Wittgenstein suggested that there are limits to how rules could 
structure practices because of the self-sufficiency of practices, and that one needs 
examples  for this as well. The presentation of examples can be understood not as 
mere illustration of an important moral value, but as an independently valuable ‘tool’ 
in the analysts’ toolbox. Part of the reason why it is important to study both past, pre -
sent, and future of the context wherein a particular moral issue might (or might not) 
play has to do with the fact that few issues are so new, innovative, and revolutionary 
that we really have nothing else to do than to come up with a new guideline, paper, or 
book explaining what to do.42 Revolutions are, by definition, rare.
Being reminded about especially the historical predecessors to the kind of issue you 
are interested in does not only contribute to the fabrication of the kind of collective 
memories that are important for the continuation or disintegration of communities and 
institutions—both are crucial within the context of ethics washing (Mittelstadt, 2019 ). 
Doing such research as part of your ethical–political judgment also supplies you with 
exemplars that you could follow (or not).
In a forthcoming chapter, David Owen explains in what way the work of James 
Tully—a ‘realist’ colleague of Geuss (Honig & Stears, 2014 )—differs from ideal 
and principle-oriented political philosophy (Owen, Forthcoming ). Owen argues that 
Tully (and in my reading also Geuss) enacts a form of political philosophy where 
not principles but ‘exemplars’ are to be sought for. The difference is that.
(…) principles aim to tell us what, as an agent, we ought to do or be, exem -
plars manifest what it is to be an agent characterized by such doing or being 
(or, to put it another way, principles tell us another world is possible, exem -
plars show us that another world is actual). Second, whereas a principle articu -
lates norms in their generality, an exemplar discloses norms through its indi -
viduality. (Owen, Forthcoming )
41 Paul B. De Laat’s thorough attempt to diffuse the ethics washing critique based on commercial actor’s 
self-published material illustrates this (de Laat, 2021 ). As he explains himself, it is not possible to say 
much about companies’ actual adherence to ethical norms and their implementation based on material 
found online.
42 Though academic practice often suggests otherwise. See also Uricchio ( 2018 ).Page15of239