(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
washing in the tech industry. I argue thirdly that a more broadly conceived under -
standing of ethics, combined with a more open understanding of who and where 
does such an ‘ethics,’ is more appropriate to our context than casuist (and principle-
based) approaches.
Let’s start with the idea that ethics is about finding out ‘what I should do’. This 
question seems to be present in many of the published ethical guidelines and prin -
ciples. But formulating this question is as old as moral philosophy itself and goes 
back to the times when Aristotle laid down the first bricks of the building that would 
eventually grow into medieval casuistry (to be broken down some centuries later). 
And the assumption that any individual at every moment would and should be able 
to ask the question what to do, and also find an answer to it (often grounded in some 
external authority like god or reason), is still the most dominant understanding of 
ethics to be found in the Western world (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 44–45).
The first thing one can learn from Geuss’ reading of several Central-European 
thinkers (e.g., Hegel, Nietzsche, Adorno, Heidegger, Kierkegaard) is that the ethi -
cal question assumes the existence of an ‘Ego’ (Nietzsche) with a limited number 
of possible courses of action of which he can freely choose (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 
54–55).19 Nietzsche (in Geuss’ reading) rejects this view on human decision-making 
because it presumes a false choice between free and unfree decisions. Instead of 
assuming that people are free to decide to engage in a morally good or bad activity, 
concrete20 human beings have different wills or interests that have an influence on 
whether they want to answer, let alone ask, the ethical question in the first place. 
An individual’s capacity should thus be taken into consideration when thinking 
about whether ethics is a valuable addition to a particular individual’s life, or not. 
For some mighty individuals, answering the question what one is ought to do might 
be one of the last things they think about when living their life. Others, by contrast, 
simply lack the means, capacities, or time to engage in such reflections (Wright, 
2021 , p. 126).
This also relates to a second criticism levied by some of the thinkers discussed by 
Geuss. Both Hegel, Nietzsche, and Heidegger damned the idea that specific individ -
uals like philosophers or casuists are the most capable of dealing with the question 
‘what ought I do?’. Better ask the experts in the respective domains out of which 
an issue arises, than relying on a philosopher and his knowledge about Theory, the 
World, and the Good (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 51–59).21 This criticism connects well to a  
comment by danah boyd and Solon Barocas that it is too easy to criticize the tech 
experts for not respecting important values of some sort without having any under -
standing of how the technology in question is being construed in practice (boyd & 
Barocas, 2017 ).22 Geuss, and boyd and Barocas hint here at an important and com -
plicated question to be asked within the context of this essay: who should do ethics? 
19 From a different angle, Annemarie Mol also argues for the need to move beyond a ‘politics of choice’ 
(Mol, 2014 , pp. 178–179). See also Amoore ( 2020 , p. 66).
20 See Benhabib ( 1992 ).
21 See for a similar approach Tully ( 2008 ).
22 See also Lee et al. ( 2020 ).Page10of23 9