(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
academia appears to be ‘deontology,’ wherein answers to the ethical question are put 
in the form of lists of principles, values, and maxims (Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 112). This 
makes it a ‘law conception of ethics,’ which either aims to be like law, or to be one 
of the ingredients to be inserted into law’s construction (Rességuier & Rodrigues, 
2020 ). Throughout this essay, this prioritization of the ethical question, and the most 
prevalent deontological answers to it, will be questioned.
3  The Problem of Ethics (Washing)
The writing and publishing of lists of ethical principles that should help academics 
and practitioners determine ethical boundaries is big business.4 Not only do public 
and private actors for various reasons try their very best to keep up with this trend 
(Schiff et  al., 2020 ; Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ; Yeung et  al., 2020 ), academics also 
have a weak spot for the regular publishing of lists of important moral principles 
that should (help to) regulate individual and collective behavior in the tech world. 
One example of such a contribution is a paper written by Luciano Floridi and Josh 
Cowls (Floridi & Cowls, 2019 ). It starts with the diagnosis that there are simply 
too many ethical lists and guidelines floating around, which are causing confusion, 
information overload, and even stimulate the kind of ‘ethics shopping’ we previ -
ously linked to the phenomenon of ethics washing.5 What, then, to do about this 
problem? Floridi and Cowls read and analyzed six of these guidelines, found a lot of 
similarities, and put forward a framework encompassing the principles listed, plus 
one extra they thought to be missing. Doing AI ethics, here, is thus the analysis of 
principles that relate to a particular technology (AI). Floridi and Cowls argue that 
their principles ought to serve as the ‘architecture’ used to build policies around the 
globe, with as small caveat that it be, “(…) broadened to incorporate a more geo -
graphically, culturally, and socially diverse array of perspectives.” And this seems to 
be going well: according to the authors, the framework has ‘influenced’ the OECD’s 
Recommendations of the Council on Artificial Intelligence. The suggestion made 
here is that the framework presented is of such a high quality that it was valuable 
enough to be included in a document composed by a large and important interna -
tional organization. What this exactly means in practice, how this framework was 
able to make this happen, and what this implies for the numerous guidelines that 
were not included, is not discussed.6
I take Floridi and Cowls’ paper exemplary for a particular way of doing ethics 
where the construction of clearly defined and coherent ethical frameworks is of prime 
importance.7 Researchers identify various reasons for doing ethics in this way. From 
4 See e.g. https://  inven  tory. algor  ithmw  atch.  org/ about .
5 See also, Floridi ( 2019 ).
6 It is also unclear how Floridi and Cowls’ reading of the guidelines used relates to the various motivates 
attributed to the writing of such guidelines by various actors. Does it make a difference for the (moral?) 
quality of such a list when a particular document’s primary function is a company’s self-promotion?
7 I hereby thus presuppose the existence of interactions and mutual influence between academic instances 
of data ethics, and their commercial counterparts. On the mutual dependencies  existing between tech eth -
ics and big tech, see Hu ( 2021 ). Taylor and Dencik identified several other ‘nodes’ of the data ethics net -Page4of23 9