(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
• With whom should I engage in the process of question and answering?33
Since one’s understanding of the social-political context is increased when one inter -
acts with this context itself, and one’s action is probably also more effective and legiti -
mate when one acts not alone, it is crucial to question the collective character of one’s 
intervention. Especially this is often ignored in list-based approaches (Metcalf, 2014 ).
There are thus three intimately related but different advantages of Geuss’ more 
‘realistic’ political philosophy noticeable. By starting with the attempt to understand 
a political practice first, you (a) will improve the epistemological character of one’s 
evaluation or critique. You are better capable of understanding why not only some -
thing is ‘good’ or ‘bad’ in a particular (cultural) context, but also how the ‘good’ and 
the ‘bad’ are constituted in the practice, and during one’s interacting with the prac -
tice. Especially this feature sets a practice-oriented approach apart from approaches 
that presuppose the relevance of particular norms prior  to engaging in their analysis. 
You (b) will also improve the normative character of the critique when the practice, 
its history and future, and ‘legitimizing mechanisms,’ are properly studied because 
you will be able to explain better why your evaluation has moral relevance in that 
particular context (if any). A and b combined will increase (c), the practical uptake 
of one’s intervention. One example to illustrate this is the act of criticizing Amazon 
for the damaging impact of their ‘Echo dots’ on the environment.34 It is relatively 
easy to argue that Amazon should stop their activities and adopt a more friendly or 
even ‘just’ attitude towards the environment. But even if you as individual would be 
able to convince Amazon to change their business model, the fact that Amazon is 
part of a global capitalist structure will not solve the problem because a Google or 
some other company will take Amazon’s place. This example pertains to show that 
it matters hugely how critique is presented and organized, and how in general the 
criticism itself is related to the criticized practice. Should your intervention have an 
individual or collective character? Should it be internal or external to the practice 
studied? Is its scope local or global? Are you interested in instantiating reform (criti -
cize BP) or revolution (fight capitalism)?35 When you want to change the tech indus -
try, answers to these and other questions should be looked for and be incorporated 
and explicated in one’s own analysis.36 And questions like these only pop up when 
you start by asking questions—like, for instance, those four listed above—and not 
by formulating lists of principles and guidelines.
36 You cannot rely solely on one’s disciplinary background to only do ‘law,’ ‘ethics,’ ‘environment,’ or ‘pri -
vacy’ because the appropriate tool one should pick depends on the character of the practice in question. Of 
course, what the practice is depends on the glasses one’s wearing, which are tainted by one’s background. There 
is a complicated interaction between practice-understanding, problem-definition, and methodology, though I 
suspect that the dominant research chronology is still background  → solution  → application  → practice – which I 
thus criticize in this essay.33 This addition amounts to an internal criticism of Geuss’ latent existentialism. I thank Joel Anderson 
for this suggestion.
34 I adjusted an example Geuss used in Geuss ( 2014 , pp. 78–79), with the help of Crawford and Joler 
(2018 ).
35 Ben Green notes that data scientists have a more reformist rather than revolutionary attitude towards 
ethics (Green, 2018 , pp. 25–26). On such ‘dilemmas,’ see Sætra et al. ( 2021 ).Page13of239