(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
recent calls for more politicized, activist, feminist, and power hierarchy-sensitive 
calls to action (Barabas et al., 2020 ; Beraldo & Milan, 2019 ; D’Ignazio & Klein, 
2020 ; Green, 2018 ; Ruppert et  al., 2017 ; Sloane, 2019 ; Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ). 
From a variety of academic backgrounds (e.g., STS, feminist theory, anthropology, 
social movement studies), scholars thus try to make sense of the problematic appro -
priation of ethics by the tech sector. What remained undeveloped so far, ironically, 
is substantive philosophical reflection onto why the formulation of principles and 
guidelines is so dominant, what this tells us about how ethics is (implicitly) being 
understood in the ‘Western’ (tech) world.44 I hope to contribute to this discussion by 
providing a historically informed reformulation of ethics, where the asking of ques -
tions, empirical analysis, and the usage of exemplars has priority over the construc -
tion of ethical theories, principles, or guidelines. The question remaining is whether 
the label ‘ethics’ is still appropriate for the ‘repoliticized ethics’ that I am arguing 
for.
The answer to this question is negative. When Wagner and Delacroix made refer -
ence to both Mouffe, Williams, and Geuss when arguing for a ‘supportive interface’ 
between answers to the ethical question and regulation, they seem to have overem -
phasized the constructive character of this relationship (Delacroix & Wagner, 2021 ). 
For them, just like in Floridi’s digital ethics, and Seger’s ‘principled’ approach 
(Seger, 2022 ), ethics and legislation are important components of a regulatory appa -
ratus. What for Mouffe, Williams, Geuss, and other scholars is also, and maybe more, 
important are the agonistic elements of making ethical–political judgments.45 At least 
two claims could be distilled from the works of these authors. First, there are dif -
ferences, tensions, and incompatibilities between individuals, worldviews, societies, 
and theories which cannot all be completely removed through processes of delibera -
tion, theorizing, or consensus forming. Second, there is also value in not attempting 
to remove all these differences, and to also support activities that disrupt, contest, 
and say ‘no’ to ossified modes of thinking or doing.46 Extrapolating these thoughts 
to our AI ethics discussion, I argue that the relationship between (academic) ethics, 
especially in its popular deontological form and political practice, and legal/corporate 
practice, could and should not only be understood in terms of support, consensus, and 
recommendations, and be opened to allow room for contentious alternatives.47
44 An exception is Terzis, who presents an existentialist critique of AI ethics that depends on individuals’ 
capacity to reflect on their freedom and responsibilities (Terzis, 2020 ). Though I sympathize with Terzis’ 
attempt to bring philosophy in the data and computer science community, I worry that his emphasis on 
one overarching value to aim for (a transcendental collective form of freedom) is in the end susceptible to 
the same concerns raised to other principle- and list-based approaches.
45 See e.g. Crawford ( 2016 ); Schaap ( 2006 ).
46 See for a relevant example of refusal (Barabas, 2020 ). An argument explaining how ‘saying no’ could 
even be part of the conceptual apparatus of arguably one of the most consensus-oriented theories of 
democracy can be found here (White & Farr, 2012 ).
47 In this context, Noortje Marres writes that the focus on ethical clarity “(…) risks distracting attention 
and support away from forms of enquiry that are less clearly ‘identifiable,’” like epistemological and 
methodological issues that new technologies also bring about. See Marres ( 2018 , p. 184).Page17of239