(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
within a ‘data ethics’ perspective, wherein the practice of doing ethics is connected 
with regulation and law, ‘hard ethics’ are concerned with values, responsibilities, 
rights, and duties (Floridi, 2018 ). The construal of ethical principles is therefore 
directly relevant and related to the writing of regulation and legislation.8 Forms of 
‘soft ethics’ provide guidance “over and beyond existing regulation,” and presup -
pose the legitimacy of existing legal frameworks and human rights (Floridi, 2018 ). 
From this perspective, the convergence of many of the AI ethics lists and guidelines 
is indicative of the gradual identification of what is considered good  practice (Taddeo 
& Floridi, 2018 ).9
The second step of this type of ethics is the translation of principles into practice, 
as a means to remove the gaps and frictions separating them (Floridi et al., 2018 ; 
Morley et al., 2020 ; Stix, 2021 ). When translations are successful, these guidelines 
and frameworks could, for instance, be used to promote internal organizational 
change by helping individuals act better, set behavioral standards in- and outside of 
the organization, or promote (moral) organizational leadership (Jobin et al., 2019 ; 
Metcalf et al., 2019 ; Schiff et al., 2020 ). The actual enforcement of principles does 
not always have to be their aim. From an academic point of view, ethical frame -
works can be understood as scientific output, illustrating the growth of our knowl -
edge about what is good and right.
Whether these promises come true is, however, debated. Thilo Hagendorff, for 
instance, cites the results of a controlled study that shows the complete lack of effect 
of ethical guidelines on the behavior of software engineers (Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 
108). But regardless of whether this result can be extrapolated to other contexts and 
principles get ‘lost in translations,’10 the fact that especially commercial actors par -
ticipate more in the production of ethical guidelines than in the enforcing of ethical 
guidance does makes these lists more susceptible to be used as paper tigers, rather 
than attempts to improve policy and practice. And just like tech developers should, 
arguably, be held accountable (if not responsible) for the problematic usage of their 
technical products, do I think that producers of lists and guidelines have a responsi -
bility for the kind of (mis)use of their academic products by commercial actors. If 
data scientists have a ‘politics’ because they are capable of influencing the world, 
data ethical practices are equally political (Green, 2018 ).11 Moreover,
8 See also Delacroix and Wagner ( 2021 ); Seger ( 2022 ).
9 But see also Rudschies et al. ( 2020 ).
10 On this see also Mittelstadt ( 2019 ).
11 As said above, neat distinctions between the domain of ethics and that of politics are hard to sustain 
both empirically and normatively. On the politics of (social) science, see e.g. Law and Urry ( 2004 ).work (Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ). See also Green et  al., who explained why it is relevant to study those 
guidelines in the following way: “we suggest these statements represent the transformation of ethics and 
design into discourses about  ethics and design. And as with discourse broadly, these statements legitimate 
(delegitimize) certain practices, providing “answers to the spoken or unspoken questions ‘Why should we 
do this’ or ‘Why should we do this in this way?’” (italics in original) (Greene et al., 2019 , p. 2124).Footnote 7 (continued)Page5of239