(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
I take these authors’ commentary to imply that it would be worrisome to do ethics 
from far away and/or in isolation from the practice concerned.23 This, I add, for three 
reasons. First, good criticism and phronesis  require a thorough understanding of the 
activity being judged. Proper judgment depends on a thorough analysis of the prob -
lem (Geuss, 2010 ).24 Second, the legitimacy or value of one’s judgment depends 
on how it relates to the norms, values, and sensibilities that structure the practice 
in question (Bennett, 2001 , pp. 156–157). Your judgment, and its implicit moral 
presuppositions, should have some traction in the context to which it is directed, to 
be able to make sense. Lastly, the quality of your intervention also depends on its 
uptake in practice (Krause, 2015 ). Evaluating and reflecting from afar, would not do 
much good. There are thus epistemological, moral, and practical reasons to be found 
that put into question the idea that individual philosophers are best equipped to deal 
with the question what someone should do. I will come back to this below.
But the question is not only if philosophers ought to be answering the ethical 
question, but whether individuals überhaupt  are the kind of entities that should 
attempt to change their reality by helping others or themselves act ethically. Espe -
cially Theodor Adorno was pessimistic about this. Individual attempts to instantiate 
social change, whether by philosophers or Chief Ethical and Humane Use Officers,
(…) may be morally praiseworthy but cannot be more than a palliative meas -
ure, and will certainly not be sufficient to deal with the deep-rooted and sys -
tematic social and economic sources of suffering.25
One cannot, according to Adorno, reasonably hope that individuals have the 
capacity to change the kind of systematic injustices we as inhabitants of the modern 
world face.26 Especially not, Geuss adds, when one is merely looking into what one 
ought to do. These and some other arguments lead Geuss to argue for a broadening 
of our understanding of what ethics is or could be to avoid restricting oneself to only 
look at a limited set of ‘ethical’ issues, topics, and methods out of which an individ -
ual should choose.27 The arts, history, and politics are some of the domains to which 
Geuss draws attention. And that is also something we should do when dealing with 
the issue at stake: ethics washing.28
Fortunately, in later work, Geuss gives a more elaborate answer to the question 
what these arguments imply for political philosophy and, as I suggest, our politi -
cized conception of data ethics. Geuss rejects here understandings of philosophy and 
25 As quoted in Geuss ( 2005b , p. 113).
26 While the Holocaust was in the background of Adorno’s writing, forms of ‘surveillance capitalism,’ 
‘data colonialism,’ and a ‘surveillance culture’ could be named as the structural features that currently 
position “the individual at the losing end of the equation.” (Beraldo & Milan, 2019 , p. 4).
27 Compare the long lists of values and ethical issues related to AI, which seem to suggest that a reader 
can choose  not only which value he could ‘use,’ but also what ethical problem could be relevant to his 
context.
28 See the other essays in the several volumes quoted, and specifically Geuss ( 2005c ). See for recent sim -
ilar arguments three blog posts published at the Ada Lovelace Institute (Powell, 2021 ; Tasioulas, 2021 ; 
Vallor, 2021 ).23 Compare “Ethics thus operates at a maximum distance from the practices it actually seeks to govern” 
(Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 112).
24 And moreover, an embeddedness in the practice one’s judging. On this, see Fossen ( 2021 ).Page11of239