(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
arguments are presented, by whom, to whom, when, and where, and ignoring these 
components of one’s ethical–political judgment does not help in understanding how 
particular types of academic work do what they do. Making such characteristics 
more explicit helps to analyze and value ethicists’ contributions, and is thus con -
ducive to empirical scrutiny of their work.51 Second, my argument’s primary aim 
was to make a case for the need to diversify the types of ethics to be found by point -
ing at some downsides of theory-oriented, list-producing, and regulation-directed 
approaches. Through showing that this dominant way of doing ethics had not been 
around for a large part of human history, I open up conceptual room for other ethical 
repertoires and by doing so also contribute to the defusing of worries that collec -
tive, contextual, or more political forms of action might not fit or belong in current 
tech practices.52 At this moment, indeed, this might be not how tech development in 
general goes,53 but that does not mean that change is inevitable, and that we should 
accept the prevalent mode of doing and understanding ethics. Ethics, in other words, 
does not necessarily have to be the individualistic and abstract academic practice 
it often is, and I urge readers into reflecting about how they position themselves as 
ethicists, what kind of role their academic products have, what it means to engage 
in what kind of evaluations, in what way they acknowledge their situatedness as 
researchers (especially vis-à-vis industry), and last but not least what kind of ‘the -
ory of change’ implicitly motivates their work. Do you think that being ‘close’ to 
the tech industry helps instantiating change, or would it be better to stand further 
away from the target of one’s criticism (Sætra et al., 2021 )? Based on the argument 
developed throughout this essay, the kind of ethical research currently popular is 
arguably too close or at least too easily subsumed into industry, which does seem to 
make it more difficult for those interested in change situated afar (Sætra et al., 2021 ). 
Acknowledging this is the first step in broadening the ethical repertoires, which will 
allow practice and contentious-minded approaches to make a stronger case for their 
viability, to in the end also get that seat at the negotiation table (reform), or the 
capacity to demolish it altogether (revolution).
Acknowledgements  I thank Annemarie Balvert, Tineke Broer, Markus Furendal, Catherine Koekoek, 
Charlotte van Oirsouw, Linnet Taylor, Eva van Vugt, the reviewers from CEPE/IACAP 2021, and two 
anonymous reviewers for their comments on earlier versions of this essay.
Author Contribution  Gijs van Maanen is the only author of this paper.
Funding  I received financial support from the Dutch Research Council (NWO 313–99-330). The revision 
of the document took place while I was being supported by a grant from the European Research Council 
(grant number 716971).
Data Availability  Not applicable.
Code Availability  Not applicable.
51 Which is still lacking and also difficult to conduct.
52 On the advantages of genealogies, see Prinz and Raekstad ( 2020 ).
53 Compare for instance how ‘privacy’ is currently being practiced (Waldman, 2021 , Chapter 1).Page19of239