(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
Following Jonsen and Toulmin’s analysis, it is no surprise that the kind of data 
ethics undergirding our example of an academic ethical AI framework is also posi -
tioned as opposed to a form of computer ethics focusing on practitioners, prone to 
“(…) the spreading of ad hoc or casuistic approaches to ethical problems” (Floridi 
& Sanders, 2002 , p. 1).16 Casuist forms of computer ethics, for Floridi and Sanders, 
lack a thorough conceptual foundation and because of that are at risk of presenting 
conservative and dogmatic answers to the question of what needs to be done, and 
of presenting ethical problems as simple. In contrast to such a professional com -
puter ethics, a more ‘mature’ theory is needed that explains the meaning of informa -
tion and digital ethics.17 And such a digital ethics “(…) studies and evaluates moral 
problems relating to data and information  (…), algorithms  (…), and correspond -
ing practices  and infrastructures  (…) in order to formulate and support morally 
good decisions (…)” (Floridi, 2018 , pp. 3–4). The overabundance of guidelines and 
frameworks, however, suggests that the identification of moral problems and moral 
principles (as episteme ) tips the scale at the cost of more practice-oriented work (as 
in phronesis ).
5  The Problem of Ethics (Washing): A Political Proposal
Jonsen and Toulmin suggested that the strong focus on the truth or strength of ethi -
cal principles forecloses a lot of different ways wherein ethics or morality could be 
practiced and be meaningful to human life (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 302). I sug -
gested that the dominant form of AI ethics indicates that their conclusion is also 
valid to that discussion.18 Throughout various essays Cambridge-based philosopher 
Raymond Geuss takes a similar issue with this limiting, limited, but nevertheless 
dominant view on ethics to be found in Western academia. Already the question 
‘what ought I do’ seems to assume that there is some determinate answer to be found 
and that that is also the most important question one should ask and also answer if 
your business card reads ‘ethicist,’ ‘philosopher,’ or ‘Chief Ethical and Humane Use 
Officer’ (Geuss, 2005a ; Kinstler, 2020 ). In this section, I draw from Geuss to com -
plicate the picture of ethics sketched by Jonsen and Toulmin. Jonsen and Toulmin 
argued for a revival of a moral practice wherein the judgment of professionals about 
particular issues within their context would help in determining what to do. I first 
explain what kind of ethics is implicit when one aims to help someone finding out 
what to do. I then deal with the assumption that specific individuals are burdened 
with the task of helping people answer that question within the context of ethics 
16 A recent study of papers published in two influential AI/computer science conferences “shows that 
there is a great tendency for abstract discussions of such topics devoid of structural and social factors and 
specific and potential harms” (Birhane et al., 2022 , p. 13).
17 See e.g. Floridi and Taddeo ( 2016 ).
18 Green points at two other sectors—ethics in science and corporate ethics—where similar problems 
with respect to the usage and abuse of ethics are present (Green, 2021 , pp. 216–218). This supports my 
argument that the problems present in AI ethics can be explained as symptoms of a more general way of 
understanding ethics in (Western) academia.Page9of239