(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Authors narrating exemplars thus draw from the past, present, or future to show 
us that the world can indeed be different, and by focusing on how in other circum -
stances the world was and is indeed different, they allow those concerned to learn 
from these stories. The kind of learning involved is not that of the imitation of the 
application of a rule (e.g., the check-box approach to ethics and law), but is meant to 
give guidance through ‘following’ (Owen, Forthcoming ). Or, in other words, stories 
about individuals or collectives that attempt to bring about change to tech compa -
nies will help elucidating the kind of questions, worries, and challenges such actions 
might generate. What can we learn, for instance, from Floridi and Cowls’ success in 
composing and communicating their list of principles? How did such a process go? 
How did they manage to get into the field? And how does being the head of a pres -
tigious research institute effect such an activity?
A good example of academic work done along the lines of the argument pre -
sented so far is Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein’s Data Feminism . Next to its 
embrace of a ‘power challenging’ approach operationalized in the form of a dismissal 
of status quo-affirming concepts like ‘ethics,’ ‘fairness,’ ‘accountability,’ and ‘trans -
parency’ (D’Ignazio & Klein, 2020 , pp. 59–64) is their book also packed with stories 
narrating the attempts of collectives to challenge techno-mediated oppressive struc -
tures. From Joy Buolamwini’s analysis of the racist features of face-analysis soft -
ware, to María Salguero’s mapping of feminicide in Mexico, to the massive ‘Google 
walkout’ at the end of 2018, D’Ignazio and Klein’s inclusion of these stories informs 
readers about how and why individuals and collectives tried to deal with big tech’s 
oppressive characteristics. These stories are not mere illustrations of the quality of 
D’Ignazio and Klein’s argument, or smaller pieces of the jigsaw puzzle that when 
finished would be able to supply us with an answer to the ethical question. “What 
is most important is not that we all share the same starting [or end43] point, but 
rather that we nurture all these emerging ecosystems and build links between them 
(D’Ignazio & Klein, 2020 , p. 214).”
8  From Ethics to Politics, or What Is Left of Ethics?
Throughout this essay I argued for the importance of a more-than-theoretical ethi -
cal approach towards the growing influence of (commercial) technology on soci -
ety, by emphasizing the importance of empirically informed analysis of techno-
political practices. Ethics in this framing becomes more than the identification of 
important values, is an inherently collective and interactive endeavor, and requires 
the acknowledging of the conflictual character of doing political work. In a recent 
‘tweet,’ political philosopher Annette Zimmermann posted an adjusted version of 
the ‘types of scientific paper’ cartoon by XDCD, wherein she identified various 
‘types of AI ethics’ (Zimmermann, 2021 ). The argument presented so far in this 
essay fits comfortably within the ‘Why ethics (and philosophy more broadly) can’t 
possibly address questions of power’-type, and also has close affinities with other 
43 I add.Page16of23 9