(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
1 Introduction
The growing number of ethical guidelines, ethical committees, and ethicists that 
can be found in both the public and private sectors nowadays prompts researchers 
within the computer and data science community to question the role that ‘eth -
ics’ plays within the tech industry (Green, 2021 ; Jobin et al., 2019 ; Metcalf et al., 
2019 ; Morley et al., 2019 ; Schiff et al., 2020 ). The idea and practice of ethics, 
according to critics, is used by companies to wash away the concerns raised by 
a company’s behavior or a techno-political crisis (Wagner, 2018 ). Ethics, also, 
allows one to strategically ‘shop’ for the principles that limit one’s action as lit -
tle as possible while simultaneously presenting oneself as contributing towards 
the common good. The pessimistic implication of this behavior could be to look 
for alternative tools and methodologies to make sure that the tech sector does not 
cross any moral Rubicons. Think for instance about replacing ethics for science 
and technology studies (STS) (Sloane, 2019 ), new forms of ‘data justice’ (Taylor, 
2019 ), or about playing safe and falling back to a human rights regime (Yeung 
et al., 2020 ). Some of the more optimistically inclined scholars in this debate beg 
to differ, and warn against the tendency to reduce a criticism of ‘ethics washing’ 
into one of ethics simpliciter (Bietti, 2020 ). While these optimists are right in 
emphasizing the danger of conflating a company’s usage of ethics, and ethics as 
a valuable and important activity, the apparent incapacity of ‘ethics’ and ethicists 
to resist against this ‘abuse’ might be indicative for a limitation for relying on 
ethics as a tool, method, or attitude in this particular context (Maanen, 2020 ).
In this essay, I argue that the focus on principles, dilemmas, and theory in 
popular ethical theories and practices could be one of the factors that explain its 
lacking resistance to abuse by dominant actors. Section  1 introduces the corner -
stone of most types of (tech) ethics: ‘the’ ethical question. In Sect.  2, I intro -
duce the problem this essay deals with, with the help of an influential AI eth -
ics example. I suggest here that the discussed work exemplifies a particular way 
of doing ethics characterized by the formulation of moral principles and frame -
works. Section  3 speculates on why there is a seeming abundance of principle-
oriented works on data ethics with the help of research done by Albert R. Jonsen 
and Stephan Toulmin (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 ). The authors show that for the 
biggest chunk of Western history, a practice-oriented mode of moral reasoning 
was dominant. This form of ethics, however, lost its popularity in the seventeenth 
century, to be replaced by a more theory and principle-focused alternative. Ever 
since, the dominant approach in ethics or moral philosophy is one focusing on 
theories, principles, and generalizations. This, however, has disadvantages, to be 
discussed in Sect.  4, where I draw from the work of Raymond Geuss to make a 
case for a question, rather than theory or principle-based ethical practice. The 
emphasis of this approach is placed on the acquisition of a thorough understand -
ing of social-political phenomena (like tech development). In two Sects.  5 and 6, 
I draw out two consequences of the practice-oriented approach put forward so far: 
the need to do empirical research, and the importance of ‘exemplars’ or stories. 
Section  7 relates the argument developed so far to similar (academic) attempts to Page2of23 9