(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
ethics that start with the formulation of the most ideal moral situation, and after that 
apply that to practice (Geuss, 2008 , p. 6). ‘Ethics first’ approaches seem to assume 
that ethics is a discipline one can study separate from empirical reality and scientific 
approaches like history, sociology, and economics, and that it is possible to formu -
late a limited number of moral principles that apply to and prescribe the actions of 
individual human beings. Broadly along the same lines as the previously discussed 
practically minded casuists,29 Geuss argues that political philosophers should start 
with human practices and investigate action rather than beliefs, take into account 
history into their analysis, and acknowledge the fact that acting politically requires 
the skill to judge whether some course of action is appropriate in a certain context 
or not (Geuss, 2008 , pp. 9–16). Theories are unlikely, as Geuss argues, to help one 
to make such political  judgments. And politics is in the end, due to the intermingle -
ment of academia and industry, and whether they like it or not, the activity ethicists 
are engaged in (and what they also should  explicitly be engaged in).
Arriving at a proper understanding of the political context you study is thus to 
be the most important first step doing ‘realist’ political theory.30 And instead of 
principles, questions are the way to go. Geuss identifies three broadly formulated 
questions which function as starting points when acting politically (Geuss, 2008 , pp. 
23–36).31 These are (in my own words):
• Who does or could do what to whom for whose benefit?
• What is the right moment on which I or we should commence this or that action?
• What are the ‘legitimatory mechanisms’ in place and how do they relate to the 
proposed course of action?
Asking yourself these three questions forces you to make sense of the compli -
cated social-political context wherein one is thrown, its various temporal charac -
teristics (past, present, future) while also considering the relevant norms and val -
ues that have an impact on why some actors do what they do, or not, and how you 
should relate to them. Doing so is especially valuable in a context where the main 
units of analysis—‘AI’; ‘algorithms’; ‘machine learning’—are highly ambiguous. 
While some scholars, for instance, understand algorithms as ‘technicalities,’ others 
argue that one should study these as constantly changing cultural objects.32 Assum -
ing it is important to understand what one’s judging when practicing ethics, paying 
careful attention to how particular technologies, norms, human beings, and organi -
zations interrelate is crucial. In the light of Geuss’ own discussion of the limitations 
of conventional ethics, I add one more question to be asked:
29 But different due to his dismissal of the relevance of ‘the ethical question.’.
30 The other four phases identified by Geuss are evaluating, orientation, conceptual innovation, and ide -
ology analysis and criticism. Though these are important components of Geuss’ realist political philoso -
phy, I take them to be less relevant for the topic at hand. On realist political philosophy, see e.g. Prinz 
(2019 ); Rossi ( 2019 ).
31 See, for a similar argument within the context of AI ethics and robotics, Keay  ( 2020 ).
32 See this illustrative discussion in Dourish ( 2016 ); Seaver ( 2017 ).Page12of23 9