(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
6  Contemplation, Action, and Empirical Research
One dominant way of answering the ethical question is thus the deontology-like 
method of writing ethical guidelines and lists. One reason for practicing ethics in 
this way is the idea that the identification of moral principles will trickle up into 
legislation helping to enforce morally good behavior. Such an approach is to be pre -
ferred, the argument goes, over more context or casuist alternatives because these 
are less capable of identifying what is good and enforcing actors’ behavior in a clear 
and consistent manner.37 Theorizing about what is morally good, thus in the end, 
after a complicated process of translating principles into practice, helps bringing 
about this good in practice.
The implicit ethical question presupposed in such reasoning, however, can be 
criticized for its individualistic character. Not only is the idea that one should make 
decisions  based on limited conceptions of individuality, one can also question the 
presumption that a specific category of individuals is best equipped to answer them, 
and moreover, whether the implicit focus on individual behavior is appropriate. I 
argued for the value of starting engagement with techno-political practices in prac-
tice, rather than in deontological theory, by asking four broadly formulated ques -
tions. These questions form the basis of a more practice and empirically minded 
approach towards the studying of (dubious) techno-political practices.
The notion of practice is crucial here. Practices can be described as “self-organizing 
and self-investigating phenomena” and what kind of norms and meanings they enact 
is something to be studied rather than presupposed (Lynch, 2001 , p. 140). Moreover, 
identifying and imposing moral principles from afar might amount to the unwar -
ranted imposition of the good, the right, or the just (Boddington, 2020 , p. 127). For 
reasons like these, scholars from a variety of disciplines have been arguing for more 
practice rather than theory-focused forms of research. Political theorists presented 
forms of public, ethnographic, or ‘realist’ ‘theories,’38 ‘praxiographers’ emphasized 
the importance of—surprise!—‘practice,’39 and others argued for ‘empirical philoso -
phy,’40 while science and technology scholars have called for more attention for more 
experimental forms of political ontology (Marres, 2013 ) and sociotechnical analyses 
(Green, 2021 ). Especially Marres’ work is helpful here because it explicates what 
proper political  judgment amounts to. Rather than analyzing if and how technolo -
gies have consequences for democracy and politics, and what this than means for our 
moral evaluation of them, Marres argues that the analysts’ challenge is to redescribe 
how technologies transform  practices of politics and democracy, and the norms they 
constitute, themselves. Algorithmic decision-making, for instance, does not merely 
affect how promptly a citizen receives her decision (and whether this is good, bad, 
37 The criticism sometimes raised against ‘realist’ political theorists that they reify a dichotomy between 
‘real’ and ‘ideal’ forms of theorizing is thus equally applicable to (ideal) forms of data ethics.
38 See e.g. Herzog and Zacka ( 2017 ); Sleat ( 2018 ); Tully ( 2008 ).
39 See e.g. Lynch ( 2001 ); Mol ( 2014 ).
40 See e.g. Dubbeld ( 2005 ); Mol ( 1994 ).Page14of23 9