(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
politicize the practice of data science and ethics. The question answered here is to 
what extent the label of ‘ethics’ still characterizes my proposal.
For both heuristic and methodological reasons, the scope of this essay is limited. 
It focuses on one type of ethics, which is placed in opposition to practice-oriented 
alternatives. This kind of ethics is primarily being practiced by academics,1 though 
it is more and more being co-opted by industry and, as such, also practiced there 
(Green, 2021 ; Hu, 2021 ). Empirically speaking, the boundaries between ethics as 
academic inquiry, and ethics as practiced in industry, are thus hard to draw. Because 
of this interminglement of academia and industry, I argue near the end of this paper 
for the explicit acknowledgement of the situatedness of one’s ethical research, 
including its susceptibility to (mis)use by others. By mainly engaging in ethics in a 
principled and constructive manner without acknowledging its politics,2 one disre -
gards and by doing so accepts  the mutual dependencies existing between research 
and commerce. It is lastly good to note that this essay is limited to a genealogy-
based explanation for AI ethics’ susceptibility to be washed by the private sector. 
Other possible explanatory factors—e.g., academic funding structures; lobbying 
power—are hinted at but not studied extensively for this essay.
2  The Ethical Question
Most ethics attempt to answer the ethical question of what one should do, or how 
one should live.3 Ethics is then considered the practice or tool to be used to approach 
an answer to this question. ‘Within’ ethics, usually three different approaches to for -
mulating an answer to the ethical question can be identified. There are deontological 
approaches focusing on rules and duties, teleological ones emphasizing the impor -
tance of evaluating consequences, and others that focus on virtues (Ananny, 2016 , 
p. 94). Deontological approaches within the context of AI ethics attempt to codify 
ethical theories and principles, and conceive ethics as intimately connected to policy 
and regulation. Teleological or consequentialist ones attempt to predict or estimate 
the risks new technologies could pose and, based on such evaluations, determine if 
how and in what way a technology should be implemented. Virtue ethicists, lastly, 
are interested in how practitioners incorporate ethical norms in the design process. 
Forms of ‘Value Sensitive Design’ (VSD) could be associated with such a take on 
the ethical question (Greene et al., 2019 , pp. 2123–2124; Jacobs et al., 2021 ).
The differences between the three different approaches are large—theoretically, 
practically, and popularity-wise. What makes them, in the end, ‘subareas’ of eth -
ics is their explicit or implicit acceptance of the ethical question, and the attempt to 
supply it with answers. Popularity-wise, the most dominant AI ethics approach in 
1 And not necessarily  the one practiced by data scientists or engineers.
2 Or by understanding ethics as a domain independent from science and politics (Sætra & Fosch-Villaronga, 
2021 ).
3 See Williams ( 2010 ). See, within the context of AI ethics, Ananny ( 2016 , p. 94); Delacroix and Wagner 
(2021 , p. 2).Page3of239