(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
and dilemmas with individuals with totally different (personal, religious, educational) 
upbringing might not be the best decision if one wants to come to agreements and 
advice. Such a discussion would probably end up in a verbal trench war where every 
commissioner hides behind her or his moral principles. To Jonsen and Toulmin’s sur -
prise, this was far from the case: the commission was usually capable of finding agree -
ment on what to do when they discussed specific issues in practice. Agreement was 
not based on the construction of consensus on the level of principles (because this was 
absent), but on a “shared perspective on what was specifically at stake in particular 
kinds of human situations” (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 18). Only at the moment the 
commission left the realm of practical affairs and entered that of moral reasoning did 
differences of opinion start to emerge. For Jonsen and Toulmin, their experiences as 
members of the National Commission were indicative for two different understandings 
of ethics and morality. The first one emphasizes the importance of finding universally 
valid principles. The other aims to arrive at an understanding of ethical issues and 
their context. The problem was that the approach stimulating argumentative deadlock 
seemed to be the most widespread, if not dominant, understanding of ethics up until 
today.14
This difference between a more ‘theoretical’ or ‘principle’-oriented account 
of ethics, and a ‘practical’ and practice-oriented one can be traced back at least 
2500 years ago when Aristotle distinguished between two modes of knowing ( epis-
teme  and phronesis ) and placed the practice of ethics in the second category, and by  
doing so made it effectively a practical rather than theoretical affair (Jonsen & Toulmin,  
1988 , Chapter  1). In contrast to episteme —whose statements have an idealized, 
atemporal, and necessary character—practicing phronesis  is concrete, temporal, and  
presumptive. Phronesis  is the art of judging what to do in concrete situations, with -
out assuming that the judgments will hold for everyone, everywhere, and every time. 
Aristotle’s emphasis on the practical issue-based character of moral practice, where 
phronesis  was to be found of greater importance that the ‘correct’ label (whether 
‘ethical,’ ‘legal,’ or ‘political’) attached to the issue in question, eventually man -
aged to influence a branch of religious problem-solving called casuistry. Casuistry 
involved the attempt to make sense of moral issues in their practical context by 
applying a mixture of case-study analysis, comparison with similar cases, and (reli -
gious) principles. Though the casuists never formalized their methods in a theory of 
some kind, Jonsen and Toulmin were able to distill from the cases they studied sev -
eral common features that they summarized in the following way. Casuistry.
is the analysis of moral issues, using procedures of reasoning based on para -
digms and analogies, leading to the formulation of expert opinions about the 
existence and stringency of particular moral obligations, framed in terms of 
rules or maxims that are general but not universal or invariable, since they 
hold good with certainty only in the typical conditions of the agent and cir -
cumstances of action (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 257).
14 Though Jonsen and Toulmin wrote in the 1980s, I take more recent works by ‘political realist’ as indi -
cations that their argument for moral philosopher generally still makes sense.Page7of239