(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
(…) detached, universal rules have a habit of becoming dissociated from the 
original moral urgency that led to their drafting. Ethics codes that have sub -
stantial effect on institutions can result in an infrastructure whose effective 
management demands more attention than the actual ethical commitments 
underlying the code. It is important to recognize the risk that the universalism 
and detachment favored by philosophical ethics can lead away from facing the 
most concrete ethical challenges and instead leave us with routinized obedi -
ence to an infrastructure. (Metcalf, 2014 , p. 7).12
For these and other reasons,13 authors have been putting forward alternative 
approaches as means to combat problematic techno-political structures. Examples 
are the aforementioned STS, global data justice, and human rights approaches. Oth -
ers have tried to slow down the move away from ethics as a valuable tool or practice. 
Ethics could, the argument goes, still be of value in an educational or possibly even 
organizational context (Bates et  al., 2020 ; Mittelstadt, 2019 ; Moore, 2020 ; Taebi 
et al., 2019 ). The problem is that it is not clear what then ethics’ contribution would, 
could, or ought to be in combating ethics washing in the tech industry. In the next 
section, I put forward an explanation for ethics’ limited contribution in this context, 
based on criticism raised by political philosophers on dominant strands of moral and 
political philosophy. I thus take this criticism to be also helpful in making sense of 
the construction of ethical guidelines in the tech sector.
4  From Theory to Practice; from  Phronesis to Episteme
Top-down attempts to define ‘good principles’ and eventually arrive at ‘good prac -
tices’ (Floridi & Cowls, 2019 ) correspond to what Raymond Geuss calls ‘ethics 
first’ approaches, and what Albert R. Jonsen and Stephan Toulmin would label as 
‘theoretical,’ rather than ‘practical’ accounts of ethics. Jonsen and Toulmin’s work 
on casuistry supplies us with both an historical explanation of why there is in gen -
eral a predominance towards the construction of ethical frameworks and theories 
(and why this was not popular for the biggest chunk of human history), and argue 
for a revival of a forgotten and discredited mode of ethical practice: casuistry. I first 
quickly summarize their argument before coming back to that of Geuss in Sect.  4, 
who allows us to critique the practice of casuistry as well.
In the 1970s, Jonsen and Toulmin were members of the ‘National Commission for 
the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research,’ which was 
set up after the controversial Roe v. Wade decision by the Supreme Court (Jonsen & 
Toulmin, 1988 , pp. 16–17). The commissions’ job was to investigate all sorts of ethi -
cal issues related to the research on vulnerable human beings and consisted of experts 
with a wide variety of backgrounds. One might expect that discussing ethical issues 
12 More downsides are listed by Boddington (Boddington, 2020 , pp. 129–130).
13 Lobbying and funding structures could also affect the kind of research being done by tech scholars, 
though that is always hard to prove. See e.g. Clarke et al. ( 2021 ).Page6of23 9