(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Like their medical colleagues, those practicing casuistry required a degree of 
phronesis  to be able to judge whether their analysis was appropriate. This judg -
ment did not revolve only around the question what rules should be considered and 
what could be learned from them, but also to what extent the application of the 
rules within or across several cases was fair and appropriate. This required in-depth 
knowledge about the circumstances out of which the issue presented itself, which 
also informed one’s understanding and application of the relevant (moral) principles 
applied.
Not surprisingly, some found the casuistic method to be lax and disrespectful 
towards the important moral beliefs of Christian faith. Blaise Pascal, the famous 
mathematician, accused the casuists of being unfaithful because as they “(…) pur -
sued their analysis of the moral life into more and more detailed cases, they seemed 
to move further and further away from the clear light of these beliefs.” (Jonsen & 
Toulmin, 1988 , p. 238). The casuists tried to connect the strong religious impera -
tives of their times with the worldly demands they encountered through the continu -
ous adjustments of these principles, and where both being accused of being lenient 
“towards the claims of morality” or of contradicting the maxims and principles they 
(personally) hold so dear (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 259). Pascal’s criticism set 
into motion a move towards the attempt to further ground and stabilize ethical theory, 
at the cost of improving its practice. Next to these theoretical worries about casuist 
moral practice, the slow deterioration of the Catholic Church further complicated the 
lives of professional casuists. What is appropriate casuistry is not to be distilled from 
the arguments put forward by individual professionals alone, but intimately relates to 
the institutional culture of which they are part—just like in medicine. And the impor -
tance of this explanatory factor for the deterioration of the practice of casuistry is not 
to be overstated. Next to theoretical and methodological validity, a proper function -
ing moral practice like casuistry also needs a secure institutional embedding. Medi -
cal ethics always had such an environment, which helped practitioners to determine 
whether they were doing well or not. Moral casuistry too—up until the moment this 
was broken down when religion slowly started to lose its dominance and ‘Enlighten -
ment’ thinkers (e.g., Galileo, Descartes, Newton, Grotius) started to look for more 
secure scientific, and rhetorically convincing foundations, which set the standard for 
moral-legal ones (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , pp. 275–276, 331).
Moving forward two centuries, Jonsen and Toulmin argue that the move away from 
practical affairs into moral theory was still taking place in the twentieth century. Moral 
philosophers in Britain and the USA (e.g., Moore, Perry, Ross, Stevenson, Rawls, 
Hare) were only interested in practical issues to the extent that these could serve as 
“(…) new ways of testing the intellectual merits of rival theoretical positions” (Jonsen 
& Toulmin, 1988 , p. 281). Though there were some exceptions (James, Dewey), moral 
philosophy was often considered to be of theoretical nature—this in complete contra -
distinction with how Aristotle understood ethics.15
15 The situation for political philosophy, specifically, was not that different. See e.g. Forrester ( 2019 , 
Chapter 8); Freeden ( 2018 , pp. 348–351).Page8of23 9