Vol.:(0123456789)https://doi.org/10.1007/s44206-022-00013-3
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
AI Ethics, Ethics Washing, and the Need to Politicize Data 
Ethics
Gijs van Maanen1 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Many commercial actors in the tech sector publish ethics guidelines as a means to 
‘wash away’ concerns raised about their policies. For some academics, this phenom -
enon is reason to replace ethics with other tools and methods in an attempt to make 
sure that the tech sector does not cross any moral Rubicons. Others warn against 
the tendency to reduce a criticism of ‘ethics washing’ into one of ethics simpliciter. 
In this essay, I argue firstly that the dominant focus on principles, dilemmas, and 
theory in conventional ethical theories and practices could be an explanation of it 
lacking resistance to abuse by dominant actors, and hence its rather disappointing 
capacity to stop, redirect, or at least slow down big tech’s course. Secondly, drawing 
from research on casuistry and political philosopher Raymond Geuss, this essay will 
make a case for a question, rather than theory or principle-based ethical data prac -
tice. The emphasis of this approach is placed on the acquisition of a thorough under -
standing of a social-political phenomenon like tech development. This approach 
should be replenished with one extra component to the picture of the repoliticized 
data ethics drawn so far: the importance of ‘exemplars,’ or stories. Precisely the fact 
that one should acquire an in-depth understanding of the problem in practice will 
also allow one to look in the past, present, or future for similar and comparable sto -
ries from which one can learn.
Keywords  AI ethics · Ethics washing · Political theory · Geuss · Casuistry
“Not only rules, but also examples are needed for establishing a practice. Our rules leave loop-holes 
open, and the practice has to speak for itself” (Wittgenstein, 1969 , para. 139).
 * Gijs van Maanen 
 gijsvanmaanen@soverin.net
1 Molengraaff Institute for Private Law, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
Received: 25 October 2021 / Accepted: 22 July 2022 /Published online: 2 August 2022