Broader Impact
In this paper we have investigated when it is possible to achieve both high accuracy and adversarial
robustness on standard image classiﬁcation datasets. Our motivation is partially to offer an alternative
perspective to previous work that speculates on the inevitability of an accuracy-robustness tradeoff.
In practice, if there were indeed a tradeoff, then robust machine learning technology is unlikely
to be very useful. The vast majority of instances encountered by practical systems will be natural
examples, whereas adversaries are few and far between. A self-driving car will mostly come across
regular street signs and rarely come across adversarial ones. If increased robustness necessitates
a loss in performance on natural examples, then the system’s designer might be tempted to use a
highly accurate classiﬁer that is obtained through regular training and forgo robustness altogether.
For adversarially robust machine learning to be widely adopted, accuracy needs to be achieved in
conjunction with robustness.
While we have backed up our theoretical results by empirically verifying dataset separation, we are
also ready to point out the many limitations of current robustness studies. The focus on curated
benchmarks may lead to a false sense of security. Real life scenarios will likely involve much
more complicated classiﬁcation tasks. For example, the identiﬁcation of criminal activity or the
maneuvering of self-driving cars depend on a much broader notion of robustness than has been
studied so far. Perturbations in `pdistance cover only a small portion of the space of possible attacks.
Looking toward inherent biases, we observe that test accuracy is typically aggregated over all classes,
and hence, it does not account for underrepresentation. For example, if a certain class makes up a
negligible fraction of the dataset, then misclassifying these instances may be unnoticeable when we
expect a drop in overall test accuracy. A more stringent objective would be to retain accuracy on each
separate class, as well as being robust to targeted perturbations that may exploit dataset imbalance.
On a more positive note, we feel conﬁdent that developing a theoretically grounded discussion of
robustness will encourage machine learning engineers to question the efﬁcacy of various methods.
As one of our contributions, we have shown that dataset separation guarantees the existence of an
accurate and robust classiﬁer. We believe that future work will develop new methods that achieve
robustness by imposing both Lipschitzness and effective generalization. Overall, it is paramount to
close the theory-practice gap by working on both sides, and we stand by our suggestion to further
investigate the various deep learning components (architecture, loss function, training method, etc)
that may compound the perceived gains in robustness and accuracy.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Kamalika Chaudhuri and Yao-Yuan Yang thank NSF under CIF 1719133, CNS 1804829 and IIS
1617157 for support. Hongyang Zhang was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency under cooperative agreement HR00112020003. The views expressed in this work do
not necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the Government and no ofﬁcial endorsement should
be inferred. Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. This work was also supported in
part by NSF IIS1763562 and ONR Grant N000141812861.
References
[1]Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Alhussein Fawzi, Robert Stanforth,
and Pushmeet Kohli. Are labels required for improving adversarial robustness? In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 12192–12202, 2019.
[2]Cem Anil, James Lucas, and Roger Grosse. Sorting out lipschitz function approximation. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[3]Pranjal Awasthi, Abhratanu Dutta, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. On robustness to adversarial
examples and polynomial optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 13737–13747, 2019.
[4]Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Daniel Cullina, and Prateek Mittal. Lower bounds on adversarial robustness
from optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 7496–
7508, 2019.
10