A Closer Look at Accuracy vs. Robustness
Yao-Yuan Yang1Cyrus Rashtchian1Hongyang Zhang2
Ruslan Salakhutdinov3Kamalika Chaudhuri1
1University of California, San Diego
2Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
3Carnegie Mellon University
{yay005, crashtchian}@eng.ucsd.edu hongyanz@ttic.edu
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu
Abstract
Current methods for training robust networks lead to a drop in test accuracy, which
has led prior works to posit that a robustness-accuracy tradeoff may be inevitable
in deep learning. We take a closer look at this phenomenon and ﬁrst show that real
image datasets are actually separated. With this property in mind, we then prove
that robustness and accuracy should both be achievable for benchmark datasets
through locally Lipschitz functions, and hence, there should be no inherent tradeoff
between robustness and accuracy. Through extensive experiments with robustness
methods, we argue that the gap between theory and practice arises from two
limitations of current methods: either they fail to impose local Lipschitzness or
they are insufﬁciently generalized. We explore combining dropout with robust
training methods and obtain better generalization. We conclude that achieving
robustness and accuracy in practice may require using methods that impose local
Lipschitzness and augmenting them with deep learning generalization techniques.1
1 Introduction
A growing body of research shows that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples , test
inputs that have been modiﬁed slightly yet strategically to cause misclassiﬁcation [ 56,17]. While
a number of defenses have been proposed [ 10,32,46,65], they are known to hurt test accuracy on
many datasets [ 41,32,68]. This observation has led prior works to claim that a tradeoff between
robustness and accuracy may be inevitable for many classiﬁcation tasks [57, 65].
We take a closer look at the tradeoff between robustness and accuracy, aiming to identify properties
of data and training methods that enable neural networks to achieve both. A plausible reason why
robustness may lead to lower accuracy is that different classes are very close together or they may
even overlap (which underlies the argument for an inevitable tradeoff [ 57]). We begin by testing if
this is the case in real data through an empirical study of four image datasets. Perhaps surprisingly,
we ﬁnd that these datasets actually satisfy a natural separation property that we call r-separation:
examples from different classes are at least distance 2rapart in pixel space. This r-separation holds
for values of rthat are higher than the perturbation radii used in adversarial example experiments.
We next consider separation as a guiding principle for better understanding the robustness-accuracy
tradeoff. Neural network classiﬁers are typically obtained by rounding an underlying continuous
Equal contribution
1Code available at https://github.com/yangarbiter/robust-local-lipschitz .
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.