6 Related Work
There is a large body of literature on developing adversarial attacks as well as defenses that apply to
neural networks [ 7,29,56,30,32,36,35,53,58,67]. While some of this work has noted that an
increase in robustness is sometimes accompanied by a loss in accuracy, the phenomenon remains ill-
understood. Raghunathan et al. [41] provides a synthetic problem where adversarial training overﬁts,
which we take a closer look at in Appendix E. Raghunathan et al. [42] proposes the robust self
training method that aims to improve the robustness and accuracy tradeoff; however, our experiments
show that they do not completely close the gap particularly when using only labeled data.
Outside of neural networks, prior works suggest that lack of data may be responsible for low
robustness [ 1,5,8,9,28,48,49,59,66]. For example, Schmidt et al. [48] provides an example
of a linear classiﬁcation problem where robustness in `1norm requires more samples than plain
accuracy, and Wang et al. [59] shows that nearest neighbors would be more robust with more data.
Some prior works also suggest that the robustness accuracy tradeoff may arise due to limitations
of existing algorithms. Bubeck et al. [6]provides an example where ﬁnding a robust and accurate
classiﬁer is signiﬁcantly more computationally challenging than ﬁnding one that is simply accurate,
and Bhattacharjee and Chaudhuri [5]shows that certain non-parametric methods do not lead to robust
classiﬁers in the large sample limit. It is also known that the Bayes optimal classiﬁer is not robust in
general [4, 44, 38, 57, 59], and it differs from the maximally astute classiﬁer [5, 62].
Prior work has also shown a connection between adversarial robustness and local or global Lipschitz-
ness. For linear classiﬁers, it is known that imposing Lipschitzness reduces to bounding the norm of
the classiﬁer, which in turn implies large margin [ 31,61]. Thus, for linear classiﬁcation of data that
is linearly separable with a large margin, imposing Lipschitzness helps generalization.
For neural networks, Anil et al. [2], Qian and Wegman [39], Huster et al. [22] provide methods
for imposing global Lipschitzness constraints; however, the state-of-the-art methods for training
such networks do not lead to highly expressible functions. For local Lipschitzness, Hein and
Andriushchenko [21] ﬁrst showed a relationship between adversarial robustness of a classiﬁer and
local Lipschitzness of its underlying function. Following this, Weng et al. [60] provides an efﬁcient
way of calculating a lower bound on the local Lipschitzness coefﬁcient. Many works consider a
randomized notion of local smoothness, and they prove that enforcing it can lead to certiﬁably robust
classiﬁers [27, 10, 37, 46].
7 Conclusion
Motivated by understanding when it is possible to achieve both accuracy and robustness, we take a
closer look at robustness in image classiﬁcation and make several observations. We show that many
image datasets follow a natural separation property and that this implies the existence of a robust and
perfectly accurate classiﬁer that can be obtained by rounding a locally Lipschitz function. Thus in
principle robustness and accuracy should both be achievable together on real world datasets.
We investigate the gap between theory and practice by examining the smoothness and generalization
properties of existing training methods. Our results show that generalization may be a particular
challenge in robust learning since all robust methods that produce locally smooth classiﬁers also
suffer from fairly large generalization gaps. We then experiment with combining robust classiﬁcation
methods with dropout and see that this leads to a narrowing of the generalization gaps.
Our results suggest that the robustness-accuracy tradeoff in deep learning is not inherent, but it
is rather a consequence of current methods for training robust networks. Future progress that
ensures both robustness and accuracy may come from redesigning other aspects of the training
process, such as customized optimization methods [ 3,15,25,34,43,50,52,51] or better network
architectures [ 13,47,69] in combination with loss functions that encourage adversarial robustness,
generalization, and local Lipschitzness. Some recent evidence for improved network architectures
has been obtained by Guo et. al. [ 19], who search for newer architectures with higher robustness from
increased model capacity and feature denoising. A promising direction is to combine such efforts
across the deep learning stack to reduce standard and adversarial generalization gaps.
9