functionf:X ! RCwithCclasses. We take inspiration from prior work, which shows that
Lipschitzness of fis closely related to its robustness [ 10,21,46,60,64]. However, one drawback of
the existing arguments is that they do not provide a compelling and realistic assumption on the data
that guarantees robustness and accuracy. We show theoretically that any r-separated data distribution
has a classiﬁer that is both robust up to perturbations of size r, and accurate, and it can be obtained
by rounding a function that is locally Lipschitz around the data. This suggests that there should exist
a robust and highly accurate classiﬁer for real image data. Unfortunately, the current state of robust
classiﬁcation falls short of this prediction, and the discrepancy remains poorly understood.
To better understand the theory-practice gap, we empirically investigate several existing methods on
a few image datasets with a special focus on their local Lipschitzness and generalization gaps. We
ﬁnd that of the methods investigated, adversarial training (AT) [ 32], robust self-training (RST) [ 42]
and TRADES [ 64] impose the highest degree of local smoothness, and are the most robust. We also
ﬁnd that the three robust methods have large gaps between training and test accuracies as well as
adversarial training and test accuracies. This suggests that the disparity between theory and practice
may be due to the limitations of existing training procedures, particularly in regards to generalization.
We then experiment with dropout, a standard generalization technique, on top of robust training
methods on two image datasets where there is a signiﬁcant generalization gap. We see that dropout in
particular narrows the generalization gaps of TRADES and RST, and improves test accuracy, test
adversarial accuracy as well as test Lipschitzness. In summary, our contributions are as follows.
Through empirical measurements, we show that several image datasets are separated.
We prove that this separation implies the existence of a robust and perfectly accurate
classiﬁer that can be obtained by rounding a locally Lipschitz function. In contrast to prior
conjectures [12, 16, 57], robustness and accuracy can be achieved together in principle.
We investigate smoothness and generalization properties of classiﬁers produced by current
training methods. We observe that the training methods AT, TRADES, and RST, which
produce robust classiﬁers, also suffer from large generalization gaps. We combine these
robust training methods with dropout [ 54], and show that this narrows the generalization
gaps and sometimes makes the classiﬁers smoother.
What do our results imply about the robustness-accuracy tradeoff in deep learning? They suggest
that this tradeoff is not inherent. Rather, it is a consequence of current robustness methods. The
past few years of research in robust machine learning has led to a number of new loss functions, yet
the rest of the training process – network topologies, optimization methods, generalization tools –
remain highly tailored to promoting accuracy. We believe that in order to achieve both robustness
and accuracy, future work may need to redesign other aspects of the training process such as better
network architectures using neural architecture search [ 13,19,47,69]. Combining this with improved
optimization methods and robust losses may be able to reduce the generalization gap in practice.
2 Preliminaries
LetXRdbe an instance space equipped with a metric dist:XX! R+; this is the metric in
which robustness is measured. Let [C] =f1;2;:::;Cgdenote the set of possible labels with C2.
For a function f:X!RC, letf(x)idenote the value of the ith coordinate.
Robustness and Astuteness. LetB(x;")denote a ball of radius ">0around xin a metric space.
We use B1to denote the `1ball. A classiﬁer gisrobust atxwith radius">0if for all x02B(x;"),
we haveg(x0) =g(x). Also,gisastute at(x;y)ifg(x0) =yfor all x02B(x;"). The astuteness
ofgat radius">0under a distribution is
Pr
(x;y)[g(x0) =yfor all x02B(x;")]:
The goal of robust classiﬁcation is to ﬁnd a gwith the highest astuteness [ 59]. We sometimes use
clean accuracy to refer to standard test accuracy (no adversarial perturbation), in order to differentiate
it from robust accuracy a.k.a. astuteness (with adversarial perturbation).
Local Lipschitzness. Here we deﬁne local Lipschitzness theoretically; Section 5 later provides an
empirical way to estimate this quantity.
2