ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 15
underlying causal structure, e.g., corresponds to Figure 1 b). Nevertheless, interpreting
positive regression coeﬃcients as evidence against He and T ian (2013) would be a mistake.
To use the analogy of Bayesian updating, control variable es timates from studies such as
C. Chen et al. (2016) and Huang et al. (2022) should not alter t he posterior probability of
analyst coverage having a negative eﬀect on innovation. Con sequently, in another study by
S.-S. Chen et al. (2021), in which analyst coverage is also in cluded as a control variable in a
patent count regression, the regression coeﬃcients of the c ontrols are not reported. This is
in accordance with the recommendations that we will discuss in the following.
Discussion and Recommendations
Beyond pure prediction tasks, the purpose of regression ana lysis in organizational
research is typically to build and test theories that explai n the causal mechanisms
underlying a studied phenomenon (Sutton & Staw, 1995). In th is paper, we argued that
attaching substantive meaning to the marginal eﬀects of bia sed control variables is
problematic, however, as researchers could develop false i ntuitions or draw erroneous
managerial and policy conclusions. Therefore, we think it i s advisable to not discuss the
results obtained for control variables in quantitative pap ers, unless the researchers can be
sure that they have accounted for all relevant inﬂuence fact ors of the outcome in a
regression ( all-causes regression ). Since in many practical settings this is unlikely to be the
case, we recommend to treat controls as nuisance parameters , which are included in the
analysis for identiﬁcation purposes (and discussed as such ) but their eﬀects are not
interpreted (). This corresponds to the way control variabl es are treated by non-parametric
matching estimators (Heckman et al., 1998) and modern machi ne learning techniques for
high-dimensional settings (). These methods do not report e stimation results related to
controls, either because there would be simply too many cova riates in the analysis (which
is the primary use-case for machine learning) or marginal eﬀ ects of control variables are not
returned by the estimation protocol (as in the matching case ).
Our recommendations thereby depart from prior literature i nsofar as control