ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 16
variable should not be promoted to have equal status with the other variables in the study
(Spector & Brannick, 2011, p. 297). Research designs based o n control variables are
employed to estimate the causal eﬀect of a treatment variabl e on an outcome. As such, the
treatment variable cannot be endogenous, otherwise estima tes would be biased and other,
more suitable research designs (such as instrumental varia bles, regression discontinuity
designs, etc.) should be applied. By contrast, control vari ables can be endogenous (Frölich,
2008) and, as we argued in the preceding theoretical discuss ion, will likely be so in
practice.∗∗Controls should be chosen to close all backdoor paths betwee n a treatment and
outcome, based on a theoretical model of the context under st udy (Bono & McNamara,
2011). As we have demonstrated previously, it is thereby not necessary to include all causal
inﬂuence factors of the outcome variable in a regression. Ou r example (Azoulay et al.,
2021) illustrates that in many cases it might actually be eas ier to control the treatment
assignment mechanism instead, if institutional knowledge is richer about what determines
treatment take-up compared to the potentially long list of v ariables that aﬀect the
outcome. Moreover, in many situations, researchers have th e choice between diﬀerent valid
adjustment sets (see Figure 1d), which highlights their aux iliary nature for the analysis.
—— Insert Table 2 about here ——
Since accounting for all inﬂuence factors of the outcome mig ht be unrealistic in
many contexts and control variables are therefore likely to be endogenous, interpreting
their eﬀect sizes in light of theory is potentially dangerou s. Authors could infer wrong
conclusions for managerial advice and subsequent studies m ight be inclined to build theory
based on biased empirical results. To avoid this, we therefo re recommend to refrain from
interpreting control variables in published papers. Moreo ver, predicting the sign of control
∗∗Similarly, the widespread notion that one endogenous varia ble in the regression would bias all other
coeﬃcients is also incomplete, as our simulation of the caus al model in Figure 1b (Table 1, col. 4) demon-
strates.