ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 11
making causal claims and instead resort to alternative form ulations to describe eﬀect sizes,
such as "association", "pattern", or "link" (Hernán, 2018) . However, a recent paper by
Hoﬀman and Strezhnev (2023) provides a ﬁtting example. The a uthors estimate the causal
eﬀect of longer travel time on the probability of a default ju dgement being made in eviction
cases as a result of defendants not showing up or being late to court. Using OLS in a
sample of more than 200,000 eviction proceedings in the city of Philadelphia between 2005
and 2021, they ﬁnd that an increase of one hour in estimated tr avel time raises the
likelihood of a default judgement by 3.8 to 8.6 percent. This eﬀect is meaningful because
defaults are diﬃcult to reopen and tenants who fail to show up in court cannot beneﬁt
from “Civil Gideon" protections oﬀered in major urban areas in the U.S.
In their models, Hoﬀman and Strezhnev control for neighborh ood characteristics
such as census tract income levels, as well as race and ethnic ity. Interestingly, for our
discussion, they also control for building characteristic s and ﬁnd a positive and statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀect size of multi-unit apartment buildings (c ompared to row houses or single
family dwelling) on the probability of default judgements. However, as the authors discuss
in their paper, this relationship is unlikely to have a causa l interpretation, since building
characteristics might be correlated with other inﬂuence fa ctors such as unfavorable terms
in residential leases or the geographical distribution of d wellings within the city. We now
turn to an example closer to the organizational research con text.
Early research exposure and career choices
Azoulay et al. (2021) investigate the eﬀect of early career e xposure to frontier
research on the career trajectory of potential innovators. Their speciﬁc empirical setting is
the Associate Training Program (ATP) of the National Instit utes of Health (NIH) in the
U.S. The ATP was started in 1953 as a training program for rece nt MD graduates.
Participants were sent to the NIH intramural campus in Bethe sda, Maryland, to receive a
two to three years research training under the supervision o f NIH investigators. Since the
NIH was originally established within the Marine Hospital S ervice, participation in the