ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 7
outcome variable (irrespective of their orientation) that remains if arrows emitted by the
treatment are deleted from the graph (Pearl, 2000). Because of the latter requirement they
are easy to spot in the causal diagram. Since all the arrows em itted by Xare deleted,
backdoor paths have to point into Xinstead; i.e., they enter “through the backdoor",
which is where the name comes from.
Control variables in a multivariate regression model are in voked to block such
backdoor paths and obtain a consistent estimate of the causa l eﬀect of XonY, in which
case one speaks of an eﬀect to be causally identiﬁed . For this purpose, it is suﬃcient to
control for any variable that lies on the open path.∗Thus, in the example of Figure 1a, the
researcher has the choice between either controlling for Z1orZ2, since both would allow to
identify the causal eﬀect of interest. The choice between di ﬀerent admissible sets of control
variables is thereby of high practical relevance. Research ers often have fairly detailed
knowledge about the treatment assignment mechanism Z1→X; e.g., because there are
organizational or administrative rules that determine ind ividual treatment status, which
can be exploited for identiﬁcation purposes (). At the same t ime, the set of variables Z2
that are direct inﬂuence factors of Ywill likely be large. Thus, in practical applications it
might be much easier to control the treatment assignment mec hanism instead of trying to
include all variables that have an eﬀect on the outcome in a re gression.
—— Insert Table 1 about here ——
Nevertheless, although controlling for Z1is suﬃcient to obtain a consistent estimate
forX, its marginal eﬀect will itself not correspond to any causal eﬀect of Z1onY. That is
because Z1is correlated with Z2and will thus partially pick up an eﬀect of Z2onYtoo
(Cinelli & Hazlett, 2020). To illustrate this phenomenon qu antitatively, we parameterize
∗Technical note: Requiring the path to be previously unblock ed rules out that the variable which is
adjusted for is a collider (Hünermund & Bareinboim, 2023). A discussion of colliders and bad controls goes
beyond the scope of this note ().