ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 5
interpreting their estimated eﬀect sizes in light of prior t heory could lead to potentially
misleading conclusions. A valid causal interpretation of c ontrol variables rests on strong
assumptions and usually requires accounting for all inﬂuen ce factors of the outcome
variable under study. Since this is unlikely to be fulﬁlled i n many research contexts, we
recommend authors to exercise caution when interpreting co ntrol variables and consider
omitting estimated coeﬃcients of control variables from re gression tables, or relegating
them to an appendix. Finally, we discuss what our recommenda tions imply for the practice
of meta-analysis, which has recently gained traction in man y ﬁelds including organizational
research (Aguinis et al., 2010).
Do researchers attach substantive meaning to control varia bles?
To assess the degree to which researchers interpret control variable estimates in
their studies, we conducted a review of all articles publish ed in Organization Science and
Strategic Management Journal between January 2015 and December 2020. We chose these
two journals because of their high prestige in the managemen t and organization ﬁeld as
well as their reputation for high-quality empirical resear ch. Our sample includes all
quantitative articles that employed parametric regressio n models such as OLS, logit,
probit, Poisson, etc. This choice was made because eﬀect siz es of control variables can
usually not be summarized by a single coeﬃcient (or marginal eﬀect) in non- and
semiparametric models. The use of such methods is rare in our sample anyway though.
We manually categorized papers according to whether they in terpret or draw
substantive insights from the coeﬃcients or marginal eﬀect estimates of control variables.
Examples of such an interpretation range from “the control v ariable CEO tenure is
positively related to performance" to “the eﬀect sizes of of control variables are in line with
previous studies". The latter interpretation is thereby of relevance because authors of future
research papers might be tempted to develop theory based on t his seemingly accumulating
empirical evidence. The result of our review shows that inte rpreting control variables was
common practice in the analyzed journals during our period o f observation. For the