ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 19
This recommendation refers to meta-analyses of partial cor relations and marginal eﬀects
(“meta-regression"), which are increasingly common in org anizational research and
economics (Stanley & Doucouliagos, 2012). Compared to zero -order correlations, they have
the advantage of being able to ﬁlter out other potential conf ounding inﬂuence factors in
settings when randomized control trials are not feasible.††However, the quoted passage
fails to mention that control variables (here: extraversio n and agreeableness) are unlikely
to have a causal interpretation themselves and therefore ad d little to the evidence base
regarding a certain eﬀect size. As their coeﬃcients may repr esent a combination of several
diﬀerent causal mechanisms jointly operating on the outcom e (here: citizenship behavior),
they do not provide accurate information about a theoretica lly meaningful quantity.
Moreover, coeﬃcients can vary substantially depending on w hich admissible adjustment
sets are used (e.g., compare columns 6–8 in Table 1). Consequ ently, meta-analyses should
be restricted to the main treatment variable(s), for which a plausible identiﬁcation
argument can be established, which highlights once again th e unequal status of treatment
and control variables in regression analysis.
To conclude, there is no reason to be worried if the estimated coeﬃcients of control
variables do not have expected signs, since they are likely t o be biased anyway in practical
applications. Instead, researchers should rather focus on interpreting the marginal eﬀects
of the main variables of interest in their manuscripts. The e stimation results obtained for
controls, by contrast, have little substantive meaning and can therefore safely be
omitted—or relegated to an appendix. This approach will not only prevent researchers
from drawing wrong causal conclusions based on endogenous c ontrols, but will furthermore
allow to streamline the discussion sections of quantitativ e research papers and save on
valuable manuscript space.
††See DeSimone et al. (2021) for methodological guidelines on how to conduct meta-analytic studies in
organizational research.