ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 18
(2022)) often have a lot of predictive power but nonetheless lead to invalid causal
inferences. Therefore, we also do not see a reason why author s should report models with
and without control variables and compare the share of expla ined variance between them
(as suggested, e.g., by Atinc et al. (2012) and Becker et al. ( 2015)).
Our recommendations are in line with Westreich and Greenlan d (2013) who discuss
a similar problem with respect to the interpretation of pote ntially endogenous controls in
epidemiology. Because epidemiological studies usually pr esent the results of multivariate
regression analyses right after a table with descriptive st atistics of the data, they coined
the term table 2 fallacy . Keele et al. (2020) discuss related examples from the ﬁeld o f
political science. They emphasize that for estimates of con trol variables to be given a
causal interpretation, their eﬀects need to be themselves c ausally identiﬁed. Since this is
only plausible if there are no omitted variables (or the cont rols are unrelated to the
omitted variables), we recommend researchers to focus atte ntion on one causal factor (or a
small set) at a time, for which backdoor paths can realistica lly be enumerated, and treat
control variables as nuisance parameters instead.
Finally, we caution against including estimates of potenti ally biased controls in
meta-analyses (Aguinis et al., 2010). Such studies pool the eﬀects of a focal variable on an
outcome across several papers. According to Becker (2005), systematic reporting of control
variables facilitates cumulative science and knowledge ag gregation by signiﬁcantly
increasing the pool of studies from which eﬀect sizes for met a-analyses can be drawn from:
“Nonreporting of control variable ﬁndings hinder any meta- analyses that would
have otherwise included the controls. For instance, in a stu dy of the
relationship between employee commitment and organizatio nal citizenship
behavior, a researcher might control for extraversion and a greeableness but not
report the ﬁndings for the controls. As a result, later meta- analyses cannot
include these ﬁndings in the assessment of connections betw een personality and
organizational citizenship behavior." (Becker, 2005, p. 2 85)