ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 14
Analyst coverage and innovation
In applied empirical research, it is not uncommon for estima ted treatment eﬀects to
change signiﬁcantly when more advanced identiﬁcation stra tegies are employed compared
to standard OLS regression. For example, Hopp et al. (2020) ﬁ nd that CEO appearance is
no longer related to company performance once ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀect s are incorporated in the
analysis. Using a discrete choice experiment, Mas and Palla is (2017) show that on average
workers value ﬂexible work arrangements much less than a sim ple compensating wage
diﬀerentials regression would indicate. Furthermore, bec ause of simultaneity bias, policing
levels and crime rates are often positively related, while M ello (2019) demonstrates a
negative causal eﬀect of policing on crime, exploiting a nat ural experiment in a
diﬀerence-and-diﬀerence design.
If subsequent research uses the same variables as controls, however, it becomes
immediately clear that their estimated regression coeﬃcie nts should not be interpreted in a
causal way. One case in point comes from the literature on ana lyst coverage and
innovation. He and Tian (2013) ﬁnd a negative relationship b etween analyst coverage and
patenting in a study of U.S. public ﬁrms from 1993 to 2005, usi ng diﬀerence-and-diﬀerences
and an instrumental variable approach. It has been theorize d that this result arises because
external stock market analysts following a ﬁrm often exert e xcessive pressure on executives,
which can worsen managerial myopia and impede investment in long-term innovation
projects. For these reasons, analyst coverage is used as a co ntrol variable in other studies of
R&D activities in publicly listed ﬁrms. However, since it is not the main variable of
interest in these studies, often less stringent identiﬁcat ion strategies are employed, possibly
leading to unexpected results. For example, C. Chen et al. (2 016) and Huang et al. (2022)
consistently ﬁnd positive eﬀects of analyst coverage in reg ressions with the natural
logarithm of patents as the dependent variable, which seemi ngly contradicts He and Tian
(2013).
Analyst coverage can be a valid control variable even though it is endogenous (if the