ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 13
al. in form of a causal diagram. Controlling for applicants’ prior research activities,
academic achievements, experience and school reputation ( the authors incorporate several
covariates for each of these dimensions, including medical school and internship hospital
ﬁxed eﬀects) is a valid backdoor adjustment set for estimati ng the causal eﬀect of ATP
participation on the choice of pursuing a research career in this graph./bardblThe analysis
depends crucially on the assumption that the unobserved (la tent) variable research
potential does not directly aﬀect program participation (ATP Partici pation/negationslash/arrowaxisleft/axisshort/axisshortResearch
Potential); i.e., interviewers are not able to select appli cants based on private information.
Azoulay et al. employ an inverse probability weighting esti mator (Austin & Stuart,
2015). As such, covariates are only used to estimate the prop ensity score of receiving
treatment and do not appear in an outcome regression. Howeve r, in this setting it would
also not be advisable to interpret the eﬀect of control varia bles such as prior research
activities on career choice. The latent node research poten tial jointly aﬀects an applicant’s
prior research activities as well as future career choices. Thus, while prior research activity
is a valid control for the eﬀect of ATP participation, it is al so endogenous, similar to the
situation in Figure 1b. Consequently, even if we were to ﬁnd a positive correlation between
prior research activities and pursuing a research career (w hich is not reported in Azoulay et
al.), it would be premature to conclude that, e.g., early pub lication success during medical
school is a signiﬁcant driver of subsequent career choices, since both of these variables are
likely confounded by an applicant’s overall ability. The re search design only allows to draw
policy conclusions for the treatment variable ATP particip ation. Researchers should
therefore be careful not to overinterpret their empirical r esults, even if that promises to
oﬀer interesting additional perspectives on a given resear ch topic.
/bardblFor simplicity, we focus on career choice as the primary outc ome and disregard several other dimensions
of scientiﬁc career success that Azoulay et al. investigate .