ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 15
"As expected, subsidiaries in higher GDP countries were mor e likely to be
supervised locally. Telecommunication positively aﬀecte d local supervision and
tax rate negatively aﬀected local supervision, although th ese coeﬃcients are
not statistically signiﬁcant. Column (2) adds quality of in stitutions; it had
a signiﬁcant and positive impact on local supervision." (Zh ou, 2015, p. 287),
Organization Science
Noting
interesting
control
variable
estimates"The coeﬃcients of several control variables oﬀered some in teresting insights
on technology exit. First, the coeﬃcient of Number of compet itors was positive
(β= 0.35, s.e. = 0.15) with a p-value of .01. We then computed [100[exp( β)−
1], which gave the percentage change in the hazard associate d with a one-unit
increase in covariate. The results suggested that if the Num ber of competitors
increased by one, then there was a 41% increase in the focal te chnology’s hazard
of technology exit." (Chen, Qian, and Narayanan, 2017, p. 25 88),Strategic
Management Journal
"A number of results for the control variables are noteworth y. Business
line diversiﬁcation negatively aﬀects the diversiﬁcation and dissimilarity of
technology-sourcing portfolios. The reason may be that bus iness line diversiﬁ-
cation diverts ﬁnancial and human resources from investmen ts in technology-
sourcing vehicles. We note that the size of the top managemen t team is also
negatively related to both diversiﬁcation and dissimilari ty (although not sig-
niﬁcant for the latter)." (Lungeanu, Stern and Zajac, 2016, p. 865), Strategic
Management Journal
"A few results from Model 1 are worth noting. First, the estim ates of the con-
trols appear aligned with our expectations: Population age exhibits a negative
and signiﬁcant eﬀect on growth rates. ... The eﬀects of MU den sity and MU
density2 are consistent with existing evidence on the conse quences of density-
dependent legitimation and competition on organizational growth rates. C4
market share exhibits a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect on MU g rowth—a result
aligned with the current understanding of resource partiti oning." (Liu & Wezel,
2015, p. 301), Organization Science