ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 6
Strategic Management Journal, we identiﬁed a total of 497 qu antitative research articles, of
which 233 (47 percent) proceeded to interpret the eﬀects of c ontrols variables. For
Organization Science, out of a total of 275 quantitative art icles, 131 (47 percent) provided
an interpretation of control variable estimates. Detailed results of the literature review and
example quotes demonstrating the diﬀerent ways in which aut hors interpret control
variable estimates in practice are reported in the suppleme ntal material to this paper.
The causal interpretation of control variables
The relationship between the main explanatory variables an d controls in a regression
can be complex, therefore it is beneﬁcial to explicitly depi ct them in a causal diagram
(Pearl, 2000). Durand and Vaara (2009) were the ﬁrst to intro duce causal graphs as a tool
to management researchers. Cinelli et al. (2022) provide a u seful overview of the diﬀerent
functions of control variables in regression analyses, exp licitly leveraging the graphical
framework. Here, we focus on the causal interpretation and r eporting of control variable
estimates, which has been a topic of ongoing debate in the org anizational literature.
Figure 1a presents a simple model with a treatment variable Xand an outcome
variable Y. Both variables are connected by an arrow, denoting the dire ction of causal
inﬂuence between them. In addition, there are two confoundi ng variables, Z1andZ2, that
are aﬀecting the treatment and the outcome. Z1andZ2are correlated, as a result of a
common inﬂuence factor they share, which is denoted by the da shed bidirected arc in the
graph. The fact that Z1andZ2are correlated creates what is known as a backdoor path
between the treatment and the outcome (Pearl, 2000). XandYare not only connected by
the direct causal path X→Y, but also by a second path, X←Z1/arrowaxisleft/axisshort/axisshort/axisshort/axisshort/arrowaxisright Z2→Y, which
creates a spurious, non-causal correlation between them.
—— Insert Figure 1 about here ——
Backdoor paths are deﬁned as any sequence of arrows connecti ng the treatment and