ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 3
On the Nuisance of Control Variables in Causal Regression An alysis
Multivariate regression is an important tool for empirical research in organization
studies, management, and economics. Beyond settings in whi ch regression analysis is used
to statistically predict a left-hand side variable given a s et of explanatory variables, the
main purposes of these methods is to control for confounding inﬂuence factors between a
treatment and an outcome in order to obtain consistent causa l eﬀect estimates.†However,
in practice scholars often overstate the role of control var iables in regressions. In this paper
we argue that, while essential for the identiﬁcation of caus al eﬀects, control variables do
not necessarily have a causal interpretation themselves. T his is because even valid controls
are often correlated with other unobserved factors, which r ender their marginal eﬀects
uninterpretable from a causal inference perspective (). Co nsequently, researchers need to
be careful with attaching too much meaning to control variab les and should consider to
ignore them when interpreting the results of their analyses .
Drawing substantive conclusions from control variable est imates is common,
however. Authors frequently make use of formulations such a s: “control variables have
expected signs" or “it is worth noting the coeﬃcients‡of our control variables". Below, we
present the results of a literature review of papers publish ed in Organization Science and
Strategic Management Journal between 2015 and 2020, in which we found that 47 percent
of manuscripts using regression methods also explicitly di scussed the estimated eﬀect sizes
of controls. This is in line with Carlson and Wu (2012), who id entiﬁed 48 percent of papers
published in the Academy of Management Journal, Journal of A pplied Psychology and
Strategic Management Journal in 2007 that interpreted and d iscussed the eﬀects of
controls. Moreover, in our own experience as authors of quan titative research papers, we
†We refer to consistency in the statistical sense that the est imator converges in probability to the true
underlying parameter (Wooldridge, 2002, Def. 3.8).
‡In linear regression models, marginal eﬀects of explanator y variables are constant and can be represented
by a single parameter. In the following we will therefore mai nly refer to regression coeﬃcients of control
variables although our arguments also apply to marginal eﬀe ct estimates obtained from nonlinear models.