ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 12
program fulﬁlled a draftee’s military service obligation. Therefore, applying to the ATP
became particularly popular among young physicians during the Vietnam War period
(1965–1975).
After a ﬁrst screening round, applicants were invited to an i nterview on NIH
campus to determine who would eventually be selected to part icipate in the program.
Selection criteria were related to applicants’ prior resea rch activities (which Azoulay et al.
measure by their number of pre-ATP publications), their aca demic achievements (proxied
by whether they were elected to the AΩA Honor Medical Society ), experience (i.e., whether
they held a Ph.D. at the time of application and the number of i nternships they had
completed), and the reputation of the institutions where ap plicants received their training
(measured by NIH grants for applicants’ medical school and i nternship hospital).
Importantly, Azoulay et al. argue that although the pool of a pplicants to the ATP was
indeed a highly selected group, selection at the (second) in terview stage was based entirely
on these observable characteristics. Applicants were earl y in their career and rather
homogeneous in their characteristics. It was therefore har d to select them based on their
future research potential beyond a few observable markers. This feature of the particular
institutional setting allows Azoulay et al. to employ a sele ction-on-observables design.
Based on that they estimate that ATP participants were twice as likely to pursue a
research-focused career later on compared to unsuccessful applicants. As a result, trainees
accumulated more publications, citations and grant fundin g over their life-cycle.
Furthermore, they were signiﬁcantly more likely to receive prestigious career awards,
including the Nobel Prize, and to become elected members of t he National Academy of
Sciences.
—— Insert Figure 2 about here ——
Figure 2 synthesizes the assumptions leading to the empiric al strategy in Azoulay et