ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 17
variable estimates ex-ante (Atinc et al., 2012) is diﬃcult i f endogenous control variables
can pick up the eﬀect of a multitude of other inﬂuence factors . Therefore, formulations
such as “estimates of control variables have expected signs " should be avoided. As a
“nudge" to stir the research community away from overinterp reting control variables, we
ﬁnd it appropriate that authors omit their coeﬃcients entir ely from regression tables or
relegate them to an appendix.
Table 2 (which is an adapted version of Table 1) illustrates s uch a regression table
format, in which check marks are included to indicate which v ariables were controlled for.
This corresponds to the way how estimation results are prese nted, e.g., in papers using
nearest neighbor or propensity score matching. We acknowle dge that omitting control
variable coeﬃcients in regression tables constitutes a tra de-oﬀ with respect to transparency.
However, we believe that this suggestion is justiﬁed by the l ower risk of drawing incorrect
theoretical inferences from empirical studies. When autho rs have important reasons for
reporting regression coeﬃcients of control variables, the format of Table 1 constitutes a
viable compromise, in our view. Compared to the standard for mat of regression table,
Table 1 clearly separates controls from the treatment varia ble and includes a note that the
control variable estimates should not be interpreted causa lly.
We emphasize that we agree with Becker (2005) in that control variables should be
carefully discussed and authors need to justify their valid ity based on prior theory.
However, their estimated coeﬃcients are less relevant. It s uﬃces to discuss the rationale for
selecting speciﬁc control variables in the empirical secti on and to clearly indicate their
inclusion in the table notes. Since the proper justiﬁcation of a regression design can only
come from theory, we caution against deciding about the incl usion of control variables
based on their incremental contribution to the R2of the model (Carlson & Wu, 2012).
This is the celebrated "no causes in, no causes out" principle (Cartwright, 1989), which
states that the validity of causal inferences must ultimate ly be supported by theoretical
considerations external to the data. For example, bad controls (as discussed in Cinelli et al.