ON THE NUISANCE OF CONTROL VARIABLES 4
frequently encountered instances in which reviewers asked us to provide an interpretation of
control variable coeﬃcients. The justiﬁcation that was oft en given was that, although they
were not the main focus of the analysis, controls could still provide valuable information for
other researchers in the ﬁeld who are investigating related research questions.
The methodological literature in organizational research usually highlights that
control variables should carry the same importance in an emp irical analysis as the main
independent variables of interest (). To increase rigor and improve transparency of
published research articles, Becker (2005) recommends to r eport all regression coeﬃcients
of control variables as well as their signiﬁcance levels. Si milarly, Spector and Brannick
(2011) advocate that controls should be given equal status t o the main treatment variable
in the analysis. Atinc et al. (2012) consider it to be best pra ctice to provide an ex-ante
prediction of the sign of the relationship between the contr ols and outcome variable based
on theory, which should subsequently be checked against the empirical evidence. In a
recent paper, Becker et al. (2015) provide a more cautionary recommendation regarding
generalizing from control variable estimates if it involve s out-of-sample extrapolation, but
otherwise considers it to be appropriate. Overall, the gene ral consensus in the
organizational literature thus seems to be that interpreti ng control variable estimates is
safe, as it adds to the body of cumulative evidence regarding a particular eﬀect size.
This paper builds on the graphical framework to causality () . Causal diagrams have
already been established as a powerful tool for determining which control variables are
relevant to a given regression model (). In addition, the app roach oﬀers a distinct
perspective on the proper interpretation and communicatio n of control variable results,
which diﬀers from prior methodological practices found in t he organizational and
management literature. In the following, we will explicate the view that control variables,
while certainly an important ingredient in many causal rese arch designs, do not have the
same status as the main variables of interest in an empirical analysis. In particular, we will
argue that in many situations valid controls can nonetheles s beendogenous . Therefore,