II.  BACKGROUND  
A.  Autonomy classification and necessary modules 
The ground vehicle automation needs a standard set of 
terminology and regulations with a taxonomy and def initions 
to coordinate all the efforts made in this field. I n 2014 SAE 
International introduced new standard J3016 to faci litate 
collaboration and simplify communication within tec hnical 
and policy domains. Figure 3 summarizes the levels of driving 
automation based on this standard. 
 
Figure 3.  Levels of driving automation, reproduced from [14] 
According to [21], an autonomous vehicle system 
accounts for three basic modules. 
 Sensing and prediction: to prepare real time data t o 
make the system capable to recognize instantaneous 
vehicle location and surrounding environment and 
produce row data for the system to process. 
 Planning: to utilize the provided data to design th e 
safe and feasible path to follow 
 Control: to adopt appropriate control strategies to  lead 
the vehicle to the desired path. 
After designing the appropriate control strategy, a ctuators 
work as the final stage of automated driving. In a conventional 
vehicle driver adjusts the speed by depressing the gas pedal or 
braking pedal, and turning the steering wheel to dr ive the 
vehicle in the correct and safe path. Differently, autonomous 
vehicles need some actuators to convert the input e lectrical 
signals from the controller to mechanical movements  to 
control the steering, engine throttle and so on. 
B.  Types of AHVs 
As mentioned earlier an AHV is a combination of two  or 
more rigid vehicles units, which are connected to e ach other 
by mechanical couplings, termed hitches, at articul ation 
points. Figure 4 shows important units of AHV [22].  
The two most popular AHVs use just one trailer, i.e ., the 
tractor-semitrailer and the truck-full trailer. Mul ti-trailer 
combinations are usually formed by connecting one o r more 
additional trailers to a tractor-semitrailer combin ation. 
Combinations with more than one trailer are often n amed 
vehicle trains. They are referred to as A-, B-, or C-trains 
relying on the type of coupling between trailers [2 2]. Figure 5 
illustrates the three configurations.  
Figure 4.  Different types of vehicle units and couplings used  in AHVs [22] 
A-train   B-train    
C-train  
Figure 5.  different ways that two trailers are hooked to one another in North 
America  [23] . 
C.  Maneuvering characteristics of AHVs 
Some regulations for AHVs are established based on 
performance-based standards (PBSs). These regulatio ns 
incorporate specific performance criteria in which required 
level of performance is quantified [6]. One instanc e of 
performance-based characteristics defined for AHVs 
movement in lateral and longitudinal directions can  be found 
in [24] and are classified in two categories. 
 The characteristics for longitudinal direction 
including startability, gradeability, acceleration 
capability, stopping distance, and down-grade 
holding capability.  
 The characteristics for lateral direction comprisin g 
rearward amplification (RWA), swept path width 
(SPW), high-speed transient off-tracking (HSTO), 
high-speed steady-state off- tracking (HSSO), yaw 
damping coefficient (YDC), straight line off-tracki ng 
(SLO), lateral clearance time (LCT), steady-state 
rollover threshold (SRT), and deceleration capabili ty 
in a turn.  
The most significant lateral characteristics for hi gh-speed 
maneuvering are RWA, HSTO, HSSO and YDC, which are 
described as follows [6]: 
 RWA is the relationship between the maximum 
motion of the first and last vehicle units during a  
specified steering maneuver and vehicle speed. It