III.  PATH FOLLOWING AND LATERAL CONTROL OF AHV S 
There are two main goals for AHVs control within an  
autonomous and semi-autonomous driving [31]. To con trol 
both the longitudinal and lateral dynamics using th e embedded 
control system with sophisticated software that are  actually 
codes written to do the job. The control algorithms  involve a 
higher level of control (strategy control) and a lo wer level of 
control (vehicle control). The former makes decisio ns based 
on the data received from the infrastructure and ot her vehicles 
by which are affected through maneuver. The later i ncludes 
vehicle steering, throttle and brake control. 
Longitudinal dynamics control of AHVs mainly refers  to 
regulating vehicle speed in order to retain enough space 
between vehicles. For implementing a successful lon gitudinal 
control four types of data are needed. Speed and ac celeration 
of the host vehicle, speed and acceleration of the preceding 
vehicle, the distance from the leading vehicle and in the case 
of platooning speed and acceleration of the first v ehicle. 
Lateral control of AHVs is to drive the vehicle clo se to the 
center of the desired lane, which includes not only  straight 
road section, but also curved path, and roundabout way (lane-
keeping maneuver). Under such complicated operating  
conditions, rollover is a common accident that AHVs  may 
experience during lane changes or cornering maneuve rs, 
which often causes harsh results, e.g., considerabl e financial 
costs and fatalities. This is usually because of hi gher center of 
gravity (CG) of heavy vehicles compared with passen ger cars. 
Hence, effective control strategies like active sus pension 
control, active steering and active braking should be employed 
to increase the roll stability. 
Path following is a vital issue for autonomous driv ing. The 
path following control for AGVs involves maneuverin g the 
vehicle autonomously through the steering control. This 
targets to help the vehicle follow the desirable pa th defined by 
the navigation system via sensors. There are differ ent 
strategies for the lateral control of AHVs during p ath 
following. Some researchers proposed the use of an active 
trailer steering system to enhance the path followi ng and 
stability control of AGVs. 
For example, in a study [32] a model predictive con troller 
was utilized to make the vehicle follow a path and yaw angle 
predicted for the trailer while minimizing the side  slip angle 
for different vehicle conditions. The designed cont roller 
efficiently improved the lateral stability and off- tracking of 
the trailer through numerical simulations. In anoth er study 
[33] a LQR-based active trailer steering controller  designed to 
improve tractor-semitrailer lateral stability at hi gh speeds and 
the maneuverability in low speeds. The researchers used a 3-
DOF linear model and a simulated annealing particle  swarm 
optimization algorithm based on TruckSim-Simulink 
environment and the results were interesting. 
A lateral-longitudinal control method was proposed to 
avoid jackknifing during automated steering [34]. T he 
jackknifing was prevented by employing an anti-wind up 
mechanism in that controlled the articulation angle  from 
exceeding the limit. Reference [35] reported a rese arch work, 
in which a control strategy adopted to make both tr actor and semitrailer of an AHV follow different paths at dif ferent 
vehicle speeds and in the presence of external dist urbances. 
They used nonlinear kinematics-based controller for  low 
speed, while it was not appropriate for high speeds  because of 
high changes in side-slip characteristics. Hence, t hey 
combined both low and high-speed controllers using a speed-
dependent gain in mid speed range. The simulation r esults 
proved an improvement in maneuverability at low spe eds and 
an enhancement of stability at high speeds. 
In another research work [36], a new lane-keeping 
controller was introduced to keep an AHV position ( lateral 
and angular) aligned with the lane, as well as main taining its 
stability in critical situation. They utilized an o ptimal control 
technique and a fuzzy supervisory strategy to adapt  the 
controller to the various driving behaviors of driv ers. The 
system was basically a human driven AHV which react ed 
appropriately in a case that the AHV deviated from the desired 
path. Different testing maneuvers were used to show  the 
effectiveness of the controllers designed. 
A controller design was proposed to deal with the p ath 
following issue for articulated robotic vehicles, w hich had 
been equipped with a number of off-axle hitched tra ilers [37]. 
The controller was highly scalable nonlinear cascad e-like that 
did not require to set the shortest distance to an ideal path. 
Instead, it used a segment-platooning reference pat h 
(introduced by the researchers) to ensure asymptoti c path 
following. Empirical results exhibited the small se nsitivity of 
designed controller to the parameters uncertainties . 
In another research study [38], a new sliding mode control 
(SMC) strategy was introduced to do the trajectory tracking 
for articulated vehicles. The designed controller t argeted to 
attain better tracking capability while minimizing the tracking 
error and declining the chattering phenomenon. The SMC was 
derived based on a nonlinear kinematic model of the  
articulated vehicle, and the stability of the contr ol strategy was 
tested using the Lyapunov’s stability method. Final ly, the 
investigators evaluated their controller performanc e in various 
paths scenarios using a small-scale model. 
As for the rollover prevention in heavy vehicles, r eference 
[39] documented a combined active anti-roll bar (AA RB) and 
active braking controller. Reference [40] introduce d a linear 
quadratic static output feedback control strategy u sing both 
AARB and electronic stability program to handle the  rollover 
issue more efficiently.  
In one research study [41], a MPC-based control str ategy 
was designed to improve the roll stability in a pat h following 
maneuver. While the brake and steering interconnect ed in the 
upper layer controller (UPC), the simulation result s 
demonstrated that this multilayer control structure  guarantees 
the path tracking with small error. Researchers int roduced an 
AARB including four electronic servo-valve hydrauli c 
actuator to actively control a heavy vehicle by sol ving a LQ 
optimization problem where the front steering consi dered to 
be an uncertain disturbance [42]. The simulation re sults in the 
frequency and time domains confirmed a remarkable 
improvement in terms of rollover stability.