denotes the increased risk of a semi-trailer roll-o ver 
or swing-out. The maximum rearward amplification 
allowed by the Australian PBS is 5.7 times the stat ic 
rollover threshold expressed in g’s where g = 9.81 
m/s 2.  
 The off-tracking characteristics, HSTO and HSSO, 
describe the lateral deviation between the path of the 
front axle and the path of the most severely off-
tracking axle of the semi-trailer. Examples of HSTO  
and HSSO are given in Figures 6 and 7. These 
measures indicate the additional space needed for t he 
semi-trailer in a specific steering maneuver and 
vehicle speed. 
 The YDC is the damping ratio of the least damped 
articulation joint’s angle during free-yaw oscillat ions 
of the vehicle combination, after a specific steeri ng 
maneuver and vehicle speed. A longer decay time 
might result in higher driver workload and increase d 
risk of the safety of other road users. 
 
Figure 6.  Lane-change maneuver illustrating HSTO, RA and YDC [6] 
 
Figure 7.  Steady -state  maneuver illustrating HSSO  [6]  
D.  Vehicle models used in automated driving controller  
design 
During the decades of vehicle lateral dynamics stud ies, 
linear handling model known as bicycle model has be en used 
predominantly. Vehicle models usually presume the v ehicle 
body as a rigid body with concentrated sprung mass at the 
center of gravity. A commonly used model that only considers 
lateral and yaw motions is known as a handling mode l. There 
are three major vehicle models including geometric,  kinematic 
and dynamic models. In geometric model, only the 
geometrical dimensions of the vehicle are considere d. 
Kinematic model just considers the motion of vehicl e in terms 
of acceleration, velocity and position. Dynamic mod el, 
differently, considers the vehicle motion in terms of its 
internal forces, inertia and energy properties.  
Models used for tractor-semitrailers vary in a vast  range of 
complexity from large multi-body combinations with numerous degrees of freedom, which demand costly 
calculations compared against simple 3-DOF bicycle models 
[25]. In many of the published research works such as [7], 
[26]–[28] a simplified 5-DOF, 3-wheel linear model has been 
used. This simple model seems quite sufficient for analyzing 
lateral stability of a tractor-semitrailer in path following 
control strategy design which is an integral part o f any 
autonomous AHV design. Figure 8 shows a scheme of t his 
model. 
 
Figure 8.  Schematic representation of the AHV model 
E.  Advantages of autonomous AHVs and barriers to 
implementation 
Table 1 highlights the magnitude of motor vehicle c rashes 
in North America and indicates that a majority numb er of 
crashes happen because of human errors including in attention, 
distraction, or speeding. Besides, it denotes that a considerable 
part of the fatal crashes involves heavy vehicles c omprising 
AHVs. As a result, the more the heavy vehicle utili ze 
autonomy, the less fatal crashes would occur. Poor weather, 
such as fog and snow, is another challenging situat ion for 
drivers, which can be tackled by using sensors and artificial 
intelligence as an essential part of automated driv ing in AHVs. 
Apart from making AHVs safer, researchers believe u sing just 
ACC function as a primitive feature of autonomy can  increase 
fuel economy and traffic congestion by 23-39% and 8 -13% 
respectively, for all vehicles in the highway trave l stream [29]. 
Furthermore, it is estimated that 5-20% of all driv ing is either 
autonomous or semi-autonomous by 2025 and the resul ting 
global financial impact would be $200 billion to $1 .9 trillion 
[30]. 
 The first barrier on the way of large-scale market  of 
autonomous AHVs is the cost, due to the technology that 
requires additional new sensors, communication netw orks, 
navigation devices, and specific software design. F or 
example, LiDAR systems on top of other sensors cost  up to 
$70,000 for long-range LiDAR, which seems to be vit al at 
least for AHVs current automated driving technology . Other 
issues include lack of legislations pertaining driv ing 
autonomous AHVs, restrictions in giving certificati on to AVs, 
arising insurance and liability concerns and worrie s about 
electronic security, computer hackers and terrorist  
applications [29].