Proceedings of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering International Congress 2020 
CSME Congress 2020 
June 21-24, 2020, Charlottetown, PE, Canada 
 
 
A REVIEW OF ESSENTIAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR AUTONOMOUS A ND SEMI-
AUTONOMOUS ARTICULATED HEAVY vehicles 
Amir Rahimi*, Yuping He 
Department of Automotive, Mechanical and Manufactur ing, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, Canada 
*amir.rahimi@ontariotechu.ca 
 
 
Abstract —To increase the safety of articulated heavy 
vehicles (AHVs), attention has been paid to explori ng active 
vehicle safety systems (AVSSs), e.g., anti-lock bra king 
systems. These active vehicle safety technologies a re 
classified as ‘reactive safety systems’, designed t o react to the 
current vehicle state. These systems are effective,  but do not 
consider the effect of driver error. The main cause  of traffic 
accidents is linked to human errors. A resolution t o the 
problem is autonomous driving, which removes human 
factors from the control loop.  There will be a tra nsition 
period, during which most vehicles have some capabi lities of 
autonomous driving. Since the late 1990s, lane depa rture 
warning and adaptive cruise control systems have be en 
proposed. These technologies are classified as ‘pre dictive 
safety systems’ (PSSs), considering not only the cu rrent 
vehicle state, but also the predicted vehicle state  and 
environmental hazards. For passenger vehicles, seve ral PSSs 
have been investigated. These PSSs are featured wit h semi-
autonomous driving functions. AHVs represent a 7.5 times 
higher risk than passenger cars in highway operatio ns. 
However, much less attention has been paid to explo ring the 
PSSs for AHVs. This paper reviews the current statu s of 
essential technologies proposed and examined for 
autonomous and semi-autonomous AHVs. The pros and c ons 
of the technologies are discussed and analyzed. As a result of 
the review, future research efforts are identified.   
Keywords-autonomous; semi-autonomous; state-of-the- art 
automated driving technologies; articulated heavy v ehicle. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The automotive industry is moving towards a new era  of 
autonomous ground vehicles (AGVs). The term AGV ref ers 
to a car that can do the navigation during driving through a 
highway or city traffic and even off-road paths wit hout human 
intervention. With software, computers, sensors and  
connected networks being increasingly used, the des ign of 
such vehicles is undergoing significant changes. 
Worldwide around 1.25 million people are killed per  year 
in road vehicle accidents [1]. Table 1 demonstrates  statistical 
data regarding the car crashes only in the US and C anada in 
2016. 93 per cent of serious crashes are because of  human 
errors. Considering the fact that in 2016 more than  37,000 people were killed in around 32,000 fatal motor veh icle 
accidents in North America [2], and also economic c osts of 
crashes are unbelievably high (277 billion dollars in the US), 
the lifesaving and financial benefits of driving as sistance 
technologies become undeniable. AGVs have the poten tial to 
decline human errors from the accidents, thereby le ading 
considerably protecting passengers, drivers and ped estrians 
and reducing the financial costs. Utilizing Advance d Driver 
Assistance Systems (ADAS), e.g. Adaptive Cruise Con trol 
(ACC), Traffic Jam Assistant (TJA) and Collision Av oidance 
Systems, fatal car crashes decreased in Europe betw een 2001 
and 2015 by 48% [3]. Figure 1 presents history of d riving 
assistance functions application and their potentia l future 
evolution.  
TABLE I.  THE U.S.  AND CANADA MOTOR VEHICLE CRASHES AND HUMAN 
FACTOR INVOLVEMENT [2][4] 
criteria  U.S.  Canada  
Total crashes per year 5.5 million 290,000 
Human cause s as main factor  93%  80%  
Economic costs of crashes  $277 billion  $37 billion  
Total fatal and injurious crashes per year 2.22 million  165,140 
Fatal crashes per year  32,367  1,895  
Total fatal and injurious crashes per year 
involving a heavy truck  96129 12000 
 
As the safety merits of automated driving are param ount, 
governments urgently need to develop vehicle safety  
guidelines for the design of AGVs [5]. The guidelin es are 
expected to identify design aspects for manufacture rs to 
consider when developing, testing and deploying suc h 
vehicles. Recently, many design methods for autonom ous 
vehicles have been proposed, but the literature foc uses on 
semiautonomous and autonomous driving of single-uni t 
vehicles, e.g., cars. Heavy vehicles exhibit unique  lateral 
dynamic characteristics. For example, the static ro ll-over limit 
for heavy trucks can be as low as 0.35g, whereas th e rollover 
limit for passenger cars is typically 1.1g [6]. In 1997, the US 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration repo rted 
more than 15,000 rollover accidents of commercial v ehicles, 
of which 9400 were rollovers of AHVs [7]. On the ot her hand, 
mortality due to AHV accidents in the US in 2017 ro se to 5.8 
per cent compared with 2016 [8]. However, little at tention has 
been paid to autonomous driving for these large veh icles.