A novel roll stability control strategy for heavy v ehicles, 
termed dynamic game theory-based path following act ive 
anti-roll (AAR) interactive shared control strategy  was 
proposed in [43]. It was indeed a cooperative path following-
roll stability controller that had two players, i.e . AARB and 
AS, determined via a closed-loop feedback Nash equi librium 
theory. Simulations based on various driving scenar ios were 
conducted to investigate the effectiveness of the m ethod. 
IV.  SENSOR TECHNOLOGY FOR AUTONOMOUS AHV S 
The way by which an autonomous vehicle learns about  its 
environment is through its sensors. Sensors should be capable 
of providing both perceptive and locational view of  the 
environment so that the vehicle can make decisions in real-
time. Sensors are utilized to detect roads, traffic  participants 
including vehicles and pedestrians, obstacles throu gh their 
paths and the peripheral environment. In most situa tions these 
sensors should be capable of determining the distan ce between 
the vehicle and other adjacent objects as well as t heir relative 
velocities.  
Generally, there is no difference in type of sensor s used for 
passenger vehicles and AHVs. Differences are mostly  related 
to the arrangement of sensors and their number. For  instance, 
one of the differences is the spots on the body of vehicles in 
which the sensors should be embedded because of the  variety 
in size, application and level of autonomy of diffe rent classes 
of vehicles. There are many types of sensors design ed to be 
used in autonomous driving, some of them are more c ommon 
which can be classified in two main categories as 
demonstrated in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9.  Main sensors employed in automated driving  
LiDAR (Light Detecting & Ranging) is a surveying 
method that measures distance to a target by illumi nating the 
target with laser light and measuring the reflected  light with a 
sensor. Differences in laser return times and wavel engths can 
then be used to make digital 3-D representations of  the target. 
A significant parameter of LiDAR sensors is the dis tance 
range which they can detect to recognize the object s. Weather 
condition, e.g., level of humidity and the reflecti vity level of 
object, affects the range detection considerably [4 4]. Today's 
LiDAR sensors are capable of measuring distances at  rates 
greater than 150 kilohertz (150,000 pulses per seco nd) and 
would be classified as a long-range sensor with a r ange of over 
250m or short range [45]. 
The full potential of these sensors has not been fu lly 
explored yet due to their high cost and low availab ility. They are complex mechanical mirror systems that offer fu ll 360° 
visibility and can cost a fortune. Today, there is a shift towards 
the development of lower cost LiDAR sensors that ar e more 
appropriate for extensive use. For example, solid-s tate LiDAR 
and infrared LiDAR [46]. Figure 10 illustrates sens or 
technologies including LiDAR, which can be used to make an 
AHV capable of driving itself. 
 
Figure 10.  Sensor technologies which can be used in autonomous AHV  [47]  
Radar is a technology that uses electromagnetic rad iation 
to measure the distance, angle and velocity of obje cts. It works 
on the principle of radio frequencies that can be u sed in several 
frequency bands. (e.g. 24 GHz, 79 GHz) [46]. Higher  
resolution of detection is achieved by higher frequ encies, and 
it allows the system to differentiate among many ob jects in the 
environment. Unlike LiDAR, radar has the virtue of being less 
affected by weather condition [44].  
Radar sensors are classified in short-range to mid- range 
from 50 m to 100-150 m and long-range capable of de tecting 
objects in 250 m distance [46]. As these kinds of s ensors are 
much cheaper than LiDAR ones and able to detect obj ects in 
all weather conditions, radar sensors are more suit able for 
autonomous driving purposes. However, their small f ield of 
view (FOV), which is usually 45 , is deemed as a negative 
point compared with LiDAR. The important benefit of  radars 
is that they are capable of determining the relativ e velocity of 
the observed objects which is advantageous for auto matic 
braking or adaptive cruise control purposes in AGVs . 
A camera works based on passive light sensors to pr oduce 
a digital image of a covered region of space. Camer as can 
detect both moving and static objects within their 
surroundings. One of the major capabilities of came ras is that 
they can identify colors and textures. This can inc rease the 
autonomous driving perception. They are also cheap and 
easily accessible. The negative point of this senso r is that they 
are sensitive to adverse weather conditions and low  intensity 
light. In addition, since the image is 2D, recogniz ing distance 
to an object using the image can only be determined  by 
employing complex processing algorithms [46]. Table  2 
presents a comparison between major sensing technol ogies of 
exteroceptive environment perception.  
Despite the drawbacks of cameras, in a 2019 confere nce, 
TESLA announced that they have found very successfu l 
methods (a combination of deep learning algorithms,  artificial 
intelligence and powerful GPUs) to use just a few c ameras in 
order to efficiently recognize the vehicle surround ing 
environment instead of using very expensive LiDAR o r Radar 
sensors. They believe that the next generation of a utonomous 
vehicles just need cameras mounted at different spo ts of 
vehicle body and use the image processing and deep learning 
sensors used 
in AGVs 
Exteroceptive 
sensors 
LiDAR 
 Radar 
Camera 
 Ultrasonic 
Proprioceptive 
sensors 
GPS 
 IMU 
Encoders