Unbeknownst to the consumer, much of this journey is guided by automated systems. The search results are generated by a
sophisticated Google ranking system, determined partly by advertisers' bids which are automatically generated using bidding ma-
chines. The content at the websites is customized based on her pro ﬁle through website morphing, and her questions are in fact
answered by chat-bots. The reviews she reads are placed prominently as they are deemed helpful by an evaluation algorithm,
and the ads she repeatedly sees are delivered through retargeting algorithms via read-time bidding. The coupon which offersher the personalized price is generated by the ﬁrm's pricing engine at just the right time. Finally, her posts on social media are
collected by social listening engines and analyzed for sentiment and feedback. These automated systems that make split-second
context-dependent decisions are known as Artiﬁcial Intelligence (hereafter referred to as AI) agents, generally implemented
using state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms.
1
AI is the affordance of human intelligence to machines. The concept has been in existence since antiquity, and rigorous AI re-
search can be traced back to 1950s, when Alan Turing established the famous Turing Test ,s t a t i n g “I propose to consider the question,
‘Can machines think? ’”(Turing, 1950 ), and John McCarthy coined the term Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 1955 when he organized the
1956 Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. In their proposal, an AI problem is de ﬁned as “that of making
a machine behave in ways that would be called intelligent if a human were so behaving ”(McCarthy, Minsky, Rochester, & Shannon,
1955 ). Initially, AI research focused on math and logical reasoning problems. The focus shifted to knowledge and expert systems in
the 1980s. Although both waves showed initial promise, they faced considerable challenges and delivered results below the overly
optimistic expectations.2
Since 1990s, AI research has mostly focused on machine learning methods. The widely used de ﬁnition of Machine Learning is
given in Mitchell (1997) :“A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance
measure P, if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E. ”Although ﬁrst evolved separately, machine
learning has become the main paradigm of AI research, and is typically considered as a sub ﬁeld of AI (Goodfellow, Bengio, &
Courville, 2016 , p.9). The past decade has witnessed impressive breakthroughs in AI performance, on image recognition, speech
processing, autonomous driving, and many other tasks typically considered as demonstrating human level intelligence. Behind
much of this breakthrough is deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015 ), methods that use multiple levels of representation
typically implemented using neural networks with multiple hi dden layers, combined with the advent of big data and the exponen-
tial growth in computer hardware. Other machine learning methods have also bene ﬁted from this trend and expanded their
applications.
Within two decades, AI has signi ﬁcantly transformed ﬁelds such as biology, education, engineering, ﬁnance, and healthcare.
Marketing is no exception. Interactions between ﬁrms and consumers are increasingly more individualized and ubiquitous, gener-
ating heavily digitized footprints. The abundance of data has prompted companies to invest heavily in machine learning to en-
hance their marketing capabilities. According to BCC Research, the global market of machine learning-enabled solutions would
grow at an annual rate of 43.6%, reaching $8.8 billion by 2022.3Sophisticated machine learning algorithms power the recom-
mender systems at e-commerce websites and content platforms such as Amazon and Net ﬂix; deep learning engines analyze
and tag the billions of images on social media sites such as Facebook; automated bidding algorithms examine a web surfer's pro ﬁle
in millisecond timescale to determine the optimal bid for ad delivery; chatbots engage human-like conversations with customers
to maintain relationship and loyalty. Through these and a myriad of other applications, such as social media mining, sentiment
analysis, and customer churn prevention, AI agents powered by machine learning algorithms have demonstrated their effective-
ness in processing large-scale and unstructured data in real-time, generating accurate predictions to assist marketing decisions.These initiatives have greatly improved all aspects of business performance.
Meanwhile, the complex marketing contexts and big data present a formidable challenge to researchers. While statistical and
econometric models with increasing levels of sophistication are being developed, researchers have also turned to machine learning
methods as a valuable alternative. A diverse set of machine learning methods, such as support-vector machine ( Cui & Curry, 2005 ;
Evgeniou, Boussios, & Zacharia, 2005 ), topic models ( Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014 ;Trusov, Ma, & Jamal, 2016 ), ensemble trees ( Guo,
Sriram, & Manchanda, 2018 ;Yoganarasimhan, 2018 ), deep neural networks ( Liu, Dzyabura, & Mizik, 2018 ;Liu, Lee, &
Srinivasan, 2018 ), network embedding ( Ma, Sun, & Zhang, 2019 ), among others, have been used in academic marketing research
for prediction and insight generation. Furthermore, they are often applied to situations where traditional quantitative methods are
not a good ﬁt, making them especially helpful. However, although the interest is rapidly growing, the use of machine learning
methods in marketing is still at an early stage, and extant studies are somewhat scattered. To date, there does not appear to
exist a consensus vision or a uni ﬁed framework on how machine learning methods should be incorporated into marketing
research.
The importance of machine learning methods warrants a systematic review and a forward-looking discussion, which we pro-
vide in this paper. We begin with an overview of machine learning tasks, including supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, ac-
tive, transfer, and reinforcement learning, and brie ﬂy introduce common machine learning methods for handling such tasks.
Compared with statistical and econometric models traditionally used in marketing, machine learning methods can effectively pro-
cess large-scale and unstructured data, and have ﬂexible structures to approximate complex functions which yield strong predic-
tive performance. Meanwhile, machine learning methods often do not enable intuitive interpretation, especially at the causal level,
and their ability to capture individual consumer level heterogeneity and dynamics is yet unproven. We then discuss several salient
1The de ﬁnitions of arti ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning can be found in Table 1 . The list of acronyms used in the paper is summarized in Table 2 .
2Both Herbert Simon and Marvin Minsky, for example, predicted in 1960s that the problem of AI will be solved within a generation.
3https://www.bccresearch.com/market-research/information-technology/machine-learning-global-markets.html .Accessed in November 2019.2 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005