While machine learning algorithms traditionally take datasets as given, situations also exist where the algorithm is involved in
the acquisition of data. Commonly included in this interactive paradigm are active learning and reinforcement learning tasks.
2.1.4. Active learning
In an active learning task ( Cohn, Ghahramani, & Jordan, 1996 ;Lewis & Gale, 1994 ), only limited training instances are available
atﬁrst. The algorithm can acquire additional training instances to improve predictive accuracy, although such data acquisition is
costly. The goal is to maximize the predictive accuracy while minimizing the data requirement. Determining the most important
training instances is a key focus of active learning.
Reinforcement learning : In a reinforcement learning task ( Sutton & Barto, 2018 ), the learning agent continuously interacts with
the surrounding environment by taking actions and observing feedbacks, in order to optimize a certain objective function. These
tasks are often formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP), a structure familiar to marketing researchers who investigate
forward-looking behaviors using dynamic programming models. The learning algorithm needs to determine the actions to take
to both learn the environment's characteristics and craft optimal policy of actions given the states. This type of machine learning
tasks has received heightened attention due to recent methodological advancement and increasing usages in the industry, from
autonomous vehicles to morphing websites.
2.2. Machine learning methods
Many machine learning methods transcend the boundaries of disciplines, e.g. linear regression and logistic regression are
widely used in machine learning and many other ﬁelds, including marketing. While the perspective and emphasis are different
in different ﬁelds, the technical foundations are the same. Meanwhile, other machine learning methods are used less frequently
in marketing research, for which we provide a brief discussion. Given the vastness of the ﬁeld, we cover only the common super-
vised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning methods that we believe are closely related to marketing research, with emphasis
given to recent developments.
2.2.1. Methods for supervised learning
2.2.1.1. Classical methods. K-nearest neighbor (kNN) is a widely used instance-based method for supervised learning ( Altman, 1992 ;
Stone, 1977 ). Let { X1,Y1},…{XN,YN} be the training instances, where Xiis the input and Yiis the output. To use kNN, a distance
metric over the input space is ﬁrst de ﬁned. For each test instance Xtest,t h e ktraining instances with the shortest distances to it
are identi ﬁed, and a function, e.g. weighted arithmetic mean, of these knearest neighbors is then used for prediction. Naïve
Bayes (NB) is a classi ﬁcation method based on the Bayes theorem: p(Y|X)= p(X|Y)p(Y)/p(X). The Bayes classi ﬁer which chooses
the class that maximizes the posterior probability is theoretically sound, but empirically infeasible for high-dimensional input
vectors. An NB classi ﬁer assumes each input dimension to be independent, reducing the task to the estimation of a set of univar-
iate distributions. Despite the strong assumption, NB performs competitively and is widely used, particularly in text mining.
Support-vector machine (SVM) is a powerful maximum margin classi ﬁer (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995 ;Vapnik, 1998 ). In a binary classi-
ﬁcation task, SVM seeks to establish a linear hyperplane in the input space between the two classes that maximizes the margin of
error. When linear hyperplanes are inadequate, SVM can generate non-linear classi ﬁcation boundaries using the kernel trick, by
mapping the original input space into higher dimensional spaces. As an extension, soft-margin SVM allows for but penalizes mis-
classi ﬁcations. Naturally a binary classi ﬁer, SVM can also be used for multi-class classi ﬁcation through training multiple one-
versus-the-rest or one-versus-another binary classi ﬁers, or through modi ﬁed methods that consider all classes at once ( Hsu &
Lin, 2002 ). Structured SVM further addresses the problems involving multiple dependent variables ( Tsochantaridis, Joachims,
Hofmann, & Altun, 2005 ). SVM can also be used for regression tasks, for which it is known as support-vector regression
(Drucker, Burges, Kaufman, Smola, & Vapnik, 1997 ).Decision tree is a popular method in machine learning ( Quinlan, 1986 ),6
where the input dataset is successively split into subsets. Each step splits an existing subset into two new ones based on the
value of one input variable, chosen to optimize a criterion such as the information gain. Over ﬁtting can be mitigated through
ex-ante regularization which constrains the minimum leaf node size or the maximum tree depth, or through ex post pruning. De-
cision tree offers intuitive interpretations, as each split is explainable based on the corresponding input variable. Artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANN)i sa ﬂexible and powerful family of machine learning methods, originally inspired by biological neural networks
in animal brains ( Lippmann, 1987 ;McCulloch & Pitts, 1943 ). ANN lays out a network of interconnected processing units called ar-
tiﬁcial neurons. Each neuron takes a list of variables, performs a certain calculation, and generates an output using an activation
function. Model training can be conducted through back propagation.
2.2.1.2. Recent developments. While the set of classical supervised learning methods is already powerful, recent developments have
further expanded the frontier. Among these important developments are ensemble methods ,probabilistic graphical models ,a n d deep
neural networks .
Ensemble methods are meta-learning algorithms that combine multiple individual learners. The intuition is that by combining a
set of weak learners complementarily, a stronger learner can emerge. Common approaches include stacking ,bootstrap aggregating
6Also called classi ﬁcation and regression tree for handling classi ﬁcation and regression tasks.5 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005