(bagging ), and boosting . In stacking, a linear combination of individual predictors is used to achieve better accuracy ( Breiman,
1996 ). In bagging, each individual predictor is learned using a bootstrap sample of the training dataset, with the predictors
then aggregated to generate a ﬁnal prediction. In boosting, individual learners are trained sequentially, and combined according
to their respective accuracy to produce a stronger learner. A popular boosting method is the adaptive boosting (AdaBoost ),
where subsequent learners are tweaked in favor of the training instances that the previous learners have misclassi ﬁed.
Two popular ensemble methods using decision trees as base learners are random forest ,o rRF(Breiman, 2001 ), and gradient-
boosted trees, orGBM (Friedman, 2001 ). Using RF, each individual tree is built from a bootstrap sample of the original data. Mean-
while, for each split, only a random subset of the input variables is considered so as to reduce correlation. RF generates the ﬁnal
prediction by averaging the predictions of individual trees. Using GBM, multiple trees are trained sequentially. Each tree reduces
the remaining errors after applying previously built ones. Both RF and GBM are widely used and are among the methods with
the best predictive performance. XGBoost, a sparsity-aware algo rithm of gradient tree boosting, is behind many winning submis-
sions to data science competitions at Kaggle ( Chen & Guestrin, 2016 ). Recent methodological advancement has also enabled causal
inference using tree ensembles ( Wager & Athey, 2018 ).
Probabilistic graphical models (PGM), also known as structured probabilistic models, is a large family of probabilistic models that
use directed or undirected graphs to encode the conditional dependence of random variables ( Koller & Friedman, 2009 ). In a PGM,
variables that are not directly connected in the graph have conditional independence properties that help simplify the analysis of
the complex joint distribution. PGM includes Bayesian networks which use directed acyclic graphs and Markov random ﬁeldswhich
use undirected graphs. This family of models has been extensively used in both machine learning and statistics. For example, the
hidden-Markov model (HMM) used in numerous marketing studies (e.g. Ma, Sun, & Kekre, 2015 ;Netzer, Lattin, & Srinivasan,
2008 )i sas p e c i ﬁct y p eo fP G M .
Deep neural networks , i.e. ANNs with more than one hidden layer, have been a main driver behind of recent surge in AI.
While already well developed early on and theoretically shown to be able to approximate any continuous function, several
limitations hindered ANN's practical use. First, an ANN often has millions of parameters and requires a large amount of data
for training; second, training an ANN is computationally demanding; third, the large number of parameters make an ANN
prone to over ﬁtting. These hurdles have been surpassed in the last de cade. The advent of big data provided ample inputs
to train complex models; the use of Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) chips enabled fast parallelized training; over ﬁtting is-
sues were also alleviated, e.g. through using dropout units. These factors combine to make deep neural networks highly suc-
cessful in recent years, outperforming alternative methods on many challenging AI tasks such as image and speech
processing ( LeCun et al., 2015 ).
Two prominent examples of deep neural networks are convolutional neural networks (CNN,LeCun & Bengio, 1995 )a n d recur-
rent neural networks (RNN,Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986 ). CNN uses convolution in at least one layer ( Goodfellow et al.,
2016 , p.321). A typical CNN consists of multiple convolutional and pooling layers. In a convolutional layer, each unit performs a
convolution operation to a local region of the input data, and weights are shared across the units. These enable the detection of
local patterns in a location-invariant manner. Meanwhile, pooling layers are used to sample local regions. The successive layers
extract data representations at different abstract levels, making CNN highly successful in analyzing image and video data. RNN
is a class of deep neural networks that keeps internal states. In an RNN, the output of each hidden layer is fed back to itself,
allowing the network to maintain a memory. A plain RNN suffers from vanishing gradient during back propagation. This issue
is alleviated using the long short-term memory (LSTM ) architecture which retains long term memories. LSTM and the similar
gated recurrent-unit (GRU) architecture have been successful on processing sequential data such as text, speech, and time series.
Recently developed attention mechanism and the transformer architecture have made further breakthroughs in natural language
processing ( Bahdanau, Cho, & Bengio, 2014 ;Dai et al., 2019 ;Vaswani et al., 2017 ).
2.2.2. Methods for unsupervised learning
2.2.2.1. Classical methods. In clustering analysis, units are assigned to separate groups to maximize within-group similarity and
cross-group distinction. Common algorithms include K-means , which randomly initializes groups and then iterates over
recalculating group means and reassigning groups, and Hierarchical clustering , which follows a bottom-up approach by starting
with each unit as a separate group and iteratively merging similar groups. DBSCAN canﬁnd groups of arbitrary shapes and is ro-
bust to data noise ( Ester, Kriegel, Sander, & Xu, 1996 ). For dimensionality reduction, where original high-dimensional data are re-
duced to lower dimensional variables, common methods include principal component analysis (PCA),singular value decomposition
(SVD), and factor analysis (FA). These classical methods have been widely used in machine learning and other ﬁelds, and are famil-
iar to marketing researchers.
2.2.2.2. Recent developments. Topic models discover and extract hidden semantic structures from textual data, with the semantic in-
formation represented using topics . A text document is treated as a mixture of topics, and each topic is a distribution over words in
the vocabulary. Latent Dirichlet Allocation ,o rLDA (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003 ), uses Dirichlet priors for both the document-topic and
the topic-word mappings. Extending from prior information retrieval methods such as the probabilistic latent semantic indexing
(Hofmann, 1999 ), LDA is the ﬁrst and most commonly used topic model. Extensions exist to incorporate topic correlation or co-
variates ( Blei & Lafferty, 2007 ;Mimno & McCallum, 2012 ). Marketing research has used this method, both to process textual
data as it was originally intended to ( Liu & Toubia, 2018 ;Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014 ), and to analyze other data where similar seman-
tic structures exist ( Jacobs, Donkers, & Fok, 2016 ;Trusov et al., 2016 ).6 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005