theories. Through deepening and expanding the methods themselves, and through closely connecting to the other key compo-
nents of empirical research, machine learning methods can make signi ﬁcant contributions to the marketing literature.
5.2. Enhancing the machine learning method toolset
At the core of the conceptual framework in Fig. 3 are the machine learning methods. Researchers should have deep under-
standings of the pertinent methods, and adapt, extend, and apply them as appropriate. From the method's perspective, we discuss
the following research agenda:
5.2.1. Introducing additional methods
The collection of machine learning methods is vast. While many methods have been introduced to marketing, a lot more can
and should be. The rich family of PGM methods can model complex interconnections of large numbers of random variables and
produce statistically interpretable results; unsupervised representation learning methods are effective at information extraction
from complex data; reinforcement learning methods enable the modeling of dynamic optimization behaviors in complex environ-
ments. Deep generative models and state-of-the-art ensemble methods are other valuable options. To expand and strengthen their
usage, we call for researchers to introduce these and many other machine learning methods to marketing research.
5.2.2. Compelling value demonstration
When introducing new methods, researchers should strive to demonstrate their value in marketing research. That a machine
learning method can address important issues or challenges that traditional quantitative models cannot address, for example,
makes a compelling case for its adoption. Alternatively, if researchers can show that a machine learning method performs signif-
icantly better than existing quantitative marketing models on certain tasks, or complements existing models to improve their per-formance, that will also demonstrate the method's value. A method should not be introduced just for the sake of introducing it. A
method also should not be evaluated based on its technical sophistication. A cutting-edge method that is unrelated to marketing,
in our belief, is less valuable than a method that is comparatively straightforward but can be used to solve important marketing
problems.
5.2.3. From periphery to center
Importantly, we call for researchers to move machine learning methods from playing a supporting role in the periphery, to ad-
dressing the central research tasks. Extant studies frequently use machine learning methods to extract variables from unstructured
data, which are then analyzed using econometrics models. In contrast, fewer have used machine learning methods to directly
model consumer decisions. While their application to data pre-processing is clearly valuable, the methods should also be appraised
of their potentials to play a more central role. Incorporating machine learning methods into a joint statistical model is a reasonable
ﬁrst step ( Li & Ma, 2019 ). Furthermore, of particular interest is the potential of using machine learning methods to model hetero-
geneous and dynamic consumer decisions. Accounting for observed and unobserved heterogeneity as well as dynamics is essential
to analyzing consumer decisions. If machine learning methods can capture these key components, their use in marketing research
will greatly expand. Machine learning methods with well-established statistical foundations have much promise for handling such
tasks, and any demonstration or the adaptation or extension of the methods for such use will signi ﬁcantly contribute to the mar-
keting literature. In addition to modeling consumer decisions, machine learning methods may play a central role in other ways, e.g.
in designing automated decision-support systems, which we also call for.
5.2.4. Extending the methods
We also call for researchers to not just adapt existing machine learning methods, but to extend them in their own right. Prop-
erties desired for marketing research are often also needed in other social science ﬁelds. For example, interpretability is a univer-
sally desirable characteristic. While strides have been made to improve the interpretability of machine learning methods, theinterpretation tends to be on a post-hoc basis (e.g. Selvaraju et al., 2017 ). Ex ante interpretability on model structure and connec-
tions among variables is preferred, especially for correlational, causal, and prescriptive analyses, and improvements in this respect
would constitute important methodological contributions. As another example, any advancement that allows the methods to han-
dle dynamic consumer decisions will be valuable to not just marketing but social science in general, so will any advancement that
enables statistical inference. Methods such as PGM, reinforcement learning, and deep generative models, among others, are prom-
ising candidates for these advancements. We call for researchers to take on the challenge of pursuing methodological contributions
at this fundamental level.
5.2.5. Delineating the boundary
While much excitement exists about machine learning methods' potential, it is equally important to know what these methods
cannot do. As more methods are introduced to handle more tasks, and even more attempts are made to do so, researchers would
begin to reach the boundary of these methods' capacity, and knowledge of such boundaries is valuable. For example, while it
would be great to use machine learning methods to analyze consumer dynamics, any convincing demonstration that the methods
are actually not able to capture such dynamics would also contribute to the literature. As the literature grows and methods ma-
ture, we also call for systematic comparisons between machine learning methods and quantitative marketing models, to obtain in-
depth understandings of their comparative strengths on handling various tasks.16 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005