Blei, Kucukelbir, & McAuliffe, 2017 ) have been used in marketing for model estimation, and given the similarity in basic model
setup, reinforcement learning methods may be leveraged for approximation estimation of dynamic forward-looking models.
5.5. Addressing important substantive issues
The rapid AI-driven transformation presents many interesting and important substantive issues, especially in the domain of
digital marketing ( Kannan & Li, 2017 ). The major trends and marketing practices discussed in Section 3 provide ample topics
for impactful research, and machine learning methods can play an important role in addressing them. In this subsection, we orga-
nize these substantive issues into several research themes.
5.5.1. Mapping out customer-purchase journey
Understanding consumer's temporal behavioral dynamics, multitasking behavior, and context-dependent decisions is becoming
ever more crucial, and many substantive issues along the customer-purchase journeys call for researchers' attention. First, continued
knowledge discovery from rich media data is called for. On average, U.S. consumers are spending over eleven hours a day connected to
media, almost six hours on video content ( Nielsen, 2018 ). What can we learn about the consumers who supply the digital content?
How do consumers adopt and consume the content? What do they learn from it and how do they respond to it? Machine learning
methods are well positioned to help answer these important questions. Second, the rich media and tracking data can improve our un-
derstanding of consumer's choice and decision process. Traditionally, marketing contacts are analyzed only at the incidence level,
e.g., using the number of contacts as a covariate. Relaxing such simpli ﬁcations can lead to richer ﬁndings ( Braun & Moe, 2013 ). Topics
extracted from product reviews, for example, provide more insights into consumers than those obtained from ratings alone ( Tirunillai
&T e l l i s ,2 0 1 4 ), and attribute-level sentiment further expands the understanding ( Chakraborty et al., 2019 ). With the help of machine
learning methods, researchers can conduct deeper and more re ﬁned investigations on how and why consumers make their decisions,
and the new ﬁndings could potentially correct previous misconceptions. Third, integrated dynamic modeling of the entire customer
journey is an exciting research opportunity. A holistic view of the customer journey can generate understandings of consumer deci-
sions in a broader context, enable the analysis of the short-term and long-term impacts of marketing interactions, and help prescribe
program designs that address the whole customer lifecycle. We call for research to map out the entire customer purchase journey,
especially the early stages which are comparatively underexplored. Both machine learning methods that can handle rich-media
andﬁne-grained tracking data, e.g. deep learning methods, and those that can incorporate dynamics, e.g. PGMs or reinforcement
learning methods, can be instrumental for such research.
5.5.2. Developing automated decision-support capabilities
The concept of adaptively learning from customer behaviors, and automatically optimizing marketing response in a forward-
looking framework, has been applied to service management and cross-selling ( Li, Sun, & Montgomery, 2011 ;Sun & Li, 2011 ;
Sun, Li, & Zhou, 2006 ). With the increasingly complex marketing environment, similar decision-support capabilities are needed
in all aspects of marketing functions, with automated systems making real-time context-dependent decisions in an online fashion.
The heighted speed and scale requirements of these automated systems raise important substantive issues that call for researchers'
attention. First, in areas where machine learning algorithms are commonly used in industry, we call for the incorporation of mar-
keting insights. For example, the rich machine learning literature on recommender systems focuses on the somewhat narrow
angle of predicting ratings and adoptions. For managers, a more decision-oriented perspective is needed, e.g., to assess the incre-
mental effect of recommendations ( Bodapati, 2008 ). Using marketing insights to strengthen recommender systems is thus an in-
teresting research issue. Second, in areas rich with theory-driven models, we call for research to scale up the model to meet real-
world demands. For example, sophisticated choice models exist to account for consumer dynamics and unobserved heterogeneity.
How should such models be scaled up to handle thousands of microsegments instead of two or three, while maintaining the
grounding in marketing theories? We encourage research into the adaptation or approximation using machine learning methods,
or the integration of machine learning methods into theory-driven marketing models, to connect marketing insights to real-world
scales. For example, one may consider using reinforcement learning methods to approximate DP models. Finally, in areas where
neither machine learning methods nor theory-driven models dominate, we call for developing decision-support capabilities
which combine scale and insights. Automated agents are likely to reach every aspect of marketing, from marketing mix decisions,to customer engagement and relationship management ( Ma et al., 2015 ;Schweidel & Moe, 2014 ), to cross-channel coordination
and attribution ( de Haan, Kannan, & Verhoef, 2018 ;Li & Kannan, 2014 ), to search and recommendations, and to even traditionally
qualitative areas such as product and advertising design. We call for extensive research on developing automated decision-support
capabilities at scale.
5.5.3. Market structure analysis
Understanding brand perceptions and product positioning in the digital age becomes more challenging given the ever more
complex environment. A holistic view of how consumers perceive of a brand requires analyzing the myriad of channels such as
paid search, social media, and e-commerce sites. Machine learning methods have shown promise to tackle such challenges
(Netzer et al., 2012 ), and we call for continued research in this area. Many online platforms, e.g. search engine platforms such
as Google, social curation platforms such as Pinterest, and e-commerce platforms such as Amazon marketplace, hold the
market-level information that enable such research. On a social media platform, brands with overlapping followers may be
close competitors; on an e-commerce platform, brands with frequent co-purchases may be close complements; on a social20 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005