customer purchase journey, especially in early stages, to develop decision-support capabilities covering all aspects of marketing
functions, and to perform holistic market structure analysis including brand positioning and competitive analysis. Fourth, we
call for the uni ﬁcation of machine learning methods and marketing theories . Challenges remain on making such connections, how-
ever, given the nature of machine learning methods. We call for injecting human insights and domain knowledge into the use of
machine learning methods, balancing a theory-driven perspective with a data-driven one, exploring potential theoretical connec-tions of various types and aspects of machine learning methods, and investigating the theoretical implications of ﬁrms' adoption of
AI tools. While this theoretical agenda is challenging, they also present opportunities for impactful research.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 ,w eb r i e ﬂy introduce common machine learning tasks and methods,
and discuss their strengths and weaknesses. Following that, we discuss AI-driven industry trends and practices in Section 3 .I n
Section 4 ,w eb r i e ﬂy review the extant machine learning literature in marketing. In Section 5 , we present the conceptual frame-
work and the multi-faceted research agenda. We conclude in Section 6 .
2. Machine learning tasks and methods –a brief overview
Machine learning is a vast and rapidly evolving ﬁeld, encompassing a wide range of methods for addressing diverse tasks. A
comprehensive review of the machine learning literature is beyond the capability and scope of this paper. Instead, we brie ﬂyd i s -
cuss common machine learning tasks and methods that are likely helpful for academic marketing research. They are summarized
inFig. 1 .
2.1. Machine learning tasks
Traditionally, a machine learning algorithm processes a given dataset for a speci ﬁed objective, with the algorithm playing no
role in data acquisition. In this paradigm, two major task categories are supervised and unsupervised learning.
2.1.1. Supervised learning
In supervised learning tasks, a training dataset is provided such that for each instance, both the input , a collection of variables
commonly denoted as X, and the output , a target variable commonly denoted as Y,a r eo b s e r v e d .
4Supervised learning seeks to
learn from this training dataset a function, Y=f(X), to predict the output when given an input. If Yis a numeric/categorical var-
iable, the task is referred to as regression/classi ﬁcation . Prediction is the key focus of supervised learning. Typically, researchers are
less concerned with uncovering the “true”linkage between the variables, than with learning a function that maximizes the accu-
racy of predicting the output using the input. The predictive accuracy must be evaluated using a different testing dataset, as absent
model constraints, perfect accuracy can be achieved for the training dataset through memorization. This testing dataset can be
used to select models or to tune hyperparameters. Once involved in model selection, though, the chosen model's performanceon this dataset is no longer an unbiased evaluation of its out-of-sample performance. Therefore, researchers typically further
split the training dataset into a training subset and a validation subset. Models will be trained using the training subset and
tuned or selected using the validation subset. The ﬁnal chosen model will then be evaluated using the testing dataset to assess
the out-of-sample performance. Researchers also routinely perform cross-validation , by iteratively using different portions of the
training dataset for training and validation (e.g. Hartmann, Heitmann, Schamp, & Netzer, 2019 ).
2.1.2. Unsupervised learning
In unsupervised learning tasks, the training dataset contains only the input variables, while the output variables are either un-
deﬁned or unknown.
5The typical goal is to ﬁnd hidden patterns in or extract information from the data. Many such tasks exist. In
aclustering analysis , the input instances are put into multiple groups to maximize within-group similarity and cross-group differ-
ence. In a dimensionality reduction task, high dimensional data are transformed into lower dimensional variables while retaining
the information in the original data. In an unsupervised feature learning orrepresentation learning task, features are extracted
from the input data to represent them. The extracted features carry key information of the original data and can be interpreted
or used as input for subsequent analysis.
2.1.3. Semi-supervised learning and transfer learning
The line between supervised and unsupervised learning can be blurred, leading to other learning tasks. In a semi-supervised
learning task ( Zhu, 2005 ), the output is known for only a subset of the data. The instances in the training dataset for which the
output is not observed are nonetheless used to improve learning, e.g. through label propagation. In a transfer learning task ( Pan
& Yang, 2009 ), researchers leverage an existing model, trained using a different dataset or for a different purpose, for the task
at hand. The existing model can serve as a starting point, which is then adjusted based on the current training dataset. For models
that require a large amount of training data and computation time, transfer learning can be effective at leveraging existing knowl-
edge. For example, it is routinely used in image analysis, where an existing model trained using a large set of images is updated
using the speci ﬁc images of the research project (e.g. Dzyabura, El Kihal, Hauser, & Ibragimov, 2019 ;Hartmann, Heitmann, et al.,
2019 ).
4For example, the input may be a customer's past interactions with a ﬁrm, and the output the customer's purchase decision.
5Using the earlier notation, in an unsupervised learning task only Xis known, but not Y.4 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005