using website morphing algorithms help provide information and generate interest. When consumers visit physical stores, sales
applications provide analytics to help agents deliver personalized assistance, and AI tools such as augmented reality and virtual
ﬁtting rooms make the shopping experience ef ﬁcient and enjoyable. After purchase, automated follow-ups to offer usage tips
keep customers engaged and loyal. Other applications abound. Machine learning algorithms extract consumer preferences from
massive online data, and help create engaging text and images to attract attention. Computer-generated virtual in ﬂuencers develop
brand followings and promote products. Powered by sophisticated AI engines in the cloud, virtual assistants such as Amazon Alexa
respond to consumers' voice inquiries to supply information or ma ke purchase. Chatbots enabled by speech recognition and nat-
ural language processing algorithms are increasingly taking over the handling of pre- and post-purchase inquires. Along the entire
customer journey, AI-driven innovations are rapidly reshaping engagement practices.
3.2.3. Search
Internet search engine is where many customer journeys begin. Originally using the PageRank algorithm, Google now processes
as i g n i ﬁcant number of searches using the deep learning-based RankBrain algorithm, which helps improve the relevance and ro-
bustness of search results.12For marketers, search engine optimization is also conducted using machine learning-based tools such
as Can I Rank or Alli AI. While keyword has been the dominant form of online search, machine learning methods are making
searches based on other content types within reach. With voice recognition, natural language processing, and text-to-speech ca-
pabilities, conversation engines such as Dialog ﬂow can handle voice search effectively. Meanwhile, tools such as Synthetic's
Style Intelligence Agent make visual search possible.
3.2.4. Recommendation
Recommending the right products to the interested consumers can signi ﬁcantly improve marketing performance. Initial recom-
mender systems use machine learning algorithms such as item-based or content-based collaborative ﬁltering. Their accuracy and
robustness have steadily improved with the incorporation of newer algorithms, e.g. matrix factorization. In recent years, deep neu-
ral networks and embedding methods have been leveraged to further enhance the performance. Analyzing the information of mil-
lions of consumers and products to assess relevance, recommender systems are now an essential component in marketing,
effectively matching products and consumers throughout digital channels.
3.2.5. Attribution
With myriad marketing channels and touchpoint interactions comes the heightened need to attribute the ﬁn a lc o n v e r s i o nt o
the responsible contacts. Traditionally, attributions are performed using simple rules such as ﬁrst-touch or last-touch which,
while easy to understand, does not accurately re ﬂect the true contributions of the touchpoints. Firms are now moving to
model-based attribution. From logistic regression to more sophisticated classi ﬁcation models and PGMs, a wide range of machine
learning methods are being evaluated and adopted to generate accurate performance feedback and help improve channel design
and allocation.
4. Review of machine learning literature in marketing
Academic marketing research started leveraging machine learning methods more than a decade ago, and the interest has in-
creased markedly in recent years. A quick summary of this literature is presented in Table 4 , which organizes the extant studies
from three distinct perspectives: method, data, and usage. In this section, we brie ﬂy discuss these studies from the method
perspective.
4.1. SVM
One of the ﬁrst machine learning methods introduced to marketing is SVM. Cui & Curry (2005) compared SVM with multino-
mial logit models, and showed that SVM in general predicts better. They argued that while multinomial logit models can help
draw insights, in large-scale automatic settings SVM is a better ﬁt.Evgeniou, Boussios, & Zacharia (2005) developed robust con-
joint estimation methods that are almost equivalent to SVM. Similar to Cui & Curry (2005) , they also showed that the methods
outperformed traditional marketing methods such as logistic regression and hierarchical Bayes. Huang & Luo (2016) developed
a multi-step method which uses a fuzzy SVM ( Lin & Wang, 2002 ) active learning algorithm to adaptively re ﬁne preference esti-
mates for consumer preference elicitation. They showed that the method worked well for product categories with as many as
100 attribute levels, a scale that would overwhelm traditional methods.
4.2. Traditional text-mining
Lee and Bradlow (2011) performed market structure analysis and visualization using Epinions reviews. They extracted phrases
and performed clustering analysis where distances were measured using cosine similarity. Their approach created informative
brand maps. Netzer, Feldman, Goldenberg, and Fresko (2012) adopted a text-mining process including downloading, cleaning,
12https://www.wired.com/2016/02/ai-is-changing-the-technology-behind-google-searches/ .A c c e s s e di nN o v e m b e r2 0 1 9 .11 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005