curation site, a holistic view of content and consumers may reveal distinct interest groups ( Ma et al., 2019 ). Machine learning
methods have the capacity to address such market structure and brand positioning questions. We call for research to both incor-
porate the competitive perspective commonly taken in the empirical IO literature (e.g. Berry, 1994 ;Berry, Levinsohn, & Pakes,
1995 ), and go beyond it to account for complex complementary relationships and dynamic evolutions.
5.6. Unifying machine learning methods with marketing theories
Theﬁnal important component in the conceptual framework is marketing theory. To obtain generalizable insights, marketing
research needs a strong theoretical foundation. Compared with using econometric models, though, researchers face more chal-
lenges in connecting machine learning methods to marketing theories. To this we provide the following discussion.
5.6.1. Human insights
When using machine learning methods, researchers should use human insights for guidance. Machine learning methods typi-
cally address data at an abstract mathematical level. A kNN classi ﬁer, for example, is simply an exercise of calculating and sorting
distances, irrespective of what each dimension or the distance represents. The method can be applied to geographical data in the
same way as to consumer preference data. While this generalizability is desirable, it also means that when using machine learning
methods for marketing research, it is incumbent upon the researchers to inject human insights into the analysis. This can begin
with feature engineering guided by domain knowledge, which studies have shown to be important for generating substantive in-
sights (e.g. Yoganarasimhan, 2018 ). More importantly, human insights should also guide the other research aspects. A deep the-
oretical understanding of the research issue, the context, and the related factors can help researchers choose the right machine
learning method, to adapt and extend it in a way that is consistent with theories and domain knowledge, and to perform the ap-
propriate analysis to answer the research questions. For example, after a consumer purchases a product, a collaborative ﬁltering
algorithm may give other products in the same category higher score. For an infrequently purchased category, however, such rec-
ommendation immediately after a purchase will likely be ineffective, and such domain knowledge should be used to adjust themodel. With methods becoming increasingly sophisticated and data growing in scale and variety, research can easily be consumed
by technical complexities. How to effectively incorporate human insights into studies using machine learning methods is thus a
key item on the research agenda.
5.6.2. Balancing theory-driven and data-driven perspectives
Marketing research tends to be theory-driven. Researchers seek to obtain or verify generalizable results on consumer or ﬁrm
behaviors or market characteristics. Machine learning, in contrast, focuses on extracting knowledge from data, and tends to impose
few constraints a priori so as to give data the opportunity to speak. A successful uni ﬁcation between the two calls for a hybrid
approach which balances both perspectives. Theories could form the foundation and guide the research design, which allows re-
searchers to draw insights that are generalizable. Meanwhile, a data-driven perspective would ensure that researchers recognize
the real-world complexity, and allow for suf ﬁcient model ﬂexibility to accommodate complex situations. Integrating these two
perspectives seamlessly is both challenging and important. This is another item on the research agenda.
5.6.3. Investigating theoretical implications of machine learning methods
Machine learning methods may have theoretical implications from marketing perspective. For example, in reinforcement learn-
ing models an agent interacts with the environment to learn its characteristics and to simultaneously optimize a policy. This is
conceptually similar to a consumer who learns from the market while maximizes her utility, or to a ﬁrm which seeks to learn
about individual consumers and to optimize marketing interactions. Modeling consumers or ﬁrms as reinforcement learners
thus can be an interesting avenue of research. As another example, the different layers of deep neural networks represent different
levels of abstractions, which may also be connected to how consumers process rich media content. Investigating marketing theo-
retical implications of machine learning methods is an underexplored topic, and another key item on the research agenda.
5.6.4. Investigating theoretical implications of AI-adoption in industry
With ﬁrms using AI to power their business decision makings, the practice of adopting AI tools may have theoretical implica-
tions to marketing research. For example, the use of machine learning methods by practitioners raises endogeneity concerns for
studies that use non-experimental data. If advertising data are obtained from a ﬁrm that performs retargeting, researchers have
to take that into account when using the data to analyze consumers' ad response and to develop targeting strategies. Such
endogeneity issue may also manifest at the method level. For example, if a ﬁrm uses a speci ﬁc method to generate recommenda-
tion, then that method would have better predictive performance than other methods when assessed using the ﬁrm's data, even
though such comparison does not generalize to other settings. From a different perspective, the adoption of AI tools may also alter
the competitive equilibrium, with signi ﬁcant consumer surplus and social welfare implications. With the complex environment
created by deploying AI technologies, other theoretical issues may also emerge, and researchers are encouraged to consider
their implications to marketing research at a deeper level.
Compared with the other perspectives, the research agenda from the perspective of unifying machine learning methods and
marketing theories may be the most challenging. Meanwhile, breakthroughs in this area would also be impactful.21 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005