AI-driven trends in the industry, where ﬁrms increasingly focus on the entire customer purchase journeys which contain frequent
and media-rich interactions, and perform large-scale and automated context-dependent personalization and targeting. These
trends both are enabled by and drive the continued improvement of the ever more powerful machine learning methods, leading
to a positive feedback loop which is transforming all areas of marketing practices. Next, we review the small but rapidly growing
marketing literature that has used a number of machine learning methods.
More importantly, we present a uni ﬁed framework and a multi-faceted agenda for incorporating machine learning methods
into academic marketing research. This framework contains ﬁve key components of empirical research: method ,data,issue ,
usage ,a n d theory . At the center of the framework is the rich family of machine learning methods . We call for researchers to de-
velop a broad and in-depth understanding of machine learning methods, and to introduce more methods to and demonstrate
their compelling values in marketing research. Meanwhile, we call for machine learning methods to play more central roles in ad-
dressing core marketing issues, e.g. to model consumer decisions, in contrast to playing supporting roles of feature extraction as is
often done. Moving to the center helps better connect machine learning methods to the marketing literature, broadening their im-
pact. Furthermore, we call for researchers to extend the methods, e.g. to improve interpretability, to make them more suitable for
social science research. Finally, as the methods are introduced and extended, developing a clear understanding of the boundaries
of their abilities is also a crucial aspect of research.
Machine learning methods need to be closely linked to the other four components in the uni ﬁed framework. First, the methods
are well positioned to extract rich insights from rich data. While studies have frequently analyzed text and image data, we encour-
age researchers to also focus on audio, video, and consumer tracking data, as well as network data and data of hybrid formats.
Second, the usage of machine learning methods in marketing research should be broadened and extended. Usages, including pre-
diction, feature extraction, descriptive interpretation, causal interpretation, prescriptive analysis, and optimization, each have dif-
ferent requirements on method transparency and theoretical connections, posing different challenges. While machine learning
methods have been used frequently for prediction and feature extraction, we call for more effort to use them for descriptive,
causal, and prescriptive analysis, and to evaluate the methods' intrinsic abilities or limitations for these usages. Third, methods
should be used to address important substantive issues . We call for using machine learning methods to help map out the entire
Fig. 1. Machine learning tasks and methods.Table 1
Key de ﬁnitions.
Term De ﬁnition
Artiﬁcial
IntelligenceAn arti ﬁcial intelligence problem is that of making a machine behave in ways that would be called intelligent if a human were so behaving
(McCarthy, Minsky, Rochester, & Shannon, 1955 )
Machine LearningA computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P, if its
performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E. ( Mitchell, 1997 )
Deep LearningRepresentation-learning methods with multiple levels of representation, obtained by composing simple but non-linear modules that each
transform the representation at one level into a representation at a higher, slightly more abstract level. ( LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015 )3 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005