were incorporated using the topic model which were associated with product covariates and user ratings. Topic models have been
applied not only to text, but also in other marketing settings where similar semantic structures exist. Jacobs et al. (2016) incorpo-
rated LDA to help predict purchases. Using data from an online retailer, they showed that the LDA model outperforms both col-
laborative ﬁltering and discrete choice models in prediction, and is scalable to large product assortments. Trusov et al. (2016)
adapted the correlated topic model (CTM), an extension to LDA, for online user pro ﬁling using consumer clickstream data. They
extended the original CTM to incorporate visitation intensity, covariates, and dynamic evolution. Their analysis uncovered easy-
to-interpret consumer behavioral pro ﬁles, and helped assess the information content of data from search engines and advertising
networks. Li and Ma (2019) integrated CTM into a dynamic model of consumers' channel visits and conversions. They showed that
incorporating search keywords using topic models improves the assessment of consumers' latent purchase stages.
4.4. Deep learning
Deep learning has been the most frequently used machine learning method in recent marketing studies, typically for analyzing
text and image data. Liu, Lee, and Srinivasan (2018) analyzed consumer reviews and showed that aesthetics and price content af-
fect conversions. They developed a full deep learning model to predict conversions and a partial deep learning model to extract
features, and they used the derivative-based method developed in Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman (2013) to evaluate feature
importance. Chakraborty, Kim, and Sudhir (2019) developed a hybrid CNN-LSTM model to extract attribute level sentiment
from text data, and corrected for attribute self-selection of the extracted scores. Using Yelp reviews, they showed that the
model does well on hard sentiment classi ﬁcation problems. Zhang, Lee, Singh, and Srinivasan (2017) investigated the impact of
images on property demand at Airbnb. They used CNN to label images as high or low quality, and showed that veri ﬁed high qual-
ity photos signi ﬁcantly increase property demand. Liu, Dzyabura, and Mizik (2018) presented a “visual listening in ”approach.
Using Flickr data, they trained classi ﬁers using both SVM which takes pre-extracted features as input and CNN which works di-
rectly on the raw images. Analyzing an Instagram dataset, they showed that brand portrayals generated from consumer-
supplied images are consistent with ﬁrm-generated images as well as the result of a national survey. Zhang and Luo (2019) ana-
lyzed Yelp photos and reviews. They found that photos are more predictive of restaurant survival than are reviews, and that in-
formation content and helpful votes are more important than photographic attributes. They used the Clarifai API13to identify
objects from food photos, and used text-based CNN to extract quality dimensions from reviews. Dzyabura et al. (2019) investi-
gated product returns, and showed that features extracted from product images using CNN signi ﬁcantly improve the prediction
accuracy of return rate. Hartmann, Heitmann, et al. (2019) used CNN to classify Twitter and Instagram images, and showed
that brand sel ﬁes lead to high levels of consumer brand engagement, a ﬁnding they corroborated using lab experiment. They
also created gradient-weighted class activation maps ( Selvaraju et al., 2017 ) to provide post-hoc interpretation of important
image aspects. Malik, Singh, Lee, and Srinivasan (2019) investigated preference-based and belief-based attractive bias using pic-
tures of MBA graduates, and found signi ﬁcant bias over a 15-year career period mainly attributed to preference-bias. They used
the CNN implementation of the OpenFace project ( Amos, Ludwiczuk, & Satyanarayanan, 2016 ) to extract image features and
SVM to predict the person's attractiveness. An innovative aspect is they used the conditional adversarial autoencoder developed
inZhang, Song, and Qi (2017) , a deep generative model, to age progress the pictures. Li, Shi, and Wang (2019) proposed two mea-
sures for video mining that can be automatically extracted from videos using CNN. Using data from a crowdfunding site, they
showed that the proposed measures have explanatory power on funding outcomes.
4.5. Tree ensembles
Yoganarasimhan (2018) investigated search personalization using a machine learning framework with three components for
generating features, search ranking, and scalability and ef ﬁciency. The search ranking component used the LambdaMART method
(Wu, Burges, Svore, & Gao, 2010 ) which combines the lambda ranking algorithm with multiple additive regression trees. Analyzing
a large dataset from Yandex, they showed that personalization improved the clicks to the top position by 3.5%, and that the return
to personalization varied with user history and query type. Raﬁeian and Yoganarasimhan (2018) used gradient-boosted trees to
predict mobile in-app ad click-throughs, and an analytical framework to conduct data-sharing counterfactuals. They showed
that the method improves targeting ability by 17.95%, and that the gains mainly stem from behavioral rather than contextual in-
formation. Dzyabura et al. (2019) used the gradient-boosted tree LightGBM ( Ke et al., 2017 ) to predict product returns using fea-
tures extracted through deep learning.
4.6. Causal forest
Recent methodological advancements have made it possible to use machine learning methods for causal research. Athey and
Imbens (2016) developed the causal-tree method for heterogeneous causal effects, and Wager and Athey (2018) developed the
causal forest method to evaluate heterogeneous treatment effects. Guo et al. (2018) applied the causal forest method to investigate
how information disclosure affects pharmaceutical companies' payments to physicians. Using a quasi-experimental difference-in-
differences approach, they showed that while payments on average declined after information disclosure laws came into effect,
13https://docs.clarifai.com/13 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005