there was considerable heterogeneity in the effect. Feng, Zhang, and Rao (2018) analyzed online home rental market. Combing the
causal forest method with propensity score matching, they showed that rental units with different values vary systematically in
their choice of cheap-talk content. Furthermore, they showed that providing either objective or subjective cheap-talk communica-
tions can increase consumer search, although only the objective content affects the ﬁnal renting decision.
4.7. Network embedding
Many marketing contexts can be represented as networks, e.g., consumer social networks or consumer-product networks. An-
alyzing large-scale networks is challenging due to their high dimensionality. Ma et al. (2019) used network embedding to analyze
consumers' social curation on Pinterest. They ﬁrst constructed a heterogeneous information network where users, images, and an-
notation words are represented as nodes, and curation actions are encoded in edges. They then used the heterogeneous embed-
ding method metapath2vec (Dong et al., 2017 ) to map the nodes to lower-dimensional vectors, while preserving the network's
structural and semantic information. They showed that the embedding vectors reveal consumer and image groups with distinct
characteristics, and generate superior predictive performance. Yang, Zhang, and Kannan (2019) formulated a user-brand network
from user engagement data on Facebook. They then used a deep autoencoder to perform embedding. Their analysis showed a
market structure of brands that is more ﬂuid and overlapping than what standard industry classi ﬁcation would suggest, and iden-
tiﬁed key competitors and complementors of brands.
4.8. Active and reinforcement learnings
Dzyabura and Hauser (2011) developed an active learning method to select questions adaptively to maximize the information
about consumers' heuristic decision rules. Huang and Luo (2016) also used active learning to adaptively select questions for con-
sumer preference elicitation. Hauser, Urban, Liberali, and Braun (2009) investigated website morphing, automatically changing the
look-and-feel of a website to match the visitor's cognitive styles. They modeled morphing as a MAB problem, and showed that a
close-to-optimal performance can be achieved on improving consumers' purchase intentions. Along a similar line, Schwartz,
Bradlow, and Fader (2017) conducted ﬁeld experiments for online display advertising by formulating the advertiser's problem
as a MAB problem, and showed that the reinforcement learning policy achieved an 8% improvement in customer acquisition.
Misra, Schwartz, and Abernethy (2018) developed a dynamic pricing experimentation policy which included microeconomic
choice theory. They proved analytically that the proposed policy is asymptotically optimal for weakly downward sloping demand
curve, and demonstrated through simulation that the policy can signi ﬁcantly improve pro ﬁt.
While a number of machine learning methods have been adopted, many others, especially in the large families of PGM, repre-
sentation learning, and reinforcement learning, are yet to be fully leveraged in marketing research. Meanwhile, Table 4 also orga-
nizes papers based on the types of data analyzed, which shows that more studies have analyzed text and image data than have
used audio, video, consumer tracking, or network data. Similarly, Table 4 lists papers based on the usage of machine learning
methods, which shows that more studies have used machine learning methods for prediction and feature extraction than for de-
scriptive, causal, and prescriptive analysis. Aside from these noticeable gaps, the literature can also be expanded and deepened in
several important ways. Considering these, we next proceed to discuss a comprehensive research agenda.
5. Harnessing the power of machine learning methods –ar e s e a r c ha g e n d a
Given their unique strengths, the use of machine learning methods in academic marketing research is expected to accelerate.
Since this trend is still at an early stage, a consensus does not yet exist on the right approach of adopting these methods, and a
holistic view is lacking. In this section, we articulate a multi-faceted research agenda. Our discussion begins with a conceptual
framework, followed by a detailed discussion from each of the ﬁve key aspects in the framework. The research opportunities
from each aspect are also summarized in Table 5 .
5.1. A conceptual framework
We propose a conceptual framework for the role of machine learning methods in marketing research, which is depicted in Fig.
3. Taking an empirical researcher's perspective, the incorporation of machine learning methods into marketing research is a multi-
faceted task, with focuses called for on ﬁve key aspects: method ,data,usage ,issue ,a n d theory .
At the core of the conceptual framework is the large collection of machine learning methods . Quantitative marketing research
has traditionally used statistical or econometric models. While these models often have similar mathematical foundations as ma-
chine learning methods, they differ in guiding philosophy and focus. Used appropriately, machine learning methods can comple-
ment econometric approaches to expand the research frontier. Researchers are encouraged to develop a broad and in-depth
understanding of machine learning methods, to introduce more of them to marketing research, and to demonstrate their compel-
ling values. For higher impact, machine learning methods should also take on a more central role in research, e.g. to model con-
sumer decisions, in contrast to peripheral applications such as feature extraction. Meanwhile, signi ﬁcant effort is called for to
extend the methods to make them better suited for research in marketing and other social science ﬁelds, and to also delineate
the boundary of their capacities. These considerations from the method's perspective are discussed in Section 5.2 .14 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005