black box with minimal theoretical connection may suf ﬁce, as researchers only need to ensure predictive accuracy. For feature ex-
traction , a black box is ﬁne, although moderate theoretical connection is needed to understand the features. For descriptive inter-
pretation , the method needs a moderate level of model transparency and theoretical connection, especially when drawing
correlational insights. For causal interpretation and prescriptive analysis , the method needs to be used as a white box and closely
connected to theories, as researchers need to establish generalizable causal linkages between variables and have con ﬁdence in pre-
scribed actions. For estimation and optimization , the method needs to have transparency as a white box, although connection to
marketing theories is less important, since the method is used in a technical capacity.
While these usages are all compatible with machine learning methods, they present different levels of challenges and oppor-
tunities. Using the methods for prediction and feature extraction is comparatively straightforward, and extant literature has mostly
adopted these usages. In contrast, it is more challenging to use machine learning methods for descriptive, causal, and prescriptive
studies, and we call for more research in these underexplored areas. We discuss each usage in detail below.
5.4.1. Prediction
In accordance with their traditional focus, machine learning methods have been used for prediction in marketing research ( Cui
& Curry, 2005 ;Dzyabura et al., 2019 ;Hartmann, Huppertz, et al., 2019 ;Huang & Luo, 2016 ). The prediction task may be the focus
of a study, or a component of a larger framework (e.g. Huang & Luo, 2016 ). While researchers typically prefer interpretations, the
importance of prediction is elevated by the increase in scale and complexity of real-world marketing tasks. For example, a system
that can predict a consumer's next store or website visit can make a strong case for methodological contribution, so can a recom-
mender system that accurately predicts the product each consumer is interested in. Such opportunities abound given the increas-ing digitization and mass customization, which researchers are encouraged to pursue.
From a different angle, we call for researchers to explore using prediction in causal research. For example, propensity score
matching (PSM) is often used in causal studies using observational data, where the lack of random assignment necessitates the
control for selection. Using PSM, researchers ﬁrst model the probability, or the propensity score, of receiving the treatment for
each unit in the dataset, and then match each treated unit with an untreated unit with similar propensity score to assess the treat-
ment effect. The ﬁrst step to generate propensity scores is essentially a prediction component. While binary logit is often used in
this step, a more sophisticated machine learning method may generate better predictions and thus better matchings. Similarly,
machine learning methods may also improve the performance of instrumental variable regressions ( Mullainathan & Spiess, 2017 ).
5.4.2. Feature extraction
Extracting features from unstructured data has been a popular usage of machine learning methods in marketing ( Lee &
Bradlow, 2011 ,Netzer et al., 2012 ,Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014 ,Liu & Toubia, 2018 ,Liu, Dzyabura, & Mizik, 2018 ,Liu, Lee, &
Srinivasan, 2018 ,Zhang, Lee, et al., 2017 ,Dzyabura et al., 2019 ,Hartmann, Heitmann, et al., 2019 ,Malik et al., 2019 ,Zhang &
Luo, 2019 ). Ample opportunities remain to extract additional and richer features, especially from audio, video, network, or con-
sumer tracking data. Using supervised learning, researchers can manually construct a training sample of the input data and
their associated features, train a supervised learning model, and then apply the model to the larger dataset to extract features. Un-
supervised representation learning is also an alternative, e.g. using word embedding methods or autoencoders to generate low-
dimensional representations of input data.
Extracted features can be used to draw insights directly or as input for subsequent analysis. Methods with well-established sta-
tistical foundations, e.g. PGM, can be integrated into joint statistical models (e.g. Trusov et al., 2016 ). Alternatively, features can be
extracted in a pre-processing step, and used as input variables for subsequent statistical analysis. When used this way, however,
Fig. 4. The usage of machine learning methods.18 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005