and parallel computing enable ef ﬁcient trainings on large datasets. Off-the-shelf tools with high-performance computing capacities
also make implementation easy. With the ever-increasing data volume in the real world, scalable methods are clearly desired.
The third advantage of machine learning methods is their ﬂexibility, beginning with input construction via feature engineer-
ing. Using econometric models, observed variables are usually entered directly for statistical inference, with manipulations re-
stricted to normalization, monotonic transformation, or adding selected interaction terms. Machine learning, however,
encourages extensive upfront efforts on creating and transforming input variables. One variable, for example, can have its orig-
inal form, binned form, higher order terms, and interaction terms, all entered as input. Additional transformations are also per-
formed based on researchers' domain knowledge. Feature engineering is frequently cited as a key success factor in winningentries of data science contests (e.g. Romov & Sokolov, 2015 ). Furthermore, the ﬂexibility is also re ﬂected in the model structure.
While marketing models typically prescribe speci ﬁc functional forms, e.g. linear utility functions or the solutions to DP prob-
lems, machine learning methods strive for ﬂexibility. Using a regression tree, arbitrary regions of the feature space can be carved
out. Using SVM, kernels map the original variables into higher or even in ﬁnite dimensional spaces. Using deep neural networks,
many layers lay between the input and the output, performing c omplex transformations. Combining feature engineering and
ﬂexible model structure increases the chance of capturing the true linkage between the input and output variables.
Fourth, due partly to the above reasons, machine learning meth ods excel in prediction, especially in real-world settings.
While econometric models typically focus on causal identi ﬁcation and interpretation, machine learning methods are evaluated
according to their out-of-sample predictive accuracy. Popular open data contests, e.g. Kaggle competitions, are usually won by
teams using machine learning methods such as deep neural networks or ensemble methods. The increasing complexity of prod-
ucts, markets, and decision contexts makes prediction increasingly important, making this another major advantage of machine
learning methods.Table 2
List of acronyms used in the paper.
Acronym Full name First described in section
AI Arti ﬁcial Intelligence 1
ANN Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks 2.2.1
CNN Convolutional Neural Network 2.2.1CTM Correlated Topic Model 4
DBSCAN Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise 2.2.2
DP Dynamic Programming 2.2.3DT Decision Tree 2.2.1FA Factor Analysis 2.2.2GBM Gradient Boosting Machine 2.2.1GPU Graphical Processing Unit 2.2.1GRU Gated Recurrent Unit 2.2.1HMM Hiddent Markov Model 2.2.1
IoT Internet-of-Things 5.3
kNN k-Nearest Neighbor 2.2.1LDA Latent Dirichlet Allocation 2.2.2LSTM Long Short-Term Memory 2.2.1MAB Multi-Armed Bandit 2.2.3MDP Markov Decision Process 2.2.3NB Naïve Bayes 2.2.1
PCA Principal Component Analysis 2.2.2
PSM Propensity Score Matching 5.4PGM Probabilistic Graphical Models 2.2.1PLSI Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing 2.2.2RF Random Forest 2.2.1RNN Recurrent Neural Network 2.2.1SARSA State-Action-Reward-State-Action 2.2.3SVD Singular Value Decomposition 2.2.2
SVM Support Vector Machine 2.2.1
TD Temporal-Difference 2.2.3UGC User-Generated Content 3.1
Table 3Strengths and weaknesses of machine learning methods.
Strength•Ability to handle unstructured data and data of hybrid formats
•Ability to handle large data volume
•Flexible model structure
•Strong predictive performance
Weakness•Not easy to interpret
•Relationship typically correlational instead of causal
•Unproven on analyzing individual consumer level heterogeneity and dynamics8 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005