Unsupervised representation learning methods have been instrumental in the progress of deep learning ( Bengio, Courville, &
Vincent, 2013 ;Hinton, Osindero, & Teh, 2006 ). One good example in this family is the word embedding method word2vec
(Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013 ).7Traditional text mining uses a high-dimensional bag-of-words vector representation,
where each word in the vocabulary occupies a separate dimension. Using word2vec, each word in the vocabulary is mapped to
a much lower dimensional vector, and the semantic relationship among words is preserved in the distances among their embed-ding vectors. The method is a form of autoencoder , a type of neural networks for extracting meaningful representation of input via
the hidden layers ( Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006 ). Autoencoder is trained by using the raw data as both input and output, with
the middle layer being learned as the representation. Word2vec has shown superior performance in many challenging text anal-
ysis tasks such as analogy. Extensions such as ELMo, which derives deep contextualized word representations, have further im-
proved the state of the art on challenging natural language processing tasks ( Peters et al., 2018 ). Meanwhile, embedding has
also been used to process large scale network data. Similar to word embedding, these network embedding methods (e.g., Dong,
Chawla, & Swami, 2017 ;Tang et al., 2015 ) map nodes in a large network to vectors in a lower dimensional vector space, while
preserving the semantic and structural information of the network. The embedding vectors can then be processed to generate
insights.
2.2.3. Methods for reinforcement learning
In the interactive paradigm of reinforcement learning, an agent rep eatedly probes an environment to learn about its characteristics
and to formulate an optimal policy. One of the earliest examples is the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem and the associated solution
methods. In a classic k-armed bandit problem, an agent repeatedly makes a choice from koptions, each generating a reward drawn
from a corresponding probability distribution, to maximize the overall reward. The greedy algorithm of choosing the best option given
the past knowledge produces reasonable results. In comparison, the ε-greedy algorithm, which chooses the best option most of the
time but also experiments with other options, can perform better due to its balance between exploration and exploitation. When actions
not only generate rewards, but also change th e agent's states such that future rewards are affected, an MDP framework is adopted. When
the state-dependent reward functions and state transition f unctions are known, the optimal policy can be derived using dynamic pro-
gramming ( DP)methods. DP methods such as policy iteration, value iteration, and backward induction have been developed in numerous
ﬁelds including mathematics, economics, engineering, and computer science, and have been used extensively in marketing research to
analyze consumers' forward-looking behaviors (e.g. Erdem & Keane, 1996 ).
In modern reinforcement learning problems, reward or state transition functions are typically not known. The method needs to
both learn about the environment and craft the optimal policy. One popular family of methods is temporal-difference (TD)l e a r n i n g ,
of which the SARSA algorithm is a standard. Using SARSA, the learning agent iteratively takes action based on the action-value
function, and updates the action-value function based on the reward feedback.
8SARSA is an example of on-policy method, in
that the actions are generated based on the current policy. In comparison, off-policy TD methods use a separate behavior policy
to generate actions while learning the optimal target policy, among which Q-learning is a prominent example ( Watkins, 1989 ;
Watkins & Dayan, 1992 ). Unifying the TD methods with Monte Carlo methods leads to the development of the more general n-
step Temporal Difference methods, including the n-step SARSA and off-policy n-step SARSA methods. Another major challenge to
reinforcement learning is the usually highly complex state space. To address this, deep neural networks are incorporated into re-
inforcement learning, leading to deep reinforcement learning methods. A prominent example of this group is deep Q-network ,
which generally follows the same process as Q-learning, and uses deep neural networks to map states and actions to values.
Deep Q-network and its extensions have seen notable successes. For example, Alphabet's DeepMind has demonstrated that agents
trained using such methods can surpass human level capabilities in a wide range of games.
2.3. Strengths and weaknesses of machine learning methods
Signiﬁcant differences exist between machine learning methods and the statistical and econometric models commonly used in
quantitative marketing research. We brie ﬂy discus their relative strengths and weaknesses, which are summarized in Table 3 .
2.3.1. Strengths of machine learning methods
Theﬁrst key strength of machine learning methods is that they can readily handle unstructured data such as text, image, audio,
and video, and can process data with complex structures such as large scale network or tracking data. In addition, machine learn-
ing methods can accommodate data of hybrid formats, such as a combination of text, image, and structured data, in an integrated
manner. Unstructured data have been the key driver of the data explosion in recent years, elevating the importance of machine
learning methods.9
Second, compared with econometric models, machine learning methods can handle larger data volume. Using econometric
models, data are typically at the scale of several hundred or thousand consumers, with a modest number of variables and re-
stricted choice sets. Forward-looking models may use even smaller samples. In machine learning research, in contrast, millions
of observations are the norm, while larger datasets abound. Ef ﬁcient optimization algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent
7Mathematically, embedding is an injective and structure-preserving map.
8SARSA stands for “state-action-reward-state-action ”.
9Industry practitioners state that more than 80% of the new data created every year are unstructured ( Grimes, 2008 ).7 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005