Full Length Article
Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing
power to human insights
Liye Maa,⁎,Baohong Sunb
aRobert H. Smith School of Business of University of Maryland, College Park, United States of America
bCheung Kong Graduate School of Business Americas, New York, United States of America
article info
Article history:
First received on June 2, 2019 and was under
review for 5 months
Available online xxxx
Area Editor: Michael HaenleinArtiﬁcial intelligence (AI) agents driven by machine learning algorithms are rapidly
transforming the business world, generating heightened interest from researchers. In this
paper, we review and call for marketing research to leverage machine learning methods. We
provide an overview of common machine learning tasks and methods, and compare them
with statistical and econometric methods that marketing researchers traditionally use. We
argue that machine learning methods can process large-scale and unstructured data, and
have ﬂexible model structures that yield strong predictive performance. Meanwhile, such
methods may lack model transparency and interpretability. We discuss salient AI-driven indus-
try trends and practices, and review the still nascent academic marketing literature which uses
machine learning methods. More importantly, we present a uni ﬁed conceptual framework and
a multi-faceted research agenda. From ﬁve key aspects of empirical marketing research:
method, data, usage, issue, and theory, we propose a number of research priorities, including
extending machine learning methods and using them as core components in marketing re-
search, using the methods to extract insights from large-scale unstructured, tracking, and net-
work data, using them in transparent fashions for descriptive, causal, and prescriptive analyses,
using them to map out customer purchase journeys and develop decision-support capabilities,
and connecting the methods to human insights and marketing theories. Opportunities abound
for machine learning methods in marketing, and we hope our multi-faceted research agenda
will inspire more work in this exciting area.
© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Keywords:
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
Machine learning
Digital marketing
Big data
Unstructured data
Tracking data
Network
Prediction
Interpretation
Marketing theory
1. Introduction
Consider an example of a customer purchase journey. A consumer is interested in e-book readers. She searches e-readers at
Google, and reads about the products at a few websites. While watching Youtube several days later, she sees an e-reader ad.
Interested, she visits the ﬁrm's website, browsing through the product description and having a few questions answered via
live-chat. She then reads consumer reviews at a third-party website. Over the next few days, she is frequently exposed to ads
about that e-reader while web sur ﬁng. After receiving a coupon in email, she follows the link and places an order. Happy about
the product, she describes her usage experience on Facebook, and posts a few pictures on Instagram. Her friends comment on
the posts with interest.International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: liyema@rhsmith.umd.edu ,( L .M a ) , bhsun@ckgsb.edu.cn . (B. Sun).IJRM-01361; No of Pages 24
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005
0167-8116/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
IJRM
International Journal of Research in Marketing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijresmar
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005