3.1. Marketing trends
3.1.1. Interactive and media-rich
Internet social media and mobile devices have dramatically increased the interactions between ﬁrms and consumers, with the
information encoded in rich media formats such as text, image, and video. It is imperative for ﬁrms to understand consumer per-
ceptions and preferences and obtain brand positioning insights based on this rich media content. Similarly, designing informative
and engaging content to enhance awareness, perception, and acceptance, is a crucial area of competition. While the rich media
content is natural for humans, it is challenging to machines.11With their superior capacity, AI tools powered by machine learning
methods are relied upon to generate insights and prescribe solutions in these interactive and media-rich environments.
3.1.2. Personalization and targeting
In markets where rich data are commonplace and digital channels make personalized offerings easy to deliver, machine learn-
ing methods are propelling large-scale context-dependent personalization and targeting to a new level. Segmentation is gettingmore ﬁne-grained, operating on hundreds of precisely carved-out microsegments instead of a few coarsely de ﬁned large ones.
Preference and behavior data, e.g. brands liked on Facebook, products searched at Google, apps used on mobile phones, etc., are
increasingly incorporated into segmentation. Continued re ﬁnement leads to personalization, where each consumer constitutes a
distinct segment, receiving tailored offers based on her individual pro ﬁle. Taking it one step further, preferences and needs are dy-
namic, and opportunities temporary. Effective targeting thus requires not only matching the right offering to the right consumer,
but also delivering it at the right moment in the right context. Much of personalization and context-dependent targeting is driven
by powerful machine learning algorithms, and these practices also drive the methods' rapid evolution.
3.1.3. Real-time optimization and automation
The complexity of marketing environment has long surpassed the threshold of human analysts' intuitive understanding and
manual capacities. Fine-grained segmentation and frequent customer interactions further make it necessary to remove human
agents from the critical path. While determining targeting strategies for several segments is humanly possible, for hundreds of pre-
cisely de ﬁned microsegments, automation is a must-have. Frequent interactions also call for real-time responses. When mobile
tracking detects an inbound consumer, for example, a window of only minutes exists to deliver a promotional offer. Automation
and real-time optimization are becoming the modus operandi of marketing. and machine learning methods are the go-to solutions.
3.1.4. Customer-journey focus
Firms are increasingly taking a holistic view of the entire customer journey. Digital technology has made it feasible to collect ﬁne-
grained customer touchpoint information, which transforms the view of an aggregate-level purchase-funnel from the ﬁrm's perspec-
tive, to the view of continuous decision journeys with feedback loops from the perspective of individual consumers. Piecing togetherthe picture of a consumer's entire journey is immensely valuable to ﬁrms, allowing them to monitor and guide the consumer, delivering
the right information, service, and promotion at the right stage and context. In addition to nudging consumers through speci ﬁch u r d l e s ,
ﬁrms can plan out a longer-term strategy to cov er the entire journey. For example, to just push a consumer through the awareness hur-
dle, a handful of exposures to any of the ﬁrm's ad would suf ﬁce. Looking forward through the entire journey, though, more exposures of
speciﬁct y p e sm a yb eb e t t e rt oc r e a t el o n g e rl a s t i n ga f ﬁnity down the road. PGM, deep learning, and reinforcement learning methods
can help ﬁrms master the entire decision journey: Before customers even emerge, a ﬁrm monitors user-generated content (UGC) plat-
forms to anticipate or shape the demand. When a lead emerges, a holistic view of the consumer helps map out a program to accompany
her through the purchase journey. When executing the program, the ﬁrm monitors the actual touchpoints across devices and channels,
assessing and adjusting tactics to create conversion. Post conversion, the interaction continues to ensure good customer experience,
positive word-of-mouth, and optimal life-time value. Machine le arning methods play an instrumental role in managing consumer de-
cision journeys, which would bring marketing effectiveness to a new level.
3.2. Marketing practices
3.2.1. Marketing mix
Marketing-mix decisions are increasingly made quantitatively instead of qualitatively. Pricing decisions are routinely made
using dynamic quantitative models, so are assortment, channel, and location decisions. Meanwhile, advertising is increasingly dig-
itized and personalized. Machine learning methods underlie many programmatic advertising tools and services, targeting users
based on pro ﬁle and behavioral history, with real-time bidding decisions made at millisecond timescale. Even product and adver-
tising creative designs, traditionally in the qualitative domain, have turned to algorithms for assistance, and these transformations
are accelerating.
3.2.2. Customer engagement
With ﬁrms focusing on customer decision journeys, intelligent agents assist customer engagement along the way to improve
experience. When consumers browse online, targeted ads delivered through bidding machines and customized webpages created
11For example, research shows that human brains can process entire images the eye sees in 13 milliseconds. ( “In the blink of an eye, ”http://news.mit.edu/2014/in-
the-blink-of-an-eye-0116 )10 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005