2.3.2. Limitations of machine learning methods
Theﬁrst key limitation of machine learning methods is they often lack interpretability, in terms of having a transparent model
structure and clear linkage between variables.10In research using econometric models, the type of model is chosen according to
the theory, e.g. choices models represent utility maximizing decisions, and DP models represent consumers' intertemporal optimi-
zation. The functional form may also re ﬂect theory, e.g. the Bass model represents diffusion driven by innovators and imitators.
Variables are also selected according to theory, and are included in a way that statistical hypothesis testing can be performed
to interpret how they are related, e.g. exposure to an ad increases utility, or to evaluate characteristics of interest, e.g. consumersdemonstrate risk aversion. In contrast, machine learning methods rely on both heavily engineered features and ﬂexible model
structures, resulting in a black-box which delivers on predictive accuracy, but not on interpretive insights which marketing re-
searchers have come to expect. Furthermore, these methods are often developed in an optimization framework, making paramet-
ric statistical hypothesis testing infeasible, presenting another hurdle for interpretation. However, we should also note several
mitigating factors: 1) many machine learning methods, e.g. PGM, do have well established statistical foundations with interpret-
able parameters; 2) post-hoc interpretation techniques exist for machine learning methods ( Lipton, 2016 ) which, while different
from interpretations based on model structure and parameters, can still generate important insights; 3) certain methods have been
successfully adapted for interpretation (e.g. Wager & Athey, 2018 ).
Second, relationships uncovered using machine learning methods are often correlational rather than causal. With a predictive
focus, little attention has been paid to endogeneity concerns when developing machine learning methods. Issues such as selection,
omitted variables, and simultaneity, which are painstakingly addressed in econometric models, are typically ignored in machine
learning analysis. Consequently, functions learned from machine learning cannot be readily taken as causal, and the predictive per-
formance may not hold in the case of regime shift or policy change. This lack of causal capacity makes it challenging to perform
counterfactual analysis, which is essential for designing and evaluating marketing mix or other important decisions such as seg-
mentation and engagement. This limits their use in a core capacity in marketing.
Third, while machine learning methods enjoy good predictive performance, their ability to capture individual consumer level
heterogeneity and dynamics is yet unproven. Traditionally, dynamic data are typically handled using time series models or speci ﬁc
PGMs such as HMM, which arguably fall more into the ﬁeld of statistics than machine learning per se. Even state-of-the-art RNN
based models ﬁnd success mostly in tasks such as speech recognition and translation, while their power for capturing consumer
dynamics is largely unexplored. Accounting for unobserved heterogeneity and dynamics is essential in many areas of marketing
research, and it remains to be seen the extent to which machine learning methods can contribute on this front.
3. AI-driven marketing industry trends
Marketing practices such as digital search and advertising, social media interaction, mobile tracking and engagement, online
purchase, and in-store shopping experience, are increasingly powered by scalable and intelligent algorithms, with the help of
both technology powerhouses such as Google and Amazon and many smaller MarTech (Marketing Technology) companies. Ma-
chine learning has propelled several major trends in marketing , which in turn pose challenges to and drive the evolution of ma-
chine learning methods, creating a positive feedback loop, as depicted in Fig. 2 .W en o wb r i e ﬂy discuss these marketing trends
and practices.
10“Interpretability ”is a widely discussed and debated concept in machine learning. The term can mean different things in different contexts. We refer readers to Lip-
ton (2016) for a comprehensive discussion on this topic. The interpretability discussed here roughly corresponds to “decomposability ”and“algorithmic transparency ”
inLipton (2016) .
Fig. 2. AI-driven marketing landscape.9 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005