5.3. Generating rich insights from rich data
Machine learning methods' ability to process unstructured data is well recognized. The rich digital footprint of consumers pre-
sents great research opportunities.
5.3.1. Unstructured media data
In marketing, a reasonably large literature now exists on analyzing textual data ( Ansari, Li, and Zhang, 2018 ;Büschken &
Allenby, 2016 ;Chakraborty, Kim, and Sudhir, 2019 ;Hartmann, Huppertz, et al., 2019 ;Lee & Bradlow, 2011 ;Li & Ma, 2019 ;Liu,
Lee, & Srinivasan, 2018 ;Liu & Toubia, 2018 ;Netzer, Feldman, Goldenberg, and Fresko, 2012 ;Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014 ;Toubia &
Netzer, 2017 ;Zhang & Luo, 2019 ). Meanwhile, that on analyzing image data is quickly growing ( Zhang, Lee, et al., 2017 ,
Klostermann, Plumeyer, Böger, & Decker, 2018 ,Liu, Dzyabura, & Mizik, 2018 ,Dzyabura, El Kihal, Hauser, & Ibragimov, 2019 ,
Hartmann, Heitmann, et al., 2019 ,Malik, Singh, Lee, and Srinivasan, 2019 ,Zhang & Luo, 2019 ). Fewer studies comparatively
have used audio or video data ( Kawaf, 2018 ;Li, Shi, and Wang, 2019 ). We call for continued effort to extract insights from un-
structured data, especially audios or videos. Topic models and word embedding methods can be applied to text data; RNNs and
1-dimensional CNNs can process audio data; 2-dimensional CNNs are the standard approach for analyzing image data; 3-
dimensional CNNs are applicable to videos. Opportunities still abound to use machine learning methods to extract insights
about consumers and products from rich media data.
5.3.2. Consumer tracking data
Technology has enabled expansive tracking of consumer activities. The now commonplace online clickstream data keep logs of
purchase, search, browsing, digital media consumption, and other web sur ﬁng actions. Mobile devices further expand the reach of
activity tracking to the of ﬂine word, recording consumers' physical locations and store visits. The proliferation of Internet-of-things
(IoT) devices and the increasing adoption of consumer wearables are bringing in even richer consumer tracking data, e.g. detailedin-store activities or 24/7 biometrics information ( Ng & Wakenshaw, 2017 ). Marketing studies have just started to leverage such
ﬁne-grained tracking data (e.g. Raﬁeian & Yoganarasimhan, 2018 ;Trusov et al., 2016 ;Yoganarasimhan, 2018 ). We call for signif-
icantly more work on this front, for which PGMs and deep neural networks, among others, are pertinent methods.
5.3.3. Network data
We live in an increasingly connected world. Aside from social networks of people, other networks, of products, brands, store
locations, etc., are also becoming prevalent. Even for traditional data, a network view may be bene ﬁcial, e.g. semantic networks
generated through word co-occurrence may shed light on market structure ( Netzer et al., 2012 ). Instead of treating consumers
or products as standalone units, network data encode the connections among a large set of entities and present a holistic view
of the marketing environment. However, analyzing large networks is also challenging due to its high dimensionality. Existing stud-ies tend to use variables that summarize local characteristics (e.g. degree centrality), while leaving out the global structural infor-
mation. Machine learning methods including network embedding, PGM, and graph deep learning, show great promise in tackling
this challenge (e.g. Ma et al., 2019 ), and we call for adopting these methods to analyze large scale networks.
5.3.4. Integrated hybrid data
Machine learning methods can handle multi-typed data with ease. Using such methods, all data types are usually ﬁrst con-
verted into vectors, making it easy to mesh them together.
14This capacity is important since consumers are increasingly exposed
to information of multiple types. For example, an apartment posting on Airbnb has both textual description and images; an online
user can read reviews and browse product speci ﬁcations; a sports game viewer may tweet out comments on Twitter while
watching the TV program. An in-depth understanding of consumer preferences and behaviors in these situations calls for combin-ing data types, potentially from multiple sources. While this has been done in several studies ( Dzyabura et al., 2019 ;Hartmann,
Heitmann, et al., 2019 ;Klostermann et al., 2018 ;Zhang & Luo, 2019 ), many more opportunities exist. Meanwhile, extant studies
often process different data using separate components, while integrated handling is preferable. Furthermore, the data combina-
tion available to practitioners and researchers also raises interesting questions. For example, Trusov et al. (2016) assessed the in-
formation content of the data available to different ﬁrms, while Kakatkar and Spann (2019) developed an approach to handle
anonymized and fragmented tracking data. Researchers are encouraged to investigate similarly interesting questions related to in-
tegrated hybrid data.
5.4. Broadening and extending usages
A method can serve a range of purposes. It can handle a prediction task, extract features of interest from data, provide descrip-
tive insights, perform causal inference or prescriptive analysis, or be used in a technical capacity for optimization. For each usage,
two considerations are important to researchers: what level of model transparency is required, and how close the method should
be connected to marketing theories. The more transparent and closer the theoretical connection, the higher impact the research
has. So, too, is the challenge. In Fig. 4 , we present a schematic view along these two dimensions. When used for prediction ,a
14For example, text data are often represented using “one-hot encoding, ”where each word occurrence in a document is represented using a vector, in which each
dimension corresponds to a word in the vocabulary.17 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005