one note of caution is in order. Suppose a researcher trains a classi ﬁer to label documents in a dataset, and then uses the labels as
an independent variable in linear regression. While commonly done, this approach introduces measurement error : the predicted
document label, even if reasonably accurate when generated using the powerful machine learning method, is still a noisy measure
of the true document label. Measurement errors of independent variables may cause attenuation bias in coef ﬁcient estimates, and
appropriate corrections should be performed (e.g. Frost & Thompson, 2000 ).
5.4.3. Descriptive interpretation
A prime example of using machine learning methods for descriptive interpretation is topic models, which has been used to an-
alyze both text and other marketing data ( Jacobs et al., 2016 ;Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014 ;Trusov et al., 2016 ). Unsupervised represen-
tation learning methods such as network embedding and autoencod ers can also generate meaningful descriptions from complex
data, and are beginning to be introduced to marketing research (e.g. Ma et al., 2019 ). We call for continued effort to generate in-
sightful descriptions of the increasingly complex marketing environments using the right methods.
The sought-after descriptions are often not about a single characteristic, but about relationships between variables. Using ma-
chine learning methods to draw such correlational insights, however, is challenging. One may consider training a supervised learn-
ing model, using the factors as the input variables and outcomes as the output. However, unlike linear econometric models,
machine learning methods typically yield non-linear and non-monotonic functions, which may not even have known functional
forms.15Further adding to the challenge, the input themselves can be heavily engineered features instead of the original variables.
Question remains open on how best to leverage machine learning methods for correlational description. Variable importance
(Breiman, 2001 ), i.e., assessing how important an input variable is on predicting the output, has been used in marketing studies
(e.g. Dzyabura et al., 2019 ). However, variable importance shows only whether a factor is related to the outcome, but not how
the latter changes in response to the former. A second option is to ﬁrst train a machine learning model and then provide post-
hoc description of the prediction function. Recent machine learning research shows this is feasible (e.g. Selvaraju et al., 2017 ).
Such post-hoc interpretations, though, also do not fully describe variable correlations. A third option is to use the methods in a
way that preserves the interpretability, instead of fully utilizing their predictive capacity (e.g. Trusov et al., 2016 ). Methods with
statistical foundations, e.g. PGM, have good potentials to be used this way. However, it is unclear whether this is feasible for
other methods such as deep neural networks or ensemble methods. Given its importance in marketing, we call for research to de-
velop effective ways for generating correlational descriptions using machine learning methods.
5.4.4. Causal interpretation
Recently developed causal trees and causal forests have made it possible to use machine learning methods for causal interpre-
tation ( Athey & Imbens, 2016 ;Wager & Athey, 2018 ). Rather than measure treatment effects at the population level, causal forest
leverages the ﬂexible structure of trees to measure heterogeneous treatment effects according to individual units' observed char-
acteristics, and has been used in recent marketing studies ( Feng et al., 2018 ;Guo et al., 2018 ). Such causal methods open up ex-
citing opportunities which researchers will continue to explore. Meanwhile, an important question is whether other machine
learning methods can be adapted for causal interpretation, especially in non-experimental settings involving complex environ-
ments and dynamic consumer decisions. Considerable adaptations of the methods are likely needed, e.g. establishing statistical
consistency and other asymptotic properties. Delving into the underlying structure to pinpoint the linkage between variables is
another necessity. While a rich econometric apparatus exists for causal analysis in non-experimental settings, its counterpart in
machine learning is still yet to be developed. We call for researchers to pursue this challenging yet potentially highly impactful
line of research.
5.4.5. Prescriptive analysis
Marketers seek to not only understand consumers, but also prescribe appropriate actions to achieve desired results. Machine
learning methods are a natural ﬁt for this prescriptive usage, and several studies have shown this direction to be highly promising
(e.g. Hauser et al., 2009 ;Misra et al., 2018 ;Schwartz et al., 2017 ;Yoganarasimhan, 2018 ). Many methods amenable to automation
and interpretation are promising candidates, and we highlight the family of reinforcement learning methods which ﬁt naturally to
prescriptive marketing tasks. For example, as in reinforcement learning, a personalized ad targeting engine needs to learn abouteach consumer through interactions, while crafting the optimal type, frequency, and timing of ad delivery. Similar situations
exist for other marketing decisions such as recommendation, promotion, and engagement. Given its nascent stage, we call for re-
searchers to pursue the abundant opportunities to develop prescriptive systems or frameworks. Decision-support capabilities are
especially important in today's highly complex and increasingly automated marketing environment.
5.4.6. Estimation and optimization
One additional way to use machine learning methods is for estimation, taking advantage of their ability to perform large-scale
optimization ( Ansari et al., 2018 ;Chiong & Shum, 2019 ;Evgeniou et al., 2005 ;Evgeniou, Pontil, & Toubia, 2007 ;Hauser, Toubia,
Evgeniou, Befurt, & Dzyabura, 2010 ). Researchers are encouraged to explore the collection of machine learning methods for
such usage. For example, variational inference methods ( Jordan, Ghahramani, Jaakkola, & Saul, 1999 ;Braun & McAuliffe, 2010 ;
15For example, in kernel SVM where inputs are transformed to higher dimensional representations, the function linking a speci ﬁc input to the output cannot be easily
described.19 L. Ma, B. Sun / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: L. Ma and B. Sun, Machine learning and AI in marketing –Connecting computing power to human
insights, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.04.005