Under review as a conference paper
GLOBAL SELF-ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR IMAGE
RECOGNITION
Shen Zhuoran, Irwan Bello, Raviteja Vemulapalli, Xuhui Jia, Ching-Hui Cheny
Google Research
Google
Seattle, WA 98103, United States
fzhuorans,ibello,ravitejavemu,xhjia,chuichen g@google.com
ABSTRACT
Recently, a series of works in computer vision have shown promising results on
various image and video understanding tasks using self-attention. However, due
to the quadratic computational and memory complexities of self-attention, these
works either apply attention only to low-resolution feature maps in later stages of
a deep network or restrict the receptive ﬁeld of attention in each layer to a small
local region. To overcome these limitations, this work introduces a new global
self-attention module, referred to as the GSA module, which is efﬁcient enough
to serve as the backbone component of a deep network. This module consists of
two parallel layers: a content attention layer that attends to pixels based only on
their content and a positional attention layer that attends to pixels based on their
spatial locations. The output of this module is the sum of the outputs of the two
layers. Based on the proposed GSA module, we introduce new standalone global
attention-based deep networks that use GSA modules instead of convolutions to
model pixel interactions. Due to the global extent of the proposed GSA module,
a GSA network has the ability to model long-range pixel interactions throughout
the network. Our experimental results show that GSA networks outperform the
corresponding convolution-based networks signiﬁcantly on the CIFAR-100 and
ImageNet datasets while using less parameters and computations. The proposed
GSA networks also outperform various existing attention-based networks on the
ImageNet dataset.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Self-attention is a mechanism in neural networks that focuses on modeling long-range dependencies.
Its advantage in terms of establishing global dependencies over other mechanisms, e.g., convolution
and recurrence, has made it prevalent in modern deep learning. In computer vision, several recent
works have augmented Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with global self-attention modules
and showed promising results for various image and video understanding tasks (Bello et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Yue et al., 2018). For
brevity, in the rest of the paper, we refer to self-attention simply as attention.
The main challenge in using the global attention mechanism for computer vision tasks is the large
spatial dimensions of the input. An input image in a computer vision task typically contains tens
of thousands of pixels, and the quadratic computational and memory complexities of the attention
mechanism make global attention prohibitively expensive for such large inputs. Because of this,
earlier works such as Bello et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2018) restricted the use of global attention
mechanism to low-resolution feature maps in later stages of a deep network. Alternatively, other
recent works such as Hu et al. (2019); Ramachandran et al. (2019); Zhao et al. (2020) restricted
the receptive ﬁeld of the attention operation to small local regions. While both these strategies are
effective at capping the resource consumption of attention modules, they deprive the network of the
Equal contribution.
yChing-Hui is now at Waymo.
1arXiv:2010.03019v2  [cs.CV]  14 Oct 2020