Under review as a conference paper
ability to model long-range pixel interactions in its early and middle stages, preventing the attention
mechanism from reaching its full potential.
Different from the above works, Chen et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2019); Shen et al. (2018); Yue et al.
(2018) made the global attention mechanism efﬁcient by either removing the softmax normalization
on the product of queries and keys and changing the order of matrix multiplications involved in
the attention computation (Chen et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2018; Yue et al., 2018) or decomposing
one global attention layer into a sequence of multiple axial attention layers (Huang et al., 2019).
However, all these works use content-only attention which does not take the spatial arrangement
of pixels into account. Since images are spatially-structured inputs, an attention mechanism that
ignores spatial information is not best-suited for image understanding tasks on its own. Hence, these
works incorporate attention modules as auxiliary modules into standard CNNs.
To address the above issues, we introduce a new global self-attention module, referred to as the
GSA module, that performs attention taking both the content and spatial positions of the pixels into
account. This module consists of two parallel layers: a content attention layer and a positional
attention layer, whose outputs are summed at the end. The content attention layer attends to all the
pixels at once based only on their content. It uses an efﬁcient global attention mechanism similar to
Chen et al. (2018); Shen et al. (2018) whose computational and memory complexities are linear in
the number of pixels. The positional attention layer computes the attention map for each pixel based
on its own content and its relative spatial positions with respect to other pixels. Following the axial
formulation (Ho et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019), the positional attention layer is implemented as a
column-only attention layer followed by a row-only attention layer. The computational and memory
complexities of this axial positional attention layer are O(Np
N)in the number of pixels.
The proposed GSA module is efﬁcient enough to act as the backbone component of a deep network.
Based on this module, we introduce new standalone global attention-based deep networks, referred
to as global self-attention networks. A GSA network uses GSA modules instead of convolutions to
model pixel interactions. By virtue of the global extent of the GSA module, a GSA network has the
ability to model long-range pixel interactions throughout the network. Recently, Wang et al. (2020)
also introduced standalone global attention-based deep networks that use axial attention mechanism
for both content and positional attentions. Different from Wang et al. (2020), the proposed GSA
module uses a non-axial global content attention mechanism that attends to the entire image at once
rather than just a row or column. Our experimental results show that GSA-ResNet, a GSA network
that adopts ResNet (He et al., 2016) structure, outperforms the original convolution-based ResNet
and various recent global or local attention-based ResNets on the widely-used ImageNet dataset.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTIONS
•GSA module: We introduce a new global attention module that is efﬁcient enough to act as
the backbone component of a deep network. Different from Wang et al. (2018); Yue et al.
(2018); Chen et al. (2018); Shen et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2019), the proposed module
attends to pixels based on both content and spatial positions. Different from Zhao et al.
(2020); Hu et al. (2019); Ramachandran et al. (2019), the proposed module attends to the
entire input rather than a small local neighborhood. Different from Wang et al. (2020), the
proposed GSA module uses a non-axial global content attention mechanism that attends to
the entire image at once rather than just a row or column.
•GSA network: We introduce new standalone global attention-based networks that use
GSA modules instead of spatial convolutions to model pixel interactions. This is one of
the ﬁrst works (Wang et al. (2020) being the only other work) to explore standalone global
attention-based networks for image understanding tasks. Existing global attention-based
works insert their attention modules into CNNs as auxiliary blocks at later stages of the
network, and existing standalone attention-based networks use local attention modules.
•Experiments: We show that the proposed GSA networks outperform the corresponding
CNNs signiﬁcantly on the CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets while using less parame-
ters and computations. We also show that the GSA networks outperform various existing
attention-based networks including the latest standalone global attention-based network
of Wang et al. (2020) on the ImageNet dataset.
2