Under review as a conference paper
Table 1: Properties of recent attention-based networks
Attention module
Method Global Content Positional Attention + CNN combination
Wang et al. (2018) X X
Few attention modules are inserted in
between residual blocksChen et al. (2018) X X
Yue et al. (2018) X X
Shen et al. (2018) X X
Huang et al. (2019) X X
Attention modules are added at the end Carion et al. (2020) X X X
Sun et al. (2019) X X X
Bello et al. (2019) X X X Convolution layers are augmented with
attention modules in parallel
Hu et al. (2019) X X
Convolution layers are replaced by
attention modulesRamachandran et al. (2019) X X
Zhao et al. (2020) X X
Wang et al. (2020) X X X
This work X X X
The ﬁnal output feature map of the GSA module is the sum of the outputs of the content and posi-
tional attention layers.
3.2 GSA NETWORKS
A GSA network is a deep network that uses GSA modules instead of spatial convolutions to model
pixel interactions. Table 1 shows how a GSA network differs from various recent attention-based
networks. All existing works except Wang et al. (2020) either insert their attention modules into
CNNs as auxiliary blocks (Bello et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2018; Yue et al., 2018; Carion et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2019) at later stages of the network
or constrain their attention mechanism to small local regions (Hu et al., 2019; Ramachandran et al.,
2019; Zhao et al., 2020). In contrast, a GSA network replaces spatial convolution layers in a deep
network with a global attention module and has the ability to model long-range pixel interactions
throughout the network. While Wang et al. (2020) also introduces a global attention module as an
alternative for spatial convolution, their module uses axial attention mechanism for both content and
positional attention. In contrast, the proposed GSA module uses a non-axial global content attention
mechanism that attends to the entire image at once rather than just a row or column.
3.3 J USTIFICATIONS
The proposed GSA module uses a direct global attention operation for content attention and an axial
attention mechanism for positional attention.
Why not axial content attention? Axial attention is a mechanism that approximates direct global
attention with column-only attention followed by row-only attention. In the proposed global content
attention layer, two pixels (i;j)and(p;q)interact directly based only on their content. In contrast,
in a column-followed-by-row axial content attention layer, pixels (i;j)and(p;q)would interact
through pixel (p;j), and hence, their interaction would be undesirably controlled by the content at
(p;j). Therefore, the proposed direct global attention is better than axial mechanism for content
attention. This is also veriﬁed by the experimental results in Table 2 which show that the proposed
GSA module that uses direct global content attention is signiﬁcantly better than axial attention.
Why not direct global positional attention? It is important to attend to pixels based on relative
positions (instead of absolute positions) to maintain translation equivariance. In the case of content
attention, each pixel has a unique key, and hence, we can multiply keys and values ﬁrst to make
the attention mechanism efﬁcient. This is not possible in the case of positional attention since the
key at a pixel varies based on its relative position with respect to the query pixel. Hence, we use
5