bution methods like RUDDER ( Arjona-Medina et al. ,2019 ) or “backpropagation through a model”
(Munro ,1987 ;Robinson ,1989 ;Robinson & Fallside ,1989 ;Bakker ,2007 ). Actor-critic algorithms
have been only proven to converge for simple settings like fo r the neural networks that are lin-
ear (Konda & Tsitsiklis ,2000 ;Konda & Borkar ,1999 ;Xu et al. ,2019 ;Yang et al. ,2019 ;Liu et al. ,
2019 ). In contrast to these convergence proofs, in our setting bo th functions can be deep neural
networks of arbitrary complexity, though they should not sh are weights.
The main contribution of this paper is to provide a convergen ce proof for general actor-critic rein-
forcement learning algorithms. We apply this convergence p roof to two concrete actor-critic meth-
ods. First, we establish convergence of a practical variant of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al. ,2018 ). PPO is an actor-critic on-policy gradient method with tru st region penalties
to ensure a small policy gap ( Schulman et al. ,2015 ). Secondly, we prove convergence of the re-
cently introduced RUDDER ( Arjona-Medina et al. ,2019 ). RUDDER targets the problem of sparse
and delayed rewards by reward redistribution which directl y and efﬁciently assigns reward to rel-
evant state-action pairs. Thus, RUDDER dramatically speed s up learning for sparse and delayed
rewards. In RUDDER, the critic is the reward redistributing network, which is typically an LSTM.
The main proof techniques are recent developments from the t wo time-scale stochastic approxi-
mation theory ( Borkar ,2008 ). The recent addition to the theory is the introduction of co ntrolled
Markov processes ( Karmakar & Bhatnagar ,2017 ), which can treat policies that become more
greedy and trust region methods that use previous policies. The two time-scale stochastic ap-
proximation framework has been applied previously to show c onvergence of actor-critic algorithms
(Konda & Tsitsiklis ,2000 ;Konda & Borkar ,1999 ) and, more recently, of Linear Quadratic Regula-
tor (LQR) problems ( Xu et al. ,2019 ) and off-policy TD learning ( Yang et al. ,2019 ). However, only
tabular cases or linear function approximations have been c onsidered. In a recent work, convergence
was shown for variants of PPO and Trust Region Policy Optimiz ation (TRPO) equipped with neural
networks ( Liu et al. ,2019 ). However, again the neural networks were only linear, the p olicy was
energy-based, and the Kullback-Leibler term of the trust-r egion method was modiﬁed.
We aim at generalizing these proofs to learning settings whi ch use deep neural networks, use
episodes, use policies that become greedy, and use trust reg ion methods. Therefore, the
idea of stationary distributions on state-action pairs doe s not apply ( Konda & Tsitsiklis ,2000 ;
Konda & Borkar ,1999 ) and we have to enrich the framework by a controlled Markov pr ocess which
describes how the policy becomes more greedy and how to use pr evious policies. While we are
developing a framework to ensure convergence, it does not im ply convergence to an optimal policy.
Such proofs are in general difﬁcult for methods that use deep neural networks, since locally stable
attractors may not correspond to optimal policies ( Mazumdar et al. ,2019 ;Jin et al. ,2019 ;Lin et al. ,
2019 ). However, convergence to a locally optimal policy can be pr oven for linear approximation to
Q-values ( Sutton et al. ,2000 ;Konda & Tsitsiklis ,2003 ). Our main contributions to the convergence
proof are, that we:
• use a Markov control in the two time-scale stochastic appro ximation framework,
• use episodes as samples instead of transitions,
• allow policies to become greedy,
• allow objectives that use previous policies (trust region methods).
In the next section, the main theorem is provided, which show s local convergence of actor-critic
methods. Next, we formulate the results for PPO and RUDDER as corollaries. The third section
gives a roadmap for the corresponding proofs, thereby intro ducing the precise framework and the
results from stochastic approximation theory ( Borkar ,2008 ;Karmakar & Bhatnagar ,2017 ). Finally,
we discuss the technical assumptions and details for the pro ofs.
2 The Main Results
2.1 Abstract setting and Main Theorem
Preliminaries We consider a ﬁnite MDP deﬁned by the 4-tuple P= (S,A,R,p)(we assume
a discount factor γ= 1) where the state space Sand the action space Aconsist of ﬁnitely many
statessand actionsaandRthe set of rewards rwhich are bounded. Let us denote by |A|and|S|
the corresponding cardinalities and KR>0an upper bound on the absolute values of the rewards.
For a given time step t, the random variables for state, action, and reward are St,AtandRt+1=
R(St,At), respectively. Furthermore, Phas transition-reward distributions p(St+1=s′,Rt+1=
2