arXiv:2012.01399v1  [cs.LG]  2 Dec 2020Convergence Proof for Actor-Critic Methods Applied
to PPO and RUDDER
Markus Holzleitner∗Lukas Gruber∗José Arjona-Medina∗
Johannes Brandstetter∗Sepp Hochreiter∗,†
∗ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab,
Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
†Institute of Advanced Research in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IARAI)
Abstract
We prove under commonly used assumptions the convergence of actor-critic reinforce-
ment learning algorithms, which simultaneously learn a pol icy function, the actor, and a
value function, the critic. Both functions can be deep neura l networks of arbitrary com-
plexity. Our framework allows showing convergence of the we ll known Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) and of the recently introduced RUDDER. F or the convergence proof
we employ recently introduced techniques from the two time- scale stochastic approxima-
tion theory. Our results are valid for actor-critic methods that use episodic samples and
that have a policy that becomes more greedy during learning. Previous convergence proofs
assume linear function approximation, cannot treat episod ic examples, or do not consider
that policies become greedy. The latter is relevant since op timal policies are typically de-
terministic.
1 Introduction
In reinforcement learning, popular methods like Proximal P olicy Optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al. ,2018 ) lack convergence proofs. Convergence proofs for these met hods are chal-
lenging, since they use deep neural networks, episodes as sa mples, policies that become greedy,
and previous policies for trust region methods. For Q-learning, convergence to an optimal policy
has been proven in Watkins & Dayan (1992 );Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1996 ) as well as for TD( λ) in
Dayan (1992 ). Convergence of SARSA to an optimal policy has been establi shed for policies that
become greedy, like “greedy in the limit with inﬁnite explor ation” (GLIE) or “restricted rank-based
randomized” (RRR) ( Singh et al. ,2000 ). Policy gradient methods converge to a local optimum,
since the “policy gradient theorem” ( Sutton & Barto ,2018 , Chapter 13.2) shows that they form
a stochastic gradient of the objective. Stochastic gradien ts converge according to the stochastic
approximation theory to an optimum ( Robbins & Monro ,1951 ;Kushner & Clark ,1978 ;Tsitsiklis ,
1994 ;Borkar & Meyn ,2000 ;Kushner & Yin ,2003 ;Borkar ,2008 ;Bhatnagar et al. ,2013 ). Tempo-
ral difference (TD) convergences to a local optimum with smo oth function approximation like by
neural networks ( Maei et al. ,2009 ). Also Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) ( Mnih et al. ,2013 ,2015 ) use a
single neural network, therefore can be shown to converge, a s done in Fan et al. (2020 ). However it
is assumed that every training set of reward-state transiti ons is drawn iid and that a global minimum
of theQ-function on the training set is provided.
We prove the convergence of general actor-critic reinforce ment learning algorithms ( Sutton & Barto ,
2018 , Chapter 13.5). Recently, actor-critic methods have had a c onsiderable success, e.g. at defeat-
ing humans in the game Dota 2 ( OpenAI et al. ,2019 ) and in mastering the game of Starcraft II
(Vinyals et al. ,2019 ). Actor-critic algorithms simultaneously learn a policy f unction, the actor, and
a critic function that estimates values, action-values, ad vantages, or redistributed rewards. The critic
is responsible for credit assignment, that is, which action or state-action pair was responsible for
receiving a reward. Using this credit assignment, a policy f unction is updated to increase the re-
turn. Actor-critic algorithms are typically policy gradie nt methods, but can also be reward redistri-