3.1 The Stochastic Approximation Theory: Borkar and Karmak ar & Bhatnagar.
For this section we use the formulations in Heusel et al. (2017 );Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ).
Stochastic approximation algorithms are iterative proced ures to ﬁnd stationary points (minimum,
maximum, saddle point) of functions when only noisy observa tions are provided. We use two time-
scale stochastic approximation algorithms, i.e. two coupl ed iterations moving at different speeds.
Convergence of these interwoven iterates can be ensured by a ssuming that one step size is consider-
ably smaller than the other. The slower iterate is assumed to be slow enough to allow the fast iterate
to converge while simultaneously being perturbed by the slo wer. The perturbations of the slower
should be small enough to ensure convergence of the faster. T he iterates map at time step n/greaterorequalslant0the
fast variableωn∈Rkand the slow variable θn∈Rmto their new values:
θn+1=θn−a(n) (h(θn,ωn,zn) + (m1)n), (13)
ωn+1=ωn−b(n) (f(θn,ωn,zn) + (m2)n), (14)
where:
•h(.)∈Rmandf(.)∈Rkare mappings for Eq. ( 13) and Eq. ( 14), respectively.
•a(n)andb(n)are step sizes for Eq. ( 13) and Eq. ( 14), respectively.
•(m1)nand(m2)nare martingale difference sequences for Eq. ( 13) and Eq. ( 14), respectively.
•zndenotes the common Markov control process for Eq. ( 13) and Eq. ( 14).
We assume that all the random variables are deﬁned on a common probability space (Ω,A,P)with
associated sigma algebra Aand probability measure P. Let us continue with an informal summary
of the assumptions needed to ensure convergence of ( 13)–(14). More precise technical details can
be found in Section A.4in the appendix and in Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ).
(A1) Assumptions on the controlled Markov processes: zntakes values in a compact metric space
S. It is controlled by the iterate sequences θnandωnand additionally by a random process an
taking values in a compact metric space W. The dynamics wrt. nare speciﬁed by a transition
kernel. Be aware that this control setting can in general be d ifferent than the already introduced
MDP setting.
(A2) Assumptions on the update functions: f, andhare jointly continuous as well as Lipschitz in
their ﬁrst two arguments, and uniformly w.r.t. the third.
(A3) Assumptions on the additive noise: Fori= 1,2the(mi)nare martingale difference se-
quences with bounded second moments.
(A4) Assumptions on the learning rates: Informally, the sums of the positive a(n)andb(n)diverge,
while their squared sums converge. a(n)goes to zero faster than b(n).
(A5) Assumptions on the transition kernels: The transition kernels of znare continuous wrt. the
topology of weak convergence of probability measures.
(A6) Assumptions on the associated ODEs: We consider occupation measures which intuitively
give for the controlled Markov process the probability or de nsity to observe a particular state-action
pair fromS×Wfor givenθandωand a given control. A precise deﬁnition of these occupation
measures can be found e.g. on page 68 of Borkar (2008 ) or page 5 in Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ).
We need the following assumptions:
• We assume that there exists only one such ergodic occupatio n measure forznonS×W, denoted
byΓθ,ω. A main reason for assuming uniqueness is that it enables us t o deal with ODEs instead of
differential inclusions. Moreover, set ˜f(θ,ω) =/integraltextf(θ,ω,z)Γθ,ω(dz,W).
• Forθ∈Rm, the ODE ˙ω(t) =˜f(θ,ω(t))has a unique asymptotically stable equilibrium λ(θ)
with attractor set Bθsuch thatλ:Rm→Rkis a Lipschitz map with global Lipschitz constant.
• The Lyapunov function V(θ,.)associated toλ(θ)is continuously differentiable.
• Next deﬁne ˜h(θ) =/integraltext
h(θ,λ(θ),z) Γθ,λ(θ)(dz,W).The ODE ˙θ(t) =˜h(θ(t))has a global
attractor set A.
• For allθ, with probability 1, ωnforn/greaterorequalslant1belongs to a compact subset QθofBθ“eventually”.
This assumption is an adapted version of (A6)’ of Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ) to avoid too many
technicalities (e.g. Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ) uses a different control for each iterate).
(A7) Assumption of bounded iterates: The iteratesθnandωnare uniformly bounded almost
surely.
6