(A5) Assumptions on the transition kernels: The state-action map
S×W×Rm+k∋(z,a,θ,ω)/mapsto→˜p(dy|z,a,θ,ω)
is continuous (the topology on the spaces of probability mea sures is induced by weak convergence).
(A6) Assumptions on the associated ODEs: We consider occupation measures which intuitively
give for the controlled Markov process the probability or de nsity to observe a particular state-action
pair fromS×Wfor givenθandωand a given control. A precise deﬁnition of these occupation
measures can be found e.g. on page 68 of Borkar (2008 ) or page 5 in Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ).
We have following assumptions:
• We assume that there exists only one such ergodic occupatio n measure forznonS×W, denoted
byΓθ,ω. A main reason for assuming uniqueness is that it enables us t o deal with ODEs instead of
differential inclusions. Moreover, set ˜f(θ,ω) =/integraltext
f(θ,ω,z)Γθ,ω(dz,W).
• We assume that for θ∈Rm, the ODE ˙ω(t) =˜f(θ,ω(t))has a unique asymptotically stable
equilibriumλ(θ)with attractor set Bθsuch thatλ:Rm→Rkis a Lipschitz map with global
Lipschitz constant.
• The Lyapunov function V(θ,.)associated toλ(θ)is continuously differentiable.
• Next deﬁne ˜h(θ) =/integraltext
h(θ,λ(θ),z)Γθ,λ(θ)(dz,W).We assume that the ODE ˙θ(t) =˜h(θ(t))
has a global attractor set A.
• For allθ, with probability 1, ωnforn/greaterorequalslant1belongs to a compact subset QθofBθ“eventually”.
This assumption is an adapted version of (A6)’ of Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ), to avoid too many
technicalities (e.g. in Karmakar & Bhatnagar (2017 ) two controls are used, which we avoid here to
not overload notation).
(A7) Assumption of bounded iterates: supn/ba∇dblθn/ba∇dbl<∞andsupn/ba∇dblωn/ba∇dbl<∞a.s.
A.5 Further Details concerning the Sampling Process
Let us formulate the construction of the sampling process in more detail: We introduced the function
Sπin the main paper as follows:
Sπ: Ω→˜Ωπ, x/mapsto→argmax
τ∈˜Ωπ

/summationdisplay
η≤τ˜Pπ(η)≤x

.
NowSπbasically divides the interval [0,1]into ﬁnitely many disjoint subintervals, such that the
i-th subinterval Iimaps to the i-th element τi∈˜Ωπ, and additionally the length of Iiis given
by˜Pπ(τi).Sπis measurable, because the pre-image of any element of the si gma-algebra ˜Aπwrt.
Sπis just a ﬁnite union of subintervals of [0,1], which is clearly contained in the Borel-algebra.
BasicallySπjust describes how to get one sample from a multinomial distr ibution with (ﬁnitely
many) probabilities ˜Pπ(τ), whereτ∈˜Ωπ. Compare with inverse transform sampling, e.g. Theorem
2.1.10. in Casella & Berger (2002 ) and applications thereof. For the reader’s convenience le t’s
brieﬂy recall this important concept here in a formal way:
Lemma 1 (Inverse transform sampling) .LetXhave continuous cumulative distribution FX(x)and
deﬁne the random variable YasY=FX(X). ThenYis uniformly distributed on (0,1).
A.6 Further Details for Proof of Theorem 1
Here we provide further technical details needed to ensure t he assumptions stated before to prove
our main theorem Theorem 1.
(A1) Assumptions on the controlled Markov processes: Let us start by discussing more details
for controlled processes that appear in the PPO and RUDDER se tting. Let us focus on the process
related to (z1)n: Letβ >1and let the real sequence znbe deﬁned by (z1)1= 1 and(z1)n+1=
(1−1
β)(z1)n+1. Thezn’s are nothing more but the partial sums of a geometric series converging
toβ.
The sequence (z1)ncan also be interpreted as a time-homogeneous Markov proces s(z1)nwith
transition probabilities given by
P(z,y) =δ(1−1
β)z+1, (38)
17