Further details (regarding the sampling process and the bou nds for the second moments) can be
found in Sections A.5andA.6in the appendix.
(A2) and (A6) Smoothness for handfand Stability of ODEs via Assumptions on Losses. We
make the following assumptions on the loss functions of Eq. ( 1) (or Eq. ( 2)) and Eq. ( 3):
(L1)π,g,Φandφall have compact support and are at least three times continu ously differentiable
wrt. their parameters θandω.
(L2) For each ﬁxed θall critical points of Lg(θ,ω)are isolated local minima and there are only
ﬁnitely many. The local minima {λi(θ)}k(θ)
i=1ofLg(θ,.)can be expressed locally as at least twice
continuously differentiable functions with associated do mains of deﬁnitions {Vλi(θ)}k(θ)
i=1.
(L3) Locally inVλi(θ),Lh(θ,λi(θ))has only one local minimum.
Some remarks concerning these assumptions are in order:
•Comment on (L1) : The parameter space of networks can be assumed to be bounded in practice.
•Comment on (L2) : For each starting point (θ0,ω0)we can ﬁnd a neighborhood Uθ0(ω0)that
connectsω0with a local minimum λi(θ0)ofLg(θ0,·), so thatUθ0(ω0)contains no further critical
points, e.g. a small neighborhood around the steepest desce nt path on the loss surface of Lg(θ0,·)
starting atω0. Next we apply the implicit function theorem (IFT) to ﬁnd a ne ighborhoodV0around
θ0, such thatλi(θ)is twice continuously differentiable there. The IFT can be a pplied tof(θ,·) =
∇ωLg(θ,·) = 0 , since the associated Hessian is positive deﬁnite and thus i nvertible. It can even be
shown that it is twice continuously differentiable, using a nalytic versions of the IFT.
•Comment on (L3) : In a similar vein, for each θ∈V0we can construct neighborhoods Uθ(ω0)
aroundω0withλi(θ)as unique associated local minimum (we may have to shrink V0). Deﬁne
∪θ∈V0({θ}×Uθ(ω0)) =V0×U0.
•Comment on compatibility with global setting: By using a suitable regularization (e.g. weight
decay) for the networks, we can assume that the algorithm Eq. (13) and Eq. ( 14) always stays in
V0×U0. This heuristically justiﬁes that for (θ0,ω0)we localize to V0×U0.
•Comment on drawbacks of assumptions: A completely rigorous justiﬁcation of this argument
would require a more thorough analysis of SGD, which would of course be a very interesting fu-
ture research direction. For SGD with one time scale, a resul t in this direction can be found in
Metrikopoulos et al. (2020 ). It would be interesting to extend it to two timescales.
•Comment on requirements for critical points: It is also a widely accepted (but yet unproven)
conjecture that the probability of ending in a poor local min imum is very small for sufﬁciently
large networks, see e.g. Choromanska et al. (2015 );Kawaguchi (2016 );Kawaguchi et al. (2017 );
Kawaguchi & Bengio (2019 );Kawaguchi et al. (2019 ). Thus, we can ensure that Eq. ( 13) and
Eq. ( 14) really converges to a useful quantity (a high quality local minimum), if our networks are
large enough.
Using these smoothness assumptions, it is not hard to ensure the required properties in (A2) and (A6)
by relating the analysis of the loss surfaces of LgandLhto a stability analysis of the corresponding
gradient systems. Further technical details can be found in Section A.6in the appendix.
(A5) and (A7) Transition Kernel and Bounded Iterates. The transition kernel is continuous (c.f.
Section A.6in the appendix). Boundedness of θnandωnis achieved by weight decay terms in
practice.
Proof of Theorem 1.
Proof. In the previous paragraphs we discussed how the assumptions of Theorem 2can be fulﬁlled.
Finite Greediness is Sufﬁcient to Converge to the Optimal Po licy. Regularization terms are
weighted by (z2)nwhich converges to zero, therefore the optimal policies are the same as without
the regularization. There exists an optimal policy π∗that is deterministic according to Proposi-
tion 4.4.3 in Puterman (2005 ). We want to ensure via a parameter (z1)nthat the policy becomes
more greedy during learning. If the policy is not greedy enou gh, estimates of the action-value or the
advantage function may misguide the algorithm and the optim al policy is not found. For example,
huge negative rewards if not executing the optimal actions m ay avoid convergence to the optimal
policy if the policy is not greedy enough. (z1)ndirectly enters the policy according to Eq. ( 15). We
show that we can estimate how large (z1)nmust become in order to ensure that Q-value and policy
gradient methods converge to an optimal policy, if it is the l ocal minimum of the loss function (we
8