490 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
and promoting a learning culture in SMEs (Employee Train -
ing). As a reference, during 2018 just a few EU countries 
(e.g. Bulgaria 23.47% Luxembourg 2.9%, Slovenia 2.6% 
Croatia 2.23%) invested in corporate training with marginal 
movements in their national budget on AI (Nepelski and 
Sobolewski 2020 ). Moreover, along with Denmark and Fin -
land, they propose concrete investments in higher educa -
tion. For example, the Danish government set aside a pool 
of DKK 190 million (EUR 25.5 million) to cover all techni-
cal fields, including new technologies like AI (Educational 
Fund). Another interesting proposal regards the investments 
for cooperation. Indeed, the Netherlands reported an open 
call, worth EUR 2.3 million, that involved different public 
organisations to coordinate efforts in research on explaina-
ble, socially aware and responsible AI (Public collaboration).
5  A discussion of social good in national 
strategies
In this section, we consider the collected results in the light 
of the policy directions put forward by the EC to understand 
to what extent National Strategies care about AI for social 
good. In particular, we focus on the macro-areas identified 
in Sect.  2.2 to classify the measures outlined in EC’s Policy 
documents for the achievement of the European AI strategy 
goals.12
Beneficial innovation
With respect to a beneficial use of AI, we did not find 
explicit figures claiming the use of AI to tackle social prob-
lems. While the Netherlands refers to specific investments 
for a social purpose, that is for studying the impact of AI 
on work and employment, other countries claim figures to 
improve the public sector. In particular, Denmark plans to 
disseminate digital welfare solutions at the national and local 
levels, while other countries target resources for the growth 
of AI research and development (Denmark, Austria, Sweden, 
and Lithuania).
Planning AI-related investments to improve the efficiency 
of public service can play an important role in promoting AI 
for Social Good. These for example can allow the state antic-
ipate and target interventions in social and health care. How -
ever, similar actions need to consider potential harms that 
may derive from the application of AI in the public sector. 
For instance, some studies showed that healthcare risk-pre-
diction algorithms can increase inequalities within society 
(Obermayer et al. 2019) and similar mechanisms can extend to a vast array of services to regulate a community of people 
or even a country (Cristianini and Scantamburlo 2020). To 
avoid potential risks for society (such as discrimmiation and 
intrusive surveillance), the introduction of AI in the public 
sector would need prevention mechanisms and measures to 
ensure that the risk is carefully considered and monitored. 
An example of such measures includes participatory design 
approaches which strive for citizens’ participation, in par -
ticular those who are part of marginalised groups, in the 
whole lifecycle of an AI system (e.g. for testing and collect-
ing feedback). Even without reporting specific funds, some 
national strategies aim to involve citizens in the process of 
defining future applications of AI, especially those that will 
be deployed and used by public administrations (e.g. Austria 
plans to support societal discussion and increase the accept-
ance of AI, and Czech Republic aims to involve employees 
in technological transformation).
Education and life-long learning
Education and life-long learning identifies a cluster of 
measures aimed at preparing society for the transformation 
brought about by AI in the labour market. In our research, 
even if few national strategies reported investments in this 
domain (5 nations out of 11), our analysis shows high diver -
sification investment in this area. Note that already in 2018 
there was an estimation of 58% of the European budget in AI 
covering education-related areas (Nepelski and Sobolewski 
2020). These plans mostly regard the re-training and upskill-
ing of the population, and will play an important role in 
promoting a more inclusive and sustainable innovation. 
In particular, AI literacy and education can contribute to 
filling the gap created by the rapid growth in AI between 
the “producers”, who know the strengths and limits of this 
technology, and the “consumers”, who may lack knowledge 
about AI and be more exposed to harmful applications. This 
will lead, on one side, to new opportunities for citizens to 
develop AI-based competences at work and contribute to 
the digital transformation that will shape our society. On 
the other hand, a widespread knowledge about AI can lead 
to a faster acceptance of new technology and penetration in 
society, bringing to life the aim to improve the society that 
Europe is wishing for.
Governance mechanisms
An area of intervention which explicitly addresses the 
good of society is the introduction of governance mecha-
nisms through the creation and adoption of ethics guidelines 
and legal frameworks. With respect to this policy area, we 
did not observe quantified investments. In particular, five 
national strategies (Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, Malta, 
Spain) state that they want to create an ethical committee to 
supervise the use and development of AI systems. Malta puts 
forward the proposal of a national AI certification program 12 Note that, given the nature of the documents analysed, our discus-
sion rests upon a policy-based approach to AI for Social Good (what 
we called “AI for Social Good as policies” in Sect. 2.1).