489 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
description (e.g. Employee Training 1 investment in Malta 
and 5 investments in the Netherlands).
Most of the national strategies (7 out of 11) report pack -
ages of investments in AI initiatives (National Fund). These 
investments vary depending on whether they refer to ongoing 
efforts (Current Investment) or future plans (Future invest-
ment). Their description is usually generic and reports total 
volumes, which often cover different areas of application 
(e.g. such as healthcare and life sciences). Some strategies 
provide figures which connect to the digital transformation 
(Innovation). For example, the Netherlands is investing EUR 
18 million in a new national supercomputer (Supercomput-
ing), while Denmark allocated DKK 1.5 billion (EUR 200 
million) on cyber and information security (Cybersecurity) 
and DKK 250 million (EUR 33.5 million) in data quality and 
cross-sectoral cooperation on health data (Data Collection).
Another emerging trend regards investments in the pri-
vate sector (Private), putting special attention to support 
start-ups and SMEs in the uptake of AI, as they make 99% 
of business in Europe (European Commission 2018b ). Thus, 
it is clear that the early adoption of new technologies will 
help boost innovation and competition in the AI landscape. 
In some strategies, there are figures that refer more specifi-
cally to the public sector (Public). For instance, Denmark 
allocates resources for testing and deploying digital wel-
fare solutions in municipalities and regions (Investment for 
Local Administration), while Austria, Lithuania, Denmark, and Sweden report investments in academic research (AI 
Research). Another interesting case regards Malta, which 
plans to spend EUR 1 million per annum to promote their 
international visibility and become an emerging hub for 
technologies in Europe (International Representation). Our 
findings on investments regarding the private and public 
sector well align with the estimates of investments made 
in 2018 in the EU (Nepelski and Sobolewski 2020), which 
suggested, among others, higher pro-capital investments for 
northern countries (e.g. Denmark, Ireland, Finland, Sweden 
and the Netherlands). Further evidence comes from a recent 
EC’s survey which found that 42% of European companies 
are already using AI (European Commission 2020b).
A few documents report quantified investments regard-
ing actions related to society. For example, the Netherlands 
assigns funding to study the impact of AI on work and 
employment (Social Impact). Denmark specifies allocated 
resources for digital welfare solutions (DigitalWelfare Solu-
tion), which connect to a wider reform in the Public Sector 
aimed at contributing to better and more cohesive welfare 
services.
Regarding education, seven strategies propose economic 
plans. For example, Denmark and France reported invest-
ments to support the population in developing digital skills 
on AI and facilitate their integration into the new labour 
market. (AI Literacy for Citizens). The Netherlands describe 
multiple economic initiatives (5 codes) for training workers Table 3  (continued)
2nd ORDER CODES
1st order codesN (#occ) Description NATIONS (#of occurrences)
AI Research 4 Investment in educational and research 
resourcesAustria, Lithuania, Denmark, Sweden
Fig. 4  List of the 2nd order codes presented by European Member States in their AI national strategy with corresponding occurrences