482 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
2.2  The European strategy
In the last few years, the development and the deployment 
of AI have grown dramatically at a global scale. While some 
top players such as China and the United States are moving 
faster to achieve leadership in AI, focusing mostly on the 
industry, the vision of the European Union (EU) is to bring 
a balance between innovation and ethical sustainability. In 
particular, the ambition stated by the EC is: “to become the 
world-leading region for developing and deploying cutting-
edge, ethical and secure AI, promoting a human-centric 
approach in the global context.” (European Commission 
2018c).
To move towards this goal, the EC put forward specific 
initiatives including policy documents, ethics guidelines and, 
more recently, a proposal for a regulation (European Com-
mission 2021a; b). All these efforts aim to define a unified 
approach across all EU Member States and ensure respon-
sible AI innovation. The ethics guidelines for Trustworthy 
AI represent a milestone in the European pathway which has 
involved an articulated production process (Smuha 2019). 
A more recent effort has been the preparation of a regula-
tory framework, first announced in a white paper (European 
Commission 2020a), and now officially proposed in a EC’s 
communication (European Commission 2021a; b) specify -
ing a set of rules based on AI systems’ risk level.
The aforementioned initiatives are part of a wider process 
which is guided by three goals defining the pillars of the 
European AI strategy (European Commission 2018b):
1. Boost the EU’s technological and industrial capacity and 
AI uptake across the economy by private and public sec-
tors. This implies to strengthen research and develop -
ment investments in AI in the EU.
2. Prepare for socio-economic changes brought by the 
transformation of AI in the labor market. Member States 
will need to prepare the Society to develop basic digital 
skills; re-skill or up-skill workers affected by automa-
tion, robotics and AI; and train more AI specialists, aim-
ing for academic excellence.
3. Ensure an appropriate ethical and legal framework 
to promote trustworthy and accountable AI made in 
Europe.
Table  1 provides an overview of the main takeaways from 
fundamental policy documents (for an overview of the EU 
AI landscape see Stix 2019). Surveying the recommenda-
tions set out in these documents we identified some macro-
areas of policy directions that can help us contextualise the 
analysis of national strategies and their investment plans (see 
Sect.  3):• Beneficial innovation to improve public services and 
tackle social problems: e.g. the use of AI for policy 
development and sustainable challenges (such as reduc-
ing pesticides in agriculture), more efficient and tar -
geted interventions in the public sectors (e.g. healthcare, 
employment, security, etc.), accessibility of AI services 
to the whole society including protected groups.
• Education and life-long learning to prepare the society 
for an AI future: e.g. access to AI literacy in primary and 
secondary schools, courses for up- or re-skilling, increas-
ing gender balance in AI and STEM, introduction of non-
technical skills in AI and STEM curricula.
• Governance mechanisms to steer AI towards a benefi-
cial use aligned with human rights and the rule of law 
through the elaboration and adoption of ethics guidelines 
and legal framework, systems to continuously monitor 
the impact of AI on society.
• Cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders:  e.g. 
exchange of best practices, creation of multi-stakeholder 
alliances, facilitating partnerships (e.g. private and pub-
lic) and research networks also to maximize investments 
and facilitate technology transfer.
• Pan-European data and technological infrastructure  
including the creation of trusted data spaces, the provi-
sion of testing facilities and sandboxes, and investments 
in clouds and high-performance computing, among oth-
ers.
The policy directions outlined above aim to achieve the 
goals set out in the European AI strategy (see the three pil-
lars) and try to contribute to sustainable innovation. In addi-
tion, each policy area suggests measures that can foster AI 
for social good and contribute to build a roadmap for our 
quality analysis of the investment plans stated in National 
AI strategies.
In addition to policy documents, The EU strategy is sup -
ported by other initiatives such as collaborations, projects 
and funding opportunities. Some activities facilitate the 
monitoring of AI development along different dimensions 
including industrial, technological and research capacity 
and policy initiatives, such as the AI Watch5 (JRC). While 
5 The AI Watch is an initiative of the European Commission (EC) 
jointly developed by the EC Joint Research Centre (JRC) and the 
Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and 
Technology (DG CONNECT). See more at https:// knowl edge4 
policy. ec. europa. eu/ ai- watch_ en. Note that another relevant monitor -
ing activity is conducted by the OECD (Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development), an intergovernmental economic 
organisation aiming to encourage economic progress and world trade 
https:// www. oecd. org/. In particular, the OECD AI Policy Observa-
tory aims at collecting data on AI worldwide. See more at https:// 
oecd. ai/.