480 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
(e.g. student dropout or prison overcrowding) and then gen -
erate unexpected harms or inconveniences as they go live 
(e.g. outcomes benefiting a small portion of the population 
or users’ over reliance). Ethics principles, moreover, will 
remain a sterile exercise if we do not put them into prac-
tice. Good AI policies are essential to support a more prac-
tical approach to ethical principles whose impact depends 
on how they integrate into larger governance ecosystems 
including relevant policies, laws, regulations and existing 
practices (Fjeld et al. 2020). In addition, AI policies can 
operate at different scales and impact on a variety of stake-
holders thereby promoting a more inclusive and responsible 
innovation approach across all ramifications of our society. 
For example, education and vocational training constitute a 
key area of intervention for a successful undertaking of AI 
for social good. Organisations and governments planning 
measures in this sphere give greater support to future and 
present workers in dealing with the challenges and opportu-
nities brought by AI.
In this paper, we focus on European AI policies and how 
these relate to AI for social good. We want to explore how 
Member States introduce AI for social good in their national 
strategies. In particular, we focus on their investment plans 
and how these commit to the human-centric approach pro-
posed by the European Commission (EC) and embedded 
into European Guidelines for Trustworthy AI. Our choice 
is motivated by the assumption that information about con-
crete investments can be a meaningful indicator of coun -
tries’ commitment towards AI for social good and the Euro-
pean human-centric vision. Therefore the identification of 
concrete measures presented in the strategies will help to 
envision how European countries are planning to fulfill the 
EC projections on AI. Our guiding questions are: What do 
Member States plan to do for a responsible development of 
AI? Do they translate the human-centric vision into targeted 
measures? What plans do they have to make AI development 
more democratic and open to society? In other words, is AI 
made in Europe truly fostering social good? We will try to 
answer these questions by analysing the investment plans 
stated in the European national strategies and providing a 
critical reflection on the definition of AI for social good 
using the EU AI Policy as a reference. The aim is to iden-
tify general trends and types of investments that can foster 
the development of a beneficial and sustainable AI. While 
our analysis suggests that Member States are trying to make 
concrete steps towards socially good AI, there is room for 
reflection on the maturity of their efforts.
The article is structured as follows. Section  2 introduces 
the idea of AI for social good, highlighting the role played 
by AI policies, and provides an overview of the European AI 
strategy and related key initiatives. In Sect.  3 we dig into the 
European Member States’ strategies and analyse the invest-
ment plans stated in such documents. Section  4 describes the results of our analysis providing an overview of the general 
trends. In Sect.  5 we comment on our findings based on the 
policy directions taken by the EU on AI for social good. 
Finally, we provide some concluding remarks summarising 
the work done and highlighting some open issues.
2  Moving towards a good AI society
The field of AI for social good spans a variety of stakehold-
ers and actions such as public events,1 scientific publica-
tions,2  movements and organisations’ special programmes.3
In the following sections, we will explore the notion of 
AI for social good at the semantic level by outlining the 
meanings that usually relate to it. In particular, we will focus 
on the policy element, which can guide and complement 
other components (i.e. AI applications with a socially good 
outcome and ethical principles), and provide an overview 
of the European strategy towards AI. The latter is, in fact, 
an example of a policy approach that aims to be “human-
centric” and for the well-being of society, and, thus, it is a 
source of stimuli for discussing how strategic choices can 
influence the implementation of AI for social good.
2.1  Framing AI for social good
What do we mean by “AI for Social Good”? To answer this 
question we identify three possible and complementary 
meanings.
1. AI for Social Good as applications
A first, intuitive meaning is to achieve a positive impact 
by applying AI to societal and environmental challenges 
such as natural disaster management, poverty reduction 
and climate change. For example, Climate Change AI is an 
organisation of volunteers using machine learning to help 
1 Conferences on this theme abounded in the past years and reached 
well-established communities in the AI field. See, for instance, the 
NeurIps 2018 workshop (https:// aifor socia lgood. github. io/ 2018/) and 
ICLM 2019 AISG (https:// aifor socia lgood. github. io/ icml2 019/ index. 
htm).
2 As well as journal special issues, see also Cambridge University 
Press’ book series: https:// www. cambr  idge. org/ core/ series/ artifi  cial- 
intel ligen ce- for- social- good/ 4E546 39036 00210 6212C 0A381 2752C  
7C.
3 Consider, for example, multi-stakeholder forums like “AI4Peo-
ple” (https:// www. eismd. eu/ ai4pe ople/) and “AI for Good” (https:// 
ai4go od. org/), United Nations’ platform “AI for Good Global Sum-
mit”, companies’ programme such as Google AI’s open call (https:// 
ai. google/ social- good/) and Microsoft’s AI for Humanitarian Action 
(https:// www. micro soft. com/ en- us/ ai/ ai- for- human itari an- action) and 
Oxford Initiative AIxSDGs (https:// www. sbs. ox. ac. uk/ resea rch/ centr 
es- and- initi atives/ oxford- initi ative- aisdgs).