481 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
reduce gas emissions. At Stanford University a group of 
researchers combined publicly available satellite imagery 
with deep learning to predict the level of poverty across 
African villages and support organizations to deliver ser -
vices to those most in need (Yeh et al. 2020). Usually, a 
shared objective of these and similar projects is to advance 
social good as defined by the UN Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDGs) (The Future Society 2020). However, 
note that applying AI to a specific social or environmental 
challenge alone is not a guarantee for the achievement of 
social good. For instance, a study on the impact of AI on the 
achievement of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals 
revealed that AI can act as an enabler on 79% of sustainable 
development targets but also inhibits 35% of them (Vinuesa 
et al. 2020).
Other challenges include AI for social good applications 
resulting in a failure because of poor ethical considerations 
(the so-called “good-AI-gone-bad”) or reflecting an acci -
dental success which misses the opportunity to extend the 
positive effects of AI to other settings (Floridi et al. 2020). 
To address these issues, Floridi et al. (2020) propose seven 
ethical factors that provide both theoretical and practical 
guidance for the design and implementation of AI projects in 
agreement with well-known ethical principles (beneficence, 
non maleficence, justice, autonomy, and explicability).
2. AI for Social Good as ethical principles
Another way to spell out the meaning of AI for social 
good is to define a set of principles that can inspire the 
design and assessment of AI systems. Popular examples 
include the European Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (HLEG 
2019a) and the intergovernmental principles adopted by the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD 2019). Similar efforts have produced an impressive 
literature in the last few years and extensive reviews suggest 
a meaningful convergence around common themes, such as 
accountability and non-discrimination, but also the need for 
more concrete approaches making such principles practi-
cally relevant (Fjeld 2020; Hagendorff 2020; Jobin et al. 
2019; Zeng et al. 2018). Whittleston et al. (2019) argue that 
a way to move principled AI forward is to acknowledge and 
address the tensions that arise when applying ethical prin-
ciples in practice. Many scholars developed specific tools 
and methodologies supporting the implementation of ethical 
principles in the deployment and assessment of AI systems, 
and recent works have provided classification, more or less 
articulated, of available tools (Morley et al. 2019; Scantam-
burlo et al 2020).
3. AI for Social Good as policies
A third important strand in the field of AI for social good 
is the development of AI policies which set up priorities and 
action plans for the development and adoption of AI in the public interest. Note that “policy” is a general term that may 
apply to different entities, such as firms and associations, 
but here we focus on public policy, i.e. those adopted by 
states to harness the potential of AI and protect citizens. In 
broad terms, an AI policy refers to a plan of actions which 
addresses both the opportunities and the risks brought about 
by AI. Usually, it includes statements about resource alloca-
tions and commitments to specific areas of concerns (Mat-
tingly-Jordan et al. 2019). It may inspire new laws or solicit 
changes to current regulations in response to specific AI 
characteristics. In general, a policy “conveys the necessity of 
exploration and planning, the finality of law, and the primacy 
of public interest without definitely endorsing or rejecting 
regulatory intervention” (Calo 2017).
AI policies can play a key role in the field of AI for social 
good complementing and integrating the other two elements 
(i.e. AI applications and ethical principles). First, they can 
offer a roadmap for a wide range of actors (companies, non-
profit organisations, research centres, public administrations, 
individual citizens, etc.) offering guidance and bringing 
cohesion to a variety of initiatives and projects. Second, AI 
policies translate ideals and goals into action plans provid-
ing concrete information on fundamental aspects such as 
funding and investments, governance mechanisms, areas of 
development and risks mitigation. Although policy docu-
ments may contain partial or provisional information, they 
can work as a mirror reflecting the values and the priorities 
of a government, but also the incoherences and the gaps 
between the aspirations and the planned actions. Nonethe-
less, the choice to approach AI for social good from a pol-
icy perspective does not exclude other conceptualizations, 
such as those described above. In fact, our idea of AI for 
Social Good cannot be reduced to a single dimension. AI 
projects that implement UN SDGs are genuine examples of 
AI for social good. However, we also acknowledge that set-
ting up AI for social good policies is paramount to give an 
agenda soliciting and steering more concrete initiatives. In 
this paper, we highlight the policy dimension because it can 
offer new, fresh insights to the field of AI for social good.
Since 2017, 60 countries, territories and the EU have 
published over 700 AI policy documents,4 also known as 
National or Regional AI Strategies, to set out their vision on 
AI, define specific interventions and coordinate governmen-
tal or intergovernmental efforts (for an inventory of these 
documents see Van Roy 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). In the fol-
lowing section, we direct our attention towards the European 
AI strategy to better understand the priorities and initiatives 
undertaken by the European Union to steer the development 
of AI. This overview, moreover, will set the stage for our 
analysis of Member States’ strategies.
4 See the OECD Observatory website: https:// www. oecd. ai/ count 
ries- and- initi atives.