487 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
Once completed the two datasets, the researchers cross-
checked the results obtained to ensure a uniform joint data-
set. Codes which were specific to only one of the two dataset 
were collaboratively revised and accepted/rejected according 
to the initial criteria. At the end of the control phase, five 
codes were deleted due to a lack of compatibility with the 
defined criteria (e.g. fundings returned entirely from the EU 
or investments made before the year of publication of the 
strategy).
In the second stage, the researchers created a new ver -
sion of the dataset inspecting all the code to unify similar 
categories. The final version of the dataset is composed of 18 
codes that cluster our 49 data related to investments. These 
codes referred also as first-order codes, describe directly 
the thematic content identified in the documents. We then 
organized the first-order codes into 8 higher-level catego -
ries by applying the axial coding methodology (Strauss and 
Corbin 1998 ). This second process generated the second-
order codes, helping the researchers to generate new high-
level relations between the codes. Table  3 represents the 
first and second-order codes and their descriptions while 
Fig. 4 presents the occurrences of second-order codes based 
on the Member States they refer to. The table includes the 
results from the analysis of 11 national strategies that have 
reported information related to investments based on our 
requirements. The complete version of the analysis, includ-
ing the text selected and document details can be found in 
the appendix.
3.3  Limitations
Our analysis is bounded by some limits regarding the fram-
ing of our research questions and the corpus of the docu-
ments selected. For example, even if the EC provided some guidance (European Commission 2018a) in the definition 
of priorities and policy measures, each national strategy 
presents differences in the structure and details provided. 
Since there were documents which did not provide specific 
and exhaustive information on investments, it was not pos-
sible to run a full comparison. For this reason, we decided to 
consider only current or future investments with a specified 
budget. This choice was motivated by a twofold reason: on 
the one hand, to define in a clear way the area of interest for 
coding, on the other hand, to focus on concrete actions taken 
by the states, not merely general intentions. We believe that 
the presence of a budget represents a stronger commitment 
that the State takes towards the EU directives. However, we 
are aware that the findings of this research might not cor -
rectly represent the current status of the investment in the 
EU. Thus, future studies in this area may complement our 
findings with estimation from the market to have a more 
representative vision of the AI landscape in the EU.
4  Results
According to the results, 11 national strategies have reported 
investment plans that meet our requirements. These include 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Lithuania, Malta, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands. In 
the following subsections, we highlight the main findings 
distinguishing between general investment plans and invest -
ments with an explicit commitment to society (e.g. welfare 
solutions, education and social impact).
The table presents the 1st and 2nd order codes, their 
occurrences (#occ), and the countries reporting the code 
in their strategies with the related occurrences and a brief 
Fig. 3  A visual representation of our two-stages qualitative analysis process and the creation of first and second-order codes with respect to the 
theme of education