496 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 32nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
Education 12 Employee 
Training6 MT The Investing in Skills programme, co-financed through the European Social Fund (ESF), 
will be operational until 30 June 2023 and has a budget of €5 m to help employed people 
develop and increase knowledge and skills through trainingp. 37 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)
NL A scheme that will structurally make more than €200 million available in the form of indi-
vidual budgets for training and development will be presented to the House of Representa-
tives after the summer of 2019. This ‘STAP’ (Labour Market Position Stimulus) budget 
replaces the current tax deduction scheme for training and is accessible to everyone up to 
the state pension age
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment is developing a scheme to implement the 
Wiersma motion, which will structurally make €48 million a year available from 2020 to 
promote a learning culture in SMEs
and the Heerma motion, which will make a total of €60 million available over a period of five 
years to provide additional support to the agricultural, hospitality and recreation sectors in 
order to attract more ‘BBL’ students (students in the ‘work-based’ VET learning pathway)
With ‘MKB!dee’, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is challenging SMEs 
to come up with ideas that will lead to more investment in the training and development of 
workers. While intended for all SMEs, the scheme focuses in particular on the challenges of 
technical SMEs and digitalisation. It relates to the broad effects of digitalisation, not to the 
ICT sector as such. In 2019, €7.5 million is available
The Regioal MBO Investment Fund (Regionaal Investeringsfonds mbo) scheme provides 
€25 million a year until 2022 for projects that improve the connection of Senior secondary 
vocational education (MBO) to the labour market, for example, if the profession for which 
they offer training changes as a result of AIp. 31 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
p. 31
p. 31
p. 31
p. 32
AI Literacy for 
Citizens2 DK The tripartite agreement from October 2017 put focus on creating a vocational adult educa-
tion and training system that is better geared to strengthening digital competences of the 
entire workforce and to adapting to the changing needs of the labour market. To support 
this, a transition fund of DKK 95 million (EUR 12.7 million) annually was set up. In 
addition to the transition fund DKK 8 million (EUR 1.1 million) is allocated to additional 
activitiesp. 48 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
FR Under the Big Investment Plan 2018–2022, €15bn have been ring-fenced 
for vocational training, primarily for the benefit of low-skilled jobseek -
ers and low-skilled young NEETs (not in employment, education or train -
ing). This budget forms the skills investment plan (PIC)p. 91 For a meaningful Arti -
ficial Intelligence (Vil -
lani, 2018)
Educational 
Fund4 DK The government has launched a talent programme to provide the most talented and motivated 
students with better opportunities and greater challenges, so they become even more skilled 
in their fields. The government will set aside a pool of DKK 190 million (EUR 25 million) 
to cover all technical fields, including new technologies like artificial intelligencep. 45 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
FI The absence of applied studies is also evident in universities of applied sciences and in 
vocational education and training. However, as stated in the budget proposal, universities of 
applied sciences will be allocated five million euros for their RDI activities. This appropria-
tion should be used in a targeted way in cooperation with business to create high added-
value products and services, especially in the utilisation of artificial intelligence, robotics 
and digitalisation applications in various sectorsp. 50 Finland’s Age of Artificial 
Intelligence (MEAE 2017)