497 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
2nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
NL Commissioned by the Minister of Education, Culture and Science, the universities have drawn 
up sectoral plans for the STEM, Social Sciences and Humanities sectors. The Ministry will 
contribute an extra €70 million to this, and the periodic resources for profiling can also be 
used for this purpose
The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science support the Education Innovation with ICT 
Acceleration Plan for all higher education institutions (universities of applied sciences and 
research universities) by making €15 million available over four yearsp. 32 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
p. 32
Private 8 Companies 
Investments8 DK It is proposed to launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool of DKK 20 million 
(EUR 3.1 million) over four years targeting companies with a business model based on arti-
ficial intelligence. The prerequisite for this is 50 percent financing from the private sector 
amounting to a total investment pool of DKK 40 million (EUR 6.2 million). The fund will 
be managed by the Danish Growth Fund
The government will launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool of DKK 20 mil-
lion (EUR 2.7million) over four years, and this will be targeted at enterprises with a busi-
ness model based on artificial intelligence. The fund will be managed by the Danish Growth 
Fund. The aim of the project is to build a bridge between investors and Danish businesses 
within artificial intelligence and thereby nurture the Danish market for artificial intelligence 
solutions
Given the requirement for private co-financing, the initiative will have a leverage effect, as 
private capital is also invested in the businesses. If the private level of funding is assumed 
to be about 50%, about DKK 40 million (about EUR 5.4 million) will be invested in the 
development of Danish businesses based on artificial intelligence. The effect of investments 
will be regularly reviewed and the project will be adjusted accordinglyp 0.21 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
p. 56
p. 57
DE We are creating new funding opportunities for venture capital and venture debt and will 
launch a Tech Growth Fund Initiative. The Federal Government is continuing to use its 
successful, well-established funding instruments for start-ups and is also developing new 
instruments designed to strengthen the German venture capital and venture debt markets. 
This includes the new, independent KfW Capital equity entity, which is to increase the 
annual amount of investment KfW provides to the Venture Capital and Venture Debt Funds 
to €200 million by 2020, thereby making it easier for young, innovative and high-growth 
technology firms to secure financing for their start-up and growth stagesp. 24 Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
(FEELS 2018)
MT Malta Enterprise has launched various incentives schemes which can finance innovative AI 
undertakings with a viable business concept in their early stages of development. The incen-
tive schemes will run through 2019 and 2020 and may be extended to the following years. 
Assistance includes: seed funding grants of up to €25,000 under Business START (B.Start). 
The total budget available for this scheme is currently €1 m per year
Repayable advances structured as a mezzanine finance instrument to support start-ups with 
a proven business concept undertake initiatives linked to raising equity investment from 
third parties, procuring equipment and crowd-funding. Typical support is in the range of 
€200,000 and advances are repayable over a number of yearsp. 23 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)p. 23