486 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
In the initial phase of our analysis, we extracted some 
quantitative information about our set of documents and 
the vocabulary employed. With this step, we aim to add 
the first layer of information describing the documents at 
large by means of simple statistics, such as term frequen-
cies and terms’ relevance. We applied basic pre-process -
ing techniques to remove useless terms (such as articles 
and prepositions) and broke up the text into essential units 
(tokens). This process highlighted the heterogeneity of our 
documents, whose length varies significantly ranging from 
1000 to 30,000 tokens (for instance, see Austria vs France 
in Fig.  2a). In addition, we created a dictionary including a 
set of unique words11 to provide an overview of the vocabu-
lary characterising the national strategies. Among the 10,262 
unique terms, the 30 most frequent words in the whole cor -
pus are reported in Fig.  2b. These include several terms that 
connect to the web of meanings characterizing the idea of 
socially good AI introduced in Sect.  1. Some of these relate 
to the public sphere (‘public’, ‘government’, ‘services’, ‘soci-
ety’, ‘national’, ‘european’) while others are associated with 
a technological transition (‘research’, ‘development’, ‘inno-
vation’, ‘education’, ‘work’, ‘companies’, ‘skills’). However, 
we observed that among the most frequent terms there are 
some general words lacking relevance for our research focus 
(e.g. ‘use’, ‘order’, ‘new’). Since this exercise was meant to 
give an overview of the vocabulary used by documents, we 
preferred to minimize our intervention, adding many con-
straints on the search and hence influencing the final result. 
An in-depth analysis of the context is hence required .
The core of our analysis consists in the application of 
grounded theory (Charmaz 2014) to explore our research question. In our case, this inductive approach is used to iden-
tify and collect meaningful pieces of text (i.e. the data) in the 
documents reporting specific budgets for investments. These 
data will be tagged with descriptive labels, hereafter referred 
to as codes, that summarise the concept or idea behind the 
text according to the open code method (Strauss and Cor -
bin 1998). As compared to other qualitative approaches, 
grounded theory offers the flexibility to revisit the codes 
created by the researchers based on the emergence of new 
themes during the analysis of the text. The collection of data 
(i.e. portions of text) and codes (i.e. the label assigned) then 
formed our dataset.
We organized our analysis on a two-stage process involv -
ing two researchers. In the first stage, each researcher ana -
lysed independently the list of documents (see Table  2) to 
generate their own dataset with their own list of codes. In 
the second stage, the datasets were merged and the codes 
revised to obtain the final results. Figure  3 presents a sketchy 
representation of our process with respect to the theme of 
education.
To facilitate the analysis, before starting the process the 
researchers agreed on some common criteria in order to 
identify pieces of text of interest. The inclusion criteria were 
the following: (i) investments must include clear estimations 
in terms of money allocation; (ii) investments must be made 
by the country under consideration; and (iii) investments 
must be planned for the year of the publication or the years 
to come.
In the first stage, each researcher selected relevant por -
tions of text based on the aforementioned criteria and 
assigned them to a code creating her own set of codes. Dur -
ing this process, the researchers were free to reiterate the 
process, adjust or create new categories of codes. This step 
was conducted individually to avoid that researchers were 
influenced by each other while interpreting the documents. 
Fig. 2  Lengths in unique tokens of National Strategies (a) and most frequent terms (b)
11 The dictionary was created by using the Gentism library available 
at the following link: https:// radim rehur  ek. com/ gensim/.