484 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
others promote cooperation through industrial and research 
networks such as the Digital SME Alliance,6 Claire,7  Ellis,8  
and EurAI.9
Among projects, the AI4EU10 platform fosters collabora-
tion among AI actors, sharing expertise and research at the 
European level. The platform also includes the European 
Observatory on Society and AI, which is coordinated by 
the authors of this work. The goal of the Observatory is to 
present and reflect on the development of AI in Europe, in 
particular regarding the ethical, legal, social, economic and 
cultural aspects of AI. This paper results from the collection 
of EU policy documents carried out by the AI4EU Obser -
vatory team and incorporate the reflections developed and 
shared in this research context.
3  European national strategy analysis
As we saw, the European AI strategy is premised on the 
idea that AI should be a “force for good in society with the 
ultimate aim of increasing human well-being.” (European 
Commission 2021a; b, p. 1). Moreover, the goals and the 
clusters of policy proposals identified in key EU documents 
(see Sect.  2.2) set out priorities and action plans that can 
facilitate the implementation of AI for the social good.
This paper aims to analyse how the goals and the policy 
directions of the European AI strategy translate in practice. 
In particular, we will examine what Member States plan to 
allocate resources in their AI national strategies. Are they 
promoting AI for social good?
To answer this question we analysed 15 European 
national policies to understand how Member States plan to 
contribute to the achievement of Trustworthy AI. In par -
ticular, we focus on investment plans to see whether the 
ethical and social aspiration emerging from the European 
AI policy documents translates into concrete actions and 
specific resource allocations.In the following sections, we contextualise our work and 
illustrate similar research comparing recent ethical guide-
lines and frameworks. We then describe the documents stud-
ied, also from a quantitative perspective, and present the 
selection process as well as the method used for the quali-
tative analysis. Finally, we discuss the results and identify 
some general trends based on our area of interest (i.e. the 
social good).
3.1  Related works
This work connects to a large literature dealing with a vari-
ety of guidelines and frameworks, which have rapidly sprung 
up worldwide to promote the responsible and sustainable 
development of AI. Several studies carried out a comparative 
analysis to identify similarities and divergences among these 
initiatives. Examples include studies mapping keywords 
of different guidelines (Zeng et al. 2018) and broad scope 
reviews (Bradley et al. 2020; Jobin et al. 2019; Hagendorff  
2020). Most of these studies consider a heterogeneous set of 
documents released by a variety of entities, including private 
companies, non-profit organisations and public institutions. 
Also, their main purpose is to study common ethical topics 
and their coverage across principles and guidelines issued in 
the last few years. Compared to these works, our study pre-
sents some points of contact, but also important distinctions. 
On the one hand, it shares the attention towards the ethical 
development of AI. But, on the other hand, it focuses on a 
more homogeneous set of documents (i.e. national strate-
gies) which are all part of a challenging European strategy. 
So, rather than (dis)agreements on AI ethical principles, our 
focus is more on how these principles translate into plans 
and measures taken by the European countries. In particu-
lar, we do agree with Fjeld et al. (2020) that principles are 
better understood in their cultural, linguistic, geographic, 
and organisational context. Hence, investigating Europe’s 
AI strategy from the perspective of different Member States 
adds value to the study of the European AI landscape 
(Fig.  1).
3.2  Materials and methods
To conduct our analysis of the investment plans stated in 
European national strategies, we selected the set of docu-
ments to be considered. We generated this selection based 
on the EU national strategies available from May 2020 to 
August 2020. According to AI Watch (Van Roy 2020) 22 
nations were at least at the final draft of their strategy, a 
count that achieved 27 in the last revised report (Van Roy 
2021). However, we have reduced the selection to 15 nations 
based on the following requirements:7 Claire AI is a network of confederation of Laboratories for Artifi-
cial Intelligence research in Europe. See more at https:// claire- ai. org/
8 Ellis (European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems) 
is an European network for research including programs for PhD. See 
more at https:// ellis. eu/.
9 EurAI (the European Association for Artificial Intelligence or 
ECCAI) represents the European community in Artificial Intelli-
gence. See more at https:// eurai. org/.
10 The AI4EU is a European project funded by Horizon 2020 aim-
ing to create a platform for collaboration between the different stake-
holders in Europe. The platform is present at https:// www. ai4eu. eu/ 
and includes the Observatory on Society and AI. See more at https:// 
www. ai4eu. eu/ obser  vatory .6 The Digital SME Alliance is a network of ICT small and medium 
sized enterprises in Europe. See more at https:// www. digit  alsme. eu/.