492 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
Among policy directions suggested by the EC (see 
Sect.  2.2), only education attracted significant investments. 
However, the investments reported in this area are mostly 
concerned with the introduction of AI in high schools and 
workforce training. While these measures are fundamental 
for guaranteeing an equitable access to the opportunities 
offered by AI, further funding could extend to other EC’s 
policy recommendations such as the integration of ethics and 
humanities into AI and STEM curricula, the strengthening of 
the multidisciplinary research environment and the improve-
ment of gender balance in computer science and engineering 
disciplines. These findings are aligned with those presented 
in Schiff (2021), who also provides recommendations to 
boost ethics and policy-oriented AI in education research 
and create a real impact for the public good.
Other categories of policy recommendations, such as 
cooperation and dialogue with stakeholders remain relatively 
new and few nations report concrete funding in this field. 
Close collaboration with stakeholders and representatives 
of vulnerable groups is of crucial importance in the devel -
opment and deployment of AI, in particular when its appli-
cation regards the public sectors and services that should 
be available for the whole society. Collaboration can also 
mean more opportunities for public–private partnerships that 
address societal and environmental challenges, for example, 
by funding hackathons and competitions.
With respect to governance mechanisms, we observed 
several good initiatives but no specific information about 
numeric investments. Considering the recent EC’s pro-
posal for an AI regulation, we expect to see more concrete 
measures in this domain. In particular, we believe that more 
resources would be needed to develop testing facilities and 
sandboxes to allow AI researchers and practitioners assess 
compliance with AI regulation. However, we also warn that 
actions guided only by the goal of legal compliance may 
not be enough to internalise the intrinsic motivations which 
underpin the development of AI for social good and sub-
stantiate the application of ethical principles (see the second 
meaning of AI4SG in Sect.  2.1). Self-interests from compa-
nies and the market may sometimes find a way to take over the existing law or use ethics to delay the work on regula-
tions (Nemitz 2018). For this reason investments in AI for 
social good should, on the one hand, be well regulated to 
avoid grey areas and overtaking interests from the market 
and, on the other, be more connected to produce long-lasting 
effects. In this regard, defining numerical expectation in the 
investments for social good could not predict the effective-
ness of the measures taken. The efforts should perhaps be 
more directed upon common goals based on genuine Euro-
pean values. More solidarity among EU states, for example 
by financially supporting the sharing and reuse of knowledge 
and tools, would help more equitable and common progress, 
as well as the consolidation of the goals achieved. Indeed, 
the European view of a suitable and responsible AI should 
not imply that some countries move faster and further than 
others. Europe should have a unified approach towards AI 
for social good with the same active participation by all 
the parts involved. Note that the revised version of the EU 
coordinated plan stresses this point by suggesting, for exam-
ple, sharing, developing and implementing actions on the 
national/regional level that proved to be successful in the 
other Member States (European Commission 2021b).
Moreover, a proportionality principle can ensure that 
resources and efforts are fairly distributed across all sectors, 
not only in AI. The development of an ethical and suitable 
approach to AI would be more credible if we address other 
issues, such as climate change, health and migration with 
the same intensity and strength. The use of AI for social and 
environmental issues, like the recent Covid-19 crisis, should 
not reduce our efforts in other directions such as guaran-
teeing access to health treatments and vaccines to all. In 
conclusion, the use of an “ethics narrative” should not be 
used to cover marketing or political interest but to support 
real actions to achieve not only a “Trustworthy AI” but also 
a culture of trustworthiness. It is essential that all stakehold -
ers engage in this process. In particular governments and 
policy-makers need to provide means to put into practice AI 
for Social Good, but also the Society (i.e. the citizens) needs 
to remain aware and actively demand changes in favour of 
social and environmental well-being.