491 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
based on its Ethical AI Framework. However, all these 
propositions lack details about allocated resources. While 
some of these proposals build upon existing initiatives and 
investments schemes we expect to see further measures like 
the ambitious goal of Trustworthy AI cannot be achieved 
without costs. The setup of an appropriate ethical and legal 
framework is, in fact, a demanding effort which implies a 
long-term view and the mobilisation of huge resources (e.g. 
experts in different fields, new business processes, holis-
tic assessment methodologies, audits, etc.). However, as of 
today, national strategies take a reflexive approach based on 
ethical principles and changes are to be made rather than 
defining clear rule-based systems (Radu 2021).
Cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders
Another set of policy recommendations aims to increase 
cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders to exchange 
best practices and facilitate the partnership. Creating a 
web of stable interactions among AI stakeholders can also 
optimise efforts targeting social good (e.g. projects fac-
ing global social or environmental challenges or sharing 
standards and good practices implementing ethical require-
ments). For example, the EC sets out the AI Alliance pre-
cisely to engage different stakeholders, including citizens, 
in a broad and open discussion of different aspects of AI. 
Another important example of international collaboration 
is the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI), funded in 2020 to 
undertake common AI projects and share mechanisms for 
multidisciplinary analysis and coordination.13
In our analysis we found only 2 national strategies allocat-
ing explicit resources for cooperation. The Netherlands, for 
example, reports investments to foster collaborations among 
public entities on explainable, socially-aware and responsi-
ble AI. The other case is Denmark, which specifies funds 
for both national and international collaborations. Build-
ing synergies between different countries or even different 
continents has important implications in the creation of a 
common ground for Trustworthy AI. Indeed, international 
collaborations can help overcome cultural barriers and build 
mutual understanding of how to ensure safe and ethical AI 
innovation at a global level (ÓhÉigeartaigh et al. 2020).
Pan-European data and technological infrastructure
In the effort of achieving the expected transformation 
for AI, the infrastructure and the computational capabili-
ties play a fundamental role in making this plan possible. 
Actions such as ensuring the data quality, making datasets 
publicly available, and putting in place mechanisms to pro-
tect their security are necessary to maintain trustworthiness at all levels of the AI pipeline. While this lays down the 
ground to implement projects and initiatives for AI for social 
good, we identified only two nations involved in this pro-
cess: Denmark and the Netherlands. The former reports the 
intention to publicly share and improve the quality of the 
data collected for weather and forecasts. They also commit 
to prevent cyber attacks by investing in strengthening their 
cybersecurity. The latter instead focuses on the acquisition 
of a new supercomputer to ensure the computing capacity 
necessary for their research. The lack of infrastructure con-
sideration presented in the national strategies raises concerns 
over the realistic possibility of the implementation of these 
plans. Moreover, specific measures for cybersecurity and 
detecting biases are expected to preserve the EU principle 
of prevention of harm.
6  Concluding remarks
In this paper, we explored the field of AI for Social Good 
from the perspective of European policies and, in particular, 
through the lens of EU national strategies. Starting from the 
goals and the policy recommendations put forward by the 
EC, we define three possible and complementary approaches 
to AI for Social Good: “as applications”, “as ethical princi-
ples” and “as policies”. In this paper, we focus on the latter 
approach, “AI for social good as policies”, to analyse which 
of the investments extracted from the national strategies 
could promote AI for Social Good in concrete ways. We 
discovered some general patterns of investments and more 
specific plans for the social good, such as those concern-
ing education, vocational training, welfare services, and 
research cooperation on responsible AI. A general obser -
vation regards the imbalance between the vocabulary used 
by national strategies and the statements concerning money 
allocations. While terms associated with social good abound 
throughout the documents—e.g. ‘public’, ‘society’, ‘educa-
tion’ and ‘services’ are among 30 most frequent terms in all 
documents—, money allocations in areas that can be stra-
tegic for the development of AI for social good are limited. 
This points to a gap between words and actions marking the 
general debate on AI ethics. On the one hand, declarations 
by states and private organizations seem to put responsible 
and beneficial AI on the top of their agenda, but, on the other 
hand, the actions needed to implement such priorities are 
not yet clearly formulated. In this regard, our analysis con-
firms that resource and money allocation is a good proxy for 
understanding to what extent an organization pushes ahead 
with AI for social good, going beyond slogans and empty 
rhetoric. In that sense, a natural way to progress the work 
presented in this paper would be a follow-up investigation 
on the status of planned investments and future allocation 
schemes.13 For more information about GPAI see the website of the initiative: 
https:// gpai. ai