Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01445-8
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Investing in AI for social good: an analysis of European national 
strategies
Francesca Foffano1,2 · Teresa Scantamburlo2,3 · Atia Cortés4
Received: 30 July 2021 / Accepted: 24 March 2022 / Published online: 5 May 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022, corrected publication 2022
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become a driving force in modern research, industry and public administration and the Euro-
pean Union (EU) is embracing this technology with a view to creating societal, as well as economic, value. This effort has 
been shared by EU Member States which were all encouraged to develop their own national AI strategies outlining policies 
and investment levels. This study focuses on how EU Member States are approaching the promise to develop and use AI 
for the good of society through the lens of their national AI strategies. In particular, we aim to investigate how European 
countries are investing in AI and to what extent the stated plans contribute to the good of people and society as a whole. 
Our contribution consists of three parts: (i) a conceptualization of AI for social good highlighting the role of AI policy, 
in particular, the one put forward by the European Commission (EC); (ii) a qualitative analysis of 15 European national 
strategies mapping investment plans and suggesting their relation to the social good (iii) a reflection on the current status 
of investments in socially good AI and possible steps to move forward. Our study suggests that while European national 
strategies incorporate money allocations in the sphere of AI for social good (e.g. education), there is a broader variety of 
underestimated actions (e.g. multidisciplinary approach in STEM curricula and dialogue among stakeholders) that can boost 
the European commitment to sustainable and responsible AI innovation.
Keywords AI policy · AI for social good · European National Strategy · AI investments · Trustworthy AI
1 Introduction
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) into social life 
has raised concerns worldwide and efforts to limit the nega-
tive impact associated with the use of such systems have 
multiplied in recent years. Research communities, non-profit 
organisations and governmental agencies have stressed the 
point that AI is not “simply” a technological artifact. AI 
is a socio-technical system made of an imprecise number of heterogeneous components ranging from pieces of code, 
high-performing CPUs to human assumptions and social 
habits.
Although the complex interdependencies underlying an 
AI system makes it difficult to fully predict and control its 
behavior, there is a large consensus on steering AI develop-
ment towards the good of people and the environment. In 
this regard, a truly global effort is the movement of AI for 
Social Good, a flurry of AI-related activities aimed at deliv -
ering positive social impact (Tomašev et al. 2020; Floridi 
et al. 2020). These include AI projects addressing specific 
social problems, such as hate speech or climate change, as 
well as guidelines and frameworks offering guidance on the 
implementation of safe and ethical AI.
However, what counts as AI for social good is still 
debated both theoretically and practically (Floridi et al. 
2020). The simple availability of AI systems with socially 
good outcomes might not guarantee that they are being used 
for the common good as ethics guidelines would recommend 
(HLEG AI 2019a ). For example, certain applications can 
originate from a genuine aspiration to solve a social problem  * Francesca Foffano 
 ff716@york.ac.uk
 Teresa Scantamburlo 
 teresa.scantamburlo@unive.it
 Atia Cortés 
 atia.cortes@bsc.es
1 University of York, York, UK
2 European Centre for Living Technology, Venice, Italy
3 Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy
4 Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain