SPEECH-LANGUAGE PRE-TRAINING FOR END-TO-END SPOKEN LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING
Yao Qian1, Ximo Bian2, Yu Shi1, Naoyuki Kanda1, Leo Shen1, Zhen Xiao1and Michael Zeng1
1Microsoft Cognitive Services Research Group, USA,2Beijing Institute of Technology, China
ABSTRACT
End-to-end (E2E) spoken language understanding (SLU) can in-
fer semantics directly from speech signal without cascading an
automatic speech recognizer (ASR) with a natural language under-
standing (NLU) module. However, paired utterance recordings and
corresponding semantics may not always be available or sufﬁcient
to train an E2E SLU model in a real production environment. In
this paper, we propose to unify a well-optimized E2E ASR encoder
(speech) and a pre-trained language model encoder (language) into
a transformer decoder. The uniﬁed speech-language pre-trained
model (SLP) is continually enhanced on limited labeled data from
a target domain by using a conditional masked language model
(MLM) objective, and thus can effectively generate a sequence of
intent, slot type, and slot value for given input speech in the infer-
ence. The experimental results on two public corpora show that
our approach to E2E SLU is superior to the conventional cascaded
method. It also outperforms the present state-of-the-art approaches
to E2E SLU with much less paired data.
Index Terms —spoken language understanding, end-to-end ap-
proach, pre-training, transfer learning, self-supervised learning
1. INTRODUCTION
The conventional SLU generally contains two components: the au-
tomatic speech recognizer (ASR) to decode the input speech into
recognized text and the natural language understanding (NLU) mod-
ule to transform the ASR hypothesis into a concept or semantic la-
bel that can drive subsequent responses in a task-oriented spoken
dialog system (SDS). These two components are optimized with dif-
ferent criteria. Nowadays, the performance of ASR has been sig-
niﬁcantly improved by using a huge amount of training data with a
deep learning architecture. Transfer learning based on transformer-
based LMs like BERT [1] or GPT [2] has also largely boosted the
accuracy of NLU. This cascaded process is beneﬁcial in reusing the
well-optimized modules to accelerate the development of the SLU
system. However, the cascaded process could propagate errors that
occurred in the current module to the following modules and results
in generating inappropriate responses or even causing the task fail-
ure.
In recent few years, an end-to-end (E2E) modeling approach has
been widely applied to speech recognition, language recognition,
etc. It enables us to utilize as little a prior knowledge as possible
and train a single model for the whole target system, skipping the in-
termediate modules in conventional pipeline designs. ASR-free E2E
SLU has also been exploited in [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], where either the raw
waveforms or the acoustic features (e.g., ﬁlterbank features) are di-
rectly used as the inputs of SLU to infer semantic meanings. In [5],
Work done while the second author was an intern at Microsoft.multiple E2E SLU approaches, i.e., direct model, joint model, multi-
task model, and multi-stage model, have been proposed to jointly
optimize the ASR and NLU components in a manner of sequence-
to-sequence mapping. On the other hand, the performance of the
end-to-end approach is always suffering from a dearth of data, i.e.,
it is difﬁcult to obtain large amounts of paired speech utterances and
corresponding semantic labels from real production environments
when we are developing new SDS applications from scratch.
Substantial work has shown that transfer learning with a pre-
trained model requires much less task-speciﬁc data than conven-
tional methods. It is also extended to cross-modal learning, e.g.,
VLP [9] and SpeechBERT [10] proposed to build two-modality joint
embeddings for image captioning, spoken question answering, etc.
There are many studies to use either speech model or language model
as a pre-trained model to address the issue of insufﬁcient data for
SLU but few tries to leverage both and jointly optimize them on
the paired data. BERT or GPT is leveraged as the pre-trained lan-
guage model [11, 12]. The speech model is pre-trained by using
ASR task [6, 8, 13], i.e., to predict phonemes, sub-words or words, or
by self-supervised learning on the unlabeled speech data [14]. Lan-
guage embeddings were assumed to have better representation for
lexical semantics than speech embeddings, so a loss function, e.g.,
mean squared error (MSE), L1 norm, or triplet loss, is employed
to make speech embeddings closer to language embeddings in the
stage of jointly training semantic representations across these two
modalities [13, 14]. This kind of alignment for speech and language
embeddings could be applied at the sentence level or token level.
Sentence-level alignment is more feasible than that of token-level
since obtaining accurate boundaries of sub-word for speech embed-
ding sequence is nontrivial. Consequently, most of the studies focus
on sentence-level SLU, i.e., domain/intent classiﬁcation, or using a
ﬁxed dimension vector of logits corresponding to the different se-
mantic labels.
In this paper, we exploit leveraging transfer learning based on
well-trained encoders from both speech and language for sentence-
level and word-level SLU, i.e., intent classiﬁcation and slot ﬁlling.
The proposed approach can compensate for insufﬁcient paired train-
ing data in the SLU tasks and avoid train a model from scratch so
that the resultant model has a better generalization capability. The
major contribution of this paper is two-fold:
1. We unify two encoders from speech and language separately
into a decoder, continually pre-train it by using a conditional
masked language model (MLM) objective, and ﬁnetune it to
generate a sequence of intent, slot type, and slot value.
2. Slot ﬁlling, conventionally regarded as a classiﬁcation or tag-
ging problem on the word/token level, is formulated as a con-
ditional sequence to sequence generation problem, given the
contextual embeddings of input speech. The effectiveness of
this approach is demonstrated by a comparison with the con-arXiv:2102.06283v1  [cs.CL]  11 Feb 2021