Table 1 . Number of audio ﬁles in training, validation and test sets,
and the number of intents and slots
# Training Validation Testing Intents Slots
FSC 23,132 3,118 3,793 31
ATIS 4,439 500 893 21 79
The generation starts with appending a [MASK] token to the input
sequence, replaces it with a sampled token, and repeats the process
till the [EOS] token is chosen. Given speech embeddings, the pre-
trained speech-language model can directly generate the correspond-
ing transcription and the ﬁne-tuned model can produce the matching
semantic label sequence. The model can also generate ASR tran-
scription and SLU semantic labels sequentially if the input text token
in Figure 1 is the concatenation of transcription and semantic labels
during the training.
4. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
4.1. Datasets
We evaluate our approach of speech-language pre-training to E2E
SLU on two public SLU datasets: Fluent Speech Commands (FSC)
[6] and Air Travel Information System (ATIS) [25].
FSC dataset was recorded by 77 speakers for a smart home or
virtual assistant. There are 248 distinct sentences. Each sentence,
e.g.,fturn on the lights in the kitchen g, was spoken by multiple
speakers in both training set and validation/test sets. Each audio ﬁle
is labeled with three slots, e.g., faction: “active”, object: “lights”,
location: “kitchen” g. We follow the usage suggested in [6], i.e.,
combining slot values as the intent of utterance and using 31 distinct
intents in total.
ATIS pilot corpus is the most commonly used dataset for SLU
research. It comprises the acoustic speech data for a query, the
transcriptions of that query, and the corresponding semantic frames,
i.e., an intent and slots ﬁlled with phrases. For example, Query:
fWhat ﬂights are available from Pittsburgh to Baltimore on Thurs-
day morningg; Intent:fﬂight infog; Slots:ffrom city : “Pitts-
burgh”, tocity : “Baltimore”, depart date : “Thursday”,
depart time : “morning”g
The statistics of these two datasets are shown in Table 1, where
lists the number of audio ﬁles in training, validation and test sets,
and the number of intents and slots. We use the same data division
as [6] and [26, 16] for FSC and ATIS datasets, respectively. Some
utterances have multiple intents in ATIS corpus, so we employed 21
intents rather than 18 intents in some papers, where only one intent
was forcedly assigned to an utterance. Slot labels in the IOB format
(120 labels in total) and human transcriptions have been widely used
in the studies (e.g., [16]) for ATIS corpus. We ﬁnd 39 utterances
have the transcriptions, but the audio ﬁles are missing. We use total
of 4,439 training utterances and the corresponding 79 original slot
types in this study.
4.2. Experimental setup
The experiments are conﬁgured as follows:
E2E with speech-language pre-training (E2E SLP) This is our
approach described in Section 3. We construct mode with the ar-
chitecture shown in Figure 1. The model parameters are initializedby using the English uncased BERT-Base model, which is a multi-
layer bidirectional transformer encoder consisting of 12 layers, 768
hidden states, and 12 heads, and is trained on BooksCorpus (800M
words) and English Wikipedia (2,500M words).
The input to the model is a concatenation of text embeddings,
speech embeddings, and three special tokens: [BOS], [SEP], and
[EOS]. Text embeddings are the sums of WordPiece embeddings
with a 30,000 token vocabulary, positional embeddings, and segment
embeddings. Speech embeddings are extracted from the outputs
of the encoder of an attention-based encoder-decoder (AED) ASR
model, which comprises of 6 layers of 1,024-dim bidirectional long
short-term memory (BLSTM) for the encoder, 2 layers of 1,024-dim
unidirectional LSTM for the decoder, and a conventional location-
aware content-based attention [27] with a single head in between the
encoder and the decoder. Layer normalization [28] was applied after
every BLSTM in the encoder but not after every LSTM in the de-
coder. The input feature is a sequence of 80-dim log Mel ﬁlter bank
with a stride of 10 milliseconds (ms). Three of them are stacked
together to form a 240-dim super-frame. We feed into the encoder
on top of the stacked features. 4,000 WordPiece tokens are used as
the output targets. This model was trained on 75 thousand hours of
Microsoft anonymized training data. A linear layer is applied to the
speech embeddings for converting 1,024-dim to 768-dim in order to
keep the same dimension as those of text embeddings.
Adam optimizer, 64 batch size, and 1e-4 learning rate are used
for both pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. We trim long utterance and pad
short utterances to 30 words for the text embeddings and 500 frames
for the speech embeddings. During the training, 15% of input text
tokens are masked and replaced with the special token [Mask], the
random token, or the original token with the probabilities of 80%,
10%, and 10%, separately. One or two/three successive tokens are
masked at random with the chances of 80% and 20%, respectively.
A beam search with beam size 4 is used in the inference stage.
E2E Joint Modeling Similar to the AED-based ASR model, the
approach of E2E joint modeling to SLU also employs an encoder-
attention-decoder architecture and trains the model in an end-to-end
manner. We use the same architecture and input acoustic features
as those of the above AED-based ASR model to train E2E SLU.
The output of this model is the concatenation of transcription and
its corresponding semantics rather than just the transcription, i.e.,
the decoder produces the transcription followed by intent, slot types,
and slot values. We test this approach by using only the FSC corpus.
The training data in ATIS is too insufﬁcient to deliver a decent E2E
model.
Cascaded ASR+NLU It is a conventional approach to SLU. We
ﬁrst use ASR described in the above section to recognize the spoken
input into text and then ﬁne-tune the pre-trained BERT model with
the ASR transcriptions of training utterances. The objective of the
ﬁne-tuning is to jointly optimize model parameters for intent clas-
siﬁcation and slot ﬁlling [16]. This approach can leverage BERT
to improve the generalization capability of NLU models and achieve
the state-of-the-art performance on the human transcriptions of ATIS
corpus. The same English uncased BERT-Base model as that em-
ployed in our approach is used for ﬁne-tuning. The hyperparameters
are also set as those in [16].
4.3. Results and discussion
Word error rate (WER) is used to evaluate the performance of ASR.
The performance metrics for semantic labeling are intent accuracy
(Intent-Acc), slot precision (Slot-Pre), slot recall (Slot-Rec), and slot
F1 (Slot-F1). Table 2 shows the performance of different systems.