Learning based models are generally applied to both vehicle man-
agement and traffic management [ 32]. The current autonomous
driving decisions are limited by the dynamic nature of the sur-
roundings as the training is carried out offline. FL can rescue such
situations by online training vehicles from different geographical
locations which can facilitate accurate labelling of the features.
Similarly for traffic flow prediction techniques, a large amount of
data is required, but most of the data is divided among various
organizations and cannot be exchanged to protect the privacy [ 21].
To address such situations also, we can deploy FL methods.
4.3 Finance
One best use of federated learning in finance is in the banking
sector, for loan risk assessment [ 6]. Normally banks use white-
listing techniques to rule out the customers using their credit card
reports from the central banks. Factors such as taxation, reputation
etc can also be utilized for risk management by collaborating with
other finance institutions and e-commerce companies. As it is risky
to share private information of customers among organizations,
they can make use of FL to build a risk assessment ML model.
4.4 Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is one of the most common
applications which is built on machine learning models. It helps us
understand human language semantics in a better way. However,
it requires huge amount of data to train highly accurate language
models. This data can be easily gathered from mobile phones, tablets
etc. Again, privacy comes as a bottleneck here for centralized lan-
guage learning models, as the textual information from each edge
device contains user information. In [ 9], the authors have shown
that it is feasible to build NLP models using a FL framework.
5 TRAINING BOTTLENECKS
Being a distributed system, Federated Learning faces several chal-
lenges during the training time.
5.1 Communication Overheads
Communication overheads is one of the major bottlenecks in fed-
erated learning. Existing works try to solve this by either data
compression [ 17] or by allowing only the relevant outputs by the
clients[13, 22] to be sent back to the central server.
5.2 Systems and Data Heterogeneity
The heterogeneity of the systems in the network as well as the
non-identically distributed data from the devices affect the perfor-
mance of the FL model [ 20,23]. Although, FedAvg is introduced as
a method to tackle the heterogeneity, it is still not robust enough
to systems heterogeneity. Works such as [ 5,21] try to address this
problem by modifying the model aggregation methods.
6 PRIVACY AND SECURITY CONCERNS
Like any machine learning model, Federated Learning models are
also prone to attacks. The attacks can be introduced by a compro-
mised central server or compromised local devices in the learning
framework or by any participant in the FL workflow. Attacks in the
context of FL will be discussed in this section.6.1 Membership Inference Attacks
Although the raw user data does not leave the local device, there
are still many ways to infer the training data used in FL. For in-
stance, in some scenarios, it is possible to infer the information
about the training data from the model updates during the learn-
ing process. The defense measure looks for mechanism offering a
differential privacy guarantee. The most common techniques are
secure computation, differential privacy schemes and running in a
trusted execution environment.
6.1.1 Defense Mechanism 1: Secure Computation. Two main tech-
niques come under Secure Computation: Secure Multiparty Compu-
tation (SMC) and Homomorphic Encryption. In SMC, two or more
parties agree to perform the inputs provided by the participants and
reveal the outputs only to a subset of participants. Whereas in ho-
momorphic encryption, computations are performed on encrypted
inputs without decrypting first.
6.1.2 Defense Mechanism 2: Differential Privacy (DP). In differential
privacy schemes, the contribution of a user is masked by adding
noise to the clipped model parameters before model aggregation
[10]. Some amount of model accuracy will be lost by adding noise
to the parameters.
6.1.3 Defense Mechanism 3:Trusted Execution Environment. Trusted
Execution Environment(TEE) provides a secure platform to run the
federated learning process with low computational overhead when
compared to secure computation techniques [ 25]. The current TEE
environment is suitable only to CPU devices.
6.2 Data Poisoning Attacks
Data Poisoning Attacks are the most common attacks against ML
models. In order to launch a data poisoning attack in FL model,
adversary poison the training data in a certain number of devices
participating in the learning process so that the global model accu-
racy is compromised. The adversary can poison the data either by
directly injecting poisoned data to the targeted device or injecting
poisoned data through other devices [ 30]. Such attacks can be ei-
ther targeted or non-targeted. By targeted it means, the adversaries
want to influence on the prediction of a subset of classes while
deteriorating the global model accuracy[33].
6.2.1 Defense Mechanisms. The defense mechanism against such
attacks is to identify the malicious participants based on their model
updates before model averaging in each round of learning.
6.3 Model Poisoning Attacks
Model Poisoning attacks are similar to data poisoning attacks,
where the adversary tries to poison the local models instead of
the local data. The major motivation behind the model poisoning
attack is to introduce errors in the global model. The adversary
launches a model poisoning attack by compromising some of the de-
vices and modifying it’s local model parameters so that the accuracy
of the global model is affected.
6.3.1 Defense Mechanisms. The defenses against model poisoning
attacks are similar to data poisoning attacks. The most common de-
fense measures are rejections based on Error rate and Loss function
3