Figure 1: Overview of Federated Learning across devices.
Figure 2: Overview of Federated Learning across organisa-
tions
interest in the Federated Learning domain, we present this survey
paper. The recent works [ 2,14,26,36] are focused either on dif-
ferent federated learning architecture or on different challenges in
FL domain. Whereas so many interesting advancements are taking
place beyond applying it to new application domains and foster-
ing the security aspects Therefore, in this survey we also try to
cover the recent developments along with providing give a general
overview on Federated Learning applications and security concerns
in the domain.
2 OVERVIEW OF FEDERATED LEARNING
A simple representation of Federated Learning is shown in fig. 1
and fig. 2. Federated Learning has primarily four main steps:
•Client Selection/Sampling : Server either randomly picks
desired participants from a pool of devices or use some algo-
rithm for client selection. [ 16,37,39] talk about some client
selection techniques for FL.
•Parameter Broadcasting: Server broadcasts the global model
parameters to the selected clients
•Local Model Training: The clients will parallelly retrain the
models using their local data.
•Model Aggregation: Clients will send back their local model
parameters to the server and model parameters will be ag-
gregated towards the global model.The above steps will be repeated in an iterative manner for n times
as desired.
3 TYPES OF FEDERATED LEARNING
In this section, we introduce different types of Federated Learning
frameworks.
•Vertical Federated Learning -Vertical Federated Learning is
used for cases in which each device contains dataset with
different features but from sample instances. For instance,
two organisations have data about the same group of people
with different feature set can use Vertical FL to build a shared
ML model.
•Horizontal Federated Learning - Horizontal Federated Learn-
ing is used for cases in which each device contains dataset
with the same feature space but with different sample in-
stances. The first use case of FL- Google keyboard uses this
type of learning in which the participating mobile phones
have different training data with same features.
•Federated Transfer Learning - Federated Transfer learning
is similar to the traditional Machine Learning, where we
want to add a new feature on a pre-trained model. The best
example would be for giving an extension to the vertical
federated learning - If we want to extend the ML to more
number of sample instances which are not present in all of
the collaborating organisations.
•Cross-Silo Federated Learning - Cross- Silo Federated Learn-
ing is used when the participating devices are less in number
and available for all rounds. The training data can be in hor-
izontal or vertical FL format. Mostly cross-silo is used for
cases with organisations. Works such as [ 40] use cross-silo
FL to develop their model.
•Cross-Device Federated Learning - Scenarios with a large
number of participating devices use Cross-device Feder-
ated Learning. Client-selection and incentive designs[ 37]
are some notable techniques needed to facilitate this type of
FL.
4 APPLICATIONS
4.1 Healthcare
Electronic Health Records (EHR) is considered as the main source of
healthcare data for machine learning applications [ 11]. If ML models
are trained only using the limited data available in a single hospital,
it might introduce some amount of bias in the predictions. Thus, to
make the models more generalizable, it requires training with more
data, which can be realized by sharing data among organizations.
Given the sensitive nature of the healthcare data, it might not be
feasible to share the electronic health records of patients among
hospitals. In such situations, federated learning can serve as an
option for building a collaborative learning model for healthcare
data.
4.2 Transportation
With the increase in the ubiquity of sensors in vehicular networks,
it is feasible to capture more data and train ML models. Machine
2