Federated Learning: Opportunities and Challenges
Priyanka Mary Mammen
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
pmammen@cs.umass.edu
ABSTRACT
Federated Learning (FL) is a concept first introduced by Google in
2016, in which multiple devices collaboratively learn a machine
learning model without sharing their private data under the super-
vision of a central server. This offers ample opportunities in critical
domains such as healthcare, finance etc, where it is risky to share
private user information to other organisations or devices. While
FL appears to be a promising Machine Learning (ML) technique
to keep the local data private, it is also vulnerable to attacks like
other ML models. Given the growing interest in the FL domain,
this report discusses the opportunities and challenges in federated
learning.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Machine learning .
KEYWORDS
Federated Learning, Distributed Systems
ACM Reference Format:
Priyanka Mary Mammen. 2021. Federated Learning: Opportunities and
Challenges. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) started getting
popular in the last few 4-5 years when AI beat humans in a board
game named Alpha-Go[ 28]. Availability of Big-data and power-
ful computing units further accelerated the adoption of Machine
Learning technologies in domains such as finance, healthcare, trans-
portation, customer services, e-commerce, smart home applications
etc. With this widespread adoption of ML techniques, it is therefore
important to ensure the security and privacy of the techniques. In
most of the machine learning applications, data from various orga-
nizations or devices are aggregated in a central server or a cloud
platform for training the model. This is a key limitation especially
when the training data set contains sensitive information and there-
fore, poses security threats. For example, to develop a breast cancer
detection model from MRI scans, different hospitals can share their
data to develop a collaborated ML model. Whereas, sharing private
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnnpatient information to a central server can reveal sensitive infor-
mation to the public with several repercussions. In such scenarios,
Federated Learning can be better option.Federated Learning is a col-
laborative learning technique among devices/organizations, where
the model parameters from local models are shared and aggregated
instead of sharing their local data.
The notion of Federated Learning is introduced by Google in
2016, where they first applied in google keyboard to collabora-
tively learn from several android phones [ 24]. Given that FL can
be applied to any edge device, it has the potential to revolutionize
critical domains such as healthcare, transportation, finance, smart
home etc. The most prominent example is when the researchers
and medical practitioners from different parts of the world collabo-
ratively developed an AI pandemic engine for COVID-19 diagnosis
from chest scans [ 1]. Another interesting application would be in
transportation networks, for training the vehicles for autonomous
driving and city route planning. Similarly for smart-home applica-
tions, edge devices in different homes can collaboratively learn on
context aware policies using a federated learning framework [38].
While the applications are many, there are several challenges
associated with federated learning. The challenges can be broadly
classified into two: training-related challenges and security chal-
lenges. Training related challenges encompass the communication
overhead during multiple training iterations, heterogeneity of the
devices participating in the learning and heterogeneity of data used
for training .Whereas security challenges include the privacy and
security threats due to the presence of adversaries ranging from
malicious clients in the local device to a malicious user who has
only a black-box access to the model. In FL, although the private
data does not leave the device, it might be still possible for an
adversary or a curious observer to learn the presence of a data
point used for training in the local models. In order to overcome
this attack, some kind of cryptographic technique is required to
keep the information differentially private [ 10]. Whereas security
attacks can be mostly induced by the presence of malicious clients
in the learning, and they can be either targeted or non-targeted.
In targeted attacks, the adversary wants to manipulate the labels
on specific tasks. Whereas in non-targeted attacks, the motivation
of the adversary is just to compromise the accuracy of the global
model. The defense mechanisms require to detect malicious devices
and remove them from further learning or nullify the effect on the
global model induced by the malicious devices [8].
Numerous research efforts have been undertaken in the last few
years to fortify the Federated Learning domain and it has some
effect on the performance parameters like accuracy, computational
costs etc. Being a distributed system,its difficult to identify mali-
cious participants in FL. FL domain has grown so far from being
a small application introduced by Google. Researchers have intro-
duced various FL architectures, incentive mechanisms to foster user
participation, cloud services for FL etc. Motivated by this growingarXiv:2101.05428v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2021