[8]. In error rate based rejections, the models with significant im-
pact on the error rate on the global model will be rejected. Whereas
in loss function based rejections, the models will be rejected based
on their impact on loss function of the global model. In some cases,
rejections can be made by combining both error based rejections
and loss function based rejections.
6.4 Backdoor Attacks
Secure averaging in federated learning lets the devices to be anony-
mous during the model updating process. Using the same func-
tionality, a device or a group of devices can introduce a backdoor
functionality in the global model of federated learning [ 3]. Using a
backdoor, an adversary can mislabel certain tasks without affecting
the accuracy of the global model. For instance, an attacker can
choose a specific label for a data instance with specific character-
istics. Backdoor attacks are also known as targeted attacks. The
Intensity of such attacks depends on the proportion of the com-
promised devices present and model capacity of federated learning
[31] .
6.4.1 Defense Mechanisms. : The defense against backdoor attacks
is either weak differential privacy or norm thresholding of updates.
Participant level differential privacy can serve as a form of defense
against such attacks but at the cost of performance of the global
model [ 10]. Whereas norm thresholding can be applied to remove
models with boosted model parameters. Even with this defense
measures, it is hard to find the malicious participants owing to the
secure aggregation techniques and capacity of the deep learning
model. Also FL framework being a distributed system, it might be
even harder to manage the randomly misbehaving devices.
7 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN FL
7.1 One-shot federated Learning
In most of the federated learning frameworks, there will be multiple
rounds of communication between devices and the central server,
which increases the communication overheads. Recently, there is
a growing interest in one-shot federated learning which is first
introduced by [ 12], where the global model is learned in a single
round of communication. In order to overcome communication
overheads of sending bulky gradients, [ 41] proposes a distilled one-
shot federated learning, where each device distills their data and
send the fabricated data to the central server. The server then learns
the global model by training over the combined data from all the
devices.
7.2 Incentive Mechanisms
Current FL approaches work under the assumption that devices
will cooperate in the learning process whenever required without
considering the rewards. Whereas in actual practice, devices or
clients must be economically compensated for their participation.
To encourage/improve device participation in FL, works such as
[15,16,37,39] propose a reputation based incentive mechanism i.e,
devices get rewards based on their model accuracy, data reliability
and contribution to the global model. However, these works did
not talk about how to model convergence and additional communi-
cation overheads induced into the framework.
Figure 3: A sample architecture for federated learning over
blockchain.
7.3 Federated Learning as a Service
Machine Learning as a Service is getting popular these days and
most of them offer only centralized services. In order to offer Fed-
erated Learning as a cloud service, it should consider collaboration
among third party applications. A recent work [ 18] tried to develop
a FL framework (as a service) which allows applications of third
parties to contribute and collaborate on a ML model. The frame-
work is claimed to be suitable for any operation environment as
well.
7.4 Asynchronous Federated Learning
Most of the current FL aggregation techniques are designed for
devices working in a synchronized manner. However, due to sys-
tems and data heterogeneity, training and model transfer occur in
a asynchronized manner. Therefore it might not be feasible to scale
federated optimization in an synchronized manner [ 35]. Works
such as [ 29,34,35] talks about carrying out federated learning in
an asynchronous environment. Compared to FedAvg (working in
a synchronized manner), asynchronous Federated averaging tech-
niques can handle more devices and allows updates to come at a
time.
7.5 Blockchain in FL
An aggregator is necessary to update the global model managing
the asynchronous arrival of parameters from the devices. This can
be a constraint for the widespread adoption for the FL models. As
blockchain is a decentralized network, devices can collaboratively
learn without the central aggregator. Works such as [ 4,7,19,27]
propose Federated Learning in a block-chain framework. A sample
architecture [7] is shown in fig 3.
8 FINAL REMARKS
Federated Learning offers a secure collaborative machine learning
framework for different devices without sharing their private data.
4