Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:21
5 SECURITYWITH GAN
Besides privacy issues, a variety of security issues also exist in GAN. In this section, the research
findingsonsecurityforGANareintroducedfromtheaspectsofmodelrobustness,malware,fraud
detection,vehiclesecurity,industryprotocol,andsoon,andacomparisonispresentedinTable 3.
5.1 ModelRobustness
For machine learning models, one of the most severe secure threats is adversarial sample attack.
LetXbethefeaturespaceofdataand Ybetheclassspace.Supposefortheoriginaldata x∈X,its
ground-truthlabelis y∈Y.Foragivenclassifier f:X→Y,anadversarialexampleattackintends
tomanipulateasample x/primethroughunperceptivemodificationtomisleadclassification,whichcan
be mathematicallyformulated asthefollowing optimizationproblem:
minL(x/prime,x), (15a)
s.t.f(x/prime)/nequalf(x)=y. (15b)
Equation ( 15a) implies the objective of minimizing the distance, L(x/prime,x), between the adversar-
ial data and the original data, where L(·,·)is a pre-defined distance metric (e.g., L2norm). Equa-
tion (15b) indicates the incorrect classification result on the adversarial data. There are two kinds
ofadversarialattacks:non-targetedandtargeted.Non-targetedattacksonlyrequire f(x/prime)/nequalf(x),
andtargetedattacksexpect f(x/prime)=yt/nequalf(x)withyt∈Ybeingatargetlabelpre-determinedby
an attacker.
5.1.1 AdversarialSampleAttacks. Therehavebeenmanyworksontargetedattacks[ 92,96]and
non-targetedattacks[ 41,138]basedontraditionaloptimizationmethods.BalujaandFischer[ 10],
for the first time, generated targeted adversarial samples using GAN to attack machine learning
models. Unlike previous works that produce adversarial samples by optimizing a noise δadded
into the original data x, the idea of Baluja and Fischer [ 10] is to train a neural network to obtain
an adversarial sample x/primedirectly from the original data x. Such an adversarial generator aims to
simultaneouslyminimizethedistancelossinthefeaturespaceandtheclassificationlossinthepre-
dictionspace.Particularly,intheimplementationoftargetedattacks,anattackerhiresareranking
functiontoresorttothepredictedlabelssuchthatthetargetlabelhasamaximumprobabilityand
the other labels maintain their original order. Compared with the traditional optimization-based
methods,thisgenerativeattackmechanismisextremelyfastandefficientoncetheneuralnetwork
has been trained. However, this attack mechanism is model dependent, which means that it does
not performwellintheblack-boxscenarioandlackstransferability.
To deal with the preceding weakness, Zhao et al. [ 158] suggested using a GAN-based model
plusadatainvertertoenhanceattackcapability.TheyadoptedWGANtogeneratevividdatafrom
random noise z∼N(0,1)and used the dense representation zto produce realistic adversarial
samples, in which a data inverter Iwas designed to map normal data to the corresponding dense
representations z∼N(0,1). With the help of this inverter I, any normal data can be transferred
intoitscorrespondingrepresentation I(x)usedasinputtoproduceanadversarialdenserepresen-
tation˜zfor sample generation in WGAN. The workflow of this attack is briefly summarized in
Figure5.
In the work of Xiao et al. [ 137], a target classifier model was seamlessly integrated into GAN
to train a stronger attacker in the black-box scenario. The proposed model aims at minimiz-
ing the target prediction loss, normal form of GAN loss, and the noise scale simultaneously.
When performing a black-box attack, the whole network is updated to obtain a strong clas-
sifierfvia two steps: (i) fix the target classifier and update the generator and the discrimi-
nator in GAN according to the objective, and (ii) fix GAN and update the classifier satisfying
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.