Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:11
similar distributions of real records. Thus, the fake and synthetic records can defend re-
identificationattacks[ 15] whileachievinghigh utility.
3.3.3 Medical Records. Accessing Electronic Health Record (EHR) records data has pro-
moted computational advances in medical research and raised people’s privacy concerns about
their EHR data. Choi et al. [ 23] constructed a Medical Generative Adversarial Network
(medGAN) based on the basic structure of GAN to generate privacy-preserving synthetic pa-
tient records. MedGAN can generate high-dimensional discrete variables, in which an autoen-
coder network is used as the generator to produce the synthetic medical data with the help of
additionalnoise,anda0–1classifierisusedasthediscriminatortoensuredatasimilarity.Asare-
sult,thesyntheticmedicaldataisapplicabletodistributionstatistics,predictivemodeling,medical
expertreview,andothermedicalapplications.Alimitedprivacyriskinbothidentityandattributes
can be achieved using medGAN. Moreover, to improve the performance of privacy protection of
medGAN, the evaluation of privacy-preserving medical records of medGAN was investigated by
Yaleetal.[ 143].CorGANwasdevelopedbyTorfiandFox[ 123]takingintoaccountthecorrelations
of medical records, and a dual-autoencoder was configured as the generator in medGAN to gen-
erate sequential EHRs instead of discrete records for higher predictive accuracy to assist medical
experts[66].
3.4 SpeechData Privacy
The works on privacy-preserving speech data based on GAN mainly focus on two fields: remote
healthmonitoring[ 130] and voiceassistantsin IoTsystems[ 6].
3.4.1 Remote HealthMonitoring. Remote healthmonitoringhasbeenintroducedasa solution
to continuous diagnosis and trace of subjects’ condition with less effort, which can be partially
achieved by passive audio recording technology that may disclose subjects’ privacy. Vatanparvar
et al. [130] designed a GAN-based speech obfuscation mechanism for passive audio recording
whenusingremotehealthmonitoring.Inthisspeechobfuscationmodel,thegeneratorisemployed
to map the audio recording into the distribution of human speech audio and filter the private
backgroundvoice,andthediscriminatorisone0–1classifiertodeterminetheprobabilityofhuman
speechpresencewithintheaudio.Aftertheadversarialtraining,thesyntheticaudiorecordingcan
be obtained to match the human speech distribution for medical diagnosis and avoid the trace of
privateinformation.
3.4.2 Voice Assistance. Voice-enabled interactions provide more human-like experiences in
manypopularIoTsystems.Currently,manyspeechrecognitiontechniquesaredevelopedtooffer
speechanalysisservicesbyextractingusefulinformationfromvoiceinputsasthevoicesignalisa
richresourcecontainingvariousstatesofspeakers,suchasemotionalstates,confidenceandstress
levels, and physical conditions. With the voice signal, service providers can build a very accurate
profile for a user through the voice, which, however, may lead to privacy leakage. In the work of
Aloufi et al. [ 6], a cyclic GAN model was built to translate voice from one domain into another
domain to hide the users’ emotional states in voice, in which the generators are used to do voice
translation,andthediscriminatorsareusedtoforcegeneratorstoproducethesyntheticvoicewith
highquality.Thesyntheticvoicecanstillbesuccessfullyexploitedtoperformspeechrecognition
for voice-controlledIoTserviceswhileresistinginferenceon users’emotionalstates.
3.5 Spatio-TemporalData Privacy
The popularity of edge computing accelerates the emergence and innovation of IoT applications
and services. Since various spatio-temporal data need to be collected from IoT devices (e.g., GPS)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.