132:2 Z.Cai et al.
framework,GANhassignificantlypromotedmanyapplicationswithcomplextasks,suchasimage
generation,super-resolution,andtextdatamanipulations.Mostrecently,exploitingGANtowork
out elegant solutions to severe privacy and security problems has become increasingly popular
in both academia and industry due to its game theoretic optimization strategy. This survey aims
toprovideacomprehensivereviewandanin-depthsummaryofthestate-of-the-arttechnologies
anddiscusssomepromisingfutureresearchdirectionsforGANintheareaofprivacyandsecurity.
Westartoursurveywitha briefintroductionto GAN.
1.1 Generative Adversarial Networks
GANwasfirstproposedbyGoodfellowetal.[ 40]toserveasagenerativemodelbridgingbetween
supervised learning and unsupervised learning in 2014, which is highly praised as “the most in-
teresting idea in the last 10 years in Machine Learning” by Yann LeCun, the winner of the 2018
Turing Award. Typically, a generative model takes a training dataset drawn from a particular dis-
tributionasinputandtriestoproduceanestimatedprobabilitydistributiontomimicagivenreal
data distribution. In particular, a zero-sum game between the generator and the discriminator is
designed to achieve realistic data generation. In other words, the generator of GAN is trained to
foolthediscriminatorwhosegoalisto distinguishtherealdata fromthegenerateddata.
GAN has promoted many emerging data-driven applications related to Big Data and Smart
Cities thanks to its fantastic properties: (i) the design of generative models offers an excellent
way to capture a high-dimensional probability distribution that is an important research focus in
mathematicsandengineeringdomains;(ii)awell-trainedgenerativemodelcanbreakthroughthe
imprisonment of data shortage for technical innovation and performance improvement in many
fields, especially for deep learning (e.g., the high-quality generated data can be incorporated into
semi-supervised learning, for which the influence of missing data could be mitigated to some ex-
tent);and(iii)generativemodels(particularlyGAN)enablelearningalgorithmstoworkwellwith
multi-modaloutputs,inwhichmorethanonecorrectoutputmaybeobtainedfromasingleinput
fora task(e.g.,thenext frame prediction)[ 79].
PriortoGAN,severalgenerativemodelsstemmingfromthemaximumlikelihoodestimationex-
isted,eachofwhichwasstateoftheartatthetimeitwasproposed.Thesepriorgenerativemodels
are either explicit density based or implicit density based, depending on whether the underlying
distributioncanbeexplicitlypre-defined.Somewell-knownexplicitdensity-basedmodels,includ-
ing Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [ 5], Fully Visible Belief Networks (FVBN) [ 37],Gauss-
ian Mixture Model (GMM) [102], Naive Bayes Model (NBM) [ 54], and Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)[100],canspecializesomespecificproblemsandscenariosbutarelimitedbytheircommon
weakness—when the explicitly defined probability density function has intensive parameters and
complexdimensions,thecomputationaltractabilityissuehappenswherethemaximumlikelihood
estimation may not be able to represent the complexity of the sample data and therefore cannot
learnthehigh-dimensiondatadistributionwell.Inaddition,themajorityofpriorgenerativemod-
els,suchasimplicitdensity-basedMarkovChainmodels,requireanassumptionofMarkovChain
that has an ambiguous distribution and can be mixed between patterns. On the contrary, GAN
gets rid of the high-dimension constraint and the Markov Chain dependence. The generator of
GAN uses a pre-defined low-dimension latent code as input and then maps its input to the target
data dimension. In addition, GAN is a non-parametric method and does not require any approx-
imate distribution or Markov Chain property, which endows GAN with the ability to represent
thegenerateddatainalowerdimensionusingfewerparameters.Mostimportantly,GANismore
like an adversarial training framework instead of a rigorous formulation. Thus, it is more flexible
and extensible to be transformed into many variants according to different requirements, such
asWasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) [7],Information Maximizing
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.