132:24 Z.Cai et al.
detector’s features without the machine learning algorithm the detector uses and the parameters
of the trained model. As the trained model details are unkown, a substituted detector is used to
fit the black-box detector and provide gradient information. The adopted substituted detector’s
training data has two parts: the set of adversarial malware examples from the generator of GAN
andthesetof examples froman additionalbenign dataset.
In the work of Shahpasand et al. [ 110], GAN was applied for detecting Android malware. The
detection focuses on black-box attacks, where attackers cannot access the inner details of the
network (including network architecture and parameters) but can get the classifier’s output and
alter the malware codes based on detection results. Generally, given a malware xwith the true
labelf(x)=1, the attacker aims to avoiding malware detection via generating an adversarial
versionx/prime=x+δsuch that f(x/prime)=0, where f(·)is a malware detector. The loss function
includes the similarity between the generated and the benign samples (denoted by LGAN)a n d
misclassification rate of the adversarial malware samples (denoted by Ladv .Mal), which can be
mathematicallyexpressedas L=αLGAN+(1−α)Ladv .Mal,whereLGANrepresentsdiscriminative
loss of GAN on real and fake data and Ladv .Mal=lf(x+G(z),0)is supposed that an adversarial
samplecanbypassthetargetedclassifier fbymanipulatingitselfas abenign class.
Furthermore, GAN can be utilized for analyzing Linux and Windows malware. Kargaard
et al. [55] brought GAN to the analysis of malware detection, where the malware binaries are
converted to images for training in GAN. In particular, the malware is collected via a honeypots
system and contains WannaCry ransomware, Linux SMB trojan, and MySQL Trojan, and so on.
All of the malware binary files are converted to greyscale images with a size of 32 ×32 for pro-
cessing.Taherietal.[ 121]proposedusingfederatedGANtodefendattackandenablethedevices
tocommunicatewitheachotherefficientlyandsecurely.Asillustratedinthiswork,theproposed
methodismuch moreeffective andreliable thanthepreviousmethods.
Among various malware, zero-day malware is outstandingly difficult to be detected because it
cannot be removed by antivirus systems that mainly use the characteristics of stored malware
fordetection.Kimetal.[ 60,61]proposedatransferreddeep-convolutionalgenerativeadversarial
network(tDCGAN)thatappliesadeepAutoencodertolearnmalwarecharacteristicsandtransfers
the characteristics to train the generator of GAN. The architecture of tDCGAN has three parts:
(i) data compression and reconstruction, in which preprocessed data is input to compress and
reconstruct the malware data; (ii) fake malware generation, in which deep Autoencoder is used
to reconstruct malware data and the decoder is transferred to the generator of GAN; and (iii)
malware detection, in which the generator is given the probability distribution to produce fake
malware.Thenthediscriminatorof GAN istransferredto themalware detector.
5.3 Bioinformatic-Based Recognition
Bio-information (e.g., fingerprints and iris) recognition systems have been widely deployed in
many areas, such as banking, criminal investigation, and national security. However, the bio-
information gathering process is expensive and time consuming. In addition, due to privacy pro-
tection legislation, publishing a bio-information database is not easy. Fortunately, GAN provides
anovelway to constructbio-informationsystemsfor authentication.
Bontrager et al. [ 14] used GAN to generate synthetic fingerprints for a fingerprint verification
systemidentifyingdifferentpeople.Intheirwork,twomethodsaredesignedbasedonGAN,with
the first one applying evolutionary optimization in the space of latent variables and the second
oneusinggradient-basedsearch.IntheworkofKimetal.[ 59],thefingerprints,namelythemaster
minutiaset,weregeneratedfromatwo-stageGAN.Thetwo-stageGANiscomposedoftwoGANs:
the first GAN is for generally describing fingerprints, and the second GAN uses the outputs from
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.