132:28 Z.Cai et al.
6.1.2 Sequential Records. Although some methods have been proposed to protect public
records’ privacy before collaborative use, they take these records as discrete data for privacy-
preservingprocessing.Theserecordsactuallyareakindofsequentialdataastherelationbetween
two words in a textual sentence is not ignorable. Thus, separating one sentence into words may
causeperformancelossfordatagenerationandprivacyprotection.Inotherwords,itisindispens-
abletotaketheserelationsintoaccountwhengeneratingprivacy-preservingpublicrecords,which
isone promisingresearchdirectionfor theeffectivenessimprovement in practice.
6.1.3 Spatio-Temporal Information in Videos and Speeches. In the prior works on privacy pro-
tectioninvideosandspeeches,thesensitiveinformationishiddenbynoiseaddedviaagenerator
and the data utility is maintained by a discriminator through an adversarial training. A video is
treated as a sequence of image frames for generation, ignoring the spatio-temporal relation be-
tween frames; a speech is only considered as a distribution of voice information, overlooking the
spatio-temporal relation between voice segments. Notably, such spatio-temporal relations can be
exploitedasside-channelinformationtomineindividuals’privateinformation,especiallywiththe
developmentofdeeplearningmodels.Asaresult,thechallengeofincorporatingspatio-temporal
relationsintoprivacyprotectionforvideos andspeechesshouldbeovercome.
6.1.4 UnderstandingSensitiveInformation. Typically,thecurrentGAN-basedmodelsaddnoise
into the synthesized data to hide sensitive information through the generator and demon-
strate the capability of privacy protection through the experimental results of reduced predic-
tion/classification accuracy. However, in these models, it is still unknown what type of sensitive
information is hidden and where the noise is added. This is because the generator is a black-box
functionofdatasynthesis,onlyrelyingonthediscriminator’sfeedbackintheadversarialtraining
process.Such a kind of training mechanism makes the privacy protection inefficient when facing
theprivacydetectorsthatarenottakenintoaccountbythediscriminator(s)inthetrainingprocess.
Therefore,understandingtheprivacy-relatedfeaturesinsourcedatawillbehelpfultostrengthen
privacyprotectionin GAN.
6.1.5 GuaranteeofPrivacyProtection. Whenappliedtoprivacy-preservingdatageneration,all
existing GAN-based methods fail to provide a theoretical guarantee of privacy protection. The
root causeis that the generatoris a black-box function of data synthesis,and its synthesisperfor-
mance is mainly determined by the feedback of the discriminator during the adversarial training
process. What is worse is that the adversarial training is not stable, resulting in the generator’s
unpredictable capabilities and the discriminator. To further promote GAN’ development and ap-
plication,techniquebreakthroughisdesiredtoofferatheoreticalguaranteeofprivacyprotection.
6.1.6 Computation Cost. With the increased popularity of emerging applications, such as IoT
and edge/fog computing, a large amount of user data is shared through connected devices ( e.g.,
mobile phones),resultingin seriousprivacyleakage duringtransmission.To protectdata privacy
in the connected devices timely before transmission, light-weighted GAN models are expected
such that the computation cost (e.g., time and energy) is affordable for these connected devices,
in which balancing the trade-off between computation performance and computation cost is an
unavoidablechallenge.
6.2 Future Research onModel Privacy
6.2.1 GANModelImprovement. FutureworksonmodelprivacyaretightlyrelatedtotheGAN
model’simprovement,whichisamainstreamresearchdirectioninthelearningfieldandwillcon-
tinuetoattractmoreresearchinterest.Forexample,theinvestigationontheconvergencerateand
mode collapse of GAN will definitely enhanceGAN’s efficacy on both attackand defense aspects.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.