132:20 Z.Cai et al.
Tothisend,Zhangetal.[ 156]andXuetal.[ 142]proposedtwomethodsaddingdifferentialnoise
on the discriminator only. The basic idea of these two methods is too similar, so we review them
heretogether.Atthebeginningoftraining,WGANisusedforpursingstabilityofthetrainingpro-
cess.Duringthetrainingprocedure,thegradientsofthediscriminatorareboundedandperturbed
using the methods of DPGAN [ 139]. However, the generated data has low quality, and the pro-
posed models converge slower than the traditional GAN, resulting in excessive privacy loss. The
followingthreesolutionswereproposedtoimprovedataquality,convergencerate,trainingstabil-
ity,andscalability.First,parametergroupingisacommonschemeusedindifferentialprivacy[ 44].
Abalancebetweenconvergencerateandprivacycostcouldbeachievedbycarefullygroupingthe
trainingparametersandclippingoverdifferentgroups.Second,adaptiveclippingcanenhancethe
data quality of using random clipping. Assume that a public dataset can be used to dynamically
adjust the clipping bounds to achieve faster convergence and stronger privacy protection. Third,
warm starting can save privacy budget for critical iterations, in which a public dataset is used to
initializethemodelswithagoodstartingpoint.Thiswork’sshortageisthattheassumptionofan
available public dataset is too strong in such a private data release scenario. Until now, all of the
generative models with differential privacy focused on unlabeled data, and the work on labeled
datahadnot beenaddressed.
Triastcyn and Faltings [ 124] developed a cGAN-based framework for the generation of labeled
data.Theproposedframeworkcanachievedifferentialprivacyforboththegeneratorandthedis-
criminatorbyonlyinjectingnoiseintothediscriminator.Thisframework’sadvantageisthatwith
the class label as auxiliary information in cGAN, the quality of generated data is extremely high
withalowprivacyloss.However,sincethegenerativemodelobservesthelabelinformation,more
information may be leaked to attackers when the model is published. As a result, this framework
might only beableto preventmembershipinferenceattacksbutfailtoprotectpreimage privacy.
As discussed in Section 4.3, for the distributed GAN, the privacy of generators in federated set-
ting also needs to be protected because the physical separation of data is not enough. More anal-
ysisofdifferentialprivacyintheprivatefederatedGANmodelswaspresentedelsewhere[ 9,126],
where the authors proposed to add differential privacy during the training process of local GAN
models. Thenoise mechanisms also utilize clippingand noisy gradients,which is similar to other
methods [ 139,142,156]. To achieve a better trade-off between utility and privacy, a relaxed ex-
pected privacy loss is adopted by Triastcyn and Faltings [ 126], whereas the work of Augenstein
et al. [9] utilizes the original Moments Accountant strategy. In a nutshell, differential privacy is a
classic standard for privacy protection and an efficient approach for preserving the membership
and preimage privacy of GAN. But the protection efficacy of differential privacy is greatly deter-
mined bythenoisescale,whichmay introduceutilityloss andneedsmore researchendeavors.
Not stopping here, a study performed by Lu et al. [ 81] pointed out that even though there had
been much research on private data release by generative models, the adopted quality metrics
are not quite suitable. For example, adopting differential privacy may impair data utility more or
less.Thus,theusers(e.g.,companies)oftendonotadoptthestrictprivacyguaranteeinacademic
areas.Instead,theyonlyrequiretheprivacylevelofsomemechanismstobeslightlybetterthanthe
governmentregulationevenintheboundaryoflaw.Forthoseusers,amorepracticalmeasurement
could be considered. In the work of Lu et al. [ 81], the experiments were set up to evaluate new
definedmetricsinadditiontotheprivacybudgetofdifferentialprivacy,suchashittingrate,record
linkage, and Euclidean distance. The extensive experiments demonstrate that for formal privacy
definition(i.e.,differentialprivacy),eventhoughitachievesstrictprivacyprotection,itlosesmore
datautility.Forindustrialandcommercialapplications,informalprivacyguarantees,suchasGAN-
basedmethods,canmeet privacyrequirementsand havebetterdata utility.
WecomparetheprecedingreviewedmethodsinTable 2fromdifferentperspectives.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.