132:16 Z.Cai et al.
Moreover,when a target model (e.g., a neuralnetwork) has high-dimension input, it is difficult
toobtainanoptimalsolutiononlywiththegivenlabel yfortheattackmodel,makingtheresulted
xlike a random noise in high-dimension space. Thus, the results of GAN-based model inversion
attacksusuallylead to unrecognizablerepresentationsthatarenot usefultoattackersin reality.
T oa d d r e s st h i sp r o b l e m ,B a s ue ta l .[ 11] proposed another white-box attack method, where an
attacker is able to access the target model and know the domain information of the target model
(e.g.,thetargetmodelistrainedonahumanfaceoropticalcharacterrecognition).Withthedomain
information, an attacker can establish a GAN model to search correct representations in a quite
low-dimension spaceby thegenerator G,formulatedin Equation( 13):
ˆz=argmin
zL(f(G(z)),y)+λR(z), (13)
whereLis the loss function of the target model, λis a parameter, and R(·)is a regularization
term.Whenanattackerlearnsthedomaininformation,hecangrabsufficientdatainthatdomain
as the training data from public data sources, such as the Internet. The grabbed data is used as
the real dataset to train a traditional GAN model. After being trained, the generator Gis used in
Equation ( 13) to obtain an optimal low-dimension input z. Essentially, GAN acts as a transmitter
to transfer a high-dimension problem into a low-dimension problem. Then the model inversion
result can be generated with ˆx=G(ˆz)quickly. This method’s attack efficiency is impressive as
shownbytheauthorsand doessolve theproblemof unrecognizedrepresentations.
Later, an improved version of model inversion attacks was developed in the work of Zhang
et al. [157]:Generative Model Inversion (GMI) , which is similar to that in the work of Basu
etal.[11]butmorepowerful.ThemajormeritsofGMIlieintwoaspects:(i)itcanperforminver-
sionattackssuccessfullyevenifthedistributionoftheattacker’spriorinformationisdifferentfrom
thatofthetrainingdataset,and(ii)animprovedobjectivefunctionmakesattackersstronger.The
implementationofGMIhastwophases: publicinformationdistillation andsecretrevelation .Inthe
firstphase,anattackertrainsaWGANmodelonpublicinformationsothatthetrainedgenerator
canbeusedtorecoverrealisticdata.Inthesecondphase,anattackeroptimizesthelatentvector z
(i.e.,theinputofthegenerator)via ˆz=argmin zLprior(z)+λLid(z),whereLprior(z)isusedtope-
nalize unrealistic data, and Lid(z)encourages the generated images to have maximum likelihood
under the target model. Additionally, it has been proved that the more accurate a model is, the
easieritistobeattacked,whichindicatesatrade-offbetweenaccuracyandsecurityvulnerability
fora learningmodel.
4.2.2 Protection of Preimage Privacy. To preserve preimage privacy in the MLaaS scenarios,
GAN-basedmechanismshavebeenutilizedtopreprocessprivatedatabeforethetrainingstage.As
showninFigure 4,theCompressivePrivacyGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(CPGAN) [128]
contains three modules: (i) the generator Gthat is a privatization mechanism for generating
privacy-preservingdata, (ii) the service module Sproviding prediction service with the predicted
labelYasutility,and(iii)theattackermodule Athatisamimicattackeraimingatgettingtherecon-
structed data X/primeusingZ. More specifically, producing ZinGrequires that the prediction service
S(Z)shouldperformwellandthereconstructionerrorof A(Z)shouldbelargeeveniftheattacker
Aisthestrongest,basedon whichtheobjectiveof CPGAN canbe formulatedby Equation( 14):
max
G[min
ALA(X,A(G(Z)))−λmin
SLS(S(G(X)),Y)]. (14)
CPGAN can defend preimage privacy attacks in MLaaS because the input data of Sdoes not con-
tain any sensitive information. However, the generator Gdirectly accesses sensitive data, which
introduces potential privacy threats to G. Furthermore, the unstable training property of GAN
makestheoptimizationprocesshardto converge.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.