Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:7
Fig. 3. The applications of GAN-baseddata privacyprotection.
The discriminator in BEGAN is an autoencoder-based architecture to prevent the discriminator
from easily beating the generator at the early training stage for fair adversarial training. Based
on DCGAN, ProGAN gradually increases the depth of GandDin the training process of GAN
togeneratehigh-resolutionimages,SAGANreliesonaself-attentionmechanismtoobtainglobal
long-rangedependencytogeneratemulti-classimages,andMsgGANconnectsthelatentspaceof
GandDwhiletrainingon multipledatasetstoensureit canbeexploited todifferentdatasets.
3 PRIVACY OF DATA
According to data type, the mainstream applications of GAN in data privacy protection can be
classified into six major categories, including image data privacy, video data privacy, textual data
privacy, speech data privacy, spatio-temporal data privacy, and graph data privacy, for which a
more detailed classification is presented in Figure 3. Technically speaking, on the one hand, the
generator is designed as a perturbation function to hide the private information and/or trained
by one or more discriminators for privacy-preserving data generation. On the other hand, the
discriminatorisemployedtoensuredatasimilaritysothatthegeneratedprivacy-preservingdata
is stillusablein realapplicationsbutishardto bedistinguishedfromtherealdata byattackers.
3.1 Image Data Privacy
As the most popular images used in deep learning, face images contain various individuals’ sen-
sitive information, easily causing privacy leakage, and thus have received lots of research atten-
tion [15,16,18,20,26,88,136,148]. In addition, the privacy of medical images [ 58] and street-
viewimages[ 129,141]havecapturedresearchinterestinrecentyears.Furthermore,anumberof
GAN-based schemes have been developed for image steganography [ 87,115], image anonymiza-
tion[62,68,122],andimageencoding[ 27,94,98,147],whichindeedcanbeexploitedonanytype
ofimagebesidesface/medical/street-viewimages.Currently,thestudyoffaceimagesandmedical
images focuses on a single object, such as one face and one human organ, whereas the study of
street-view images deals with multiple objects, including pedestrians, vehicles, buildings, and so
on.Inthefollowing,theexistingworksonfaceimages,medicalimages,street-viewimages,image
steganography,image anonymization, and image encodingareintroducedin order.
3.1.1 FaceImages. Chenetal.[ 20]proposedamethodofimagerepresentationlearningbased
ontheVariationalGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(VGAN) forprivacy-preservingfacialex-
pressionrecognition,where VariationalAutoencoder(VAE) [80]andcGAN[ 90]arecombined
to create an identity-preserving representation of facial images while generating an expression-
preserving realistic vision. In VGAN, the generator (i.e., the encoder-decoder pair in VAE) takes
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.