Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:23
aconditionalGANstructurewasestablished,wherethegenerator G(x/prime)takesadversarialsample
x/primeas training data and learns the normal data distribution with G(x/prime)=x. In other words, the
distribution of the generated data should be the same as that of the real data to make the output
become clean data. In this GAN framework, the loss function of the discriminator is the same as
that in the original GAN, whereas the generator’s goal consists of a distance loss that constraints
thedistancebetween xandG(x/prime)tobesmallandanadversariallossthatrequires D(G(x/prime))tohave
ahigherscore.AsimilarideawasexploitedbySamangoueietal.[ 108]todevelopa“Defense-GAN”
frameworkthatde-noisesadversarialsamplestoobtainnormalsamplesthroughthegeneratorof
GAN.Theslightdifferenceisthatintheirwork[ 108],thedenoisinggeneratoristrainedonclean
datafromnoise ztominimizethedistancebetweeninputdataandgenerateddata.Aftertheopti-
mizedz∗is obtained, a reconstructed data G(z∗)is fed into fexpecting that the output f(G(z∗))
is the same as normal data. The denoising method can be used in conjunction with any classifier
anddoesnotneedtomodifytheclassifierstructure.Thus,itwillnotdecreasetheperformanceof
thetrainedmodel.Inaddition,itisindependentofanyattackmethod,whichmeansthatitcanbe
usedas adefenseagainst anyattack.
Totackletheissueofinsufficientadversarialdatainadversarialtraining,agenerativeadversarial
training method was proposed by using GAN [ 67]. In this method, the generator G(∇)takes the
gradient∇ofnormaldata xasinputandoutputsadversarialnoisetoperturb x.Thelossfunctionof
GisLG(∇,y)=H(f(x+G(∇)),y)+λ/bardblG(∇)/bardbl2,whereH(f(x+G(∇)),y)encouragesthegenerated
datax+G(∇)to be classified correctly by the classifier f,a n dλ/bardblG(∇)/bardbl2requests the generated
noiseG(∇)to be small and imperceptible. The desired classifier fwas configured as a GAN’s
discriminator to reduce the classification loss for both the normal data and the generated data.
Thelossfunctionoftheclassifier fisLf=αH(f(x),y)+(1−α)H(f(x+G(∇)),y),whereH(·,·)is
definedascrossentropy.ThisarticlepresentsthefirstworktoapplyGANtoadversarialtraining
andprovidesarobustclassifiersothatenoughadversarialdatacanbeusedtoenhancethedesired
model’s regularization power effectively. It is worth pointing out that the proposed method is
modeldependentandcanonlyworkonsomespecificmodelsduetotheclassifier f’sinvolvement
in theadversarialtraining.
AnimprovementhasbeenmadebyLiuetal.[ 75],whoproposedamodel-independentmethod
namedGanDefthatcanbeadefenseformanydifferentclassifiers.Accordingtotheiranalysis,the
misclassification of deep models is caused before the soft-max layer. The input of soft-max layer
would be different from adversarial samples and normal samples through forward propagation,
which explains why the final output of deep models is different. Moreover, the normal samples
hold a property of “invariant features”; in other words, if a set of data is classified into correct
classes, the input of soft-max should follow the same distribution. The failure of classification on
theadversarialsamplesindicatesthattheadversarialsamplesandthenormalsamplesdonothave
the same invariant features. Thus, for correct classification, a classifier and a discriminator are
deployed in a GAN framework to modify adversarial samples such that their invariant features
arethesameasnormaldata.FollowingthetrainingprocessoftheoriginalGAN,theclassifierand
the discriminator are iteratively updated. Finally, the classifier is supposed to have the ability to
make the adversarial sample’s invariant features similar to (ideally, even the same as) the normal
samples. Thus, any data can be processed before the soft-max layer with this mechanism and get
thecorrectprediction.
5.2 MalwareDetection
Hu and Tan [ 49] developed MalGAN to generate adversarial malware examples, where GAN was
employed as a binary malware feature generator to attack a malware detector. The malware only
extracts the program output of detection with the assumption that the attacker only knows the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.