132:22 Z.Cai et al.
Fig. 5. The structureof aGANinverter.
argmin fExH(f(x),b(x))+H(f(x+G(x)),b(x+G(x))),wherebisthetargetblack-boxclassifier,
fis a shadow model built from observation of b,a n dH(·,·)is the cross-entropy function. After
the training process, the generator in GAN can be used to produce adversarial sample x+G(x).
Since the attack model is dynamically trained based on the target classifier’s changes, the attack
capabilityis enhanced,andtheattacksuccessrateisincreased.
Unlikethepreviousattackmethodsrequiringsmalladversarialnoiseforaccuratehumanpercep-
tionandclassification,anunrestrictedadversarialattackmethodwasproposedbySongetal.[ 117]
to mislead the victim classifier to the target label ytusing a modified ACGAN model of Odena
et al. [95]. In the beginning, a generator G(z,y)is trained to generate synthetic labeled data from
random noise zand data label y. To generate the adversarial samples with target label yt,a na t -
tackertriestooptimize zto˜zuntilf(G(˜z,y))=yt,wherefisagivenvictimclassifier.Thisattack
isachievedbytwooptimizationproceduresinACGAN:(i)forthevictimclassifier f,minimizethe
loss between f(G(˜z,y))andyt, and (ii) for the additional classifier C, minimize the loss between
C(G(˜z,y))andy.Theadvantageofthisattackisthatitcangeneratenumerousadversarialsamples
thatcould beeven different fromtheoriginaldatawithoutbeingdetectedbya human.
Similar to Odena et al. [ 95], Wang et al. [ 132] designed an AT-GAN model using a pre-trained
generator GandACGANtotransfer GtoGattackthatcanbeusedtoproduceadversarialsamples
directly. In the beginning, an attacker trains G(z,y)to mimic real data distribution with ACGAN.
Based on the training results of G(z,y), the attacker slightly modifies G(z,y)toGattack(z,y)by
minimizing/bardblGattack(z,y)−G(z,y)/bardblsuchthat Gattack(z,y)canproducedatawiththetargetlabel
yt, where the prediction loss, L(f(G(z,y)),yt), and the distance loss, /bardblGattack(z,y)−G(z,y)/bardbl,
are taken into account for simultaneous minimization. For the desired adversarial samples, the
prediction loss assures the modified samples can be classified to the target class, and the distance
losscontrolsperturbationmagnitude betweenrealand fakedata.
However,asagenerativemodel,GANitselfalsofacesthedangerofbeingattacked.Inthework
of Kos et al. [ 63], a framework was given to show how to design adversarial samples to attack
generative models, such as GAN and VAE. Apart from the original adversarial samples in classi-
fication models, an adversarial sample x/primein the generative model is achieved by minimizing the
distanceL(x/prime,x)such that f(G(x/prime))=yt/nequalf(G(x)).To realize the attack purpose, the entire loss
function, λL(x,x/prime)+H(f(G(x/prime)),yt), should be minimized, in which L(·,·)controls the distance
betweenxandx/prime,andH(·,·)compelsG(x/prime)tobeclassifiedtothe ytclass.Thisisthefirstworkto
design an attack model for the generative models. However, the proposed attack model can only
handle white-box attack implementation, making it infeasible to perform attacks without prior
knowledge.
5.1.2 Adversarial Sample Defense. The existing strategies against adversarial sample attacks
can be briefly classified into three categories: denoising, adversarial training, and detection. The
GAN-baseddefensemethodswillbesummarized from theprecedingcategories.
The first denoising method based on GAN was designed by Shen et al. [ 111] with the funda-
mental idea that the generator can take adversarial samples to output normal data. Accordingly,
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.