Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:15
(ii) reducing the inference gain Gf(h).M o r e o v e r , Gf(h)also works as a regularization term con-
trolled by λ, improving the generalization capability of classifier f. The min-max optimization
cantrainaprivateclassifiereveniftheattackerhasthestrongestinferencegain.Nevertheless,the
proposedmethodhasitsdisadvantages.Asshownintheexperiments,thetrainedclassifier’sclassi-
fication accuracy is decreased by around 3% compared with the classifiers without an adversarial
regularization term. Another flaw is that the training process of the proposed method requires
much data as a reference dataset. In practice, it is hard to obtain so much data with the same
distribution as the data given by users in MLaaS, which lowers the applicability of the proposed
method.
Wuetal.[ 135]investigatedthegeneralizationabilityofGANfromanovelperspectiveofprivacy
protection. They theoretically analyzed the connection between the generalization gap and the
membershipprivacyforaseriesofGANmodels.Motivatedbyawell-knownintuition[ 150],“the
smallerthegeneralizationgapis,thelessinformationofthetrainingdatasetwillberevealed,”they
linkedthestability-basedtheoryanddifferentialprivacy[ 29],whichillustratesthatadifferentially
private training mechanism not only reduces the membership privacy leakage but also improves
thegeneralization capabilityof themodel.
4.2 Preimage Privacy
Some other attacks (e.g., model inversion attacks [ 35] and data reconstruction attacks [ 34]) move
onemorestepandcancausemoreseriousdamagetomachinelearningmodels.Inmodelinversion
attacks, given a target model fand a label yt, the purpose of an attacker is to retrieve the input
xof the target model fsuch that f(x)=yt. Similarly, in data reconstruction attacks, an attacker
focuses on recovering the raw data in the training dataset of a given model fwith the help of
additional information. The objective of these two types of attacks is to find private information
of input data of learning models, for which we propose a new term called preimage privacy to
depictmodelinversionattacksanddata reconstructionattacks.
4.2.1 Attacks on Preimage Privacy. Model inversion attacks have been successfully conducted
as a severe threat under the white-box setting, whereas for the black-box scenario, there are no
impressive works before the birth of GAN. In the work of Aïvodji et al. [ 3], a model inversion
attack framework was built under the black-box setting. Given a target model fand a label yt,
an attacker aims at characterizing data xtbelonging to yt. To achieve the goal, an attacker trains
a GAN framework using adaptive loss in BEGAN [ 13], where the generator Gworks as a data
inverter(i.e., G:z→x),andthediscriminator Disreplacedbyaneuralnetworkclassifiertaking
xas input and predicting a label yas output. Since there is no real data, a randomly sampled
datasetXD∼N(0,1)isusedforself-adaptiveupdatingbasedonBEGAN.Thetrainingprocessof
an attackisexpressedasfollows:
min
GH(f(G(z)),yt), (11)
min
DH(D(XD),f(XD))−ktH(D(G(z)),f(G(z))). (12)
In Equation ( 11) and Equation ( 12),Hdenotes the cross-entropy loss, and ktis a parameter of
self-adaptiveupdating.Thisattackmethodcanefficientlyattacktheblack-boxmodeleventhough
the model is trained with a differential privacy mechanism, providing much inspiration to future
research.Butthismethodhasanessentialflawthatiscommonforallblack-boxattacks:anattacker
has to issue lots of queries to get a predicted label of input data as auxiliary training information,
bringingahugecost.Forexample,inthiswork,1,280,000queriesareneededtoachievethedesired
attackperformance.Suchafrequentandintensivequeryoperationmaybedetectedbythetarget
modeleasily.Thus,thereshouldbesome otherways toimprove theattackmethod.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.