Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:13
into the synthetic graph for perturbation to protect privacy before publishing graph data to the
public.TheideaofanadversarialgraphhasbeenextendedintheworkofLietal.[ 70]toconsider
boththeproblemsofimperceptibledatagenerationandcommunitydetectionforanenhancedpri-
vacyprotection.TheproposedGAN-basedmodelofLietal.[ 70]hasthreecriticalcomponents:(i)
aconstrainedgraphgeneratorbasedonagraphneuralnetworktogenerateanadversarialgraph,
(ii) a 0–1 classifier working as the discriminator to make the synthetic graph real-like for main-
taining utility, and (iii) a community detection model that helps the adversarial graph prevent
community detection attacks. Similarly, the graph feature learning model of Li et al. [ 69] was de-
signed based on GAN to perturb a probability adjacency matrix with the help of Laplace noise in
the graph reconstruction process to obtain an anonymous graph. This reconstructed anonymous
graph maintains the utility of link prediction due to GAN’s good feature learning ability, and can
be used to defend community detection and de-anonymization attack owing to the utilization of
Laplace noise.
3.6.2 Graph Embedding. It is well known that graph embedding is useful to learn low-
dimension feature representations for various prediction tasks. Adversaries can also infer sensi-
tiveinformationfromthesegraphnoderepresentations,resultinginprivacyleakage.Lietal.[ 72]
designed an Adversarial Privacy Graph Embedding (APGE) training framework based GAN
to remove users’ private information from the learned representations of graph data. In APGE,
oneautoencoder-basedgeneratorisusedtolearngraphnoderepresentationswhileimplementing
disentangling, and purging mechanisms. During the process of adversarial training, one 0–1 clas-
sifier is employed to make the synthetic representations real-like, and one non-private attribute
predictionmodelandoneprivateattributepredictionmodelaredesignedtokeepdatautilityand
protectusers’privacy,respectively.
Thecomparisonof surveyedapproachesfordata privacyissummarized in Table 1.
4 PRIVACY OF MODELS
In the previous section, we discussed the works on the privacy issues of various sensitive data. It
is worth noting that privacy can be inferred not only through data but also through the adopted
models,especiallyin MachineLearningasaService(MLaaS) [106].Asanalyzedintheworkof
Fredriksonetal.[ 36],amodel’sprivacybreachesifanadversarycanusethemodel’soutputtoinfer
the private attributes used to train the model. This section will survey how to steal privacy from
thelearningmodelsandhowtoprotectthelearningmodelprivacyusingGAN-basedapproaches.
4.1 MembershipPrivacy
Membership inference attacks can be launched toward a machine learning and/or deep learning
model to determine if a specific data point is in the given model’s training dataset or not [ 114].
Typically, after a model is trained, an attacker feeds data into the model and gets the correspond-
ingpredictionresultsthatcanbeusedasadditionalknowledgetoperformblack-boxmembership
inference attacks. Such an attack will cause privacy leakage and even other severe consequences.
For instance, with a patient’s medical records and a predictive model trained for a disease, an at-
tackercanknowwhetherthepatienthasacertaindiseasebyimplementingmembershipinference
attacks. To defend against such attacks, the techniques of GAN, anonymization, and obfuscation
have beenexploited todesign countermeasures[ 4,29].
4.1.1 Attacks on Membership Privacy. Membership privacy of generative models was studied
f o rt h efi r s tt i m eb yH a y e se ta l .[ 46], in which a model named LOGANwas designed to attack
a generative model through either black-box or white-box via released API in MLaaS. In white-
box attacks, an attacker is assumed to know the target GAN model’s structure and parameter
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.