Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:9
GANmodelbasedonDCGAN,wherethegeneratorisusedtodetect,remove,andpaintinmoving
objectsbyusingmulti-viewimagery,andthediscriminatorisusedtomakethegeneratedimages
photorealistic. With these settings, the multi-view GAN removes private regions and is able to
retaintheutilityofthesynthesizedstreet-viewimages.Similarly,Lietal.[73]proposedthePicPri-
vacymodel[ 73]tosegmentanderasesensitiveinformation,suchashumanportraits,fromstreet-
viewimageswhilerepairingblankregionsbasedonGANtomaintaintheperformanceof3Dcon-
struction.Inaddition,todefendagainstlocationinferenceattacksonvehicularcameradata,Xiong
etal.[140,141]proposedthree Auto-DrivingGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(ADGAN) mod-
elsbasedonDCGANtogenerateprivacy-preservingvehicularimagesandvideosforautonomous
vehicles. The core idea of their three methods is to prevent the location-related background in-
formation in images/videos from being identified by attackers and maintain data utility simulta-
neously. The generator takes original data as input and outputs the privacy-preserving data, and
multiple discriminators are constructed following the convolutional 0–1 classifier structure with
different filter sizes to distinguish real/fake data more efficiently. Additionally, for the trade-off
between privacy and utility, customized privacy loss and utility loss are calculated through the
difference between the original data and the generated data. To improve model performance and
data quality, an extra target model was added in the work of Xiong et al. [ 140] to provide more
accuratefeedbackondata generation.
3.1.4 Image Stegangraphy. With the widespread Internet of Things (IoT) applications in re-
cent years, the risk of privacy leakage has increased. Traditionally, steganography is a critical
method to find the trade-off between personal privacy disclosure and covert communication. A
new steganography algorithm is developed based on image-to-image translation using a cyclic
DCGANframework,where G1isasteganographymoduletransferringdatafrom x1-domainto x2-
domain,and G2isanothersteganographymoduletransferringdatafrom x2-domainto x1-domain.
These two steganography modules are used as two generators in Steganography-CycleGAN so
that the stego images generated by the proposed method will be close to the cover images. Two
discriminators Dx2andDx1ar eusedtom akesur ethatnotonl ythesteg oim ag esfr om x1-domain
tox2-domain but also the stego images from x2-domain to x1-domain are similar to the real ones.
Inaddition,toresistdetectionbythesteganalysismodule,onesteganalysismodule DSisdeployed
to realize the concealment and security in transmission by an adversarial training. Similarly, Shu
et al. [115] applied GAN to successfully achieve the encrypted rich-data steganography during
transmissionin wirelessnetworks.
3.1.5 ImageAnonymization. Protectingindividuals’dataprivacyisanessentialtaskforpublic
data collection and publication. In the work of Kim and Yang [ 62], a privacy-preserving adversar-
ial protector network (PPAPNet) was designed as a DCGAN-based anonymization method that
converts a sensitive image into a high-quality and attack-immune synthetic image. Under PPAP-
Net, the generator is initialized as a protector with pre-trained Autoencoder, the discriminator
is the WGAN [ 43] critic with a gradient to guide the protector to generate realistic images that
candefendmodelinversionattacks,andanoiseamplifierinsidetheprotectorplaysavitalrolein
noise optimization for effective image anonymization. Similarly, Lee et al. [ 68] implemented face
anonymization on the drone patrol systems to hide the sensitive information in face images by
convertingasensitiveimage intoanothersyntheticimage basedonDCGAN.
3.1.6 Image Encoding. A formula was established for learning an encoding function based on
DCGAN in the work of Pittaluga et al. [ 98]. The encoder is trained to prevent privacy inference
and maintain the utility of predicting non-private attributes. In this adversarial framework, the
generator is an encoding function that outputs limited information of private attributes while
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.