132:26 Z.Cai et al.
Autoencoder, and GMMs for fraud detection. Particularly, the encoder together with a GMM was
usedasthediscriminator,andthedecoderwasusedasthegenerator.Thentheencoderandanother
GMMoutputtheclassificationresults(i.e.,whethera given sample isnormalorfraud).
5.5 Botnet Detection
As one of the most formidable threats to cybersecurity, a botnet is often enrolled in launching
large-scale attack sabotage [ 33]. The network-based detection mainly studies the abnormal char-
acteristics of botnets based on network flows. Some other classic detection approaches are based
ontheextractionandselectionoffeaturesusingstatisticalanalysis,machinelearning,datamining,
andothermethods.However,thesetraditionaldetectionschemeshavetwomainshortcomings.On
the one hand, most of the existing network-based methods for botnet detection are limited to the
packet inspection level and focus on partial characteristics of network flows, which cannot fully
characterize botnets’ abnormal behaviors. On the other hand, botnets keep pace with the times
and take advantage of advanced ideas and technologies to escape detection, raising insurmount-
ablechallengesto thetraditionaldetectionschemes.
The discriminator is essentially a binary classifier that classifies the samples into real or fake
categories. Similarly, the real samples can be further categorized into normal traffic or abnormal
trafficforabotnetdetector.Inspiredbytheseobservations,Yinetal.[ 151]proposedaGAN-based
botnetdetectionframework,whichissuitableforaugmentingtheoriginaldetectionmodel.Intheir
work [151], the discriminator was replaced with a botnet detector, and the corresponding binary
output(i.e.,normalandanomaly)wastransformedintoatripleoutput(i.e.,normal,anomaly,and
fake)fordetectionusingthesoft-maxfunction.
5.6 Network Intrusion Detection
Network environment is very complex and time varying, so it is difficult to use traditional meth-
ods to extract accurate features of intrusion behaviors from the high-dimensional data samples
and process the high-volume data efficiently. Even worse, the network intrusion samples are sub-
merged intomany normaldata packets,leadingto insufficientsamplesfor modeltraining.
Yangetal.[ 146]proposedaDCGAN-basedmethodtoextractfeaturesdirectlyfromtherawdata
andthengeneratednewtrainingdatasetsbylearningfromtherawdata,inwhichLSTM[ 39]was
applied to learn the features of network intrusion behaviors automatically. The generator Gwas
configuredwithCNN,wherethepoolinglayerwasreplacedwiththefractionalstrideconvolutions.
Then, the fully connected layer was removed, ReLU was applied for all layers except the output
layer, and tanh is used at the output layer. In addition, batchnorm was utilized to solve the poor
initializationproblemandpropagateeachlayer’sgradient.Thediscriminatorwasalsoconstructed
usingCNNthatcontainsapoolinglayerwithoutanyfullyconnectedlayer,andLeakyReLUisused
at all layers. Batchnorm was used to propagate the gradient to each layer to avoid the generator
convergingallsamplesto thesame point.
5.7 Vehicle Security
Seo et al. [ 109]p r o p o s e da GAN-based Intrusion Detection System (GIDS) for vehicular net-
works. A Controller Area Network (CAN) bus in the networks is an efficient standard bus en-
ablingcommunicationbetweenallElectronicControlUnits.However,CANitselfisvulnerabledue
tothelackofsecurityfeatures.GIDSaimsatdetectingunknownattacksonCANwithtwodiscrim-
inativemodels.ThefirstdiscriminatorreceivesnormalandabnormalCANimagesextractedfrom
theactualvehicle.Becausethefirstdiscriminatorusesattackdatainthetrainingprocess,thetype
of attacks that can be detected may be limited to the attack used for training. The generator and
theseconddiscriminatoraretrainedsimultaneouslyinanadversarialprocess,wherethegenerator
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.