Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:3
Generative Adversarial Network (InfoGAN) [21], and CycleGAN [ 160]. Motivated by these
characteristics,novelresearchbenefitsfrom GAN in awidespreadway.
1.2 The MostRecent Research onGAN
Currently, two mainstream kinds of research on GAN are being conducted concurrently:
application-oriented study and theory-oriented study. As the restrictions of previous generative
models are overcome by GAN, the applications related to data generation are thoroughly investi-
gated for different data formats, such as image generation [ 83,95,131,145],Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [24,32,53,149], time series data generation [ 17,28,30,42], and semantic seg-
mentation [ 82,99,118,161]. These application scenarios can be further divided into fine-grained
subcategories, including image-to-image translation, image super-resolution, image in-painting,
face aging, human pose synthesis, object detection, sketch synthesis, text synthesis, medical data
generation, texture synthesis, language and speech synthesis, video and music generation, and
so on. Those prosperous applications demonstrate the extraordinary capability and widespread
popularityof GAN.
Meanwhile, to push GAN’s capability to a higher level, theoretical methodologies proceed
to tackle essential issues including non-stable training, mode collapse, gradient vanish, lack of
properevaluationmetrics,andsoon.Somefeasiblesolutionshavebeenproposed,suchasfeature
matching, unrolled GAN, mini-batch discrimination, the Self-Attention Generative Adversar-
ial Network (SAGAN) , label smoothing, proper optimizer, gradient penalty, and alternative loss
function[ 84].
1.3 GANin Privacy and Security
Withindividuals’increasingprivacyconcernsandgovernments’graduallystrengtheningprivacy
regulations,thwartingsecurityandprivacythreatshasbeenputinacriticalplacewhendesigning
applications,suchas medicalimage analysis,street-viewimage sharing,and facerecognition.
Thanks to the characteristics of adversarial training, GAN and its variants can be exploited to
investigatetheprivacyandsecurityissueswithoutanypre-determinedassumptionsofopponents’
capabilities that are often hard to be determined in traditional attacks and defense mechanisms.
As the adversarial training process can capture the interactions between an attacker and a de-
fender in a min-max game, the GAN-based methods can be formulated to either launch an attack
tobreakasoliddefenseorimplementprotectiontodefendagainststrongattackers.Foranattack
model, the generator is modeled as an attacker aiming at fooling a defender (i.e., the discrimina-
tor)[10,38,47,158].Inadefensemodel,thegeneratorismodeledasadefendertoresistapowerful
attacker (i.e., the discriminator), such as Generative Adversarial Privacy (GAP) [ 51], Privacy Pre-
serving Adversarial Networks (PPANs) [ 127], Compressive Adversarial Privacy (CAP) [ 22], and
ReconstructiveAdversarialNetwork(RAN)[ 77].
In a nutshell, the existing GAN-based privacy and security methods mainly differ in their con-
figurations of GAN models and formulations of loss functions. However, from the perspective of
application scenarios, model design, and data utilization, there is plenty of room for taking maxi-
mumadvantageofGAN,leavinglotsofresearchblanksforfurtherenhancements.Thosepotential
directionsareelaboratedattheend ofthissurvey.
The organization of this survey is illustrated in Figure 1. We present the preliminaries about
GANanditsvariantsinSection 2.TheapplicationsofGANforprivacy,includingdataprivacyand
modelprivacy,arereviewedinSection 3andSection 4,respectively.Security-relatedapplications
are described in Section 5, and promising future works are discussed in Section 6.F i n a l l y ,w e
concludethesurveyin Section 7.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.