132:10 Z.Cai et al.
preserving non-private attributes, and the discriminators are neural network–based estimators
for privacy protection. Similarly, other works [ 27,94,147] attempted to learn representations or
dimension-reduced features from raw data based on DCGAN, in which the desired variables are
maintainedforutilityrepresentations,andthesensitivevariablesarehiddenforprivacyprotection.
Especially, these representations encoded from users’ data can exhibit the predictive ability and
protectprivacy.
3.2 Video Data Privacy
There is an increasing concern in computer vision devices invading users’ privacy by recording
unwanted videos [ 87,107,134,141]. On the one hand, some previous works that focus on im-
age privacy can be applied to hide sensitive content in videos by simply considering a video as a
sequence of image frames [ 62,147]. On the other hand, videos can also be used to recognize im-
portanteventsandassisthumans’dailylivesbyadvanceddeeplearningmodels,whichdifferfrom
imagerecognitionapplications.Thus,itisexpectedthatinvideos,individuals’privacyshouldnot
be intruded and the efficiency of detecting continuous action should be kept at the same time. A
videofaceanonymizerisbuiltbasedontheDCGANmodelbyRenetal.[ 104],wherethegenerator
isdesignedasamodifierofthefaceinvideos,andtwodiscriminators,includingone0–1classifier
andonefaceclassifier,aredeployed.Specifically,the0–1classifierisappliedforadversarialtrain-
ing, and the face classifier is used for face detection. As a result, the video face anonymizer can
finally hidethefacesbutmaintain theinformationusedfor actionrecognition.
3.3 Textual Data Privacy
To implement privacy protection using GAN for textual data, various schemes for anonymous
textsynthesis[ 74,112]andprivacy-preservingpublic/medicalrecordsrelease[ 23,66,97,123,143]
havebeenproposed.
3.3.1 Texts. NLP[52]enablesauthoridentificationofanonymoustextsbyanalyzingthetexts’
stylisticproperties,whichhasbeenalreadyappliedtodescribeusersbydeterminingtheirprivate
attributeslikeageand/orgender.Shettyetal.[ 112]pr oposedan AuthorAdversarialAttribute
Anonymous Neural Translation (A4NT) with a basis of DCGAN to defend NLP-based adver-
saries. The objective of A4NT is to fool the identity classifier by altering the semantics of the
input text in person while maintaining semantic consistency. To this end, the A4NT network is
designedasastyle-transfernetworkthattransformstextsintoatargetstylebasedon longshort-
term memory (LSTM) [120] and fools the attribute classifier simultaneously. The generator in
anA4NTnetworktransformstheinputtextsfromasourceattributeclasstogeneratethestyleof
adifferentattributeclass.Onediscriminatorusesa0–1classifiertohelpthegeneratorhidetheau-
thor’sidentity,andtheotherdiscriminatormakesthetextsemanticconsistentbyminimizingthe
semanticandlanguageloss.Withasimilaridea,Lietal.[ 74]presentedamethodtolearntextrep-
resentations instead of texts, preserve users’ personal information, and retain text representation
utility.
3.3.2 PublicRecords. Whensharingrecordswithpartnersand/orreleasingrecordstothepub-
lic, traditional approaches perform privacy protection by removing identifiers, altering quasi-
identifiers, and perturbing values. In the work of Park et al. [ 97], the DCGAN architecture with
an auxiliary classifier is exploited to develop a model called AC-DCGAN , where the generator
produces synthetic records to hide sensitive information. Through adversarial training, the auxil-
iary classifier is used to predict synthetic records’ labels such that the records’ identification can-
not be re-identified, and the discriminator is trained to ensure that the synthetic records have
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.