132:18 Z.Cai et al.
Distrainedbymaximizingthelossofdatagenerationandvictimidentification.Afterthetraining
process,theattackercanuse Gtogeneratesensitiveinformationofanytargetvictimmodel.Inad-
dition,amorepowerfulactiveattackisprovided,inwhichthemaliciousserverallocatesanisolated
model to a victim model without sharing any model. In this case, Din the attacker’s GAN model
is exactly the same as the model uploaded by the victim. As a result, the attacker can reconstruct
Gto produce more accurate data without influence on other local models. But this active model
actuallyaffectstheprotocolofdistributedlearninganddecreaseslearningperformancecompared
withoriginalattacks.Moreover,thereisaverystrongassumption:theserverhasaglobaldataset.
Ifthisis true,thereisno needtouseGAN for attackimplementation.
4.3.2 PrivacyProtectioninDistributedLearningSystems. Privacyprotectionindistributedlearn-
ingsystemsalsodeservesourattention.Yanetal.[ 144]designedaprotectionmechanismagainst
two different attack behaviors, including stealing user information and attacking server parame-
ters. In their protection mechanism, except for the attacker, every local model is embedded with
an additional layer called the buried point layer and all of its weights are set to be 0. When an
attacker starts to attack, for the sake of an unknown buried point layer, the parameters uploaded
to the server should be different from harmless local models. At the server, a detection module is
used to detect abnormal changes. If the attacker uploads parameters to the server, the detection
module immediately discovers the intrusion. When an intrusion is detected for the first time, the
linkbetweentheattackerandtheserverisawaitedforacheck,andwhenanintrusionisdetected
forthesecondtime,theconnectionis blacklisted.
A few current works focus on the extension of GAN to a federated scenario. Due to the con-
straintthatnorawdatacanleaveitslocaldataset,federatedlearningissomehowrestrictedtotrain
classifiers only and thus cannot be used in other important applications, such as data generation
and reinforcement learning, especially on small datasets. The integration of GAN and federated
learning can realize distributed data generation, improving traditional federated learning’s appli-
cability.Generallyspeaking,federatedGAN’sobjectiveistoobtainaglobalgeneratorattheserver
toproducerealisticdatafollowingthedatadistributionoflocalclientswithoutprivacyleakage.In
theworkofHardyetal.[ 45],thegenerateddataandcorrespondingerrorsareexchangedfordata
generationamongageneratorattheserveranddistributeddiscriminatorsatlocalclients.Similar
updatingrulesareadoptedbyYonetanietal.[ 153]fordatagenerationinanon-i.i.d.settingbyas-
signingdifferentweightstolocaldiscriminatorsattheaggregationstage.Rasoulietal.[ 103]built
thefederatedGANinanotherwaythattrainsboththegeneratorandthediscriminatorlocallyon
eachprivatedatasetand employstheserverasa parameteraggregator and distributor.
4.4 Differential Privacy in GAN
According to the analysis in Sections 4.1through4.3and the conclusion of Song et al. [ 116], we
canfindthattherootcauseofprivacyleakageofmodelsisthatmachinelearningmodelsremem-
ber too much. In other words, during the training process of a model, the model parameters are
optimized to fit the underlying training dataset, which implies that the information of training
data (e.g., distribution, features, membership) is embedded into the model parameters. Therefore,
theadversarycan unveilprivateinformation byexploitingthemodelparameters.
So far, two types of solutions have been proposed to overcome this vulnerability in learning
models. The first method is adding a regularization term in a loss function to avoid overfitting
during the training process. The regularization item can improve robustness and generalize a
model to work on the data that the model has never seen. For example, this method can be used
to defend membership inference attack [ 93] as described in Section 4.1.2. The second method is
to add acceptable noise into model parameters to hinder privacy inference attacks. Such type of
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.