Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:25
Fig.6. Theframework of adversarialattack networks.Source: http://iprobe.cse.msu.edu/datasets.php.
the first GAN to create fingerprint images. Then the minutiae extracted from the second GAN’s
outputsand a featureextractionalgorithmisusedtodo extraction.
For face recognition, there are also more and more attack methods that generate adversarial
examplestoviolatethedeeplearningbasedfacerecognitionmodels.Zhuetal.[ 162]appliedGAN
to make up adversarial example attack on well-trained face recognition models. The proposed
method consists of two GAN-based sub-networks, including a “makeup transfer sub-network”
that transfers face images from non-makeup domain to makeup domain and an “adversarial at-
tack sub-network” that generates adversarial examples. The configuration of “makeup transfer
sub-network”followsCycleGAN[ 160]asshowninFigure 6(a),inwhich xistherealnon-makeup
input,yistherealmakeupinput,thegenerator GoutputsG(x)toobfuscatethediscriminator Dy,
andthenetwork F:Y→Xgeneratesresultsof non-makeupfacestoobfuscatethediscriminator
Dx. In the “makeup transfer sub-network,” one generator adds makeup effect to non-makeup im-
ages, and the other removes makeup effect while still maintaining the original identity. However,
Dxdistinguishes between the real non-makeup photos and the generated ones, and Dydistin-
guishes between the real makeup photos and the generated ones. The structure of “adversarial
attack sub-networks” is presented in Figure 6(b), where a transformation T(·,·)is input with the
blendoforiginalimage xandthegeneratedoutput G(x)of“makeuptransfersub-network.”Then,
T(x,G(x))servesastheinputofthegenerator H,whichisusedtogenerateimages H(T(x,G(x)))
that can deceive both the target network Aand the discriminator Dh. In the “adversarial attack
sub-networks,”thediscriminator Dhfunctionssimilarlyas Dy,andDyisalsousedasapre-trained
model parametertoinitialize Dh.
In addition, Damer et al. [ 25] proposed MorGAN to launch a realistic morphing attack by con-
sideringtherepresentationloss.MorGANisinspiredbytheideaofadversariallylearnedinference
but uses a VAE instead of simple Autoencoder. By doing so, MorGAN can avoid the possibilities
of non-continuous latent space and further lead to more realistic output from the interpolation
betweenencodedvectors.
5.4 Fraud Detection
Financialfrauddetectionproblems,includingcreditcardfraud,telecomfraud,andinsurancefraud,
and so on, are well known for highly non-linear and complex solutions. The artificial neural net-
work,whichsimulatesinteractingneurons’properties,hasbeensuccessfullyutilizedtosolvesuch
problems.However,inrealapplicationsforfrauddetection,theartificialneuralnetworkfacestwo
problems: (i) the receiving bank cannot get access to detailed information about the sending ac-
counts when the transaction happens between different banks, and (ii) the receiving bank also
cannotobtaincallrecordsof therecipientsof transfersfromthetelecommunicationprovider.
To deal with these problems, in the work of Zheng et al. [ 159], GAN was applied to telecom
fraud detection under the bank receiving scenario, which is also useful for many other anomaly
detection problems when the training dataset is limited. In this work, the authors coupled GAN,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.