132:14 Z.Cai et al.
consisting of a generator and a discriminator. It is known that the discriminator is able to assign
a higher probabilityto a data point that is in the trainingdataset. Accordingly, an attackerinputs
several data points into the discriminator obtaining the corresponding probabilities and selects
thenmost probable data points as the nmembers of the training dataset. For black-box attacks,
membershipprivacycanbeinferredwithoutorwithauxiliaryknowledge.Ifthereisnoauxiliary
knowledge, an attacker uses the generator of the target GAN from query API to produce enough
generateddatalabeledas“real”fortrainingalocalGANsuchthathe/shecangetaparameterized
discriminator. Then, the attacker performs the aforementioned white-box attacks on his/her dis-
criminator to learn membership privacy. If the attacker knows some auxiliary information, such
asthedataonlyfromthetrainingdatasetorthedatafromboththetrainingandtestdatasets,the
attacker’sdiscriminatorcanbebettertrainedandusedinwhile-boxattacksformembershipinfer-
ence. However, there are too many assumptions in black-box attacks, which may be impractical
inrealapplications.
Sumetal.[ 76]proposed“co-membership”attacktowardgenerativemodels.Unliketheprevious
worksthatinferthemembershipofasingledatapointeachtime,theco-membershipattackaims
to simultaneously decide whether n(n≥1) data points are in the training dataset of the target
generativemodel.Theimplementationofco-membershipattackscomesfromtheintuitiveunder-
standingofGAN:ifGANispowerfulenough,itshouldbeabletogenerateanydatafromalatent
vectororreconstructanydatafromitslatentrepresentation.Toaccomplishsuchattacks,aneural
network is trained on the attacker side with the following objective: min γ1
n/summationtextn
iΔ(xi,G(Aγ(xi))),
whereγis a network parameter, Gis the generator of GAN that takes a latent vector zas input
and outputs generated data G(z),a n dAγis the attacker’s network that takes original data xias
input and outputs a low-dimensional vector with a shape same as z. After the training process is
finished,theattackergetsadistance(e.g., L2distance) Δ(xi,G(Aγ(xi)))betweenxiandG(Aγ(xi)).
If the distance is greater than a threshold, the reconstruction of xifromzis not associated with
the original xi,w h i c hm e a n s ximay not be a member of the training dataset; otherwise, xiis a
member of the training dataset. The proposed attack method has some fatal flaws: (i) for a large
training dataset, if the pre-determined value of nis small, the attack accuracy is lower than that
of the traditional membership attacks, and (ii) for each victim model, an attacker needs to train a
different attack network Aγfrom randomly initialized weights. So the attack efficiency is not as
high as expected. In addition, the proposed co-membership attack is a kind of white-box attack
andis impossibleto beusedin ablack-boxscenario.
4.1.2 Protection of Membership Privacy. To prevent membership inference attacks, Nasr
et al. [93] proposed an end-to-end method that trains a machine learning model with member-
ship privacy protection using adversarial regularization based on GAN, which enables a user to
train a privacy-preserving predictive model on the MLaaS platforms (e.g., Google, Amazon, and
Microsoft).Theirproposedmethodcontainstwoparties:anattacker handadefensiveclassifier f.
Theattacker’sprivacygain fromthevictimmodel fisdefinedas follows:
Gf(h)= E
(x,y)∈D(X,Y)[log(h(x,y,f(x)))]+ E
(x,y)∈D/prime(X,Y)[log(1−h(x,y,f(x)))],(10)
where(x,y)is a data point, D(X,Y)is a training dataset, and D/prime(X,Y)is the set of data that is
not inD(X,Y). By maximizing Equation ( 10), an attacker can obtain an accurate prediction on
all data points and know if they are in the training dataset. A defender’s loss function is formu-
lated as min f(LD(f)+λmaxhGf(h)),w h e r eLDis the normal loss when training a classifier (
e.g.,crossentripy),and λisaparametertoadjustthetrade-offbetweenutilityandprivacy.Inthis
method,thedefensiveclassifierhastwoobjectives:(i)minimizingthenormallossfunctionof fand
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.