Provable Beneﬁts of Actor-Critic Methods
for Ofﬂine Reinforcement Learning
Andrea Zanette⇤
University of California, Berkeley
zanette@berkeley.eduMartin J. Wainwright
University of California, Berkeley
wainwrig@berkeley.edu
Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@stanford.edu
Abstract
Actor-critic methods are widely used in ofﬂine reinforcement learning practice,
but are not so well-understood theoretically. We propose a new ofﬂine actor-critic
algorithm that naturally incorporates the pessimism principle, leading to several
key advantages compared to the state of the art. The algorithm can operate when
the Bellman evaluation operator is closed with respect to the action value func-
tion of the actor’s policies; this is a more general setting than the low-rank MDP
model. Despite the added generality, the procedure is computationally tractable
as it involves the solution of a sequence of second-order programs. We prove an
upper bound on the suboptimality gap of the policy returned by the procedure that
depends on the data coverage of any arbitrary, possibly data dependent comparator
policy. The achievable guarantee is complemented with a minimax lower bound
that is matching up to logarithmic factors.
1 Introduction
The problem of learning a near-optimal policy is a core challenge in reinforcement learning (RL).
In many settings, it is beneﬁcial to be able to learn a good policy using only a pre-collected set of
data, without further exploration with the environment; this problem is known as ofﬂine or batch
policy learning . The ofﬂine setting has unique challenges due to the incomplete information about
the Markov decision process (MDP) encoded in the available dataset. For example, due to maxi-
mization bias, a naive ofﬂine algorithm can return a policy with a severely overestimated value. In
order to avoid such undesirable behavior, researchers have introduced the idea of pessimism under
uncertainty, and there is now a growing literature (e.g., Liu et al. (2020); Jin et al. (2020b); Buck-
man et al. (2020); Kumar et al. (2019); Kidambi et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2020)) on different ways in
which pessimism can be incorporated. See Appendix B for additional references and discussion of
this body of work.
At a high level, incorporating pessimism prevents algorithms from settling down on uncertain poli-
cies whose value might be misleadingly high under the current dataset due to statistical errors. By
using pessimism, uncertain policies are penalized in such a way that only those policies robust to
statistical errors are returned. The principle can be implemented in at least two different ways: (a)
by penalizing policies that are far from the one that generated the dataset; or (b) by penalizing the
value functions of policies not well covered by the dataset. In this paper, we take the latter avenue.
⇤This work was fully completed while Andrea Zanette was a PhD candidate at Stanford University. Future
updates of this work will be available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08812
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).