(2020) can be specialized to the low-rank MDP setting; however, even in this simpler setting, the
results would be sub-optimal and also require additional density estimates.
Deriving a computationally tractable model-free algorithm without low-rank dynamics but subject
to value function perturbations (e.g., optimistic or pessimistic perturbations) is an open problem
even in the more heavily studied online exploration setting: there the current state-of-the art Zanette
et al. (2020b); Jin et al. (2021); Du et al. (2021); Jiang et al. (2017) only present computationally
intractable algorithms with the exception of Zanette et al. (2020c) for a PAC setting with low in-
herent Bellman error which however requires an additional “explorability” condition. Due to space
constraints, the proof outline is deferred to Appendix A.
5 Discussion
In this paper, we have developed and analyzed an actor-critic method procedure, designed for ﬁnd-
ing near-optimal policies in the ofﬂine setting. The P ACLE procedure introduces pessimism into the
critic’s evaluation of a given policy’s value function, thereby ensuring that, under suitable parameter
choices and assumptions, it maintains (with high probability) a lower bound on the true value func-
tion. The actor then performs a form of mirror ascent so as to maximize the value of these lower
bounds.
An important feature of our method is that it introduces pessimism via direct perturbations of the pa-
rameter vectors in a linear function approximation scheme. In this way, we avoid having to impose
additional model assumptions; moreover, the pessimism does notsubstantially increase the com-
plexity of our under value/policy classes, which allows us to provide minimax-optimal guarantees.
We note that similar approaches have appeared before in the exploration setting; for example, see the
recent papers Zanette et al. (2020b); Jin et al. (2021); Du et al. (2021). These methods enjoy similar
advantages in terms of theoretical guarantees, but at the expense of computational tractability. In
contrast, the method of this paper entails solving a low-dimensional second-order cone program, a
simple class of convex programs for which there exist many polynomial-time algorithms. We enjoy
this advantage due to some key differences between the ofﬂine and online settings of RL. In the
ofﬂine setting, it is possible to keep the actor’s update cleanly separated from the evaluation step of
the critic, as we have done here; this separation underlies the computational tractability.
Our work leaves open a number of interesting questions for future work. First, it would be interesting
to provide some numerical studies of the P ACLE ’s performance, so as to understand its practical
behavior relative to the theoretical guarantees provided here. Also, our analysis here has focused
purely on approximation using linear basis expansions; extension to more general function classes
is an important next step. Finally, it will be interesting to see to what extent these ideas can be
translated to the more challenging setting of exploration.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by NSF-DMS grant 2015454, NSF-IIS grant 1909365, and NSF-
FODSI grant 2023505 to MJW, a Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory Toyota gift to EB, and
a Ofﬁce of Naval Research grant DOD-ONR-N00014-18-1-2640 to MJW.
References
Abbasi-Yadkori, Y., Pal, D., and Szepesvari, C. (2011). Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) .
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S., Krishnamurthy, A., and Sun, W. (2020a). Flambe: Structural complexity
and representation learning of low rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10814 .
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G. (2020b). Optimality and approximation
with policy gradient methods in markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory ,
pages 64–66.
Agarwal, R., Schuurmans, D., and Norouzi, M. (2020c). An optimistic perspective on ofﬂine rein-
forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 104–114. PMLR.
10