1.1 Overview and our contributions
Implementing pessimism with function approximation is challenging for several reasons. First, un-
certainty must be estimated with particular care. On one hand, underestimating it can fail to correct
the coverage problem. On the other hand, overestimating it leads to policies that are too conserva-
tive and thus underperform. Second, the incorporation of pessimism may introduce complex, higher
order perturbations into the value function class handled by the algorithm. Similar issues can arise
when adding optimistic bonuses in the exploration. The increased complexity of the function class
often requires additional assumptions on the model, because the new class needs to interact “nicely”
with the Bellman operator. Prior art on pessimism with function approximation has by-passed this
problem by making strong model assumptions, such as low-rank transitions Jin et al. (2020b) or
algorithm-speciﬁc assumptions Liu et al. (2020).
Actor-critic methods: Most past theoretical work on ofﬂine reinforcement learning on ﬁnding
with high probability the policy with the highest performance has focused on algorithms that are
either model or value-based2Liu et al. (2020); Jin et al. (2020b); Buckman et al. (2020); Kidambi
et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2020); these often incorporate pessimism into the estimates of the policy
performance. Actor-critic methods are a hybrid class of methods that mitigate some deﬁciencies
of methods that are either purely policy or purely value-based Konda and Tsitsiklis (2000, 2003);
Heess et al. (2015); Haarnoja et al. (2017, 2018); in modern RL, they are widely used in practice
(e.g., Levine et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2019, 2021); Kumar et al. (2019, 2020)). An actor-critic method
generally consists of an actor that changes the policy in order to maximize its value as estimated by
the critic. Given their popularity, it is natural to ask the following question: do actor-critic methods
provably offer any advantage in ofﬂine RL? The main contribution of this paper is to give a positive
answer to this question: by separating the policy optimization from the policy evaluation, both tasks
become simpler to design and the pessimism principle can be incorporated more naturally.
Contributions: More speciﬁcally, we study the problem of policy learning using linear function
approximation in the ofﬂine setting. We assume that we are given a batch data set D, in which each
sample consists of a quadruple. The ﬁrst two components are the state-action pair, corresponding
to the state in which a given action was taken, and the last two components correspond to a noisy
observation of the reward, and a successor state drawn from the appropriate transition function.
Our theory allows for a very general dependence structure among the the state-action pairs in these
samples; when the data set is ordered according to how the samples were collected (which need
not be related to a trajectory), we allow the state-action pair at any given instant to depend on all
past samples. This set-up allows from data collected from arbitrary policies, mixtures of policies,
generative models or even in adversarial manner.
Given such a data set, our objective is to ﬁnd the policy that performs best in the face of uncertainty.
In particular, we need to account for the fact that the optimal policy ⇡⇤for the underlying MDP may
not be well covered by the dataset D, in which case the associated uncertainty would be prohibitive.
In order to achieve this goal, we design an actor-critic procedure that iteratively optimizes a lower
bound on the value of the optimal policy. Suppose that we are interested in optimizing the value
function at some given initial s1. Our strategy works as follows: for any given policy ⇡, we construct
a family M(⇡)of “statistically plausible” MDPs, and use them to deﬁne a simple second-order
cone program. By solving this convex program, we obtain value function estimate V⇡
M(s1)=
arg min M2M(⇡)V⇡
M(s1)that—for an appropriately constructed family M(⇡)—is guaranteed to be
a lower bound on the true value function of ⇡in the unknown MDP that generated the dataset. Given
a procedure for producing such lower bounds, it is then natural to maximize these lower bounds over
some family ⇧of policies. This combination leads to the saddle-point problem
max
⇡2⇧min
M2M(⇡)V⇡
M(s1). (1)
Note that actor-critic methods ﬁt naturally in this framework: the critic provides a pessimistic eval-
uation of any given policy ⇡, and the actor solves the outer maximization problem over policies.
2Exceptions to this include importance-sampling based approaches to selecting among a ﬁnite set of policies
(e.g. Mandel et al. (2014); Thomas et al. (2015, 2019)); however, such approaches have focused on operating
without a Markov assumption and inherently provide much looser guarantees than the ones we and others
consider for the Markov setting.
2