Unsupervised Learning for Real-World Super-Resolution
Andreas Lugmayr Martin Danelljan Radu Timofte
CVL, ETH Z ¨urich, Switzerland
Abstract
Most current super-resolution methods rely on low and
high resolution image pairs to train a network in a fully
supervised manner. However, such image pairs are not
available in real-world applications. Instead of directly
addressing this problem, most works employ the popular
bicubic downsampling strategy to artiﬁcially generate a
corresponding low resolution image. Unfortunately, this
strategy introduces signiﬁcant artifacts, removing natural
sensor noise and other real-world characteristics. Super-
resolution networks trained on such bicubic images there-
fore struggle to generalize to natural images.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised approach for
image super-resolution. Given only unpaired data, we learn
to invert the effects of bicubic downsampling in order to re-
store the natural image characteristics present in the data.
This allows us to generate realistic image pairs, faith-
fully reﬂecting the distribution of real-world images. Our
super-resolution network can therefore be trained with di-
rect pixel-wise supervision in the high resolution domain,
while robustly generalizing to real input. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in quantitative and quali-
tative experiments.
1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) aims to enhance the resolution of
natural images. Recent years have seen an increased inter-
est in the problem, driven by emerging applications. Most
notably, current generations of smartphones allow for the
deployment of powerful image enhancement techniques,
based on machine learning approaches. This calls for super-
resolution methods that can be applied to natural images,
that are often subject to signiﬁcant levels of sensor noise,
compression artifacts or other corruptions encountered in
applications. In this work, we therefore address the prob-
lem of super-resolution in the real-world setting.
Real-world SR poses a fundamental challenge that has
been largely ignored until very recently. The lack of nat-
ural low resolution (LR) and high resolution (HR) image
pairs greatly complicates the evaluation and training of SR
?
?
?
?Original ESRGAN Ours Ground Truth
Figure 1. Super-resolving ( 4) natural images (left) with ESR-
GAN [35], trained on bicubic LR images, and our unsupervised
approach. Ground truth data is unavailable in the real-world set-
ting. Our approach learns to handle sensor noise and other artifacts
in natural images, while ESRGAN fails to generalize.
methods. Therefore, research in the ﬁeld has long relied
on the use of known degradation operators such as bicubic
kernel in order to artiﬁcially generate a corresponding LR
image [9, 31, 34]. While this straight-forward approach en-
ables simple and efﬁcient benchmarking and generation of
virtually unlimited training data, it comes with signiﬁcant
drawbacks. Bicubic downsampling can drastically change
the natural characteristics of an image by, e.g., removing
sensor noise and compression artifacts.
State-of-the-art methods trained only to reconstruct im-
ages artiﬁcially downsampled with a bicubic kernel, do not
generalize to natural images. As visualized in Figure 1,
even small levels of noise causes a network trained only on
bicubic images, in this case ESRGAN [35], to output sig-
niﬁcant artifacts. In fact, this is expected as deep learning
methods are known to be sensitive to signiﬁcant differences
1arXiv:1909.09629v1  [eess.IV]  20 Sep 2019