JPEG Sensor Noise
Ours (DSR) ZSSR EDSR ESRGANESRGAN
FT INESRGAN
FT OUTOurs (DSR) Ours (CSR) GT
Figure 7. Qualitative comparison between our approach and four
state-of-the-art approaches. Our approach is able to recover the
original distribution. This is due to the input and output domain
awareness that the other methods lack of.
best performance, owing to its zero-shot learning strategy.
Our unsupervised approach achieves the best overall per-
ceptual quality, signiﬁcantly reducing the LPIPS error met-
ric by 58% and44% for DSR and CSR respectively, in the
sensor noise setting.
As show in Figure 7 the ESRGAN approaches produce
strong artifacts in the case of noisy input. This is likely due
to the perceptual loss that encourages the network to out-
put high-frequency components in order to provide a sharp
image. In contrast, our method do not suffer from such
artifacts despite employing a strong perceptual loss. This
demonstrates that our SR network has learned signiﬁcant
robustness towards image noise, though our unsupervised
training strategy.
JPEG Compression In the DSR case, where SR is per-
formed within the same domain, our approach achieves a
signiﬁcantly lower LPIPS distance compared to state-of-
the-art. For CSR, where the task is to additionally clean
the input from artifacts, our approach has a strong advan-
tage, reducing the LPIPS by more than 0:17. However, as
shown in Figure 7, the difference in perceptual quality is not
fully captured by the quantitative results. All compared ap-
proaches produces highly visible block artifacts, stemming
from the JPEG compression of the input image. In contrast,
our approach provides visually pleasing output without such
artifacts.
4.4. Real-World Evaluation on the DPED Dataset
In this section we apply our method to the original im-
ages of the DPED iPhone3 dataset [17]. It contains natu-
ral images, which include real-world degradations due to
poor sensor and lens quality. We train our model using
the training split to represent both the input and output dis-
tributions. We also ﬁnetune the ESRGAN model on the
same data, as described in the previous experiment. Since
ground-truth images are not available in this real-world set-
ting, we show a diverse set of qualitative examples from the
DPED iPhone3 validation set in Figure S5. The artifacts
produced by ZSSR, EDSR, ESRGAN and ESRGAN Fine-
Ours (DSR) Input Ours (DSR) Ours (CSR) ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN ESRGAN FT
Figure 8. Qualitative comparison on real-world images from the
DEPD dataset. Due to the training setup of other state-of-the-art
methods they produce large artifacts on real-world data while our
methods (DSR, CSR) can super-resolve those images in a percep-
tual satisfying manner.
tuned are of similar nature as in the sensor noise case in the
DIV2K setting in Figure 7. Note that these limitations in
previous approaches cannot be alleviated by more training
data or architectural designs. Instead these issues originate
from an oversimpliﬁed problem formulation not reﬂected in
most real-world applications. Our approach is able to over-
come the limitations of previous methods by learning the in-
put image distribution. Our approach generate high-quality
images, with very few artifacts.
5. Conclusion
We tackle the problem of real-world super-resolution,
where no paired data is available. To avoid the artifacts
caused by bicubic downsampling, we learn a network that
restores the low resolution image to the real-world image
distribution. This allows us to generate realistic training
pairs for our super-resolution model. Lastly, we propose a
benchmark, based on the DIV2K dataset, for quantitatively
evaluating real-world super-resolution approaches. Experi-
ments are performed on our real-world benchmark and the
DPED datasets. Compared previous methods, our approach
generalizes to natural images, affected by signiﬁcant sensor
noise, compression artifacts and other effects.
Acknowledgements. This work was partly supported by
ETH General Fund, Amazon through an AWS grant, Nvidia
through a GPU grant, and Huawei.
References
[1] E. Agustsson and R. Timofte. Ntire 2017 challenge on single
image super-resolution: Dataset and study. In CVPR Work-