the same protocol to generate the low resolution training
samples as ESRGAN to ﬁnetune the pretrained model. The
super-resolution network is trained to reconstruct images
that are bicubic downsampled by B. As shown, this pro-
duces strong artifacts due to the mismatch of input domains
during the training and testing phases. A ﬁrst approach
to match the input distribution of the super-resolution net-
work is to ﬁrst clean the low resolution image during test
time (Figure S1b). The domain distribution mapping Fis
learned using cycle consistency loss to map input images
to the domain of bicubic downsampled images. Another
way to obtain matching domains during train and test time
is to do supervision in low resolution, as one can directly
use the natural image as low resolution input for training
(Figure S1c).
In Our approach (Figure S1d we make sure that the in-
puts during train and test are matching by applying the map-
pingGduring training to invert the effects of bicubic down-
sampling on the image distribution. This mapping is learned
by our with unsupervised domain distribution learning (Sec-
tion 3.3). Compared to the version in Figure S1b, our ap-
proach requires no extra network for processing the input
image during test-time, before the super-resoution is ap-
plied. Instead, our approach leans to super-resolve natural
images directly. Moreover, in contrast to Figure S1c, we do
a pixel-wise supervision in high resolution with the original
natural image, which helps the super-resolution network to
produce crisp, photo-realistic images.
S4. Real-world SR Benchmarking Details
Here, we provide additional details of the proposed
benchmarking procedure and dataset for real-world super-
resolution methods. In classical super-resolution, the low
resolution images for training and evaluation are con-
structed by applying bicubic downsampling to a dataset of
natural images. Therefore, those methods are only evalu-
ated on how well they super-resolve images that were down-
sampled the same way as during training. However, in
the real-world setting the aim is to super-resolve natural
images to a higher resolution that is unseen during train-
ing. Thus, the desired high resolution images are not avail-
able for training the super-resolution network. To reﬂect
this crucial aspect in the proposed benchmarking procedure
for real-world super-resolution, we apply different proce-dures for constructing training and test data. Importantly,
the training data only contains low resolution images, while
the original high resolution images are only used when eval-
uating the methods. Thus the ﬁnal desired image resolution
is unseen during training, as in real-world applications.
We construct the train and test images for real-world
super-resolution, based on a dataset of original images. An
illustration of the procedure is shown in Figure 4 (also
shown in the main paper). For evaluation we construct an
input-output image pair. The input image is obtained by
ﬁrst downsampling the original image and then applying the
degradation transformation to simulate the real-world case.
Since the degradation is heavily affected by image down-
sampling, it is always applied after the downsampling pro-
cedure. In the domain-speciﬁc super-resolution case (DSR),
where the goal is to super-resolve the image while preserv-
ing the original characteristics, we construct the ground-
truth output image by applying the same degradation op-
eration directly to the original image. In the clean super-
resolution case, we employ the original image as ground-
truth. The training set is constructed by ﬁrst downsampling
the original image and then applying the degradation oper-
ation. In the CSR case, a set of clean images are also avail-
able during training (see Section 4.1 in the paper). These are
constructed by only applying bicubic downsampling to the
original images, and no degradations. Note that no images
of the original resolution, used for evaluation, are available
for training.
In this work, we employ the DF2K [35] dataset, consist-
ing of DIV2K [1] and Flikr2K [35] datasets. The dataset
speciﬁcations are summarized in Table S4. For testing, the
100 validation images in DIV2K are used. The training sets
are constructed using the 3450 training images in DF2K.
The images for training and evaluation has no overlap. We
always employ 4downsampling, and evaluate the meth-
ods for sensor noise and JPEG degradation, as described in
the paper (Section 4.1).
S5. Domain Mapping Examples
As described in Section 3.3 of the main paper, we learn
a generatorGthat transfers the downsampled images to the
natural domain. In Figure S2 and Figure S3 we show how
the downsampled images are transferred to images with sen-
sor noise and JPEG artifacts respectively. In the sensor
Bicubic ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN (Baseline) Cleaning the Input Low resolution supervision Ours
LPIPS# 0.2537 0.2320 0.2534 0.2670 0.2272 0.2038 0.1858
PSNR" 22.72 22.66 22.48 21.10 20.56 19.98 18.89
SSIM" 0.52 0.51 0.49 0.37 0.42 0.47 0.49
Table S3. Comparison of the different state-of-the-art methods and three versions of our ablation study for the DSR. We validate the
methods on the DIV2K Track 2 dataset, which was published for the NTIRE2018 Challenge. Our approach achieves superior perceptual
quality measured by the LPIPS distance.