between the train and test distributions. The ESRGAN has
not seen noisy input images during train-time due to the
smoothing effects introduced by bicubic downsampling.
In this work, we present a novel way of training a generic
method in order to overcome the challenges of real-world
SR. We address the shift between training and testing distri-
butions arising from the bicubic downsampling by learning
the corresponding inverse mapping operation. To this end,
we train a mapping from the bicubic images to the distri-
bution of real-world LR images. By employing cycle con-
sistency losses [40], we learn this mapping in a fully unsu-
pervised manner. The learned network is applied on bicu-
bically downsampled images to generate paired LR and HR
images that follow the real-world distribution. This allows
us to learn the SR network on a realistic dataset, unaffected
by the bicubic shift. Furthermore, the SR network is trained
with direct pixel-wise supervision in the HR domain, with-
out the need of any paired ground-truth data. Visual results
of our approach on natural images is shown in Figure 1.
Due to the unavailability of paired data, we introduce a
protocol for benchmarking real-world SR methods, based
on simulating natural degradations. We analyze our ap-
proach in two scenarios, namely Domain (DSR) and Clean
Super-Resolution (CSR). In the former case, the real-world
data distribution is deﬁned by one set of natural images.
However, our approach generalizes to the case when the
real-world input and output distributions of the SR network
are different. We therefore introduce the CSR task, where
the goal is to achieve a clean super-resolved image, deﬁned
by a separate output distribution of high-quality images. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the afore-
mentioned benchmark, and compare it to baseline methods
and state-of-the-art approaches. Finally, we show qualita-
tive results for the task of super-resolving real-world smart-
phone images on the DPED [17] dataset.
2. Related Work
Until very recently, single image super-resolution (SISR)
methods were primarily benchmarked in terms of PSNR,
for the task of super-resolving bicubic downsampled im-
ages. While traditionally addressed with classical tech-
niques [19, 12, 29, 36, 15], current approaches [9, 10, 22,
23, 26, 11, 2, 3, 14, 16] employ deep learning methodolo-
gies to train a mapping from LR to HR. Among the latter,
EDSR [26] notably introduced a ResNet inspired architec-
ture, better adapted for the task at hand. For training the net-
work however, these methods rely on the L1 or L2 losses.
While these losses are closely related to the PSNR evalua-
tion metric, they do not preserve the natural image charac-
teristics, generally leading to a blurry result [38]. To address
this problem, Ledig et al. [24] introduced an objective func-
tion aimed at perceptually more pleasing results. The novel
objectives were a GAN discriminator and a loss computedin the VGG feature space. While providing inferior PSNR
compared to state-of-the-art, the super-resolved images ex-
perienced signiﬁcantly better perceptual quality. Following
this philosophy, the recent winner of the PIRM2018 [18]
challenge ESRGAN [35], proposed further architectural im-
provements to further enhance the perceptual quality.
Despite their success, the aforementioned approaches are
severely limited by their reliance on the bicubic downsam-
pling operation for training data generation. This opera-
tion eliminates most high frequency components and there-
fore, signiﬁcantly altering the natural image characteristics,
such as noise, compression artifacts, and other corruptions.
The bicubic assumption therefore rarely reﬂects the real-
world scenario. Blind SR generalizes the problem by as-
suming LR and HR image pairs with an unknown degrada-
tion and downsampling kernel. Early attempts [4] to this
problem include explicitly estimating the unknown point
spread function itself [28, 13]. Another direction of re-
search aims to completely remove the need for external
training data by performing image-speciﬁc SR. Following
this idea, ZSSR [30] trains a lightweight network using only
the testing image itself, by performing extensive data aug-
mentation. However, this approach still employs a ﬁx down-
sampling operation to generate synthetic pairs at test time.
Furthermore, the image-speciﬁc learning leads to extremely
slow prediction.
A few recent works address the unsupervised SR setting,
where no paired LR-HR pairs are given and the relation be-
tween LR and HR images is unknown. The Cycle-in-Cycle
network [37] learns a mapping from the original input im-
age to a clean image space, using a framework that employs
cycle consistency losses. The SR network itself is trained
by only employing indirect supervision in the LR domain,
in addition to the usual perceptual GAN-discriminator. In
contrast, our framework allows direct supervision in the HR
domain, resulting in better training of the SR network itself.
Furthermore, instead of “cleaning” the input image during
train and test time, we learn a mapping to the original in-
put domain for only the training. Another work focuses on
the downsampling process [21] in order to improve the SR.
However, SR is only performed on images with the learned
downsampling operation, and is therefore not applicable to
our real-world scenario. Also Bulat et al. [5] focus on the
problem of learning the downsampling process. However,
this approach speciﬁcally addresses the problem of super-
resolving faces, where strong content priors can be learned
by the network. In contrast, we tackle the general SR prob-
lem, not putting any assumptions on the image content.
Lastly, recent works [39, 7, 6] propose strategies to capture
real LR-HR image pairs. However, these methods rely on
complicated data collection procedures, requiring special-
ized hardware, that is difﬁcult and expensive to scale. Our
approach operates without the need of any additional data,