greatly increasing its use and applicability.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. The Super-Resolution Problem
In essence, super-resolution (SR) is the problem of in-
creasing the resolution of natural images. However, this
problem comes with a fundamental challenge that has been
largely ignored up until very recently. Namely, the lack of
natural LR and HR image pairs, which are needed for evalu-
ation and training. Therefore, research in SR has long relied
on the use of known downscaling operators (e.g. bicubic) in
order to artiﬁcially generate a corresponding LR image pair.
While this simpliﬁcation has historically also served the de-
velopment of SR methods, it is fundamentally limiting.
Bicubic downsampling can drastically change the nat-
ural characteristics of an image by, e.g., removing sensor
noise and compression artefacts. A real-world example is
shown in Figure 2. The natural image (left) is affected by
natrual sensor noise. However, the corresponding bicubi-
cally downsampled image does not preserve these charac-
teristics. Hence, a network trained to super-resolve the lat-
ter image cannot be expected to generalize to the original
real-world distribution.
To formalize the problem, we let Xdenote the natural
image we wish to super-resolve. We also introduce the dis-
tributionpXof such natural images XpXon which we
want our SR approach to operate. In practice, pXcould
be deﬁned as images obtained from a speciﬁc camera or a
dataset of real-world images. The aim is to learn a func-
tionSthat maps an image XpXto a high resolution
image ^Y=S(X)that is distributed according to the output
distribution pY. In applications, we could have pY=pX,
meaning that we want the characteristics of the image to
remain unchanged after super-resolution. We term this set-
ting domain-speciﬁc super-resolution (DSR). Another alter-
native would be to let pYbe deﬁned by a set of high-quality
images, which we call clean super-resolution (CSR) setting.
For most real-world applications it is incredibly hard
and strenuous to collect natural image pairs (X;Y )for SR.
In classical SR this is addressed by artiﬁcially construct-
ing the input image Z=B(Y), whereBis the bicubic
downsampling operation. The task is then aimed to super-
resolveZto match the original image S(Z)Y. How-
ever, as illustrated in Figure 2, the bicubically downsam-
pled images ZpZdo not match the input distribution,
i.e.pZ6=pX. Unfortunately, methods trained in this man-
ner struggle when supplied with real data XpX.
Related to our discussion is the concept of blind SR. In
this setting, the input images Xare assumed to be gener-
ated from the output images Ywith some ﬁxed and sim-
ple transformation that is unknown. Often, a more general
downsampling kernel kis used in combination with a non-
Original Crop Bicubic Restored
Figure 2. Here we visualize the effects for bicubic downsampling
and compare it to our domain distribution learning. The original
HR image contains signiﬁcant sensor noise, which almost com-
pletely disappears after bicubic downsampling. This is clearly ob-
served when compared with the same-resolution crop of the origi-
nal image. Our learned mapping Grestores the image characteris-
tics present in the original image (right).
linear degradation function fdeg, such thatX=fdeg(kY).
Some methods try to ﬁnd the kernel kfrom data or learn the
transformation end-to-end.
3.2. Overview
The real-world SR setting, addressed in this work, can
be seen as a generalization of blind SR. In our approach, we
assume no particular relation, such as a parameterized trans-
formation, between the input Xand outputYimages. We
only assume that a set of input image samples fXigM
i=1
pXand a set of output image samples fYjgN
j=1pYare
available. These image samples are not paired. Given this
data, the problem is to learn a mapping Sthat can super-
resolve a new image XpXsuch thatS(X)pY. In
order to train Sfrom such unpaired data, we learn a func-
tion ^X=G(Z)that maps the bicubically downsampled
imageZ=B(Y)from the output distribution to an image
sample ^XpXthat ﬁts the input distribution pX. This
effectively constructs an input-output training pair (^X;Y ),
allowing the SR network Sto be learned in a supervised
manner such that S(^X)Y. The main advantage of our
approach is that the SR network can be trained with direct
pixel-wise supervision in the HR domain. The proposed
framework is depicted in Figure 3.
We ﬁrst train the generator G, called the domain dis-
tribution network , in a conditional GAN setting. This is
performed by employing a discriminator network aiming to
differentiate the generated images ^X=G(B(Y));YpY
from true input images XpX. Since no paired output
is available, we enforce a cycle consistency loss by em-
ploying a second generator Fmapping input images Xto
^Z=F(X)pZ. Crucially, we train the domain distri-
bution network Gindependently from the SR network S.
While, this may seem counter intuitive at ﬁrst, it is clearly
motivated from the fact that the networks GandShave
fundamentally conﬂicting objectives. The aim of Gis to
map a bicubically downsampled image Z=B(Y)from
the output distribution to an image ^Xfollowing the input
distributionpX, such that a faithful training sample (^X;Y )
is generated for the SR network. The network Ssimply