If a gatezmfollows a neuron parameterized by weights
Ws∈Sm, then the importance approximation I(1)
mis:
I(1)
m(z) =/parenleftbigg∂E
∂zm/parenrightbigg2
=/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
s∈Smgsws/parenrightbigg2
=I(1)
Sm(W),(9)
whereSrepresents the inner dimensions needed to compute
the output of the previous layer, e.g. input dimension for a
linear layer, or spatial and input dimensions for a convolu-
tional layer. We see that gate importance is equivalent to
group contribution on the parameters of the preceding layer.
Through some manipulation, we can make a connection
to information theory from our proposed method. Let’s
denote hm=∂E
∂zm=gT
s∈SmWs∈Smand observe (under the
assumption that, at convergence, E(hm)2= 0):
Var(hm) =E(h2
m)−E(hm)2=I(1)(z), (10)
where the variance is computed across observations.
If the error function E(·)is chosen to be the log-
likelihood function, then assuming the gradient is estimated
ashx=∂lnp(x;z)
∂z, borrowing from concepts in information
theory [3], we obtain
Varx(h) =E
x/braceleftbig
hxhT
x/bracerightbig
=J(h), (11)
whereJis the expected Fisher information matrix. We
conclude that the variance of the gradient is the expectation
ofthe outer product of gradients and is equal to the expected
Fisher information matrix. Therefore, the proposed metric,
I(1), can be interpreted as the variance estimate and as the
diagonal of the Fisher information matrix.
3.1. Pruning algorithm
Our pruning method takes a trained network as input and
prunes it during an iterative ﬁne-tuning process with a small
learning rate. During each epoch, the following steps are
repeated:
1.For each minibatch, we compute parameter gradients
and update network weights by gradient descent. We
also compute the importance of each neuron (or ﬁlter)
using the gradient averaged over the minibatch, as de-
scribed in (7) or (8). (Or, the second-order importance
estimate may be computed if the Hessian is available.)
2.After a predeﬁned number of minibatches, we average
the importance score of each neuron (or ﬁlter) over the
of minibatches, and remove the Nneurons with the
smallest importance scores.
Fine-tuning and pruning continue until the target number of
neurons is pruned, or the maximum tolerable loss can no
longer be achieved.3.2. Implementation details
Hessian computation. Computing the full Hessian in
Eq. (4) is computationally demanding, thus we use a diago-
nal approximation. During experiments with ImageNet we
cannot compute the Hessian because of memory constraints.
Importance score accumulation. During training or ﬁne-
tuning with minibatches, observed gradients are combined
to compute a single importance score ˆI=E/angbracketleftbig
I/angbracketrightbig
.
Importance score aggregation. In this work, we compute
the importance of structured parameters as a sum of individ-
ual contributions deﬁned in Eq. (8), unless gates are used
automatically compute the group contribution on the param-
eters from the preceding layer. Second-order methods are
always computed on gates. We observed that the “group
contribution” criterion in Eq. (7) exhibits very low correla-
tion with the “true” importance (3) if the parameter set Sis
too large, due to expectation of gradients tending to zero at
convergence.
Gate placement. Unless otherwise stated, gates are placed
immediately after a batch normalization layer to capture
contributions from scaling and shifting parameters simulta-
neously. The ﬁrst-order criterion computed for a feature
mapmat the gate can be shown to be I(1)
m(γm,βm) =
(γm∂E
∂γm+βm∂E
∂βm)2withγandβbeing the scale and shift
parameters of the batch normalization.
Averaging importance scores over pruning iterations.
We average importance scores between pruning iterations us-
ing an exponential moving average ﬁlter (momentum) with
coefﬁcient 0.9.
Pruning strategy. We found that the method performs better
when we deﬁne the number of neurons to be removed, prune
them in batches and ﬁne-tune the network after that. An
alternative approach is to continuously prune as long as the
training or validation loss is below the threshold. The latter
approach leads the optimization into local minima and ﬁnal
results are slightly worse.
Number of minibatches between pruning iterations needs
be sufﬁcient to capture statistics of the overall data. We use
10minibatches and a small batch size for CIFAR datasets,
but a larger ( 256) batch size and 30minibatches for Ima-
geNet pruning, as noted with each experiment.
Number of neurons pruned per iteration needs to be chosen
based on how correlated the neurons are to each other. We
observed that a ﬁlter’s contribution changes during prun-
ing and we usually prune around 2%of initial ﬁlters per
iteration.
4. Experiments
We evaluate our method on a variety of neural network
architectures on the CIFAR-10 [ 19] and ImageNet [ 31]
datasets. We also experiment with variations of our method
to understand the best variant. Whenever we refer to Weight ,
11267