hyperparameters to set, other than providing the desired
number of neurons to prune; b) globally consistent scale
of our criterion across network layers without the need for
per-layer sensitivity analysis; c) a simple way of computing
the criterion in parallel for all neurons without greedy layer-
by-layer computation; and d) the ability to apply the method
to any layer in the network, including skip connections. We
highlight our main contributions below:
•We propose a new method for estimating, with a little
computational overhead over training, the contribution
of a neuron (ﬁlter) to the ﬁnal loss. To do so, we use
averaged gradients and weight values that are readily
available during training.
•We compare two variants of our method using the
ﬁrst and second-order Taylor expansions, respectively,
against a greedy search (“oracle”), and show that both
variants achieve state-of-the-art results, with our ﬁrst-
order criteria being signiﬁcantly faster to compute with
slightly worse accuracy. We also ﬁnd that using a
squared loss as a measure for contribution leads to
better correlations with the oracle and better accuracy
when compared to signed difference [ 22]. Estimated
Spearman correlation with the oracle on ResNets and
DenseNets trained on ImageNet show signiﬁcant agree-
ment (>93%), a large improvement over previous meth-
ods [17, 22, 23, 27, 32], leading to improved pruning.
•Pruning results on a wide variety of networks trained
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, including those with skip
connections, show improvement over state-of-the-art.
2. Related work
One of the ways to reduce the computational complexity
of a neural network is to train a smaller model that can mimic
the output of the larger model. Such an approach, termed
network distillation, was proposed by Hinton et al. [15]. The
biggest drawback of this approach is the need to deﬁne the
architecture of the smaller distilled model beforehand.
Pruning – which removes entire ﬁlters, or neurons, that
make little or no contribution to the output of a trained net-
work – is another way to make a network smaller and faster.
There are two forms in which structural pruning is com-
monly applied: a) with a predeﬁned per-layer pruning ratio,
or b) simultaneously over all layers. The second form al-
lows pruning to automatically ﬁnd a better architecture, as
demonstrated in [ 1]. An exact solution for pruning will be to
minimize the ℓ0norm of all neurons and remove those that
are zeroed-out. However, ℓ0minimization is impractical as
it is non-convex, NP-hard, and requires combinatorial search.
Therefore, prior work has tried to relax the optimization
using Bayesian methods [25, 29] or regularization terms.
One of the ﬁrst works that used regularization, by Hanson
and Pratt [ 9], used weight decay along with other energy
minimization functions to reduce the complexity of the neu-ral network. At the same time, Chauvin [ 2] discovered that
augmenting the loss with a positive monotonic function of
the energy term can lead to learning a sparse solution.
Motivated by the success of sparse coding, several meth-
ods relax ℓ0minimization with ℓ1orℓ2regularization, fol-
lowed by soft thresholding of parameters with a predeﬁned
threshold. These methods belong to the family of Iterative
Shrinkage and Thresholding Algorithms (ISTA) [ 4]. Han et
al. [8] applied a similar approach for removing individual
weights of a neural network to obtain sparse non-regular
convolutional kernels. Li et al. [23] extended this approach
to remove ﬁlters with small ℓ1norms.
Due to the popularity of batch-normalization [ 18] layers
in recent networks [ 11,16], several approaches have been
proposed for ﬁlter pruning based on batch-norm parame-
ters [ 24,32]. These works regularize the scaling term ( γ) of
batch-norm layers and apply soft thresholding when value
fell below a predeﬁned threshold. Further, FLOPS-based
penalties can also be included to directly reduce computa-
tional costs [ 6]. A more general scheme that uses an ISTA-
like method on scaling factors was proposed by [ 17] and can
be applied to any layer.
All of the above methods explicitly rely on the belief
that the magnitude of the weight or neuron is strongly cor-
related with its importance. This belief was investigated as
early as 1988 by Mozer [ 28] who proposed adding a gating
function after each layer to be pruned. With gate values
initialized to 1, the expectation of the negative gradient is
used as an approximation for importance. Mozer noted that
weights magnitude merely reﬂect the statistics of importance.
LeCun et al. [22] also questioned whether magnitude is a
reasonable measure of neuron importance. The authors sug-
gested using a product of the Hessian’s diagonal and the
squared weight as a measure of individual parameter impor-
tance, and demonstrated improvement over magnitude-only
pruning. This approach assumes that after convergence, the
Hessian is a positive deﬁnite matrix, meaning that removing
any neuron will only increase the loss. However, due to
stochasticity in training with minibatches under a limited
observation set and in the presence of saddle points, there
do exist neurons whose removal will decrease the loss. Our
method does not assume that the contribution of all neurons
is strictly positive. Therefore, we approximate the squared
difference of the loss when a neuron is removed and can do
so with a ﬁrst-order or second-order approximation, if the
Hessian is available.
A few works have estimated neuron importance empir-
ically. Luo et al. [26] propose to use a greedy per-layer
procedure to ﬁnd the subset of neurons that minimize a re-
construction loss, at a signiﬁcant computational cost. Yu et
al. [33] estimate the importance of input features to a linear
classiﬁer and propagate their importance assuming Lipschitz
continuity, requiring additional computational costs and non-
11265