Weight magnitude orBN scale , we useℓ2norm.
4.1. Results on CIFAR­10
With the CIFAR-10 dataset, we evaluate “ oracle ” meth-
ods and second-order methods by pruning smaller networks,
including LeNet3 and variants of ResNets [ 10] and pre-
activation ResNets [11].
4.1.1 LeNet3
We start with a simple network, LeNet3, trained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset to achieve 73% test accuracy. The ar-
chitecture of LeNet consists of 2convolutional and 3lin-
ear layers arranged in a C-R-P-C-R-P-L-R-L-R-L (C:
Conv, R: ReLU, P: Pooling, L: Linear) order with 16,32,
120,84, and10neurons respectively. We prune the ﬁrst 2
convolutional and ﬁrst 2linear layers without changing the
output linear layer or ﬁnetuning after pruning.
Single layer pruning. In this setup, we only prune the ﬁrst
convolutional layer. This setting allows us to use the Com-
binatorial oracle , the true ℓ0minimizer: we compute the
loss for all possible combinations of kneurons that can be
pruned and pick the best one. Note that this requires an expo-
nential number of feedforward passes to evaluate –/parenleftbign
k/parenrightbig
per
k, wherenis the number of ﬁlters and kis number of ﬁlters
to prune, and so is not practical for multiple layers or larger
networks. We compare against a greedy search approxima-
tion, the Greedy oracle , that exhaustively ﬁnds the single
best neuron to remove at each pruning step, repeated ktimes.
Results shown in Fig. 2 show the loss vs. the number of
neurons pruned. We observe that the Combinatorial oracle
is not signiﬁcantly better than the Greedy oracle when prun-
ing a small number of neurons. Considering that the former
has exponential computational complexity, in subsequent
experiments we use the Greedy oracle (referred to simply as
Oracle ) as a representation of the best possible outcome.
Figure 2: Pruning the ﬁrst layer of LeNet3 on CIFAR-10 with
Combinatorial oracle and Greedy oracle. Networks remain ﬁxed
and are not ﬁne-tuned. Results for Greedy oracle are averaged over
30seeds with mean and standard deviation shown. Best observed
results for Combinatorial oracle for every seed are averaged.All layers pruning. Fig. 3 shows pruning results when all
layers are pruned using various criteria. We refer to our
methods based on the Taylor expansion as Taylor FO /Taylor
SO, indicating the order of the approximation used, ﬁrst-
and second-order, respectively. We consider both a direct
application to convolutional ﬁlter weights (“on weight”) and
the use of gates following each convolutional layer (“on
gate”).] We treat linear layers as 1×1convolutions. In all
cases, pruning removes the entire ﬁlter and its corresponding
bias. At each pruning iteration, we remove the neuron with
the least importance as measured by the criterion used, and
measure the loss on the training set.
Results in Fig. 3 show that Oracle pruning performs best,
followed closely by the second- and ﬁrst-order Taylor expan-
sion criteria, respectively. Both ﬁrst and second-order Taylor
methods prune nearly the same number of neurons as the
Oracle before exceeding the loss threshold. Weight-based
pruning, which removes neurons with the least ℓ2norm, per-
forms as poorly as randomly removing neurons. OBD [ 22]
performs similarly to the Oracle and Taylor methods.
The experiments on LeNet conﬁrm the following: (1) The
greedy oracle closely follows the pruning performance of
theCombinatorial oracle for small changes to the network,
while being exponentially faster to compute. (2) Our ﬁrst-
order method (Taylor FO) is comparable to the second-order
method (Taylor SO) in this setting.
4.1.2 ResNet-18
Now we compare pruning criteria on the more com-
plex architecture ResNet-18, from the pre-activation fam-
ily [ 11]. Each residual block has an architecture of
BN1-ReLU-conv1-BN2-ReLU-conv2 , together with a
skip connection from the input to the output, repeated for a
total of8blocks. Trained on CIFAR-10, ResNet-18 achieves
a test accuracy of 94.79%. For pruning, we consider entire
Figure 3: Pruning LeNet3 on CIFAR-10 with various criteria. Net-
work remains ﬁxed and is not ﬁne-tuned. Results are averaged over
50seeds with mean and standard deviation. The number of pruned
neurons when the loss reaches 1.0is shown in parentheses.
11268