1
Multifactorial Evolutionary Algorithm with Online
Transfer Parameter Estimation: MFEA-II
Kavitesh Kumar Bali,Yew-Soon Ong,yAbhishek Gupta,yPuay Siew Tan
School of Computing Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
ySingapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology (SIMTech),
A*STAR, Singapore.
Abstract —Humans rarely tackle every problem from scratch.
Given this observation, the motivation for the present work is to
improve optimization performance through adaptive knowledge
transfer across related problems. The scope for spontaneous
transfers under the simultaneous occurrence of multiple problems
unveils the beneﬁts of multitasking. Multitask optimization has
recently demonstrated competence in solving multiple (related)
optimization tasks concurrently. Notably, in the presence of
underlying relationships between problems, the transfer of high-
quality solutions across them has shown to facilitate superior
performance characteristics. However, in the absence of any prior
knowledge about the inter-task synergies (as is often the case
with general black-box optimization), the threat of predominantly
negative transfer prevails. Susceptibility to negative inter-task
interactions can impede the overall convergence behavior. To
allay such fears, in this paper, we propose a novel evolutionary
computation framework that enables online learning and ex-
ploitation of the similarities (and discrepancies) between distinct
tasks in multitask settings, for an enhanced optimization process.
Our proposal is based on principled theoretical arguments that
seek to minimize the tendency of harmful interactions between
tasks, based on a purely data-driven learning of relationships
among them. The efﬁcacy of our proposed method is validated
experimentally on a series of synthetic benchmarks, as well as
a practical study that provides insights into the behavior of the
method in the face of several tasks occurring at once.
Index Terms —Evolutionary Multitasking, multifactorial opti-
mization, inter-task synergies, online similarity learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In machine learning, the notion of knowledge transfer has
manifested in many guises, ranging from transfer learning [1–
5] to multitask learning [6]. Transfer learning leverages on a
pool of available data from various source tasks to improve
the learning efﬁcacy of a related target task. Interestingly,
while transfer learning mainly focuses on just the target task,
multitask learning, in contrast, learns all tasks simultaneously
by sharing information across the different tasks, in order
to improve the overall generalization performance. Simply
put: what is learned for each task can help other tasks be
learned better . Fueled by data abundance, the concepts of
knowledge transfer have mainly been prominent in the ﬁeld of
predictive analytics (e.g. classiﬁcation and regression). On the
other hand, attempts made to transfer knowledge in the context
ofoptimization problems (which typically start the search with
zero prior data) [7], have relatively been scarce, and received
little visibility.However, it is contended that real world optimization prob-
lems seldom occur in isolation. That is, the presence of la-
tent similarities, even between distinct black-box optimization
instances, are commonplace. This is particularly true when
we are working within a particular domain of application.
With this in mind, a plethora of information can potentially
be shared across related problems. Arguably, it may seem
unnecessarily laborious to isolate and solve any such related
optimization problems from scratch (i.e., from a zero-state
knowledge) [7]. Consequently, the existence of useful informa-
tion across complementing problems, opens doors for fruitful
knowledge transfer. In practical settings, leveraging on such
a rich pool of knowledge, can yield substantial cost-saving
beneﬁts [8, 9]. Thus, the ability to solve many tasks, with
the scope of knowledge exchange among them, has been a
longstanding goal of artiﬁcial intelligence systems targeting
improved problem-solving efﬁcacy [10].
Over the years, a handful of success stories have surfaced
in the relatively young ﬁeld of transfer optimization (TO),
encompassing sequential transfers [11–16] as well as multi-
tasking [17–24]. Similar to transfer learning, sequential trans-
fer optimization utilizes high quality solutions from various
source problems to solve a target optimization task. Therein,
the transfer of knowledge (from past optimization problems to
present) is conducted in a unidirectional fashion. That is, only
a single target task is optimized at a time; re-optimization
of the source task(s) is irrelevant. Solving multiple tasks
concurrently is thus, beyond the scope of sequential transfer
optimization techniques.
Multitasking effectively ﬁlls this void. Surprisingly, in spite
of the longevity of multitask learning , the idea has only re-
cently been introduced into the arena of optimization problem-
solving [17, 18]. To elaborate, multitask optimization aims to
facilitate efﬁcient resolution of multiple problems simultane-
ously, by promoting omnidirectional knowledge transfer for
greater synergistic search. Simply put, all the optimization
tasks can in principle mutually help each other.
Despite its practical implications, preliminary works have
indicated that the performance of multitask optimization is
sensitive to the degree of underlying inter-task similarities.
To elaborate, each optimization task may not always be
closely related to all other available tasks. In such scenarios,
assuming relatedness and solving (any) unrelated optimization
problems concurrently can potentially lead to performance