3
similarities and discrepancies online are currently under way.
With this in mind, this paper presents a novel evolutionary
multitasking approach for data-driven online learning of the
latent similarities across problems; in turn promoting fruitful
knowledge exchange between them. Our method generalizes
well to a range of optimization problem types, as shall be
showcased in the experimental study.
III. O VERVIEW OF MIXTURE MODELS IN THE CONTEXT OF
MULTITASK OPTIMIZATION
Herein, we present an overview of constructing and sam-
pling probabilistic mixture distributions–that combine search
distributions drawn from different tasks–as a way of initial-
izing knowledge exchange in a multitask setting. It must
be noted that for such a combination to be possible, all
distributions must be deﬁned in a common/shared space, which
we refer to as the uniﬁed search space .
A. Uniﬁed search space
The importance of search space uniﬁcation in multitasking
is to encompass all the individual search spaces of different
optimization tasks such that we have a shared platform on
which the transfer of knowledge can seamlessly take place [7,
19, 42]. For the sake of brevity, consider Kmaximization
tasksfT1;T2;:::;TKgto be solved concurrently. The search
space dimensionality of each of the optimization tasks is
given byD1;D2;:::;DKrespectively. In such a scenario, we
can deﬁne a uniﬁed space XXXof dimensionality Dunified =
maxfD1;D2;:::;DKg, such that there is sufﬁcient ﬂexibility
to encompass each task in the multitask setting. The mo-
tivation behind using such a uniﬁcation scheme, instead of
simply concatenating the Kdistinct search spaces such that
Dunified = (D1+D2+:::+DK), is two-fold:
Firstly, it helps circumvent the challenges associated with
the curse of dimensionality when solving several tasks
with multidimensional search spaces simultaneously.
Secondly, it is considered to be an effective means of
accessing the power of population-based search, promot-
ing the discovery and implicit transfer of useful genetic
materials from one task to another in an efﬁcient manner.
With this, we propose XXXto be limited to the range
[0;1]Dunified , which serves as a continuized uniﬁed space
into which all candidate solutions are mapped ( encoded ).
Accordingly, while tackling the kthtask, a subset of Dk
variables are extracted from a candidate solution x2XXX
and decoded (inverse of the mapping function) to a task-
speciﬁc solution representation for evaluation. For the case of
box-constrained continuous optimization problems, a simple
linear scaling offers a suitable one-to-one mapping between
the task-speciﬁc solution space and the uniﬁed space. On the
other hand, for the variety of discrete/combinatorial problems,
different encoding/decoding processes can be conceived -
readers are referred to [42] for a comprehensive overview.
B. Knowledge sharing via mixture distributions
Without loss of generality, for all k2f1;2;:::;Kg, let the
(sub)populations associated with the kthtask be denoted asPk. The corresponding objective function is denoted as fk
andf
k=fk(x)denotes the global maximum of the kth
task. Note that we assumed xto be a candidate solution
in the uniﬁed search space XXX. With this background, a
key assumption in the subsequent theoretical deductions of
multitasking is that for any task Tk, the Borel measure of
a setH=fxjx2XXX;fk(x)> f0
kgis positive for any
f0
k< f
k. In an evolutionary multitasking algorithm, let the
subpopulations associated with each of the Ktasks at time step
t >0originate from the underlying probability distributions
p1(x;t);p2(x;t);:::;pK(x;t)respectively. Accordingly, in the
process of facilitating inter-task interactions, the offspring
population generated for the kthtask at the tthiteration is
considered to be drawn from the following mixture distribu-
tion,
qk(x;t) =kpk(x;t) +X
j6=kjpj(x;t): (1)
The ﬁnite mixture qk(x;t)is a linear combination of all K
available distributions, with mixture coefﬁcients given by the
0s[43]. Note that k+P
j6=kj= 1, and0s0.
C. Actualizing knowledge transfers in multitasking
The onset of knowledge transfer in multitasking occurs
during subsequent sampling of candidate solutions from the
mixture distribution speciﬁed in Eq. (1) [8, 44]. The degree of
mixing (i.e., the amount of knowledge exchange) is mandated
by the mixture coefﬁcients 0s. It is noteworthy that in the
absence of prior knowledge about the inter-task relationships,
any inappropriate (blind) mixing of probability distributions
will pose a threat of predominantly negative transfers by
wrongly biasing the search distribution. To alleviate any such
issues, it is imperative to facilitate the optimal mixture of the
component densities by ensuring that the mixture coefﬁcients
(0s) are appropriately learned online .
D. Does Multitasking Prevent Global Convergence?
In this section, we highlight the effects of the mixture dis-
tribution on the global convergence behavior of multitasking.
In particular, we show that asymptotic global convergence
properties of probabilistic modeling based EAs continue to
be preserved. For mathematical convenience, the theoretical
study is carried out for large (sub)population sizes ( N), i.e.,
under the assumption that N! 1 . Although such an
assumption may not be completely practical, it is considered
a reasonable simpliﬁcation for developing the foundations of
our proposals. Subsequently, the practical implications of our
derived theoretical results are veriﬁed through experimental
studies in Section VI.
In the limit of large values of N, it follows from the
Glivenko-Cantelli theorem [45] that the empirical probability
density of the (sub)population Pkclosely approximates the
true underlying distribution pk(x). Further, we assume that for
the initial population, pk(x;t= 0) is positive and continuous
inXXXfor allk2f1;2;:::;Kg. With this background, asymp-
totic convergence to the global optimum(s) of each constitutive