2
slowdowns [25]. Overlooking such inter-task discrepancies
and sharing knowledge across multiple diverse problems give
rise to a phenomenon known as negative transfer . In fact,
the threat of negative transfer has commonly been reported
in the machine learning literature [6, 26], thereby highlighting
a central pitfall of multitasking in general (i.e., be it in learning
or in optimization).
Based on the above facts, in this paper, we propose a novel
data-driven multitasking approach adept at online learning of
how much knowledge to transfer across distinct optimization
problems in multitask settings - without the need for any
human intervention. We focus on the use of evolutionary
algorithms (EAs) since they generally allow ﬂexible data
representations and have shown to combine well with prob-
abilistic modeling approaches [27] - which forms the crux
of our learning strategy. We ﬁrst describe an instantiation
of a multitasking evolutionary optimization framework from
a probabilistic modeling perspective. Thereafter, we unveil
how the principled integration of probabilistic models drawn
from different tasks can actualize knowledge transfers while
curbing negative inter-task interactions. It is noteworthy that
the ideas described herein directly encompass a previously
proposed multifactorial evolutionary algorithm (MFEA) for
multitasking [18]. In comparison to the MFEA, our main
contributions in this work are twofold:
While the mode of transfer remains the same as MFEA
(namely, crossover-based genetic transfer), the parameter
inducing the extent of transfers is modiﬁed to take the
the form of a symmetric matrix. This allows effective
multitasking across more than two tasks with possibly
diverse inter-task relationships.
The transfer parameter matrix is continuously learned
and adapted online based on the data generated during
the course of the multitasking search. As the result of a
theoretically principled learning paradigm, the need for
extensive manual parameter tuning is avoided.
With this, the novel algorithm put forward in this paper is
labeled as MFEA-II. We re-emphasize that in MFEA-II the
mode of communication between tasks is primarily through
crossover-based implicit genetic transfer . It is worth noting
that conceptually similar modes of transfer are often sought
in distinct domains such as genetic programming and deep
learning, where learned features (in the form of genetic
programming sub-trees, or multiple layers of feature detectors)
are reused across models trained on related datasets [5, 28, 29].
Importantly, this fast and scalable transfer mechanism is found
to be effective in general black-box optimization settings as
well, where we only have access to a ﬁnite set of solution-
ﬁtness pairs (without knowing their underlying relationship).
In such settings, while constructing more complex transforma-
tions between tasks may be considered (see [17]), the asso-
ciated learning algorithm consumes computational resources
beyond typical applications of evolutionary methods.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows. Sec-
tion II brieﬂy discusses the backgrounds of the most notable
approaches for multitask optimization, spanning Bayesian
and evolutionary methods. An overview of mixture modelsand subsequent theoretical developments in the context of
multitasking are contained in Section III. In Section IV, we
present an instantiation of a candidate evolutionary algorithm
for multitask optimization, namely the MFEA. The theoretical
foundations of the MFEA and its associated shortcomings are
analyzed. Thereafter, the proposed online parameter estimation
strategy for MFEA-II is presented in Section V. Experimental
results and analyses on a series of discrete and continuous
toy/benchmark examples are provided in Section VI. A prac-
tical case study on black-box neuroevolution-based controller
design is carried out in Section VI-D. In particular, this section
provides insights into the behavior of MFEA-II while tackling
many tasks at once; with each task being a distinct variant
of the popular double-pole balancing problem. Section VII
concludes the paper with a brief discussion of future work.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we present a brief review of recent strides in
the ﬁeld of multitask optimization. The purpose of this section
is to compare and contrast the outlined contributions of this
paper to those available in the literature.
Multitask Bayesian optimization has been a prominent
advancement in the context of bolstering hyperparameter
optimization for automatic machine learning [17]. Its prime
success is achieved by utilizing multitask Gaussian process
models [26] to adaptively learn inter-task dependencies and
improve the overall search of a Bayesian optimization algo-
rithm. However, Bayesian optimization is generally limited
to problems with fairly low or moderate dimensions. This is
because, as the dimensionality of the search space increases,
the number of data points required to ensure a good coverage
of the space (for learning accurate Gaussian process models)
increases exponentially (often referred to as the cold start
problem) [30]. Furthermore, the applications of Bayesian opti-
mization are primarily limited to continuous search spaces and
do not directly apply to combinatorial search spaces wherein
indeﬁnite kernels maybe difﬁcult to deal with [31].
In contrast, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been
promising in bridging these gaps. EAs offer immense ﬂexibil-
ity in accommodating diverse data representations (be it con-
tinuous or combinatorial [32]), and scale fairly well to higher
dimensions [33, 34]. Recently, evolutionary multitasking, un-
der the label of multifactorial optimization [18], has demon-
strated various success stories in solving multiple optimization
problems simultaneously, encompassing discrete, continuous,
single-, as well as multi-objective optimization [18, 19, 35–
37]. Beyond this, evolutionary multitasking has also found
its way in the ﬁeld of machine learning; from training an
ensemble of decision trees [38] to feedforward neural networks
with modular knowledge representation [39].
Despite signiﬁcant progress, it must be noted that existing
evolutionary multitasking engines largely rely on prior as-
sumption of the existence of exploitable synergies between
tasks. In the absence of any knowledge about inter-task
relationships, susceptibility to negative transfers have been
highlighted [25, 40, 41]. Since the ﬁeld of evolutionary mul-
titasking is still in its infancy, efforts to identify inter-task