5
the context of real-coded EAs. Common examples include the
simulated binary crossover (SBX) [50], polynomial mutation
(PM) [51] and Gaussian mutation with small variance [52], to
name a few. In such settings, it is not unreasonable (as shown
below in Section IV-A) to consider that the empirical density
of the offspring population Pc(t)tends to closely approximate
that of the parent population P(t); which can be expressed as
pc(x;t)p(x;t). While such an assumption will not neces-
sarily hold under arbitrary evolutionary operators, it provides
sufﬁcient simpliﬁcation for an intuitive theoretical analysis that
builds on the result of Section III. The practical implications of
the same shall be demonstrated in the experimental sections.
A. Preservation of parent distribution under parent-centric
evolutionary operators
For simplicity, consider the probability distribution of a
parent population to follow a multivariate Gaussian with mean
mand covariance . Additionally, let the mean and covariance
of the offspring population be mcandcrespectively. It
is noteworthy that parent-centric crossover operators already
ensuremc=m[53]. In general, we may write pc(x;t) =
p(x;t)+m, wheremis a random vector with zero mean and
covariance. Restricting the evolutionary operators to treat
each variable independently (through variable-wise crossovers
and/or mutations), we may write c=+, whereis
a diagonal matrix of the form (i;i)=2
i. Here2
iis the
induced variance of the ithvariable during offspring creation.
The speciﬁed high probability of creating offspring near the
parents implies that 2
i<< (i;i). Therefore, c, which
suggests that the underlying distribution of the parent and
offspring populations remain largely unaltered under variable-
wise parent-centric operations.
B. Preliminaries of the MFEA
The MFEA employs a single population Pof individuals to
solveKoptimization tasks fT1;T2;:::;TKgsimultaneously,
where each task is seen as an added factor inﬂuencing the
evolution of the population. The subpopulation associated with
thekthtask is denoted as Pk. Given this background, certain
terminologies commonly encountered in the context of the
MFEA are as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Skill Factor ): The skill factoriof theith
individual is the one task, amongst all Ktasks in the
multitasking environment, with which the individual is
associated.
Deﬁnition 2 (Scalar Fitness ): The scalar ﬁtness of the
ithindividual in a multitasking environment is given by
'i= 1=ri
i, whereri
iis the rank of the ithindividual
on taski.
1) Overview of the MFEA: Algorithm 1 summarizes the
general work ﬂow of the present-day MFEA. The procedure
evolves a population of NKindividuals encoded in a uniﬁed
spaceXXX. Speciﬁcally, each of the Ktasks is allocated equal
resource of Nindividuals in its subpopulation. During the
evolutionary process, in addition to the standard intra-task
crossover between parents of the same skill factor, inter-
task crossover can also occur between candidate solutionsassociated with distinct optimization tasks, i.e., possessing
different skill factors. It is this simple feature that opens the
door for knowledge transfers through crossover-based genetic
exchanges across tasks.
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of a basic MFEA
1Randomly sample NKindividuals in XXXto form initial population P(0);
2for every individual piinP(0)do
3 Assign skill factor i= mod (i;K) + 1 , for the case of Ktasks ;
4 Evaluatepifor taskionly ;
5Sett= 1 ;
6while stopping conditions are not satisﬁed do
7P(t) Select topNK=2 (50%) of generated individuals (based on
scalar ﬁtness');
8 Conﬁgure offspring population Pc(t) =;;
9 while offspring generated for each task <N do
10 Sample two individuals uniformly at random (without replacement): xi
andxjfromP(t);
11 ifi==jthen
12 [xa;xb] Intra-task crossover betweenxiandxj;
13 Assign offspring xaandxbskill factori;
14 else if randrmp then
15 [xa;xb] Inter-task crossover betweenxiandxj;
16 Each offspring is randomly assigned skill factor iorj;
17 else
18 [xa] local variation (mutation) of xi;
19 Assign offspring xaskill factori;
20 [xb] local variation (mutation) of xj;
21 Assign offspring xbskill factorj;
22 Evaluate [xa;xb]for their assigned skill factors only;
23 Pc(t) =Pc(t)[[xa;xb]
24t=t+ 1;
The extent of knowledge transfer in the MFEA is governed
by a scalar (user-deﬁned) parameter labeled as the random
mating probability (rmp) . To elaborate on the role of the
rmp, we refer to Step 14in Algorithm 1. If two individuals
selected from the parent pool correspond to different tasks,
they can undergo crossover under a probability speciﬁed by
rmp2[0;1]. During inter-task crossover, the genetic material
created for one optimization task gets copied into the solution
chromosome of an individual associated with a different task.
As a result, implicit transfer of information is actualized across
tasks. Clearly, if rmpis large, the transfer is more frequent than
otherwise.
C. Theoretical Foundations of the MFEA
At any generation tof the MFEA, the probability density
functionp(x;t)of the parent population P(t)is essentially a
mixture ofKprobability densities pk(x;t)representing the
Ktasks in the multitask setting. Herein, the kthmixture
component corresponds to subpopulation Pk(t)P(t).
Importantly, while the overall offspring population distribution
may satisfy pc(x;t)p(x;t)under appropriate assumptions
on the evolutionary operators, the inter-task crossovers indicate
that distribution pk
c(x;t)need not necessarily be equivalent to
pk(x;t). In particular, we have the following result on the
mixture distribution occurring in the MFEA.
Lemma 2. Under the stated assumptions of parent-centric
evolutionary operators, the offspring mixture distribution
pk
c(x;t)of thekthtask in the MFEA can be expressed as,