16
Kavitesh Kumar BALI is currently a PhD student
in the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singa-
pore. Bali recieved his MSc degree in Computer Sci-
ence from the University of the South Paciﬁc (USP),
Fiji, in 2016. His current research interests are in
evolutionary computation, transfer optimization and
machine learning.
Yew-Soon ONG (M99-SM12-F18) received the
Ph.D. degree in artiﬁcial intelligence in complex
design from the University of Southampton, U.K.,
in 2003. He is currently a Professor at the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Tech-
nological University (NTU), Singapore, where he is
also Director of the Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence Research Center and Singtel-NTU Cognitive
& Artiﬁcial Intelligence Corporate Laboratory. His
research interest in artiﬁcial intelligence spans across
memetic computing, optimization intelligence, and
machine learning. Dr. Ong is the founding Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, Technical
Editor-in-Chief of Memetic Computing and associate editor of the IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, the IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks & Learning Systems, the IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, and
others. He has received several IEEE outstanding paper awards and listed
as a Thomson Reuters highly cited researcher and among the World’s Most
Inﬂuential Scientiﬁc Minds.
Abhishek GUPTA received his PhD in Engineer-
ing Science from the University of Auckland, New
Zealand, in the year 2014. He graduated with a
Bachelor of Technology degree in the year 2010,
from the National Institute of Technology Rourkela,
India. He currently serves as a Scientist in the
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology
(SIMTech), Agency of Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He has diverse
research experience in the ﬁeld of computational
science, ranging from numerical methods in engi-
neering physics, to topics in computational intelligence. His recent research
interests are in the development of memetic computation as an approach for
automated knowledge extraction and transfer across problems in evolutionary
design.
Puay Siew TAN leads the Manufacturing Control
TowerTM(MCTTM) as the Programme Manager
which is responsible for the setup of Model Fac-
tory@SIMTech. Her research has been in the cross-
ﬁeld disciplines of Computer Science and Opera-
tions Research for cyber physical production system
(CPPS) collaboration, in particular sustainable com-
plex manufacturing and supply chain operations. To
this end, she has been active in using context-aware
and services techniques. Her present research inter-
ests include Complex Systems, speciﬁcally quantita-
tive techniques for understanding disruptions propagation in networked supply
chains and mitigation of risks caused by these disruptions.