4
extra power for the computing system. It is worth noting that
the computing system’s power distribution is non-negligible in
modern A Vs [49]. In this section, we summarize several key
technologies and discuss their state-of-the-art.
A. Sensors
1) Cameras: In terms of usability and cost, cameras are
the most popular sensors on autonomous driving vehicles. The
camera image gives straightforward 2D information, making
it useful in some tasks like object classiﬁcation and lane
tracking. Also, the range of the camera can vary from several
centimeters to near one hundred meters. The relatively low
cost and commercialization production also contribute to the
complete deployment in the real autonomous driving vehicle.
However, based on lights, the camera’s image can be affected
by low lighting or bad weather conditions. The usability of the
camera decreases signiﬁcantly under heavy fog, raining, and
snowing. Futhermore, the data from the camera is also a big
problem. On average, every second, one camera can produce
20-40MB of data.
2) Radar: The radar’s full name is Radio Detection and
Ranging, which means to detect and get the distance using
radio. The radar technique measures the Time of Flight (TOF)
and calculates the distance and speed. Generally, the working
frequency of the vehicle radar system is 24GHz or 77GHz.
Compared with 24GHz, 77GHz shows higher accuracy in
distance and speed detection. Besides, 77GHz has a smaller
antenna size, and it has less interference than 24GHz. For
24GHz radar, the maximum detection range is 70 meters,
while the maximum range increases to 200 meters for 77GHz
radar. According to [10], the price for Continental’s long-range
radar can be around $3000, which is higher than the camera’s
price. However, compared with a camera, radar is less affected
by the weather and low lighting environment, making it very
useful in some applications like object detection and distance
estimation. The data size is also smaller than the camera. Each
radar produces 10-100KB per second.
3) LiDAR: Similar to Radar, LiDAR’s distance informa-
tion is also calculated based on the TOF. The difference is
that LiDAR uses the laser for scanning, while radar uses
electromagnetic waves. LiDAR consists of a laser generator
and a high accuracy laser receiver. LiDAR generates a three-
dimensional image of objects, so it is widely used to detect
static objects and moving objects. LiDAR shows good perfor-
mance with a range from several centimeters to 200 meters,
and the accuracy of distance goes to centimeter-level. LiDAR
is widely used in object detection, distance estimation, edge
detection, SLAM [50], [17], and High-Deﬁnition (HD) Map
generation [51], [52], [53], [18]. Compared with the camera,
LiDAR shows larger sensing range and its performance is
less affected by bad weather and low lighting. However, in
terms of the cost, LiDAR seems less competitive than camera
and radar. According to [11], the 16 lines Velodyne LiDAR
costs almost $8000, while the Velodyne VLS-128E costs over
$100,000. High costs restrict the wide deployment of LiDAR
on autonomous vehicles, contributing to the autonomous ve-
hicle’s high cost. LiDAR can generate almost 10-70MB dataper second, a huge amount of data for the computing platform
to process in real-time.
4) Ultrasonic sensor: Ultrasonic sensor is based on ultra-
sound to detect the distance. Ultrasound is a particular sound
that has a frequency higher than 20kHz. The distance is also
detected by measuring TOF. The ultrasonic sensor’s data size
is close to the radar’s, which is 10-100KB per second. Besides,
the ultrasonic sensor shows good performance in bad weather
and low lighting environment. The ultrasonic sensor is much
cheaper than the camera and radar. The price of the ultrasonic
sensor is always less than $100. The shortcoming of ultrasonic
sensors is the maximum range of only 20 meters, limiting its
application to short-range detection like parking assistance.
5) GPS/GNSS/IMU: Except for sensing and perception of
the surrounding environment, localization is also a signiﬁcant
task running on top of the autonomous driving system. In the
localization system of the autonomous vehicle, GPS, GNSS,
and IMU are widely deployed. GNSS is the name for all the
satellite navigation systems, including GPS developed by the
US, Galileo from Europe, and BeiDou Navigation Satellite
System (BDS) [12] from China. The accuracy of GPS can
vary from several centimeters to several meters when different
observation values and different processing algorithms are
applied [13]. The strengths of GPS are low costs, and the
non-accumulation of error over time. The drawback of GPS is
that the GPS deployed on current vehicles only has accuracy
within one meter: and GPS requires an unobstructed view in
the sky, so it does not work in environments like tunnels, for
example. Besides, the GPS sensing data updates every 100ms,
which is not enough for the vehicle’s real-time localization.
IMU stands for inertial measurement unit, which consists
of gyroscopes and accelerometers. Gyroscopes are used to
measure the axes’ angular speed to calculate the carrier’s po-
sition. In comparison, the accelerometer measures the object’s
three axes’ linear acceleration and can be used to calculate the
carrier’s speed and position. The strength of IMU is that it does
not require an unobstructed view from the sky. The drawback
is that the accuracy is low, and the error is accumulated
with time. IMU can be a complementary sensor to the GPS
because it has an updated value every 5ms, and it works
appropriately in environments like tunnels. Usually, a Kalman
ﬁlter is applied to combine the sensing data from GPS and
IMU to get fast and accurate localization results [14].
Table III shows a comparison of sensors, including camera,
radar, LiDAR, and ultrasonic sensors with human beings. From
the comparison, we can easily conclude that although humans
have strength in the sensing range and show more advantaged
application scenarios than any sensor, the combination of all
the sensors can do a better job than human beings, especially
in bad weather and low lighting conditions.
B. Data Source
1) Data characteristics: As we listed before, various sen-
sors, such as GPS, IMU, camera, LiDAR, radar, are equipped
in A Vs, and they will generate hundreds of megabytes of data
per second, fed to different autonomous driving algorithms.
The data in A Vs could be classiﬁed into two categories: