10
straightforward but the most difﬁcult solution is to prevent data
from being obtained by an attacker, such as access control
[193], [194] and data encryption [44]. However, autonomous
vehicles will inevitably utilize location-based services. Except
for the leak of current location, attackers could learn the home
address from the vehicle trajectory [198]. Thus, data desensiti-
zation is necessary to protect privacy, including anonymization
and differential privacy [199].
V. C HALLENGES AND DISCUSSIONS
From the review of the current key technologies of the
computing system for autonomous driving, we ﬁnd that there
are still many challenges and open issues for the research
and development of L4 or L5 autonomous driving vehicles.
In this section, we summarize twelve remaining challenges
and discuss the challenges with our visions for autonomous
driving.
A. Artiﬁcial intelligence for AVs
Most of the A V’s services (e.g., environmental perception
and path planning) are carried out by artiﬁcial-intelligence-
based approaches. As the focus of the automotive industry
gradually shifts to series production, the main challenge is how
to apply machine learning algorithms to mass-produced A Vs
for real-world applications. Here, we list three main challenges
in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for A Vs.
1) Standardization of safety issue: one of the main chal-
lenges is that machine learning algorithms are unstable in
terms of performance. For example, even a small change to
camera images (such as cropping and variations in lighting
conditions) may cause the ADAS system to fail in object
detection and segmentation [200], [201], [27]. However, the
automotive safety standard of ISO 26262 [202] was deﬁned
without taking deep learning into consideration because the
ISO 26262 was published before the boom of AI, leading to
the absence of proper ways to standardize the safety issue
when incorporating AI for A Vs [203].
2) Infeasibility of scalable training: to achieve high per-
formance, machine learning models used on A Vs need to
be trained on representative datasets under all application
scenarios, which bring challenges in training time-sensitive
models based on Petabytes of data. In this case, collaborative
training [204], model compression technologies [205], [206],
[207], [208], [209], [210], and lightweight machine learning
algorithms [211], [212], [213] were proposed in recent years.
Besides, getting accurate annotations of every pedestrian,
vehicle, lane, and other objects are necessary for the model
training using supervised learning approaches, which becomes
a signiﬁcant bottleneck [214].
3) Infeasibility of complete testing: it is infeasible to test
machine learning models used on A Vs thoroughly. One reason
is that machine learning learns from large amounts of data
and stores the model in a complex set of weighted feature
combinations, which is not intuitive or difﬁcult to conduct
thorough testing [215]. In addition, previous work pointed out
that, to verify the catastrophic failure rate, around 109hours
(billion hours) of vehicle operation test should be carried out[216] and the test needs be repeated many times to achieve
statistical signiﬁcance [203].
B. Multi-sensors Data Synchronization
Data on the autonomous driving vehicle has various sources:
its sensors, other vehicle sensors, RSU, and even social media.
One big challenge to handle a variety of data sources is how
to synchronize them.
For example, a camera usually produces 30-60 frames per
second, while LiDAR’s point cloud data frequency is 10HZ.
For applications like 3D object detection, which requires
camera frames and point cloud at the same time, should
the storage system do synchronization beforehand or let
the application developer do it? This issue becomes more
challenging, considering that the timestamp’s accuracy from
different sensors falls into different granularities. For example,
considering the vehicles that use network time protocol (NTP)
for time synchronization, the timestamp difference can be as
long as 100ms [217], [218]. For some sensors with a built-
in GNSS antenna, the time accuracy goes to the nanosecond
level. In contrast, other sensors get a timestamp from the host
machine’s system time when accuracy is at the millisecond
level. Since the accuracy of time synchronization is expected
to affect the vehicle control’s safety, handling the sensor data
with different frequency and timestamp accuracy is still an
open question.
C. Failure Detection and Diagnostics
Today’s A Vs are equipped with multiple sensors, including
LiDARs, radars, and GPS [219]. Although we can take ad-
vantage of these sensors in terms of providing a robust and
complete description of the surrounding area, some open prob-
lems related to the failure detection are waiting to be solved.
Here, we list and discuss four failure detection challenges:
(1)Deﬁnition of sensor failure: there is no standard, agreed-
upon universal deﬁnition or standards to deﬁne the scenario of
sensor failures [41]. However, we must propose and categorize
the standard of sensor failures to support failure detection by
applying proper methods. (2) Sensor failure: more importantly,
there is no comprehensive and reliable study on sensor failure
detection, which is extremely dangerous since most of the
self-driving applications are relying on the data produced by
these sensors [42]. If some sensors encountered a failure,
collisions and environmental catastrophes might happen. (3)
Sensor data failure: in the real application scenario, even when
the sensors themselves are working correctly, the generated
data may still not reﬂect the actual scenario and report the
wrong information to people [220]. For instance, the camera
is blocked by unknown objects such as leaves or mud, or the
radar deviates from its original ﬁxed position due to wind
force. In this context, sensor data failure detection is very
challenging, (4) Algorithm failure: In challenging scenarios
with severe occlusion and extreme lighting conditions, such as
night, rainy days, and snowy days, deploying and executing
state-of-the-art algorithms cannot guarantee output the ideal
results [221]. For example, lane markings usually fail to be
detected at night by algorithms that ﬁnd it difﬁcult to explicitly