3
cameraLiDARradarGPS……OSMiddlewareApplications
Computation CPUGPUFPGA……CommunicationWi-Fi4G/LTEDSRC……networkdriverschedulerfile systemspub/subservicesynchronizationcollaborationobject/lane detectionlocalizationvehiclecontrol
StoragePowermanagementSensors
DSPV2X
Security & Privacy5GC-V2Xdrive-by-wire
ComputingSystems
CAN/Automotive Ethernet predictionplanningASIC
Fig. 1. Representative reference architecture of the computing system for
autonomous driving.
foster research, development, and integration of A Vs and guide
consistent policy across the U.S. Government. These principles
cover safety, security, cyber security, privacy, data security,
mobility, accessibility, etc. Corresponding to the autonomous
driving principles, we deﬁne several metrics to evaluate the
computing system’s effectiveness.
Accuracy Accuracy is deﬁned to evaluate the difference
between the detected/processed results with the ground truth.
Take object detection and lane detection, for example, the
Intersection Over Union (IOU) and mean Average Precision
(mAP) are used to calculate the exact difference between
the detected bounding box of objects/lanes and the real po-
sitions [35], [36]. For vehicle controls, the accuracy would be
the difference between the expected controls in break/steering
with the vehicle’s real controls.
Timeliness Safety is always the highest priority. Au-
tonomous driving vehicles should be able to control them-
selves autonomously in real-time. According to [20], if the
vehicle is self-driving at 40km per hour in an urban area
and wants the control effective every 1 meter, then the whole
pipeline’s desired response time should be less than 90ms. To
satisfy the desired response time, we need each module in the
computing system to ﬁnish before the deadline.
Power Since the on-board battery powers the whole com-
puting system, the computing system’s power dissipation can
be a big issue. For electrical vehicles, the computing system’s
power dissipation for autonomous driving reduces the vehicle’s
mileage with up to 30% [37]. In addition to mileage, heat dissi-
pation is another issue caused by high power usage. Currently,
the NVIDIA Drive PX Pegasus provides 320 INT8 TOPS of
AI computational power with a 500 watts budget [38]. With the
power budget of sensors, communication devices, etc., the total
power dissipation will be higher than 1000 watts. The power
budget is supposed to be a signiﬁcant obstacle for producing
the real autonomous driving vehicle.
Cost Cost is one of the essential factors that affect the
board deployment of autonomous vehicles. According to [39],
[40], the cost of a level 4 autonomous driving vehicle attains
300,000 dollars, in which the sensors, computing device,
and communication device cost almost 200,000 dollars. In
addition to the hardware cost, the operator training and vehicle
maintenance cost of A Vs (like insurance, parking, and repair)
is also more expensive than traditional vehicles.Reliability To guarantee the safety of the vehicle, relia-
bility is a big concern [41]. On one hand, the worst-case
execution time is supposed to be longer than the dead-
line. Interruptions or emergency stops should be applied in
such cases. On the other hand, failures happen in sensors,
computing/communication devices, algorithms, and systems
integration [42]. How to handle these potential failures is also
an essential part of the design of the computing system.
Privacy As the vehicle captures a massive amount of sensor
data from the environment, vehicle data privacy becomes a big
issue. For example, the pedestrian’s face and the license plate
captured by the vehicle’s camera should be masked as soon
as possible [43]. Furthermore, who owns the driving data is
also an important issue, which requires the system’s support
for data access, storage, and communication [44].
Security The secureness of the on-board computing system
is essential to the success of autonomous driving since, ulti-
mately, the computing system is responsible for the driving
process. Cyber attacks can be launched quickly to any part of
the computing system [44], [45]. We divide the security into
four aspects: sensing security, communication security, data
security, and control security [46], [47]. We envision that the
on-board computing system will have to pass a certain security
test level before deploying it into real products.
IV. K EYTECHNOLOGIES
steeringthrottleshiftingbrakeVehicle CAN busdrive-by-wire system
NVIDIADrivePX2
camerasradars
DSRCGNSSLiDAR
power distribution system
Fig. 2. A typical example of a computing system for autonomous driving.
An autonomous vehicle involves multiple subjects, includ-
ing computing systems, machine learning, communication,
robotics, mechanical engineering, and systems engineering,
to integrate different technologies and innovations. Figure 2
shows a typical example of autonomous driving vehicles
called Hydra , which is developed by The CAR lab at Wayne
State University [48]. An NVIDIA Drive PX2 is used as the
vehicle computation unit (VCU). Multiple sensors, including
six cameras, six radars, one LiDAR, one GNSS antenna, and
one DSRC antenna, are installed for sensing and connected
with VCU. The CAN bus is used to transmit messages between
different ECUs controlling steering, throttle, shifting, brake,
etc. Between the NVIDIA Drive PX2 and the vehicle’s CAN
bus, a drive-by-wire system is deployed as an actuator of
the vehicle control commands from the computing system.
Additionally, a power distribution system is used to provide