13
through V2X communications. Besides, RSUs are also used
to surveil road situations using various on-board sensors like
cameras and LiDARs [245]. The collected data is used for
various tasks, including weather warning, map updating, road
events detection, and making up blind spots of A Vs. (3) Task
ofﬂoading: Various algorithms are running on vehicles for
safe driving. Handling all workloads in real-time requires a
tremendous amount of computation and power, infeasible on
a battery-powered vehicle [246]. Therefore, ofﬂoading heavy
computation workloads to the infrastructure is proposed to
accelerate the computation and save energy. However, to
perform feasible ofﬂoading, the ofﬂoading framework must
ofﬂoad computations to the infrastructure while ensuring tim-
ing predictability [247]. Therefore, how to schedule the order
of ofﬂoading workloads is still a challenge to beneﬁt from the
smart infrastructure.
J. Dealing with Human Drivers
According to NHTSA data collected from all 50 states and
the District of Columbia, 37,461 lives were lost on U.S. roads
in 2016, and 94% of crashes were associated with “a human
choice or error” [248]. Although autonomous driving is pro-
posed to replace human drivers with computers/machines for
safety purposes, human driving vehicles will never disappear.
How to enable computers/machines in A Vs to interact with a
human driver becomes a big challenge [249].
Compared with a human driver, machines are generally
more suited for tasks like vehicle control and multi-sensor data
processing. In contrast, the human driver maintains an advan-
tage in perception and sensing the environment [250]. One
of the fundamental reasons is that the machine cannot think
like a human. Current machine learning-based approaches
cannot handle situations that are not captured in the training
dataset. For example, in driving automation from SAE, one
of the critical differences between level 2 and level 3/4/5 is
whether the vehicle can make decisions like overtaking or lane
changing by itself [251]. In some instances, interacting with
other human drivers becomes a big challenge because human
drivers can make mistakes or violate trafﬁc rules.
Many works focus on getting a more accurate speed and
control predictions of the surrounding vehicles to handle the
machine-human interaction [252], [133]. Deep reinforcement
learning shows promising performance in complex scenarios
requiring interaction with other vehicles [100], [28]. However,
they are either simulation-based or demonstration in limited
scenarios. Another promising direction to tackle machine-
human interaction is through V2X communications. Compared
with predicting other vehicles’ behavior, it is more accurate to
communicate safety information [253].
K. Experimental Platform
The deployment of autonomous driving algorithms or proto-
types requires complex tests and evaluations in a real environ-
ment, which makes the experimental platform becomes one
of the fundamental parts of conducting research and devel-
opment. However, building and maintaining an autonomous
driving vehicle is enormous: the cost of a real autonomousdriving vehicle could attain $250,000; maintaining the vehicle
requires parking, insurance, and auto maintenance. Let alone
the laws and regulations to consider for ﬁeld testing.
Given these limitations and problems, lots of autonomous
driving simulators and open-source prototypes are proposed
for research and development purposes. dSPACE provides an
end-to-end simulation environment for sensor data processing
and scenario-based testing with RTMaps and VEOS [254].
The automated driving toolbox is Mathwork’s software, which
provides algorithms and tools for designing, simulating, and
testing ADAS and autonomous driving systems [255]. A VL
DriveCube is a hardware-in-the-loop driving simulator de-
signed for real vehicles with simulated environments [256]. In
addition to these commercialized products, there are also open-
source projects like CARLA and Gezabo for urban driving or
robotics simulations [257], [258].
Another promising direction is to develop affordable re-
search and development of autonomous driving platforms.
Several experiment platforms are quite successful for indoor or
low-speed scenarios. HydraOne is an open-source experimen-
tal platform for indoor autonomous driving, and it provides
full-stack programmability for autonomous driving algorithms
developers and system developers [259]. DragonFly is another
example that supports self-driving with a speed of fewer than
40 miles per hour and a price of less than $40,000 [260].
L. Physical Worlds Coupling
Autonomous driving is a typical cyber-physical sys-
tem [261], where the computing systems and the physical
world have to work closely and smoothly. With a human
driver, the feeling of a driver is easily coupled with the vehicle
control actions. For example, if the driver does not like the
abrupt stop, he or she can step on the brake gradually. In
autonomous driving, the control algorithm will determine the
speed of braking and accelerating. We envision that different
human feelings, coupled with complex trafﬁc environment,
bring an unprecedented challenge to the vehicle control in
autonomous driving. Take the turning left as an example: how
fast should the drive-by-wire system turn 90 degrees? An ideal
vehicle control algorithm of turning left should consider many
factors, such as the friction of road surface, vehicle’s current
speed, weather conditions, and the movement range, as well
as human comfortableness, if possible. Cross-layer design and
optimization among perception, control, vehicle dynamics, and
drive-by-wire systems might be a promising direction [262].
VI. C ONCLUSION
The recent proliferation of computing and communica-
tion technologies like machine learning, hardware acceler-
ation, DSRC, C-V2X, and 5G has dramatically promoted
autonomous driving vehicles. Complex computing systems
are designed to leverage the sensors and computation devices
to understand the trafﬁc environments correctly in real-time.
However, the early developed autonomous vehicles’ fatalities
arise from time to time, which reveals the big gap between
the current computing system and the expected robust system
for level-4/level-5 full autonomous driving. In this paper, we