11
utilize prior information like rigidity and smoothness of lanes
[222]. However, humans can easily infer their positions and ﬁll
in the occluded part of the context. Therefore, how to develop
advanced algorithms to further improve detection accuracy is
still a big challenge.
For a complex system with rich sensors and hardware
devices, failures could happen everywhere. How to tackle
the failure and diagnosing the issue becomes a big issue.
One example is the diagnose of lane controller systems from
Google [223]. The idea is to determine the root cause of mal-
functions based on comparing the actual steering corrections
applied to those predicted by the virtual dynamics module.
D. How to Deal with Normal-Abnormal?
Normal-abnormal represents normal scenarios in daily life
that are, abnormal in the autonomous driving dataset. Typ-
ically, there are three cases of normal-abnormal: adverse
weather, emergency maneuvers, and work zones.
1) Adverse weather: One of the most critical issues in the
development of A Vs is the poor performance under adverse
weather conditions, such as rain, snow, fog, and hail, be-
cause the equipped sensors (e.g., LiDAR, radar, camera, and
GPS) might be signiﬁcantly affected by the extreme weather.
The work of [224] characterized the effect of rainfall on
millimeter-wave (mm-wave) radar and proved that under heavy
rainfall conditions, the detection range of millimeter-wave
radar can be reduced by as much as 45%. Filgueira et al. [225]
pointed out that as the rain intensity increases, the detected
LiDAR intensity will attenuate. At the same time, Bernardin et
al. [226] proposed a methodology to quantitatively estimate the
loss of visual performance due to rainfall. Most importantly,
experimental results show that, compared to training in narrow
cases and scenarios, using various data sets to train object
detection networks may not necessarily improve the perfor-
mance of these networks. [227]. However, there is currently
no research to provide a systematic and uniﬁed method to
reduce the impact of weather on various sensors used in A Vs.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for novel deep learning
networks that have sufﬁcient capabilities to cope with safe
autonomous driving under severe weather conditions.
2) Emergency maneuvers: In emergency situations, such
as a road collapse, braking failure, a tire blowout, or suddenly
seeing a previously “invisible” pedestrian, the maneuvering
of the A Vs may need to reach its operating limit to avoid
collisions. However, these collision avoidance actions usually
conﬂict with stabilization actions aimed at preventing the
vehicle from losing control, and in the end, they may cause
collision accidents. In this context, some research has been
done to guarantee safe driving for A Vs in emergent situa-
tions. For example, Hilgert et al. proposed a path planning
method for emergency maneuvers based on elastic bands
[228]. [229] is proposed to determine the minimum distance
at which obstacles cannot be avoided at a given speed. Guo
et al. [230] discussed dynamic control design for automated
driving, with particular emphasis on coordinated steering and
braking control in emergency avoidance. Nevertheless, how
an autonomous vehicle safely responds to different classes of
emergencies with on-board sensors is still an open problem.3) Work zone: Work zone recognition is another challenge
for an autonomous driving system to overcome. For most
drivers, the work zone means congestion and delay of the
driving plan. Many projects have been launched to reduce
and eliminate work zone injuries and deaths for construction
workers and motorists. "Workzonesafety.org" summarizes re-
cent years of work zone crashes and supplies training programs
to increase public awareness of the importance of work-zone
safety. Seo [231] proposed a machine learning-based method
to improve the recognition of work zone signs. Developers
from Kratos Defense & Security Solutions [232] present an
autonomous truck which safely passes a work zone. Their
system relied on V2V communications to connect the self-
driving vehicle with a leader vehicle. The self-driving vehicle
accepted navigation data from the leader vehicle to travel along
its route while keeping a pre-deﬁned distance. Until now, the
work zone is still a threat to drivers and workers’ safety but
has not attracted too much attention to autonomous driving
researchers. There are still signiﬁcant gaps in this research
ﬁeld, waiting for researchers to explore and tackle critical
problems.
E. Cyberattack Protection
Attacks and defenses are always opposites, and absolute
security does not exist. The emerging CA Vs face many security
challenges, such as reply attacks to simulate a vehicle’s elec-
tronic key and spoof attacks to make vehicle detour [195], [44].
With the integration of new sensors, devices, technologies,
infrastructures, and applications, the attack surface of CA Vs
is further expanded.
Many attacks focus on one part of the CA Vs system and
could be protected by the method of fusing several other
views. For example, a cheated roadblock detected by radars
could be corrected by camera data. Thus, how to build such a
system to protect CA Vs, systematically, is the ﬁrst challenge
for the CA Vs system. The protection system is expected to
detect potential attacks, evaluate the system security status,
and recover from attacks.
Besides, some novel attack methods should be attended.
Recently, some attacks have been proposed to trick these
algorithms [233]. For example, a photo instead of a human
to pass the face recognition or a note-sized photo posted on
the forehead makes machine learning algorithms fail to detect
faces [234]. Thus, how to defend the attacks on machine
learning algorithms is a challenge for CA Vs systems.
Furthermore, some new technologies could be used to en-
hance the security of the CA Vs system. With the development
of quantum computing technology, the existing cryptography
standards cannot ensure protected data, communication, and
systems. Thus, designing post-quantum cryptography [235]
and architecture is a promising topic for CA Vs and infras-
tructure in ITS.
Also, we noticed that the hardware-assistant trusted exe-
cution environment [236] could improve the system security,
which provides an isolated and trusted execution environment
(TEE) for applications. However, it has limited physical mem-
ory size, and execution performance will drop sharply as the