8
TABLE IV
THE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT COMPUTING HARDWARE FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING .
Boards Architecture Performance Power Consumption Cost1
NVIDIA DRIVE PX2 GPU 30 TOPS 60W $15,000
NVIDIA DRIVE AGX GPU 320 TOPS 300W $30,000
Texas Instruments TDA3x DSP - 30mW in 30fps $549
Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC ZCU104 FPGA 14 images/sec/Watt - $1,295
Mobileye EyeQ5 ASIC 24 TOPS 10W $750
Google TPU v3 ASIC 420 TFLOPS 40W $8 per hour
challenge is to ensure that sensors collect the right data, and
it is processed immediately, stored securely, and transferred
to other technologies in the chain, such as Road-Side Unit
(RSU), cloud data center, and even third-party users [161].
More importantly, creating hierarchical storage and workﬂow
that enables smooth data accessing and computing is still
an open question for the future development of autonomous
vehicles.
In [162], a computational storage system called HydraSpace
is proposed to tackle the storage issue for autonomous driving
vehicles. HydraSpace is designed with multi-layered storage
architecture and practical compression algorithms to manage
the sensor pipe data. OpenVDAP is a full-stack edge-based
data analytic platform for connected and autonomous vehicles
(CA Vs) [161]. It envisions for the future four types of CA Vs
applications, including autonomous driving, in-vehicle info-
tainment, real-time diagnostics, and third-party applications
like trafﬁc information collector and SafeShareRide [163].
The hierarchical design of the storage system called driving
data integrator (DDI) is proposed in OpenVDAP to provide
sensor-aware and application-aware data storage and process-
ing [161].
F . Real-Time Operating Systems
According to the automation level deﬁnitions from the
SAE [164], the automation of vehicles increases from level
2 to level 5, and the level 5 requires full automation of
the vehicle, which means the vehicle can drive under any
environment without the help from the human. To make the
vehicle run in a safe mode, how to precept the environment
and make decisions in real-time becomes a big challenge. That
is why real-time operating systems become a hot topic in the
design and implementation of autonomous driving systems.
RTOS is widely used in the embedded system of ECUs to
control the vehicle’s throttle, brake, etc. QNX and VxWorks
are two representative commercialized RTOS widely used in
the automotive industry. The QNX kernel contains only CPU
scheduling, inter-process communication, interrupt redirection,
and timers. Everything else runs as a user process, including
a unique process known as “proc,” which performs process
creation and memory management by operating in conjunction
with the microkernel [165]. VxWorks is designed for embedded
systems requiring real-time, deterministic performance and, in
many cases, safety and security certiﬁcation [166]. VxWorks
supports multiple architectures, including Intel, POWER, andARM. VxWorks also uses real-time kernels for mission-critical
applications subject to real-time constraints, which guarantees
a response within pre-deﬁned time constraints.
RTLinux is a microkernel-based operating system that sup-
ports hard real-time [167]. The scheduler of RTLinux allows
full preemption. Compared with using a low-preempt patch
inLinux ,RTLinux allows preemption for the whole Linux
system. RTLinux makes it possible to run real-time critical
tasks and interprets them together with the Linux [168].
NVIDIA DRIVE OS is a foundational software stack from
NVIDIA, which consists of an embedded RTOS, hypervi-
sor, NVIDIA CUDA libraries, NVIDIA Tensor RT, etc. that
is needed for the acceleration of machine learning algo-
rithms [169].
G. Middleware Systems
Robotic systems, such as autonomous vehicle systems, often
involve multiple services, with many dependencies. Middle-
ware is required to facilitate communications between different
autonomous driving services.
Most existing autonomous driving solutions utilize the ROS
[32]. Speciﬁcally, ROS is a communication middleware that
facilitates communications between different modules of an
autonomous vehicle system. ROS supports four communica-
tion methods: topic, service, action, and parameter. ROS2 is
a promising type of middleware developed to make commu-
nications more efﬁcient, reliable, and secure [170]. However,
most of the packages and tools for sensor data process are still
currently based on ROS.
The Autoware Foundation is a non-proﬁt organization
supporting open-source projects enabling self-driving mobil-
ity [171]. Autoware.AI is developed based on ROS, and it is the
world’s ﬁrst "all-in-one" open-source software for autonomous
driving technology. Apollo Cyber [172] is another open-source
middleware developed by Baidu. Apollo aims to accelerate the
development, testing, and deployment of autonomous vehicles.
Apollo Cyber is a high-performance runtime framework that is
greatly optimized for high concurrency, low latency, and high
throughput in autonomous driving.
In traditional automobile society, the runtime envi-
ronment layer in Automotive Open System Architec-
ture( AutoSAR ) [173] can be seen as middleware. Many compa-
nies develop their middleware to support AutoSAR . However,
there are few independent open-source middlewares nowadays
because it is a commercial vehicle company’s core technology.