12
total memory usage increases. Therefore, how to split the
system components and make critical parts in the TEE with
high security is still a challenge in design and implementation.
F . Vehicle Operating System
The vehicle operating system is expected to abstract the
hardware resources for higher layer middleware and au-
tonomous driving applications. In the vehicle operating system
development, one of the biggest challenges is the compatibility
with the vehicle’s embedded system. Take Autoware as an
example: although it is a full-stack solution for the vehicle op-
erating system that provides a rich set of self-driving modules
composed of sensing, computing, and actuation capabilities,
the usage of it is still limited to several commercial vehicles
with a small set of supportable sensors [237]. On a modern
automobile, as many as 70 ECUs are installed for various
subsystems, and they are communicated via CAN bus. For
the sake of system security and commercial interests, most
of the vehicles’ CAN protocol is not open-sourced, which is
the main obstacle for developing a uniﬁed vehicle operating
system.
AUTOSAR is a standardization initiative of leading auto-
motive manufacturers and suppliers founded in the autumn
of 2003 [173]. AUTOSAR is promising in narrowing the
gap for developing an open-source vehicle operating system.
However, most automobile companies are relatively conserva-
tive to open-source their vehicle operating systems, restricting
the availability of AUTOSAR to the general research and
education community. There is still a strong demand for a
robust, open-source vehicle operating system for A Vs.
G. Energy Consumption
With rich sensors and powerful computing devices imple-
mented on the vehicle, energy consumption becomes a big
issue. Take the NVIDIA Drive PX Pegasus as an example: it
consumes 320 INT8 TOPS of AI computational power with a
500 watts budget. If we added external devices like sensors,
communication antennas, storage, battery, etc., the total energy
consumption would be larger than 1000W [38]. Besides, if
a duplicate system is installed for the autonomous driving
applications’ reliability, the total power dissipation could go
up to almost 2000W.
How to handle such a tremendous amount of power dis-
sipation is not only a problem for the battery management
system; it is also a problem for the heat dissipation system.
What makes this issue more severe is the size limitation and
auto-grid requirements from the vehicle’s perspective. How
to make the computing system of the autonomous driving
vehicle become energy efﬁcient is still an open challenge.
E2M tackles this problem by proposing as an energy-efﬁcient
middleware for the management and scheduling deep learning
applications to save energy for the computing device [49].
However, according to the proﬁling results, most of the energy
is consumed by vehicles’ motors. Energy-efﬁcient autonomous
driving requires the co-design in battery cells, energy manage-
ment systems, and autonomous vehicle computing systems.H. Cost
In the United States, the average cost to build a traditional
non-luxury vehicle is roughly $30,000, and for an A V , the
total cost is around $250,000 [238]. A Vs need an abundance
of hardware equipment to support their normal functions.
Additional hardware equipments required for A Vs, include
but are not limited to, the communication device, computing
equipment, drive-by-wire system, extra power supply, various
sensors, cameras, LiDAR, and radar. In addition, to ensure
A V’s reliability and safety, a backup of these hardware devices
may be necessary [239]. For example, if the main battery fails,
the vehicle should have a backup power source to support
computing systems to move the vehicle.
The cost of building an autonomous vehicle is already
very high, not to mention the maintenance cost of an A V ,
e.g., diagnostics and repair. High maintenance costs lead to
declining consumer demand and undesirable proﬁtability for
the vehicle manufacturers. Companies like Ford and GM
have already cut their low-proﬁt production lines to save
costs [240], [241].
Indeed, the cost of computing systems for A Vs currently in
the research and development stage is very high. However, we
hope that with the maturity of the technologies and the emer-
gence of some alternative solutions, the price will ultimately
drop to a level that individuals can afford. Take battery packs
of electric vehicles (EVs) as an example: when the ﬁrst mass-
market EVs were introduced in 2010, their battery packs were
estimated at $1,000 USD per kilowatt-hour (kWh). However,
Tesla’s Model 3 battery pack costs $190 per kilowatt-hour,
and General Motors’ 2017 Chevrolet Bolt battery pack is
estimated to cost $205 per kilowatt-hour. In 6 years, the price
per kilowatt-hour has dropped by more than 70% [242]. Also,
Waymo claims to have successfully reduced the experimental
version of high-end LiDAR to approximately $7,500. Besides,
Tesla, which uses only radar instead of LiDAR, says its
autonomous vehicle equipment is around $8,000 [238]. In
addition to the reduction of hardware costs, we believe that
the optimization of computing software in an A V can also
help reduce the cost to a great extent.
I. How to Beneﬁt from Smart Infrastructure?
Smart infrastructure combines sensors, computing plat-
forms, and communication devices with the physical trafﬁc
infrastructure [243]. It is expected to enable the A Vs to
achieve more efﬁcient and reliable perception and decision
making. Typically, A Vs could beneﬁt from smart infrastructure
in three aspects: (1) Service provider It is struggling for an
A V to ﬁnd a parking space in the parking lot. By deploying
sensors like RFID on the smart infrastructure, parking services
can be handled quickly [244]. As the infrastructure becomes
a provider for parking service, it is possible to schedule
service requests to achieve the maximum usage. Meanwhile,
A Vs can reduce the time and computation for searching
services. (2) Trafﬁc information sharing: Trafﬁc information
is essential to safe driving. Lack of trafﬁc information causes
trafﬁc congestion or even accidents. Roadside Units (RSUs) is
implemented to provide trafﬁc information to passing vehicles