1
Computing Systems for Autonomous Driving:
State-of-the-Art and Challenges
Liangkai Liu, Sidi Lu, Ren Zhong, Baofu Wu, Yongtao Yao, Qingyang Zhangy, Weisong Shi
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA, 48202
ySchool of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China, 230601
{liangkai, lu.sidi, ren.zhong, baofu.wu, yongtaoyao, weisong}@wayne.edu, qingyang@thecarlab.org
Abstract — The recent proliferation of computing technologies
(e.g., sensors, computer vision, machine learning, and hardware
acceleration), and the broad deployment of communication mech-
anisms (e.g., DSRC, C-V2X, 5G) have pushed the horizon of
autonomous driving, which automates the decision and control
of vehicles by leveraging the perception results based on multiple
sensors. The key to the success of these autonomous systems
is making a reliable decision in real-time fashion. However,
accidents and fatalities caused by early deployed autonomous
vehicles arise from time to time. The real trafﬁc environment
is too complicated for current autonomous driving computing
systems to understand and handle. In this paper, we present
state-of-the-art computing systems for autonomous driving, in-
cluding seven performance metrics and nine key technologies,
followed by twelve challenges to realize autonomous driving. We
hope this paper will gain attention from both the computing
and automotive communities and inspire more research in this
direction.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Recently, with the vast improvements in computing tech-
nologies, e.g., sensors, computer vision, machine learning,
hardware acceleration, and the wide deployment of commu-
nication mechanisms, e.g., Dedicated short-range communica-
tions (DSRC), Cellular Vehicle-to-Everything (C-V2X), and
5G, autonomous driving techniques have attracted massive
attention from both the academic and automotive communi-
ties [1], [2]. According to [3], the global autonomous driving
market expects to grow up to $173.15B by 2030. Many au-
tomotive companies have made enormous investments in this
domain, including ArgoAI, Audi, Baidu, Cruise, Mercedes-
Benz, Tesla, Uber, and Waymo, to name a few [4], [5], [6],
[7]. Several ﬂeets of SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers)
L4 vehicles have been deployed around the world [8], [9].
To achieve autonomous driving, determining how to make
the vehicle understand the environment correctly and make
safe controls in real-time is the essential task. Rich sensors
including camera, LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging),
Radar, Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), Global Navigation
Satellite System (GNSS), and Sonar, as well as powerful
computation devices, are installed on the vehicle [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14]. This design makes autonomous driving a real
powerful "computer on wheels." In addition to hardware, the
rapid development of deep learning algorithms in object/lane
detection, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM),
and vehicle control also promotes the real deployment and
prototyping of autonomous vehicles [15], [16], [17], [18]. Theautonomous vehicle’s computing systems are deﬁned to cover
everything (excluding the vehicle’s mechanical parts), in-
cluding sensors, computation, communication, storage, power
management, and full-stack software. Plenty of algorithms
and systems are designed to process sensor data and make
a reliable decision in real-time.
However, news of fatalities caused by early developed
autonomous vehicles (A Vs) arises from time to time. Until
August 2020, ﬁve self-driving car fatalities happened for level-
2 autonomous driving: four of them from Tesla and one from
Uber [19]. Table I summarizes the date, place, company,
and reasons for these ﬁve fatalities. The ﬁrst two fatalities
attributed to Tesla happened in 2016 with the ﬁrst accident
occurring because neither the Autopilot system nor the driver
failed to recognize the truck under thick haze. The vehicle in
the second incident mistook the truck for open space. In the
2018 incident involving Tesla, the autopilot failed to recognize
the highway divider and crashed into it. The most recent
fatality from Tesla happened in 2019 because the vehicle failed
to recognize a semi-trailer. The fatality from Uber happened
because the autonomous driving system failed to recognize
that pedestrians jaywalk.
In summary, all four incidents associated with Tesla are due
to perception failure, while Uber’s incident happened because
of the failure to predict human behavior. Another fact to pay
attention to is that currently, the ﬁeld-testing of level 2 au-
tonomous driving vehicles mostly happens in places with good
weather and light trafﬁc conditions like Arizona and Florida.
The real trafﬁc environment is too complicated for the current
autonomous driving systems to understand and handle easily.
The objectives of level 4 and level 5 autonomous driving
require colossal improvement of the computing systems for
autonomous vehicles.
This paper presents state-of-the-art computing systems for
autonomous driving, including seven performance metrics and
nine key technologies, followed by eleven challenges and
opportunities to realize autonomous driving. The remaining
parts of this paper are organized as follows: Section II dis-
cusses the reference architecture of the computing systems
for autonomous driving. In Section III, we show some metrics
used in the evaluation of the computing system. Section IV dis-
cusses the key technologies for autonomous driving. Section V
presents possible challenges. Finally, this paper concludes in
Section VI.arXiv:2009.14349v3  [cs.DC]  7 Dec 2020