2
TABLE I
LIST OF FATALITIES CAUSED BY LEVEL 2AUTONOMOUS DRIVING VEHICLES .
Date Place Company Reason
20 Jan. 2016 Handan, Hebei China Tesla fail to recognize truck under a thick haze
07 May 2016 Williston, Florida USA Tesla mistook the truck for open sky
18 Mar. 2018 Tempe, Arizona USA Uber fail to recognize pedestrians jaywalk at night
23 Mar. 2018 Mountain View, California USA Tesla fail to recognize the highway divider
1 Mar. 2019 Delray Beach, Florida USA Tesla fail to recognize semi-trailer
TABLE II
END-TO-END APPROACHES FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING .
Work Methods Characteristics
[24] supervised DNNraw image to steering angles for off-road
obstacle avoidance on mobile robots
[25] supervised DNNmap an input image to a small number of
key perception indicators
[26] supervised DNNCNN to map raw pixels from a camera
directly to steering commands
[27] supervised DNNFCN-LSTM network to predict multi-modal
discrete and continuous driving behaviors
[28] DQNautomated driving framework in simulator
environment
[29] DQNlane following in a countryside road without
trafﬁc using a monocular image as input
II. R EFERENCE ARCHITECTURE
As an essential part of the whole autonomous driving
vehicle, the computing system plays a signiﬁcant role in the
whole pipeline of driving autonomously. There are two types
of designs for computing systems on autonomous vehicles:
modular-based and end-to-end based.
Modular design decouples the localization, perception, con-
trol, etc. as separate modules and make it possible for people
with different backgrounds to work together [20]. The DARPA
challenges is a milestone for the prototyping of autonomous
driving vehicles, including Boss from CMU [21], Junior from
Stanford [22], TerraMax and BRAiVE from University of
Parma [23], etc. Their designs are all based on modules
including perception, mission planning, motion planning, and
vehicle controls. Similarly, the survey ﬂeet vehicles developed
by Google and Uber are also modular-based [4], [7]. The main
differences for these A V prototypes are the software and the
conﬁguration of sensors like camera, LiDAR, Radar, etc.
In contrast, the end-to-end based design is largely motivated
by the development of artiﬁcial intelligence. Compared with
modular design, end-to-end system purely relies on machine
learning techniques to process the sensor data and generate
control commands to the vehicle [24], [25], [26], [27], [28],
[29]. Table II shows a detailed description of these end-to-
end designs. Four of them are based on supervised DNNs to
learn driving patterns and behaviors from human drivers. The
remaining two are based on Deep Q-Network (DQN), which
learns to ﬁnd the optimum driving by itself. Although the
end-to-end based approach promises to decrease the modular
design’s error propagation and computation complexity, there
is no real deployment and testing of it [30].
As most prototypes are still modular-based, we choose it
as the basis for the computing system reference architecture.Figure 1 shows a representative reference architecture of the
computing system on autonomous vehicles. Generally, the
computing system for autonomous driving vehicles can be
divided into computation, communication, storage, security
and privacy, and power management. Each part covers four
layers with sensors, operating system (OS), middleware, and
applications. The following paragraphs will discuss the corre-
sponding components.
For safety, one of the essential tasks is to enable the “com-
puter” to understand the road environment and send correct
control messages to the vehicle. The whole pipeline starts
with the sensors. Plenty of sensors can be found on an au-
tonomous driving vehicle: camera, LiDAR, radar, GPS/GNSS,
ultrasonic, inertial measurement unit (IMU), etc. These sensors
capture real-time environment information for the computing
system, like the eyes of human beings. Operating system
(OS) plays a vital role between hardware devices (sensors,
computation, communication) and applications. Within the OS,
drivers are bridges between the software and hardware devices;
the network module provides the abstraction communication
interface; the scheduler manages the competition to all the
resources; the ﬁle system provides the abstraction to all the
resources. For safety-critical scenarios, the operating system
must satisfy real-time requirements.
As the middle layer between applications and operating sys-
tems [31], middleware provides usability and programmability
to develop and improve systems more effectively. Generally,
middleware supports publish/subscriber, remote procedure call
(RPC) or service, time synchronization, and multi-sensor col-
laboration. A typical example of the middleware system is the
Robot Operating System (ROS) [32]. On top of the operating
system and middleware system, several applications, including
object/lane detection, SLAM, prediction, planning, and vehicle
control, are implemented to generate control commands and
send them to the vehicle’s drive-by-wire system. Inside the
vehicle, several Electronic Control Units (ECUs) are used to
control the brake, steering, etc., which are connected via Con-
troller Area Network (CAN bus) or Automotive Ethernet [33].
In addition to processing the data from on-board sensors, the
autonomous driving vehicle is also supposed to communicate
with other vehicles, trafﬁc infrastructures, pedestrians, etc. as
complementary.
III. M ETRICS FOR COMPUTING SYSTEM
According to the report about autonomous driving tech-
nology from the National Science & Technology Council
(NSTC) and the United States Department of Transportation
(USDOT) [34], ten technology principles are designed to