Figure 3: Model sensitivity to additive noise aligned with different Fourier basis vectors on CIFAR-10. We
ﬁx the additive noise to have `2norm 4and evaluate three models: a naturally trained model, an adversarially
trained model, and a model trained with Gaussian data augmentation. Error rates are averaged over 1000
randomly sampled images from the test set. In the bottom row we show images perturbed with noise along the
corresponding Fourier basis vector. The naturally trained model is highly sensitive to additive noise in all but the
lowest frequencies. Both adversarial training and Gaussian data augmentation dramatically improve robustness
in the higher frequencies while sacriﬁcing the robustness of the naturally trained model in the lowest frequencies
(i.e. in both models, blue area in the middle is smaller compared to that of the naturally trained model).
energy. For corruptions such as contrast and fog, the energy of the corruption is concentrated more
on low frequency components.
The observed differences in the Fourier statistics suggests an explanation for why the two augmenta-
tion methods improve performance in additive noise but not fog and contrast — the two augmentation
methods encourage the model to become invariant to high frequency information while relying more
on low frequency information. We investigate this hypothesis via several perturbation analyses of
the three models in question. First, we test model sensitivity to perturbations along each Fourier
basis vector. Results on CIFAR-10 are shown in Figure 3. The difference between the three models
is striking. The naturally trained model is highly sensitive to additive perturbations in all but the
lowest frequencies, while Gaussian data augmentation and adversarial training both dramatically
improve robustness in the higher frequencies. For the models trained with data augmentation, we
see a subtle but distinct lack of robustness at the lowest frequencies (relative to the naturally trained
model). Figure 4 shows similar results for three different models on ImageNet. Similar to CIFAR-10,
Gaussian data augmentation improves robustness to high frequency perturbations while reducing
performance on low frequency perturbations.
Figure 4: Model sensitivity to additive noise aligned with different Fourier basis vectors on ImageNet validation
images. We ﬁx the basis vectors to have `2norm 15:7. Error rates are averaged over the entire ImageNet
validation set. We present the 6363square centered at the lowest frequency in the Fourier domain. Again, the
naturally trained model is highly sensitive to additive noise in all but the lowest frequencies. On the other hand,
Gaussian data augmentation improves robustness in the higher frequencies while sacriﬁcing the robustness to
low frequency perturbations. For AutoAugment, we observe that its Fourier heat map has the largest blue/yellow
area around the center, indicating that AutoAugment is relatively robust to low to mid frequency corruptions.
5