A Fourier Perspective on Model Robustness in
Computer Vision
Dong Yin
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
dongyin@berkeley.eduRaphael Gontijo Lopesy
Google Research, Brain team
Mountain View, CA 94043
iraphael@google.comJonathon Shlens
Google Research, Brain team
Mountain View, CA 94043
shlens@google.com
Ekin D. Cubuk
Google Research, Brain team
Mountain View, CA 94043
cubuk@google.comJustin Gilmer
Google Research, Brain team
Mountain View, CA 94043
gilmer@google.com
Abstract
Achieving robustness to distributional shift is a longstanding and challenging
goal of computer vision. Data augmentation is a commonly used approach for
improving robustness, however robustness gains are typically not uniform across
corruption types. Indeed increasing performance in the presence of random noise is
often met with reduced performance on other corruptions such as contrast change.
Understanding when and why these sorts of trade-offs occur is a crucial step
towards mitigating them. Towards this end, we investigate recently observed trade-
offs caused by Gaussian data augmentation and adversarial training. We ﬁnd that
both methods improve robustness to corruptions that are concentrated in the high
frequency domain while reducing robustness to corruptions that are concentrated in
the low frequency domain. This suggests that one way to mitigate these trade-offs
via data augmentation is to use a more diverse set of augmentations. Towards this
end we observe that AutoAugment [ 6], a recently proposed data augmentation
policy optimized for clean accuracy, achieves state-of-the-art robustness on the
CIFAR-10-C [17] benchmark.
1 Introduction
Although many deep learning computer vision models achieve remarkable performance on many
standard i.i.d benchmarks, these models lack the robustness of the human vision system when the train
and test distributions differ [ 24]. For example, it has been observed that commonly occurring image
corruptions, such as random noise, contrast change, and blurring, can lead to signiﬁcant performance
degradation [ 8,3]. Improving distributional robustness is an important step towards safely deploying
models in complex, real-world settings.
Data augmentation is a natural and sometimes effective approach to learning robust models. Examples
of data augmentation include adversarial training [ 14], applying image transformations to the training
data, such as ﬂipping, cropping, adding random noise, and even stylized image transformation [11].
However, data augmentation rarely improves robustness across all corruption types. Performance
gains on some corruptions may be met with dramatic reduction on others. As an example, in [ 10] it
Work done while internship at Google Research, Brain team.
yWork done as a member of the Google AI Residency program g.co/airesidency .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.