3 Moreover, much current academic writing seems ignorant of what happened from 1970 to 
2000 despite the availability of extens ive publications. 
This research position paper aims to understand the challenges associated with the use and impact of the new generation of AI based systems for decision making and identify research opportunities for information systems (IS) researchers. The paper first provides a view of the history of AI through the relevant papers published in the International Journal of Information Management (IJIM) . It then discusses AI for decision making in general and the 
specific issues regarding the interaction and integration of AI techniques to support or replace human decision makers in particular. To advance research on the use of AI for decision 
making in the era of Big Data, the paper offers twelve research propositions for IS 
researchers in terms of concep tual and theoretical development, AI technology -human 
interaction, and AI implementation.  
2. A view of the history of AI through IJIM papers  
In this section, we present an historical perspective on the history and development of AI based on a review of relevant papers published in the International Journal of Information Management (IJIM) , including those under its former title of Social Science Information 
Studies (SSIS) . To achieve this, we carried out full -text searches on the SSIS/IJIM  archive for 
the terms artificial intelligence  and intelligent, plus  the list of 25 more specific terms related 
to AI shown in Table 1. To develop that list, we began with selected terms from the list of categories of papers at AI conferences in Cantu -Ortiz (2014). We excluded those not specific 
to AI such as bioinformatics  and planning and scheduling, and added a few other terms such 
as recommender system  that emerged in the course of our search as alternative keywords in 
relevant papers.  
Table 1 Terms used in the full -text search of the SSIS/IJIM archive  
1. case-based reasoning  
2. computer vision 
3. cognitive computing 
4. cognitive science  
5. data mining  
6. data science  
7. expert system  
8. fuzzy linguistic modeling  
9. fuzzy logic  
10. genetic algorithm  
11. image recognition  
12. k-means  
13. knowledge -based system  14. logic programming  
15. machine learning  
16. machine vision 
17. natural language processing 
18. neural network  
19. pattern recognition  
20. recommendation system  
21. recommender system  
22. semantic network  
23. speech recognition  
24. support vector machine/SVM  
25. text mining  
 
A preliminary screening removed papers where the term intelligent had nothing to do with AI, 
and papers where the term that had been found appeared only in a cited reference and the 
citation did not refer to any AI aspect. This gave a total of 123 SSIS/IJI M papers. We 
categorised these into those in which AI was a substantive part of the paper (52 in total) and those in which AI was mentioned only in passing (71). The latter category comprised papers