14 replacing, or automating decision making, IS researchers need to propose the design criteria 
from technology -human inter action perspective for system developers to create ideal AI 
systems for human decision makers. For example, what are the ergonomic design issues for developing AI systems that are suitable for decision making? Therefore, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 5 – The ergonomic design of AI systems is important for their success, but the 
ergonomic issues are different between supporting, augmenting, replacing, or automating systems.  
4.2.3. Refining and improving AI system performance while in use by decision makers  
The unique strength of human intelligence is its ability to learn and adapt to new environment and challenges. Refining and improving performance through continuing learning has been a challenge for advancing AI until the recent advances in deep l earning and Big Data. Deep 
learning, as a subset of machining learning, has been one of the essential enablers for the 
renewed AI success. Can AI systems be refined and improved by deep learning while they 
are in use by decision makers? This question needs  to be addressed by further research, so we 
make the following proposition:  
Proposition 6 – AI systems performance for decision making can be refined and improved by 
deep learning while the systems are in use by decision makers.  
4.2.4. AI users’ behaviour issues  
Why do human decision makers accept/reject using AI for decision making? Previous 
research show when people use AI as a supporting tool for decision making, different people 
may take different attitudes and actions on implementing the decisions recommended  by AI 
system. For example, Davenport (2018) and Miller (2018) identify  the need for employees to 
adapt to the smart machines being used to partially or fully automate cognitive work. Davenport and Kirby (2016)  introduce a model of ‘Five Ways of Stepping’ to help people 
renegotiate their relationship to machines and to co -exist with smart machines by aligning 
their contributions in the age of AI.  
For example, senior managers’ attitudes towards using AI can be critical as Ransbotham, Gerbert, Reeves, Kiron, and Spira (2018)  suggest that scaling AI in the enterprise demands 
new ways to engage business experts with technology. Considering the importance of users’ beha viour towards using AI, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 7 –AI users’ personal traits and knowledge and understanding of AI will significantly affect the use and success of AI.  
4.3. AI systems implementation  
4.3.1. Understanding the critical success fact ors 
AI has been revitalised with Big Data and is becoming ever more powerful than before. However, while technology advancement may have no limit, its applications may encounter 
bottlenecks and unprecedented barriers. Although there may be many factors aff ecting the