10 outcomes during the 1950s and 1960s, steady progress has been sus tained over the last four 
decades in the main areas of AI (Cantu -Ortiz, 2014) . 
Using AI for decision making has been one of the most important applications in AI history. 
The roles of AI have been classified in various way s. Broadly speaking, AI systems can be 
used either to support/assist the human decision makers, or to replace them (Edwards, Duan, & Robins, 2000) . More specifically, the early publication by Bader, Edwards, Harris -Jones, 
and Hannaford (1988)  identified six roles for knowledge based systems: Assistant, critic, 
second opinion, expert consultant, tutor, and automaton. 
Edwards et al. (2000)  conducted  an analysis of expert systems for business decision making 
at different levels and in different roles based on experiments carried out two decades ago. 
The roles of AI (e.g. expert systems) are examined using the three organisational decision making level s, i.e. strategic, tactical and operational decisions. Their findings show that:  
• Expert systems in a replacement role are effective at the operational and tactical decision levels, but have limitations at the strategic level.  
• Expert systems in a support role can help users make better decisions at all three decision making levels, but their effectiveness can only be fulfilled through their users.  
• An expert system acting in a support role does not necessarily save a user’s time, but an expert system in a replacement role does improve the efficiency of decision making.  
• The users of expert systems in a support role did not believe that they had learned 
from using the system.  
The role of AI systems, e.g. expert systems, for decision making is also discussed bas ed on 
the structure of decisions that is named by Simon (1987)  as structured, semi -structured and 
unstructured decisions. The findings by Edwards et al. (2000)  suggest that AI (e.g. expert 
systems) can be used to replace human decision makers for structured or semi -structured 
decisions, but it would be better to be used as a decision support tool for dealing with unstructured deci sions at the strategic level in organisations.  
In a relevant assessment on the potential use of AI in organisations in 1985, Lee (1985)  (p.8) 
commented “Because mechanical inference relies on a stable, fixed semantics, the utility of an idealized, fully integrated, knowledge -based inference system will be limited to 
organizations in completely stable environments.” and “integrated information systems will only be of use for those aspects of the organization’s ac tivities where semantic stability can 
be maintained. This conclusion corresponds to the empirical observations made by Gorry and Scott -Morton (1971) .” This indicates that with the limitations of early AI technologies in 
dealing with dynamic environments, AI for organisational decision making was more 
effective in working in stable and familiar conditions.  
In a recent joint research with Deloitte, Davenport (2018) examined 152 AI deployment 
projects that are making use of AI-based systems across a wide range of business functions 
and processes. Based on the survey results, Davenport categorises AI system applications into 
three categories: