11 • Cognitive Process Automation: Automation of back office administrative and 
financial activities using ‘Robotic Process Automation’.  
• Cognitive Insights: Detecting patterns in data and interpreting their meaning using statistically -based machine learning algorithms.  
• Cognitive Engagement: Engaging employees and/or customers using natural lang uage 
processing chatbots, intelligent agents and machine learning.  
As the progress of AI technology enables researchers to create advanced machines, it is possible for AI to undertake more complex tasks that require cognitive capabilities such as making ta cit judgements, sensing emotion and driving processes which previously seemed 
impossible (Mahroof, 2019) . As a result, an increasing number of jobs are autonomously 
performed by AI systems without human control and supervision (Złotowski, Yogeeswaran, & Bartneck, 2017) . There are many reports on the benefits of AI for decision making because 
AI is believed to be ab le to help organisational employees to reach better decisions, to boost 
our analytic and decision -making abilities and heighten creativity (Wilson & Daugherty, 
2018) . However, “with t he resurgence of AI, a new human -machine symbiosis is on the 
horizon and a question remains: How can humans and new artificial intelligences be 
complementary in organizational decision making?” (Jarrahi, 2018 p. 579) . 
4. Research Propositions for addressing challenges and opportunities  
This section discusses the challenges and research opportunities of AI based systems for 
decision making in the era of Big Data from the use and impact perspective. As AI 
development and applications cover a wide range of areas, future research directions can be diverse. To help IS researchers in their endeavour to advance our knowledge and understanding on how to maximise the benefit of the new ge neration AI systems for decision 
making, twelve research propositions are offered, based on three areas: conceptual and theoretical development, AI technology -human interaction, and AI implementation. 
4.1. Conceptual and theoretical development  
4.1.1. Defining the key concepts and terms  
AI has been applied in many different domains and numerous terms are used to describe AI based systems for decision making, such as: expert systems, knowledge -based systems, 
intelligent decision support systems, intelligent software age nt systems, intelligent executive 
systems, etc. However, as AI is constantly evolving and advancing, names of AI based systems for decision making have changed over the years as shown in our review of IJIM  
papers in section 2. Many names for AI based decis ion systems have disappeared or have 
been replaced with new names. It can be argued that defining AI and its related terms has become a moving target.  
To clarify any conceptual confusion and controversy, there is a need to have a systematic review of AI re lated definitions and terms and to re -define them to reflect the new generation 
of AI in the era of Big Data. We make the following proposition: