9 “wizards” in software packages, and now as an engine powering recommendations , so that 
the user would not be confronted with the “cursed” term.  
KBS was the most common term in use for an AI system in IJIM during the 2000s, and many 
business/management academics and practitioners still regard it as the most appropriate term 
to use. A s Bimba et al. (2016, p.857)  put it, “A system which represents knowledge is 
normally referred to as a knowledge based system.” Interestingly, this only seems to be true in business and management. In other domains, especially science and engineering, expert system is still the more common term. Web Of Science lists more than 10,000 publications 
since the year 2000 that include the term expert system(s) , as opposed to fewer than 2,000 
including knowledge -based system(s) . 
2.3.3. The rise of the intelligent machine -  and data mining (during the 2010s)  
During the 2010s, the term AI has come back into popularity as the overall label. This may in part be the result of the fact that deep learning systems such as multi -layer neural networks do 
not produce explanations that humans can understand easi ly, or indeed at all. Arguably, 
therefore, these systems do not represent knowledge as in the definition in the previous subsection. They certainly do not represent human knowledge.  
Within AI, the terms machine learning and data mining are also in much mor e common use 
nowadays. In part, this reflects technological developments. Machine learning used to be seen as highly -technical  jargon , but the success of machine learning systems widely reported in 
news stories such as the AlphaGo system defeating one of t he best human players of the 
game Go  (Koch, 2016)  and IB M’s Watson system beating the human champions on the US 
TV quiz show “Jeopardy” (Gabbatt, 2011)  has done much to improve its image. Data mining 
is a newer term than any of the others. Its original mean ing in the field of economics was 
trying various models to see which fitted the data best. The more general usage did not become widespread until the mid -1990s. 
More confusingly, these changes also overlap with another area of terminological change, relati ng to the rise of the term analytics. Some authors now regard machine learning as a form 
of analytics (for example Lismont, Vanthienen, Baesens, & Lemahieu, 2017) , while some of 
the techniques discussed in section 2.1 are now referred to as data mining when in the 1990s they would simply have been called statistical techniques.  
It can be argued that there are subtle differences between expert systems, knowledge -based 
systems and AI systems, but some of the changes in terminology are surely no more than simply “fashion”. For example, what were  often referred to in the 1980s or 1990s as 
production rules are now called business rules or just rules. Similarly, Kao et al. (2017)  refer 
to the CART decision tree approach used to develop their rules as a data mining technique, whereas in the 1990s it would have been referred to as a rule induction algorithm. 
3. An overview of using AI for decision making  
The promises made to develop machines capable of outperforming humans i n several tasks in 
a few years and the real accomplishments achieved have been reported widely (McCorduck, 
2004). Despite what can now be thought of as excessively optimistic promises for AI