7 Chen, & Macredie, 2006; Gottschalk, Filstad, Glomseth, & Solli -Sæther, 2011; Yaqoob et al., 
2016) .  
2.1.6. Other techniques  
Techniques discussed in IJIM  that have also been commonly used elsewhere include frame -
based representation (Dugdale, 1996) , and genet ic algorithms (Lebib, Mellah, & Drias, 2017) . 
Frames allow richer forms of knowled ge representation than rules, but the inferencing 
process is more complex, so less straightforward and harder to understand. Genetic 
algorithms mimic the process of Darwinian natural selection, with a population of solutions 
undergoing processes equivalent  to inheritance, reproduction, mutation, and cross -over, until 
the best solution emerges. Neural networks and genetic algorithms are both examples of techniques inspired by biology: a review of those and others may be found in Kar (2016) .  
2.2. Domains  
Some of the domains in which AI systems were being applied, or at least considered, have 
featured throughout the period. This is most likely  because of the potential economic rewards 
from a successful system. These include: manufacturing, such as the 1992 Nippon Steel 
example discussed above and clothes manufacturing (Ying, Pee, & Jia, 2018) ; health care, 
from Thornett (2001)  looking at computer support for general practice to Kao et al. (2017)  on 
risk factors for cardiac arrest survival; and legal practice (du Plessis & du Toit, 2006) . 
Recommender/recommendation systems have also been common throughout the period, but 
with a change in emphasis. Earlier systems tended to tackle major investments such as  
property (Lu & Mooney, 1989)  or stocks and shares (Dugdale, 1996) , but the ir practical use 
was limited. Systems addressing higher -volume but lower -value decisions are now in 
everyday use, and central to the success of organizations such as Amazon and Netflix, who have capitalized on the Big Data that they acquire. IJIM papers si milarly now cover topics 
such as which books to read (Kim, Kim, Oh, & Ryu, 2010) , which videos t o watch (Choi, Oh, 
Kim, & Ryu, 2016)  or which kitchen appliances to purchase (Ahmad & Laroche, 2017) . 
Often these are offering technical improvements in the methods used. 
As is fitting given the scope of SSIS/IJIM, intelligent information retrieval has been a concern 
since the earliest days (Wormell, 1984) . Improvements in natural language understanding 
have facilitated progress here, wh ich continues with articles such as those by Chung (2014)  
and Bouakkaz et al. (2017) . 
Some domains reflect changes in the wider world and its technology, such as the appearance of papers on website quality (Heradio, Cabrerizo, Fernández -Amorós, Herrera, & Herrera -
Viedma, 2013; Rekik et al., 2018) . 
Other domains reflect the technology finally reaching the tipping point for practical usefulness, such as the work of Araujo and Pestana (2017)  on employee health and well -
being, and of Ragini et al. (2018)  on disaster response and recovery.  
In a different direction, Mostafa and El -Masry (2013)  is the first IJIM  paper to use AI as a 
research tool, with various data mining methods being used to analyse a survey about e -