15 success of AI applications, it is important to identify what are the most critical success factors 
based on the empirical evidence collected from the real -world AI applications. These critical 
success factors will help organisations to be more f ocused by addressing the most critical 
issues. The critical success factors can also offer valuable guidelines for AI designers and developers in their effort to overcome challenges in order to provide the most effective and acceptable systems for decision  makers.  
Based on the work by Duan, Ong, Xu, and Mathews  (2012)  before the era of Big Data, the 
technical challenges related to supporting executive decision making using AI (intelligent software agents in this case) are the agents’ capability to understand a business executive as 
an individual user with specific doma in of work and information, and to fit the intelligence 
activities into the right content and context. They call for alleviating the limitations and 
bottlenecks of AI applications in terms of representing human intuition and judgement.  
For example, underst anding the technology can be critical for adoption success. Davenport 
and Ronanki (2018)  argues that before embarking on an AI initiative, companies must 
understand which technolog ies perform what types of tasks, and the strengths and limitations 
of each.  
Overall, factors affecting the use,  impact, success and failure of information systems have 
been studied extensively (Dwivedi et al. 2015; 2017ab; Hughes et al. 2016; 2017; 2019).  
There has been some work on critical success factors for implementing data mining systems (Bole, Popovič, Žabkar, Papa, & Jaklič, 2015) , but across the board there is a lack of research 
on identifying the critical success factors affecting the current use of AI and its impact in the era of Big Data. Therefore, the f ollowing proposition is offered:  
Proposition 8 –  There are a set of critical factors that will significantly affect AI’s success for 
decision making.  
4.3.2. Understanding the synergy of AI and Big Data  
It can be argued that it is Big Data that has empowered AI f or its current boom and the 
domain of cognitive computing will be incomplete without harnessing the benefits of Big Data analytics (Gupta, Kar, Baabdullah, & Al -Khowaiter, 2018) . The Big Data era has added 
types of data that were not previously used in analysis, such as that from social media (Martínez -Rojas, Pardo- Ferreira, & Rubio -Romero, 2018; Ragini et al., 2018) . On the other 
hand, AI makes Big Data meaningful through cognitive computing because analysis of Big Data by humans can be extremely time- consuming and thus the utilisation of AI techniques 
help to make sense of Big Data (Gupta et al., 2018) . Yet AI is only one of many ways in 
which Big Data can be used (Yaqoob et al., 2016) . Thus there is still a strong need to further 
explore and understand the synergy of AI and Bi g Data. More research is needed to establish 
the unique advantages obtained by the combination of these technologies and understand how AI can be further improved with the increasing availability of Big Data with its volume, variety and velocity. Therefore, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 9 –There is a necessary to fully understand the synergy of AI and Big Data and its implications for AI research and practice.