13 In an early published paper in IJIM, Seeger (1983, p.205)  voiced a concern that is still current 
“complex progra mmes of the kind developed in the field of artificial intelligence may lead to 
information system designs where the intellectual procedures of information work will be 
performed by machines. This could make a significant part of human information input obsolete.”  
In the era of AI and Big Data, Miller (2018a)  argues the imperative of a new human -machine 
symbiosis and calls for the rethink of “how humans and machines need to work symbiotically to augment and enhance each other’s capabilities.” (page 2).  
There has been an increased interest in examining the role of AI in recent years, i.e. automation or augmentation. Some AI practitioners and researchers argue that AI should be used to augment the human judgement rather than automation (Miller, 2018a; Wilson & Daug herty, 2018)  and “AI systems should be designed with the intention of augmenting, not 
replacing, human contributions” (Jarrahi, 2018 p. 584) , but this assertion should be  further 
supported with rigorous research and investigation with empirical evidence on how and why AI is best at providing augmentation in supporting human judgement r ather than decision 
automation. 
Wilson and Daugherty (2018)  argue that companies that deploy AI mainly to displace 
employees will see only short -term productivity gains. What is the evidence for this claim? If 
this is true, why and how will using AI for replac ing employees not deliver the long term 
gains and how can this shortcoming be overcome?  
Wilson and Daugherty (2018)  also claim that companies can benefit from optimizing 
“collaboration between humans and artificial intelligence” and develop employees’ “fusion 
skills” that enable them to work effectively at the human -machine interface. However, some 
AI systems don’t have the capability to explain the reasoning process of dec ision making, 
how to solve the Blackbox issue, i.e. knowing why decisions are made in a certain way 
(Davenport, 2018) and provide explanations to AI users?  To address this issue, Miller (2018b)  
observes that t here has been a recent resurgence in the area of explain able AI because  
researchers and practitioners seek to make AI  algorithms more understandabl e. 
Many previous studies have examined the roles of AI before the era of Big Data. However, considering the super power of the new generation AI and the overwhelming ly mixed views 
and debate on the role of AI in decision making, it is imperative that the role of AI should be revisited and redefined, therefore we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 4 – AI can play multiple roles in decision making, but AI will be mostly accepted 
by human decision makers as a decision support/augmentation tool rather than as the automation of decision making to replace them.  
4.2.2. System design criteria for supporting decision making 
As the effectiveness of AI systems for decision maki ng can only be realised through its 
acceptance and use by the end users (Edwards et al., 2000) , the system design criteria for AI 
based systems has been an issue since the early applications of AI. For example, system design criteria have been an issue since the days of SSIS, before it became IJIM (Pejtersen, 
1984) . Based on our understanding of  the roles of AI, whether for supporting, augmenting,