6 2.1.2. Semantic linguistic analysis  
Almost as pervasive are the various methods of semantic linguistic analysis. The use of maps 
to help understand natural language in documents for infor mation retrieval was one of the 
techniques identified in a review by Wormell (1984) . These soon afterwards became known 
as semantic networks. More recent systems such as those by Tadeusiewicz, Ogiela, and 
Ogiela (2008)  for medical diagnosis and Ogiela and Ogiela (2014)  for analysing financial 
data use versions of this approach, sometimes with theoretical extensions such as the  latent 
semantic analysis used by Ahmad and Laroche (2017) . 
2.1.3. Bayesian networks  
Bayesian networks are based on probabilistic inference, with the conditional probabilities associated with each path between nodes in the network adapting in the light of new data, thus encompassing learning. Specific use of this term is relatively recent, with papers such as Zhao, Tang, Darlington, Austin, and Culley (2008)  on evaluat ing information in engineering 
documents and Ramírez -Noriega, Juárez -Ramírez, and Martínez -Ramírez (2017)  using a 
Bayesian network as the design for an intelligent tutoring system. However, it is likely that some of the unspecified inference methods in earl ier expert systems or knowledge -based 
systems papers used this approach.  
2.1.4. Similarity measures  
The concept of identifying examples that are similar or close to a new observation is at the 
heart of case- based reasoning, which has been an active area for most of the period (Tseng, 
Chen, Hu, & Lin, 2017; Zantout & Marir, 1999) . Similarity measures are the metrics for 
similarity/closen ess. Bouakkaz, Ouinten, Loudcher, and St rekalova (2017)  compare several 
similarity measures for textual analysis, and find that the k -means approach produced the best 
results in their experiment.  The k -means approach also has the advantage of being 
conceptually very simple. It divides a set o f observations into a predetermined number  of 
clusters (k)  by an iterative process . First a random set of k points are chosen to be  the centres 
of the clusters, then each observation is assigned to its closest centre. Once all observations have been  clust ered, the mean point of each cluster is recalculated and these become the new 
set of cluster centres. The process is repeated until no observation changes cluster.  
Support vector machines (Ragini, Anand, & Bhaskar, 2018)  are another commonly used 
similarity measure approach; in this case examples are categorized by maximizing the width 
of the gaps between the clusters . 
2.1.5. Neural networks  
Neural networks, more precisely artificial neural networks (ANN), are intended to mimic the way the human brain works, and are at the forefront of the current expansion in AI even though applications can be found as far back as the 1980s (Ford, 1989) . Inte restingly, few 
papers in IJIM address specific applications of ANN, exceptions including Liébana-
Cabanillas, Marinković, and Kalinić (2017); Mostafa and El -Masry (2013) . ANN are more 
likely to be discussed in general summary and review articles (Frias -Martinez, Magoulas,