5 may mention AI techniques, especially review papers, it is oft en not clear whether those other 
papers are describing systems that had been developed, were being developed, or simply that 
might possibly exist someday.  
Table 2. Substantive AI papers categorized by type  
Type of paper  Number  
Conceptual paper  12 
Theoretical development  3 
Pilot study/proof of concept  21 
Fielded application  1 
Survey  7 
Management/organizational issues  3 
Review  11 
 
2.1. Techniques  
In this section we consider the techniques that comprise the forms of knowledge 
representation and/or the algorithms used to build the AI systems described. We only include 
those techniques mentioned and discussed by name. It is important to note that this does not necessarily measure how widely th ey are used, even in IJIM’s research domain, as some 
papers use terms like knowledge -based system or machine learning without describing the 
specific techniques employed.  
2.1.1. Rule-based inference  
Despite that caveat, the most common technique used in the AI sy stems reported is definitely 
rule-based inference. The very first system described in detail in IJIM  (Lu & Mooney, 1989)  
was a rule- based expert system. In addition, the first mention in IJIM of an AI system in 
practical everyday use was also a rule- based system. This came in a paper by Bowonder and 
Miyake (1992) , discussing information management in Japan’s Nippon Steel Corporation. 
They noted tha t Nippon Steel had been the first in the world to use an AI system for blast 
furnace control (see Yui, Watanabe, Amano, Takarabe, & Nakamori, 1989) . 
Nearly all of the AI systems mentioned up to year 2000 use rule -based inference, and this 
element of AI techniques remains with us t oday; three of the specific AI systems in articles 
from 2017 and 2018 (Araujo & Pestana, 2017; Kao et al., 2017; Rekik, Kallel, Casillas, & Alimi, 2018)  are also rule- based.  
The main change over time is that originally the rules were usually elicited from human experts by a human knowledge engineer, whereas now they are more likely to have been developed using an automated method such as CART (Classification and Regression Tre es) 
(Kao et al., 2017)  or association rule mining (Rekik et al., 2018) .