16 4.3.3. Culture and AI applications  
Culture has been recognised as an important influential factor in technology acceptance by 
many studies in the past. Does culture, such as national  or organisational culture , and 
personal and religious  values , also play a critical role in acceptance/adoption and use of AI 
applications? For example, Gerbert, Reeves, Ransbotham, Kiron, and Spira (2018)  examine 
“Why Chinese companies approach AI differently”. Liu, Chan, Zhao, and Liu (published 
online 2018)  also find a significant influence of both organisational and Chinese national 
culture on knowledge management. If culture does play a role, how, why and to what extent 
does it affect the AI success? Thus, we formulate the following proposition:  
Proposition 10 – The acceptance of AI for decision making can be affected by different 
cultures and personal values. On the other hand, will the wide use of AI for supporting and automating human decision 
making change culture? This is an area that has not been well explored so far, thus requir ing 
further investigation with the following research proposition:  
Proposition 11 – The acceptance and successful application of AI for decision making may 
result in a change of culture in organisations and in individual behaviour. 
4.3.4. Ethical and legal issues  
Rapid advances in AI are raising serious ethical concerns. Remenyi and Williams (1996)  was 
an early example of consideration of the ethics of  an AI system published in IJIM  over two 
decades ago. Ethical and legal concerns surrounding the applications of AI have become a 
major challenge. As this topic has received a substantial amount of attention and debate, a 
separate full paper would be more appropriate to this topic. However, as the role of government is critical for addressing the ethical concerns and legal challenges, particularly around responsibility for and explainability of decisions made by an automaton AI system, it is imperative that more research must be carried out on the role of the government in shaping 
the future of AI (Galston, 2018). How can the government develop adequate policy, regulations, ethical guidance and legal framework to prevent misuses of AI and their potential 
disastrous consequences on both individual and societal levels? Therefore, this paper m akes 
the following proposition:  
Proposition 12 – Government plays a critical role in safeguarding the impact of AI on society.  
5. Conclusion  
As AI has become more popular toda y due to Big Data, advanced algorithms, and improved 
computing power and storage, AI systems are becoming an embedded element of digital 
system s, and more specifically , are making  a profound impact on human decision making. As 
a result, there is an increas ing demand for information systems researchers to investigate and 
understand the implications of AI for decision making and to contribute to the theoretical advancement and practical success of AI applications. This paper aims  to address this need 
by analy sing and highlighting the critical challenges and opportunities for IS researchers. 
Twelve research propositions are provided focusing on the use and impact  of AI for decision 
making in terms of: theoretical development, technology -human interaction and AI