2 1. Introduction 
The rise of Artificial Intelligence in recent years has attracted numerous controversial 
remarks. For example, CEO of IBM, Ginni Rometty, argues that AI technologies  are 
“technologies to  augment human intelligence …By and large we see a world where this is a 
partnership between man and machine and this is in fact going to make us better and allow us 
to do what the human condition is best able to do.”1 . Stephen Hawking, on the other hand, 
remarked that “the development of full artificial intelligence could s pell the end of the human 
race” (Cellan -Jones, 2014) , and Bill Gates has also said that humans should be worried about 
the threat posed by Artificial Intelligence (Rawlinson, 2015) . 
These very different views from leading experts call for further investigation on how human 
beings can co -exist with AI and how to minimise the negative impact of the technology.  
There is no commonly accepted definition of AI. It  is normally referred to  as the ability of a 
machine to learn from experience, adjust to new inputs and perform human- like tasks . The 
terms AI and AI systems were first introduced in the 1950s . Since then, AI has experienced 
its ups (“AI springs”) and downs (“AI winters”). With the rapid advancement of Big Data 
technologies, e.g. improved computing storage capability and super -fast speed of data 
process ing machines, AI is being revitalised with the availability and power of Big Data.  
Therefore, after years of hope and promise, AI is gaining meaningful traction within top 
corporations (Bean, 2018) . It is reported that the take -up of AI -enabled systems in 
organisations is expanding rapidly (Miller, 2018a)  and AI is transforming business 
(Daugherty & Wilson, 2018) . The new wave of AI systems has improved an organisation’s 
ability to use data to make predictions and has substantially reduced the cost o f making 
predictions (Agrawal, Gans, & Goldf arb, 2018) . According to Gartner’s 2018 technology 
trend survey (Panetta, 2018) , AI is listed as the No. 1 strategic technology. The ability to use 
AI to enhance decision making, reinvent business models and ecosystems, and remake the customer experience will drive the payoff for digital initiatives through 2025. The  Gartner 
survey showed that 59% of organizations are st ill gathering information to build their AI 
strategies, while the remainder have already made progress in piloting or adopting AI solutions (Panetta, 2018) . 
Organisations that are engaged in using the new generation of AI systems “will find that AI faces the usual obstacles to progress of any unproven and unfamiliar technology,” says Whit Andrews, Vice President and disting uished analyst at Gartner (Pettey, 2018) . “However, 
early AI projects offer valuable lessons and perspectives for enterprise architecture and technology innovation leaders embarking on pilots and more formal AI efforts.” (Pettey, 2018) . 
Overall, there are many white papers and reports from leading technology providers and articles in top management magazines, e.g. Harva rd Business Review  and MIT Sloan 
Management Review , that provide corporates with strategic and practical guidelines on how 
to benefit from AI. However, it appears that there are very limited academic research papers 
focusing on understanding the use and im pact of the new generation of AI from the 
technology application perspective with rigorous academic investigation and theorisation. 
                                                           
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNEQsl1 -iZs