8 government in Egypt. Other pap ers using AI to analyse results include (Liébana -Cabanillas et 
al., 2017; Rekik et al., 2018) . 
Nevertheless, some domains remain at the “potential” level.  As far back as 1997, Martinsons 
(1997)  was discussing the potential for using knowledge -based systems in human resource 
management, and commenting that it “rema ins unrealized” (p.35). Many systems have been 
developed and indeed implemented for job matching and screening applications, but there 
continues to be scepticism about their use. This extends to the latest development; the use of chatbots to respond to que ries from applicants, for example by L’Oréal (Thibodeau, 2019) ; 
and use of AI based interviews for London City j obs particularly in financial sectors. This is 
posing a new challenge to job appli cants as training for AI -based interviews is costing them 
about £9k (Blunden, 2018) . 
2.3. Terminology  
We can identify three overlapping eras in the IJIM literature. Broadly speaking, the central 
terms in each era are r espectively expert systems, knowledge -based systems, and a 
combination of artificial intelligence/machine learning/data mining.  
2.3.1. Expert systems rule! (Up to 2000)  
The three systems described in IJIM  in detail up to 2000 (Dhaliwal & Tung, 2000; Dugdale, 
1996; Lu & Mooney, 1989)  were all expert systems. Examining the other SSIS/IJIM  papers 
over that period confirms that AI was more or less synonymous with expert systems.  
Since 2000, the term expert system has become far less important as a label. It may still be a 
phrase mentioned in the text, but it does not appear in IJIM  paper titles, abstracts or keywords.  
2.3.2. Knowledge is power -  but only in business and management? (1983 onwards)  
This era overlaps both of the others. The term knowledge -based system (KBS) began to 
become popular with the launch of the UK Government’s Alvey Programme of IT research in 
1982/3, and was used in early SSIS  papers (Ingwersen, 1984a, 1984b; Nicholas & Harman, 
1985) . Some saw expert systems as a subset of KBS; others regarded the two terms as 
equivalent.  
The start of the 21st century saw the term expert systems decline in popul arity in business 
and management in favour of knowledge -based systems. There were three reasons for this:  
1. The bad reputation that some expert systems projects achieved, meaning that “expert 
system” was not an attractive label.  
2. An increasing realization tha t the system often served to assist or support a human 
decision -maker, rather than as an expert telling the human what to do.  
3. A shift in emphasis from “the expert” to “the knowledge”, with the growth in popularity of knowledge management in the late 1990s. 
 
Ironically, systems using the rule -based technology common in early expert systems 
proliferated in the 21st century. They were simply embedded in other systems, for example as