12 Proposition 1 –  Defining AI can be difficult, so it is necessary and beneficial to re -define the 
concept of AI and related terms to reflect the changing nature of AI development and 
applications in the era of Big Data. 
4.1.2. Understanding, theorising and measuring AI use and impact  
With the rapid increase in AI applications, many claims are made by AI developers and larg e 
corporates about its substantial benefits and impact. For example, according to Davenport and 
Ronanki (2018), a survey of 250 executives who are familiar with their companies’ use of cognitive technology (a term Davenport and Ronanki explain as “next -generation AI”) shows 
that three -quarters of them “believe that AI will substantially transform their companies 
within three years” (p.110). 
As most similar claims are not substantiated by measurable empirical evidence and rigorous 
academic research, it is di fficult to know how, why and to what extent AI systems are being 
used and impacting on individual and organisational decision making and transforming 
organisations. This raises a challenge on how to measure the benefits and impact of AI for 
decision making  from short to long term, and from social, economic and political 
perspectives. What would be the implications for future business executives in making strategic decisions?  
Therefore, the following proposition is offered:  
Proposition 2 – Measuring the bene fit of AI and its impact is very difficult, but possible. 
Therefore, there is a need to develop and test theoretically sound and practically feasible AI 
impact indicators to measure its benefits. 
Overall, to have a systematic understanding on how and why A I based systems are being 
used and affecting individual and organisational performance, an appropriate theoretical 
framework should be developed.  
Proposition 3 – It is necessary to theorise the use of AI and its impact on decision making, 
therefore an inte grated conceptual framework is needed to provide a systematic 
understanding of AI for decision making.  
4.2. Technology -human interaction 
4.2.1. The role of AI for decision making 
For the early applications of AI in business and management field, Edwards (1992)  points out 
that the spread of expert systems (representing and applying expert knowledge using AI) into 
management and administrative applications from the scientific/technical domains of the early systems was very slow. The view put forward in his paper was that for expert systems 
to be applied to problems in management or administration, the traditional ‘closed- world’ 
picture of an expert system was usually inadequate. The real manifestation of the expert system’s role (and indeed that of the human exper t) in management involves much more 
negotiation and interaction than in scientific/technical domains. The consequences for the 
resulting system are that it looks much more like the traditional picture of a decision support 
system than a classic standalone expert system.