or complete, depending on the guarantee of complete cov-
erage of the free space [23]. Cellular decomposition is used
either implicitly or explicitly by many coverage algorithms,
where space is broken into simplistic regions to guarantee
the coverage. These algorithms can be approximated, semi-
approximated, and exact [25]. Randomisation is an approach
for coverage problems, which, although far from optimal,
is a low-cost solution for small dimensions robots working
on conﬁned spaces. Choset et al. [26] claims that the main
advantage of a random approach is that no localisation sensors
neither complex algorithms for path planning are required.
However, this is unthinkable for agricultural ﬁeld demands,
as precision agricultural tasks require speciﬁc operations that
cannot be fulﬁlled with random operations. Also, the operation
costs of the platform would be signiﬁcantly higher.
Exact cellular decomposition methods break the free space
into simple regions (cells). The free cells are simple to cover
using simple motions. For example, a zigzag pattern could
cover all the free cells. Choset et al. [27] and Acar et al.
[28] present approaches for path generation with exact cellular
decomposition. Acar et al. [29] discuss coverage path planning
in demining applications. This paper states an omnidirec-
tional vehicle with two coverage algorithms: exact cellular
decomposition with back-and-forth motion and a probabilistic
method. Zelinsky et al. [30] used the conventional Wavefront
algorithm to determine a coverage path. Yang et al. present a
neural network tool for coverage path planning problems [31]
for application in cleaning robots in dynamic environments.
Sch¨aﬂeet al. [32] proposed a coverage path planning using
GA with energy optimisation. The ACO algorithm was the
choice of Chibin et al. [33] to resolve a complete coverage
path planning problem.
IV. P ATH PLANNING IN AGRICULTURE
Path planning applications in agriculture are spread over
several areas with different applications, being that we have
identiﬁed a total of 22 papers for this review. From these
works, 10 articles present Point-to-Point path planning ap-
proaches, while the remaining 11 papers deal with coverage
path planning problems. The agricultural applications are
spread over various areas such as navigation in orchards,
vineyards, greenhouses, and wheat plantations. The navigation
has several purposes like monitoring, precision spraying, and
harvesting. However, some authors present a path planning
algorithm adapted for agricultural ﬁelds and/or machines with-
out applications to a speciﬁc task. There is not a popular
path planning algorithm for agrarian purposes, with distinct
approaches for each work either for 2D or 3D environments.
Tables I and II present details about the works mentioned in
this section, with a list of all the selected papers and short
answers for the questions presented in section II.
In Point-to-Point path planning, the earliest article referred
dates from 1997 and presents a GA for creating a path to an
agricultural robot, considering only the restrictions imposed
by the platform. [34] Then, the work of Linker et al. , in 2008,
presents an article with a modiﬁed cell decomposition withA* algorithm for navigation in orchards, considering the roll
and pitch angles imposed to the robot. The authors claim that
the generated path is optimal, but some of the restrictions
may generate a sub-optimal path. Recently, Santos et al. [35]
resorted to a similar approach for safe navigation in a steep
slope vineyard, where the algorithm limits the roll, pitch, and
yaw angles considering the centre of mass of the robot. Some
extensions of this method consider other parameters like the
soil compaction and automatic recharging systems. Another
work in literature uses cell decomposition with D*, which is
based on A* but considers the robot dynamics. The goal is to
navigate in an unknown oil palm plantation [36]. An artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld planner is used for energy optimisation in an
unstructured 3D terrain [37], and Mai et al. [38] resorts to
an ACO for multi-point measurement in potato cultivation.
Although cell decomposition is slightly preferred, the authors
diverge in the choice of an algorithm for Point-to-Point path
planning.
In coverage path planning problems, the chosen algorithms
also vary in the found literature. A common goal in this area
is the complete coverage of irregularly shaped terrains. So, the
earliest selected work proposed, in 2006, a Hamiltonian Graph
exploration to coverage irregular-shaped ﬁelds to minimise
overlaps and manoeuvres [45]. While Oksanen et al. [25], pre-
sented in 2009, a greedy algorithm with a heuristic algorithm
for coverage curve-shaped ﬁelds. Five years later, Hameed et
al.[46] proposes a GA-based algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal
driving direction, which minimises the fuel consumption of an
agricultural machine. Three more recent works, also propose
methods for optimisation of irregular polygons with a 2D grid-
based method with 3D projection with cylindrical topography
optimisation [47], a robot swarm for seeding task (coverage
algorithm not speciﬁed) [48] and an approach for coverage
wheat areas for robot combine harvester with an N-Polygon
algorithm to determine the optimum area [49]. A* and Dijkstra
search in graphs are referred in three papers, to cover all the
rows of a steep slope vineyard [50], the rows of hilly vineyards
[51], which are similar but not so complex, and the rows of
plants in greenhouses for precision polinization [52].
The authors of nine articles claim that their approach is
optimal or near-optimal, while in other seven works, the
authors provide a sub-optimal solution. The majority of the
approaches are off-line path planners in a static environment,
being that only two Point-to-Point papers [35], [36], and two
coverage path planning papers [48], [52], propose an on-line
solution in dynamic environments. However, less than half of
the authors claim to have performed tests in a real scenario,
being that only 3 Point-to-Point approaches are included in this
group. Besides, some works do not even specify the robot’s
characteristics.
The computational complexity was analysed without any
ofﬁcial metrics, as most of the authors did not provide enough
information on this topic, not even computational require-
ments, and in some cases, temporal requests. In coverage
path planning, some papers classify their method with non-
deterministic polynomial-time (NP) complexity, which is a2020 IEEE International Conference on
Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC)
April 15-16, Ponta Delgada, Portugal
63