Section II shows the methodology used for this review work.
Section III presents a brief explanation of the path planning
concept and its different approaches. In section IV, the found
related works with path planning in agriculture are analysed.
Section V presents the conclusions of this revision.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
The collection of the related work was performed between
December 2019 and January 2020, resorting to the scientiﬁc
search engine Google Scholar. The search was open to any
path planning approach in the agrarian ﬁeld for ground robots,
and white22 papers were selected from different agricultural
areas. The analysis of the related work intends to answer the
following issues: i) agricultural task ii) planning approach; iii)
on-line capability; iv) dynamic or static; v) path optimality;
vi) geometry features; vii) optimisation criteria; viii) robot
restrictions; ix) limitations; x) computational complexity and
processing time; xi) real scenario tests.
III. P ATH PLANNING ALGORITHMS
Based on the environment information, there are two cate-
gories of path planning algorithms, off-line and on-line. The
ﬁrst category is used when the robot has prior access to
complete information about the environment, including static
obstacles and trajectories of non-static objects. On the other
hand, when this information is incomplete or not available,
the robot should evaluate the path during the navigation.
This second category is known as on-line path planning.
A fundamental approach for formulating and solving the
path planning problem is the conﬁguration space (C-space)
approach. The central idea is the representation of the robot
as a single point. As the robot is reduced, the obstacles are
enlarged by the size of the robot to compensate [13]. The path
planning methods consist of various concepts such as potential
ﬁeld, sampling-based method, cell decomposition and nature-
inspired algorithms as the Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle
Swarm Optimisation (PSO), and Ant Colony Optimisation
(ACO). Independently, path planning can be divided into two
sub-categories: Point-to-Point Path planning and Coverage
Path Planning.
A. Point-to-Point path planning
In Point-to-Point Path planning of a mobile robot, the goal
consists of determining a collision-free path from a starting
point to a destination point, optimising parameters like time,
distance, or energy.
In potential ﬁeld planners, the robot behaves as a particle
immersed in a potential ﬁeld, where the goal point represents
an attraction potential, and the obstacles represent repulsive
potentials. A common problem is the existence of local min-
imums, which emerges when the repulsive potential is higher
than the attraction potential. This situation may prevent the
robot from reaching the destination point [14].
Rapidly exploring random tree (RRT) is a known sampling-
based method, which explores the path randomly. Although
these planners are simple, they are not optimal and tend togenerate paths with abrupt curves [15]. However, Karaman et
al.[16] presented RRT* which converges to a near-optimal
method.
The cell decomposition method decomposes the free space
into small regions called cells [17]. The goal is to search for a
collision-free path using the empty spaces in the cell graph
[13]. Each cell contains information about its availability.
Search algorithms like A* or Dijkstra are recurrent with the
cell decomposition method to search for a path. When using
A*, this method always generates an optimal path, according
to the desired requirements. However, this approach has el-
evated computational complexity. Goto et al. [18] presented
a method with A* algorithm to improve the processing time.
Fernandes et al. [19] approach uses cell decomposition with
A* to restrict the robot to its maximum turning rate.
Nature-inspired algorithms have obtained attention in the
path planning ﬁeld. GA, PSO, and ACO are recurrent studies
targets in literature, demonstrating good performances for
robot path planning. Mac et al. [10] details and reviews
literature of these nature-inspired path planning methods.
GA is an optimisation tool based on natural genetics,
which takes advantage of procedures such as natural selection,
crossover, and mutation. [10] Elhoseny et al. [20] implemented
a modiﬁed GA for path planning in a dynamic ﬁeld.
PSO is a population-based algorithm like GA. However,
PSO was inspired by the social behaviour of ﬁsh schooling.
PSO is initialised with a set of random solutions, and then
they are updated based on an optimal schema. Zhang et al.
[21] proposes a multi-objective PSO for path planning in
uncertain environments like a ﬁre rescue mission, landmines,
and enemies war ﬁeld.
ACO is implemented by swarm behaviour, originated from
natural ant colony functioning. The interacted communication
between the ants enables them to ﬁnd the shortest path between
the nest and food sources. This characteristic is inherited in
ACO algorithm to solve discrete optimisation problems [10].
Recently, Xiong et al. [22] used an ACO algorithm for path
planning of multiple autonomous marine vehicles.
B. Coverage path planning
Coverage path planning (CPP) is the task of determining
a path that passes overall points of an area or volume while
avoiding obstacles [23]. Cao et al. [24] deﬁned the following
requirements for a coverage operation:
1) The robot must cover the whole area.
2) The robot must ﬁll the region without overlapping.
3) The operations should be continuous and sequential
without repetition of paths.
4) The robot must avoid all obstacles.
5) Use simple motion trajectories.
6) An “optimal” path is desired under available conditions.
However, it is not always possible to satisfy all of these
requirements in complex environments. Therefore, priority
consideration is required. Independently the on-line or off-line
classiﬁcation, these algorithms can be classiﬁed as heuristic2020 IEEE International Conference on
Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC)
April 15-16, Ponta Delgada, Portugal
62