Path Planning for ground robots in agriculture: a
short review
Lu´ıs C. Santos∗†, Filipe N. Santos∗, E. J. Solteiro Pires∗†,
Ant´onio Valente∗†, Pedro Costa∗‡and Sandro Magalh ˜aes∗
∗INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
†UTAD, Vila Real, Portugal
‡FEUP, Porto, Portugal
Email: luis.c.santos@inesctec.pt, fbsantos@inesctec.pt, epires@utad.pt,
avalente@utad.pt, pedrogc@fe.up.pt, sandro.a.magalhaes@inesctec.pt
Abstract —The world’s population is estimated to reach nine
billion people by the year 2050, which indicates that agricultural
productivity must increase sustainably. The mechanisation and
automatisation of agricultural tasks is an essential step to face
population growth. Ground robots have been developed along
the last decade for several agricultural applications, being, the
autonomous and safe navigation one of the hardest challenge
in this development. Moving autonomously, a mobile platform
involves different tasks, such as localisation, mapping, motion
control, and path planning, a crucial step for autonomous oper-
ations. This article performs a survey of different applications
for path planning techniques applied to various agricultural
contexts. This paper analyses different agricultural applications
and details about the employed path planning method. The
conclusion indicates that path planning has been successfully
applied to agrarian robots for ﬁeld coverage and point-to-point
navigation, being that coverage path planning is slightly more
advanced in this ﬁeld.
Index Terms —Autonomous navigation, Path Planning, agricul-
tural robotics, heuristic, survey.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Agriculture is a critical sector of the global economy. This
activity was adapted along years to fulﬁl the needs of the
world’s population, which has duplicated in the last 50 years
[1]. Several studies predict the continued growth of the world
population, expecting to reach nine billion people by the year
2050, a 60% increase. Further, the prediction indicates an
increment of people living in urban areas and a decrease in the
ratio between working people and retired people [2]. Besides,
there has been a substantial decrease in human resources
for agricultural labour [3], [4]. This data indicates that the
world’s agriculture productivity must increase sustainably, and
more independent of handcraft work with the automatisation
and optimisation of agricultural tasks. The technology was
introduced to agriculture more than one century ago, with the
ﬁrst tractor presented in 1913. Nowadays, mechanical tech-
nology has had a considerable evolution, with a considerable
This work is ﬁnanced by the ERDF – European Regional Development
Fund through the Operational Programme for Competitiveness and Interna-
tionalisation - COMPETE 2020 Programme, and by National Funds through
the Portuguese funding agency, FCT - Fundac ¸ ˜ao para a Ci ˆencia e a Tecnologia,
within project SAICTPAC/0034/2015 - POCI-01-0145-FEDER-016418 and
project PTDC/CCI-INF/29583/2017- POCI-01-0145-FEDER-029583.amount of commercial technology available [5]. This evolution
increased agricultural productivity and reduced the necessary
amount of human labour in agriculture. However, this may
not be enough to sustain the world’s demand for future years.
There are several studies performed since the 1990s to improve
the production efﬁciency, which originated the concept of
“precision agriculture”, a farm management notion based on
the observation, measurement, and actuation to the variability
in the crops, to optimise the returns while preserving resources
[6].
The strategic European research agenda for robotics [7]
states that robotic platforms will improve agriculture efﬁ-
ciency. However, despite the increase of this area in the
research domain [8], few commercial solutions are available
[9]. Multiple works applied automation solutions for different
agricultural tasks such as planting, harvesting, monitoring,
spraying, and pruning. For all of these processes, the au-
tonomous robot navigation is essential. This step consists of
four requirements known as localisation, mapping, motion
control, and path planning, a necessary part of the autonomous
robot navigation. Path planning of a robot consists of ﬁnding
a sequence of translation and rotation from a starting point to
a destination while avoiding obstacles in its working environ-
ment [10].
Agricultural environments place many challenges for
robotic navigation. Unlike indoor environments, agrarian ﬁelds
are intricate, unstructured, and ﬁckle. The path planning strate-
gies well suited for inside spaces may not ﬁt in the agricultural
requirements, which creates the necessity of advanced path
planning strategies suited for agriculture.
The literature contains several works regarding this issue,
with early works dating from 1989, where Palmer et al.
[11] presented an issue about efﬁcient ﬁeld courses around
an obstacle motivated by concerns in the farming industry.
Bochtis et al. [12] did a review about advances in agricultural
machinery, where one of the approached topics involves path
planning methods for area coverage in farms. To the best of
our knowledge, there is no other revision work about path
planning applications in agriculture. So, this paper analyses the
approaches taken along the years for path planning in several
agricultural areas.2020 IEEE International Conference on
Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC)
April 15-16, Ponta Delgada, Portugal
978-1-7281-7078-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 61