in which case we might be better off training on the additional examples. Unless we make such
assumptions explicit, we cannot make meaningful comparisons between few-shot learning algorithms.
We ﬁnd the above avenues to be more promising future directions than true few-shot learning given
the challenge of model selection.
Inspired by prior work [ 78–81], we offer recommendations for future work in true few-shot learning:
•Report all hyperparameters (prompts) considered and the hyperparameter selection criteria.
•Include validation examples in the number of examples used by a few-shot learning
algorithm. Validation examples include all examples used to decide on any aspect of learning:
hyperparameters, prompts, training objectives, decoding strategies, model architecture, etc.
•Once you have decided on the learning algorithm, submit your model for test evaluation
directly, without ﬁrst evaluating on validation. Report the total number of test evaluations
conducted (ideally, just one). Use the validation set only after test evaluation for any
ablations you report, to avoid making decisions about your algorithm with the validation set.
•Do not rely on hyperparameters from prior work that were tuned using validation examples
for the same benchmark (e.g., SuperGLUE), to avoid indirectly beneﬁting from validation
examples. Instead, re-tune such hyperparameters using only the given few-shot examples.
The above protocols are strict but mimic how a true few-shot learning algorithm would be used in a
real, low-data setting. To ensure researchers comply with such strict protocols, future benchmarks
may need to keep large test sets private while releasing only a few labeled examples.
Given our negative results on true few-shot learning, a major question remains: is it possible to
select models in a true zero-shot setting? Prior work uses LMs for zero-shot learning by choosing
an arbitrary prompt [ 17,82] which requires no data but is suboptimal [ 4]. Other efforts try multiple
prompts and choose between them via trial and error alongside manual evaluation [ 1], effectively
leveraging human supervision. CLIP [ 13] achieves high zero-shot accuracy on ImageNet after
extensively tuning prompts and label names using ImageNet’s training set (1.28M examples), as we
noticed from the open-source code.5The authors report a 5% accuracy gain from tuning prompts
alone, but the training examples used for tuning are not available in true zero-shot learning. Without
any labeled data, the problem of model selection is even more challenging than in the true few-shot
case. Overall, our work provides guidance for future work in few-shot learning by clarifying the
assumptions made by the true few-shot setting and empirically demonstrates that model selection is a
major roadblock to true few-shot learning.
6 Limitations and Broader Impact
We facilitate fair comparisons between few-shot methods in future work by disambiguating between
three few-shot settings: multi-distribution, tuned, and true few-shot learning. We highlight that
one setting, tuned few-shot learning, gives up the practical advantage of few-shot learning by using
many labeled examples. Furthermore, we show that several tuned few-shot learning algorithms work
signiﬁcantly worse in the true few-shot setting, without tuning on many examples. While we explored
CV , MDL, and several other criteria (Appendix §B), it is possible that effective true few-shot model
selection is possible using other criteria (§2.4) or heuristics not explored here. In this event, our work
will have discouraged work on a few-shot learning setting with applications to low-data settings, e.g.,
that involve low-resource languages or expert annotation. Overall, however, we believe our work will
redirect future work to few-shot settings with more practical applications.
We show that it is hard to detect when a small input change hurts an LM’s generalization, even
when the change appears reasonable to human readers. We argue that practitioners will beneﬁt from
knowing such limitations, but they may also be discouraged from deploying LMs in many useful
contexts, such as question-answering, hate speech detection, automatic translation, and commercial
dialogue systems. Our ﬁndings may also encourage adversaries to target LM-based applications and
highlight which models are most susceptible to attack (e.g., larger models). By shedding light on the
shortcomings of (few-shot) LMs, we hope to spur future work to address these shortcomings.
5https://github.com/openai/CLIP/blob/main/notebooks/Prompt_Engineering_for_
ImageNet.ipynb
10