0.08 0.1 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.7 6.7 13175
Model Parameters (B)0102030405060T est Acc. of Chosen Prompt (%)Worst
Mean
MDL
CV
Best
0.08 0.1 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.7 6.7 13175
Model Parameters (B)20
020406080100Relative T est Acc. of
Chosen Prompt (%)MDL
CVFigure 1: Left: LAMA-UHN accuracy of CV/MDL-chosen prompts vs. accuracy of the worst,
average (randomly-selected), and best prompt (prior work). Right : The average accuracy gain from
using CV/MDL-chosen prompts instead of randomly-chosen ones, relative to the gain from the best
prompt. We plot mean/std. err. across 5 runs with different training sets. CV/MDL-chosen prompts
obtain only small improvements over randomly-chosen ones and do far worse than the best prompts.
single LM forward pass to compute the loss on each example conditioned on the previous examples.
This feature makes MDL more computationally efﬁcient than CV .
Marginalizing out example order The order of training examples impacts the generalization of
LMs [ 7], so we treat order as a random factor Rthat we marginalize over to evaluate the generalization
of a promptA. We compute the exact ER;F[CV(A;R;F )]andER;F[MDL (A;R;F )]by averaging
over allN!training example orders. We use N= 5examples to limit N!. We estimate the average
test accuracy on N! = 120 examples in LAMA, excluding the training examples, by evaluating on
one test example per permutation of training examples. We compute CV , MDL, and test accuracy
withN! = 120 forward passes in total by appending a test example to each permutation of training
examples, and we compute all selection criteria using the same set of N! = 120 forward passes to
maximize comparability across different methods. We show the test accuracy from CV/MDL-chosen
prompts, averaged over all relations. For comparison, we show the test accuracy of always choosing
(1) the best prompt, chosen using held-out accuracy as in prior work, (2) the worst prompt, as a lower
bound, and (3) random prompts (we show the mean accuracy over all prompts).
3.2 How well does prompt selection do in true few-shot learning?
Fig. 1 (left) shows the results; prompt selection obtains marginal improvements over random selection
across model sizes ranging over 3 orders of magnitude. Prompts chosen by CV and MDL alike
underperform the best prompt (chosen using held-out performance) by 5-7% absolute on average. In
fact, prompts chosen based on held-out performance often outperform larger models whose prompts
are chosen in a true few-shot manner. CV and MDL do tend to choose better-than-average prompts,
but only close the gap between the average and best prompts by 20-40%, as shown in Fig. 1 (right).
We ﬁnd similar results for several other tasks (§3.7) and selection criteria (Appendix §B).
Fig. 2 (left) shows that CV/MDL struggle to choose the prompt with the highest test accuracy. Poor
top-prompt selection is especially prevalent for larger models like GPT-3 175B that have spurred
interest in prompt design (only 21% accuracy for CV vs. 9% for random chance). In Appendix §A,
we show that CV/MDL-chosen prompts differ from the best prompts not only in accuracy but also in
how effectively they transfer to models of different sizes. Altogether, our results show that optimal
prompt selection is difﬁcult in the true few-shot setting, and that prior work overestimated the ability
of LMs by using held-out examples for prompt selection.
3.3 How reliably does prompt selection improve over the average prompt?
If the average improvement from prompt selection is small, can we at least obtain an improvement
with high probability for a given task and train set? Fig. 1 (left) shows that the worst prompts do far
worse than average, so it would be useful if prompt selection helped to avoid the worst prompts. We
5