tasks in the LAMA benchmark [ 17]. For choosing hyperparameters, true few-shot selection causes
performance to drop by 2-10% across 8 tasks for ADAPET [12], a state-of-the-art few-shot method.
Furthermore, true few-shot model selection has high variance in performance; selected models often
do much worse than randomly-chosen ones. We ﬁnd similar results when varying the number of
examples used, amount of computation, and conservativeness of our selection criterion. Altogether,
our results suggest that model selection is a fundamental roadblock to true few-shot learning.
2 Can We Do Model Selection in Few-Shot Learning?
Prior work uses the phrase “few-shot learning” in multiple senses, raising questions about what it
means to do few-shot learning. We categorize few-shot learning into three distinct settings, each of
which assumes access to different data. Here, we formally disambiguate between these settings to
help future work avoid inadvertently comparing few-shot methods that operate in different settings.
Consider the supervised learning scenario where we have a dataset of inputs x1:Nand labelsy1:N,
sampled from a distribution over datasets D. We aim to determine the learning algorithm A2
A1;:::;AAwith the smallest generalization loss Lat predicting ygivenxon unseen validation
examplesDvalDafter learning on training examples DtrainD. We say that an algorithm
A(Dtrain;R)maps a training dataset Dtrainand various random factors Rthat inﬂuence training to
a function that predicts ygivenx.Aspeciﬁes, e.g., the model architecture, hyperparameters, and
prompt.Rincludes random factors that impact the results of a learning algorithm, such as parameter
initialization and the order of training examples for online learning algorithms like stochastic gradient
descent. We say that Aobtains a generalization loss L(A(Dtrain;R);Dval)on a given validation set
Dval. We aim to ﬁnd the Athat minimizes the expected loss across training and validation sets:
EL(A;R) =EDtrain;Dval
L
A(Dtrain;R);Dval
Indata-rich supervised learning ,EL(A;R)is usually evaluated with a single train-validation split
(Dtrain;Dval). Since large DtrainandDvalare not always available, the traditional few-shot setting
evaluates EL(A;R)with many small (Dtrain;Dval)drawn from many, distinct distributions D[see,
e.g., work in meta-learning 18–21]. Each distribution Dis sampled from D, a distribution over
distributions (e.g., of similar tasks), so we call this setting multi-distribution few-shot learning .
Recent work does not assume access to data from other distributions, performing few-shot learning
using only a few examples from a single distribution to update a pretrained LM [ 2,12]. These papers
use a large validation set Dvalto tune the learning algorithm A, a setting we term tuned few-shot
learning . For example, Brown et al. [ 2] try prompts with different phrasings and numbers of training
examples to improve the validation accuracy of GPT-3. Tam et al. [ 12] choose the early stopping
iteration, prompt, and other model-speciﬁc hyperparameters based on validation performance. Tuned
few-shot learning relies on many labeled examples, so we argue that tuned few-shot learning does not
qualify as few-shot learning. If many validation examples are available, they could be incorporated
into the training set and trained on using data-rich supervised learning. Tuned few-shot learning
algorithms should be compared against data-rich supervised learning algorithms that use the same
amount of total data jDtrainj+jDvalj.
In this work, we evaluate the success of tuned few-shot learning methods when no large Dvalis
available, a setting we term true few-shot learning . Formally, we aim to choose a learning algorithm
Awith low expected loss EL(A;R)using only a small training set Dtraindrawn from a single
distribution. Here, we must choose Aby approximating EL(A;R), e.g., using cross-validation.
Several papers claim to circumvent the need to estimate EL(A;R)by choosing hyperparameters
based on an educated guess [ 3,9,14]. However, the proposed learning algorithms themselves are
quite sophisticated, and it is unclear how they were designed if not by using validation performance.
Other work chooses the learning algorithm and hyperparameters using one or multiple other datasets
before evaluating on the target dataset [ 5,11]. Such approaches fall under multi-distribution few-shot
learning and cannot be directly compared to methods that attempt to perform true few-shot learning,
even though prior work has made such comparisons [14].
In what follows, we describe two model selection criteria – cross-validation and minimum description
length – which we use to evaluate tuned few-shot methods in the true few-shot setting.
2