True Few-Shot Learning with Language Models
Ethan Perez1, Douwe Kiela2, Kyunghyun Cho13
1New York University,2Facebook AI Research,
3CIFAR Fellow in Learning in Machines & Brains
perez@nyu.edu
Abstract
Pretrained language models (LMs) perform well on many tasks even when learning
from a few examples, but prior work uses many held-out examples to tune various
aspects of learning, such as hyperparameters, training objectives, and natural
language templates (“prompts”). Here, we evaluate the few-shot ability of LMs
when such held-out examples are unavailable, a setting we call true few-shot
learning . We test two model selection criteria, cross-validation and minimum
description length, for choosing LM prompts and hyperparameters in the true
few-shot setting. On average, both marginally outperform random selection and
greatly underperform selection based on held-out examples. Moreover, selection
criteria often prefer models that perform signiﬁcantly worse than randomly-selected
ones. We ﬁnd similar results even when taking into account our uncertainty in a
model’s true performance during selection, as well as when varying the amount
of computation and number of examples used for selection. Overall, our ﬁndings
suggest that prior work signiﬁcantly overestimated the true few-shot ability of LMs
given the difﬁculty of few-shot model selection.
1 Introduction
Major progress in language model (LM) pretraining has led to the idea that LMs can learn a new task
using a small number of examples only, i.e., few-shot learning [ 1–3]. Few-shot learning overcomes
many challenges with data-rich supervised learning: collecting labeled data is expensive, often
requires experts, and scales poorly with the number of tasks. However, the few-shot performance of
LMs is very sensitive to the textual task description [“prompt”; 3–6], order of training examples [ 6–8],
decoding strategy [ 9,10], and other hyperparameters [ 3,5,9,11,12], as well as the learning algorithm
itself [3, 12]. Thus, effective model selection is crucial for obtaining good few-shot performance.
There are issues with how recent work approaches model selection in few-shot learning, however.
Prior work uses large train or held-out sets with many examples to choose prompts [ 2,12,13] and
hyperparameters [ 12]. Other work claims to use no validation set for hyperparameter selection [ 3,
11,14] but does not describe how they design other aspects of their learning algorithm (e.g., training
objectives). It is unlikely that no validation examples were used, given the sophisticated nature of the
proposed algorithms. In this work, we examine if prior few-shot learning methods still perform well
when using only the provided examples for model selection, a setting we term true few-shot learning .
We ﬁnd that true few-shot model selection yields prompts that marginally outperform random selection
and greatly underperform selection based on held-out examples. Our result shows that prior work
may have greatly overestimated the few-shot ability of LMs. In other words, one reason that prompts
are so effective [“worth many examples”; 15] is that they are often tuned using many examples. We
evaluate two standard model selection criteria – cross-validation (CV) and minimum description
length (MDL) – ﬁnding that both obtain only limited improvements over random selection and
perform much worse than selection using held-out examples. For prompt selection, our observation
holds for 9 LMs ranging over 3 orders of magnitude in size [ 1,2,16] on 3 classiﬁcation tasks and 41
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).