Spectral, Probabilistic, and Deep Metric Learning: Tutorial and Survey 29
Figure 4. The structure of Siamese network with (a) two and (b) three sub-networks.
5.3.2. P AIRS AND TRIPLETS OF DATA POINTS
Depending on the number of sub-networks in the Siamese
network, we have loss functions for training. The loss func-
tions of Siamese networks usually require pairs or triplets
of data points. Siamese networks do not use the data points
one by one but we need to make pairs or triplets of points
out of dataset for training a Siamese network. For mak-
ing the pairs or triplets, we consider every data point as the
anchor point, denoted by xa
i. Then, we take one of the sim-
ilar points to the anchor point as the positive (or neighbor)
point, denoted by xp
i. We also take one of the dissimilar
points to the anchor point as the negative (or distant) point,
denoted byxn
i. If class labels are available, we can use
them to ﬁnd the positive point as one of the points in the
same class as the anchor point, and to ﬁnd the the nega-
tive point as one of the points in a different class from the
anchor point’s class. Another approach is to augment the
anchor point, using one of the augmentation methods, to
obtain a positive points for the anchor point (Khodadadeh
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020).
For Siamese networks with two sub-networks, we make
pairs of anchor-positive points f(xa
i;xp
i)gnt
i=1and anchor-
negative pointsf(xa
i;xn
i)gnt
i=1, wherentis the num-
ber of pairs. For Siamese networks with three sub-
networks, we make triplets of anchor-positive-negative
pointsf(xa
i;xp
i;xn
i)gnt
i=1, wherentis the number of
triplets. If we consider every point of dataset as an anchor,
the number of pairs/triplets is the same as the number of
data points, i.e., nt=n.
Various loss functions of Siamese networks use pairs or
triplets of data points to push the positive point towards
the anchor point and pull the negative point away from it.
Doing this iteratively for all pairs or triplets will make the
intra-class variances smaller and the inter-class varianceslarger for better discrimination of classes or clusters. Later
in the following, we introduce some of the loss functions
for training a Siamese network.
5.3.3. I MPLEMENTATION OF SIAMESE NETWORKS
A Siamese network with two and three sub-networks is de-
picted in Fig. 4. We denote the output of Siamese network
for inputx2Rdbyf(x)2Rpwherepis the dimensional-
ity of embedding (or the number of neurons at the last layer
of the network) which is usually much less than the dimen-
sionality of data, i.e., pd. Note that the sub-networks
of a Siamese network can be any fully-connected or convo-
lutional network depending on the type of data. The used
network structure for the sub-networks is usually called the
backbone network.
The weights of sub-networks are shared in the sense that
the values of their weights are equal. Implementation of a
Siamese network can be done in two ways:
1. We can implement several sub-networks in the mem-
ory. In the training phase, we feed every data point
in the pairs or triplets to one of the sub-networks and
take the outputs of sub-networks to have f(xa
i),f(xp
i),
andf(xn
i). We use these in the loss function and up-
date the weights of only one of the sub-networks by
backpropagation (Ghojogh et al., 2021c). Then, we
copy the updated weights to the other sub-networks.
We repeat this for all mini-batches and epochs until
convergence. In the test phase, we feed the test point
xto only one of the sub-networks and get the output
f(x)as its embedding.
2. We can implement only one sub-network in the mem-
ory. In the training phase, we feed the data points in
the pairs or triplets to the sub-network ont by one and
take the outputs of sub-network to have f(xa
i),f(xp
i),