To appear as a part of an upcoming textbook on dimensionality reduction and manifold learning.
Spectral, Probabilistic, and Deep Metric Learning: Tutorial and Survey
Benyamin Ghojogh BGHOJOGH @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Ali Ghodsi ALI.GHODSI @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science & David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science,
Data Analytics Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Fakhri Karray KARRAY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Centre for Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Mark Crowley MCROWLEY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
This is a tutorial and survey paper on metric
learning. Algorithms are divided into spectral,
probabilistic, and deep metric learning. We ﬁrst
start with the deﬁnition of distance metric, Ma-
halanobis distance, and generalized Mahalanobis
distance. In spectral methods, we start with
methods using scatters of data, including the
ﬁrst spectral metric learning, relevant methods to
Fisher discriminant analysis, Relevant Compo-
nent Analysis (RCA), Discriminant Component
Analysis (DCA), and the Fisher-HSIC method.
Then, large-margin metric learning, imbalanced
metric learning, locally linear metric adapta-
tion, and adversarial metric learning are covered.
We also explain several kernel spectral methods
for metric learning in the feature space. We
also introduce geometric metric learning meth-
ods on the Riemannian manifolds. In probabilis-
tic methods, we start with collapsing classes in
both input and feature spaces and then explain
the neighborhood component analysis methods,
Bayesian metric learning, information theoretic
methods, and empirical risk minimization in met-
ric learning. In deep learning methods, we ﬁrst
introduce reconstruction autoencoders and super-
vised loss functions for metric learning. Then,Siamese networks and its various loss functions,
triplet mining, and triplet sampling are explained.
Deep discriminant analysis methods, based on
Fisher discriminant analysis, are also reviewed.
Finally, we introduce multi-modal deep metric
learning, geometric metric learning by neural
networks, and few-shot metric learning.
1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction and manifold learning are used
for feature extraction from raw data. A family of dimen-
sionality reduction methods is metric learning which learns
a distance metric or an embedding space for separation of
dissimilar points and closeness of similar points. In su-
pervised metric learning, we aim to discriminate classes
by learning an appropriate metric. Dimensionality reduc-
tion methods can be divided into spectral, probabilistic,
and deep methods (Ghojogh, 2021). Spectral methods
have a geometrical approach and usually are reduced to
generalized eigenvalue problems (Ghojogh et al., 2019a).
Probabilistic methods are based on probability distribu-
tions. Deep methods use neural network for learning. In
each of these categories, there exist several metric learn-
ing methods. In this paper, we review and introduce the
most important metric learning algorithms in these cate-
gories. Note that there exist some other surveys on met-
ric learning such as (Yang & Jin, 2006; Yang, 2007; Kulis,
2013; Bellet et al., 2013; Wang & Sun, 2015; Su ´arez et al.,
2021). A survey speciﬁc to deep metric learning is (Kaya
& Bilge, 2019). A book on metric learning is (Bellet et al.,arXiv:2201.09267v1  [stat.ML]  23 Jan 2022