Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network
Chuxu Zhang
University of Notre Dame
czhang11@nd.eduDongjin Song
NEC Laboratories America, Inc.
dsong@nec-labs.comChao Huang
University of Notre Dame, JD Digits
chuang7@nd.edu
Ananthram Swami
US Army Research Laboratory
ananthram.swami.civ@mail.milNitesh V. Chawla
University of Notre Dame
nchawla@nd.edu
ABSTRACT
Representation learning in heterogeneous graphs aims to pursue
a meaningful vector representation for each node so as to facili-
tate downstream applications such as link prediction, personalized
recommendation, node classification, etc. This task, however, is
challenging not only because of the demand to incorporate het-
erogeneous structural (graph) information consisting of multiple
types of nodes and edges, but also due to the need for considering
heterogeneous attributes or contents ( e.д., text or image) associ-
ated with each node. Despite a substantial amount of effort has
been made to homogeneous (or heterogeneous) graph embedding,
attributed graph embedding as well as graph neural networks, few
of them can jointly consider heterogeneous structural (graph) infor-
mation as well as heterogeneous contents information of each node
effectively. In this paper, we propose HetGNN, a heterogeneous
graph neural network model, to resolve this issue. Specifically, we
first introduce a random walk with restart strategy to sample a
fixed size of strongly correlated heterogeneous neighbors for each
node and group them based upon node types. Next, we design a
neural network architecture with two modules to aggregate feature
information of those sampled neighboring nodes. The first module
encodes “deep” feature interactions of heterogeneous contents and
generates content embedding for each node. The second module
aggregates content (attribute) embeddings of different neighboring
groups (types) and further combines them by considering the im-
pacts of different groups to obtain the ultimate node embedding.
Finally, we leverage a graph context loss and a mini-batch gradient
descent procedure to train the model in an end-to-end manner. Ex-
tensive experiments on several datasets demonstrate that HetGNN
can outperform state-of-the-art baselines in various graph mining
tasks, i.e., link prediction, recommendation, node classification &
clustering and inductive node classification & clustering.
KEYWORDS
Heterogeneous graphs, Graph neural networks, Graph embedding
ACM Reference Format:
Chuxu Zhang, Dongjin Song, Chao Huang, Ananthram Swami, and Nitesh
V. Chawla. 2019. Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network. In The 25th ACM
Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM acknowledges that this contribution was
authored or co-authored by an employee, contractor or affiliate of the United States
government. As such, the Government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to
publish or reproduce this article, or to allow others to do so, for Government purposes
only.
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
©2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6201-6/19/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330961SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’19),
August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330961
1 INTRODUCTION
Heterogeneous graphs (HetG) [ 26,27] contain abundant informa-
tion with structural relations (edges) among multi-typed nodes as
well as unstructured content associated with each node. For in-
stance, the academic graph in Fig. 1(a) denotes relations between
authors and papers (write), papers and papers (cite), papers and
venues (publish), etc. Moreover, nodes in this graph carry attributes
(e.д., author id) and text ( e.д., paper abstract). Another example
illustrates user-item relations in the review graph and nodes are
associated with attributes ( e.д., user id), text ( e.д., item description)
and image ( e.д., item picture). This ubiquity of HetG has led to an
influx of research on corresponding graph mining methods and
algorithms such as relation inference [ 2,25,33,35], personalized
recommendation [10, 23], node classification [36], etc.
Traditionally, a variety of these HetG tasks have relied on fea-
ture vectors derived from a manual feature engineering tasks. This
requires specifications and computation of different statistics or
properties about the HetG as a feature vector for downstream ma-
chine learning or analytic tasks. However, this can be very limiting
and not generalizable. More recently, there has been an emergence
of representation learning approaches to automate the feature engi-
neering tasks, which can then facilitate a multitude of downstream
machine learning or analytic tasks. Beginning with homogeneous
graphs [ 6,20,29], graph representation learning has been expanded
to heterogeneous graphs [ 1,4], attributed graphs [ 15,34] as well
as specific graphs [ 22,28]. For instance, the “shallow” models, e.д.,
DeepWalk [ 20], were initially developed to feed a set of short ran-
dom walks over the graph to the SkipGram model [ 19] so as to
approximate the node co-occurrence probability in these walks
and obtain node embeddings. Subsequently, semantic-aware ap-
proaches, e.д., metapath2vec [ 4], were proposed to address node
and relation heterogeneity in heterogeneous graphs. In addition,
content-aware approaches, e.д., ASNE [ 15], leveraged both “latent”
features and attributes to learn node embeddings in the graph.
These methods learn node “latent” embeddings directly, but are
limited in capturing the rich neighborhood information. The Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) employ deep neural networks to aggre-
gate feature information of neighboring nodes, which makes the
aggregated embedding more powerful. In addition, the GNNs can
be naturally applied to inductive tasks involving nodes that are not
present in the training period. For instance, GCN [ 12], GraphSAGE
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
793