including link prediction, recommendation, node classification &
clustering, and inductive node classification & clustering.
2 PROBLEM DEFINITION
In this section, we introduce the concept of content-associated het-
erogeneous graphs that will be used in the paper and then formally
define the problem of heterogeneous graph representation learning.
Definition 2.1. Content-associated Heterogeneous Graphs .
A content associated heterogeneous graph (C-HetG) is defined as
a graph G=(V,E,OV,RE)with multiple types of nodes Vand
links E.OVandRErepresent the set of object types and that of
relation types, respectively. In addition, each node is associated
with heterogeneous contents, e.д., attributes, text, or image.
The academic graph in Figure 1(a) is a C-HetG. The node types
OVincludes author, paper andvenue. The link types REincludes
author-write-paper, paper-cite-paper andpaper-publish-venue. Be-
sides, the author or venue node is associated with paper abstract
written by the author or included in the venue, and the paper node
contains abstract, references, as well as venue. The bipartite review
graph in Figure 1(a) is also C-HetG as |OV|+|RE|≥3, where OV
includes user and item, the relation REindicates review behavior.
The user node is associated with review that is written by the user
and the item node contains title, description, and picture.
Problem 1. Heterogeneous Graph Representation Learning .
Given a C-HetG G=(V,E,OV,RE)with node content set C,
the task is to design a model FΘwith parameters Θto learn d-
dimensional embeddings E ∈R|V|×d(d≪|V|)that are able to
encode both heterogeneous structural closeness and heterogeneous
unstructured contents among them. The node embeddings can
be utilized in various graph mining tasks, such as link prediction,
recommendation, multi-labels classification, and node clustering.
3 HetGNN
In this section, we formally present HetGNN to resolve those three
challenges described in Section 1. HetGNN consists of four parts:
(1) sampling heterogeneous neighbors; (2) encoding node hetero-
geneous contents; (3) aggregating heterogeneous neighbors; (4)
formulating the objective and designing model training procedure.
Figure 2 illustrates the framework of HetGNN.
3.1 Sampling Heterogeneous Neighbors (C1)
The key idea of most graph neural networks (GNNs) is to aggregate
feature information from a node’s direct (first-order) neighbors,
such as GraphSAGE [ 7] or GAT [ 31]. However, directly applying
these approaches to heterogeneous graphs may raise several issues:
•They cannot directly capture feature information from different
types of neighbors. For example, authors do not directly connect
to local authors and venue neighbors in Fig. 1(a), which could
lead to insufficient representation.
•They are weakened by various neighbor sizes. Some author writes
many papers while some only have few papers in the academic
graph. Some items are reviewed by many users while some receive
few feedbacks in the review graph. The embedding of “hub” node
could be impaired by weakly correlated neighbors and “cold-start”
node embedding may not be sufficiently represented.•They are not suitable for aggregating heterogeneous neighbors
which have different content features. Heterogeneous neighbors
may require different feature transformations to deal with differ-
ent feature types and dimensions.
In light of these issues and to solve the challenge C1, we design a
heterogeneous neighbors sampling strategy based on random walk
with restart (RWR). It contains two consecutive steps:
•Step-1: Sampling fixed length RWR. We start a random walk
from node v∈V. The walk iteratively travels to the neighbors
of current node or returns to the starting node with a probabil-
ityp. RWR runs until it successfully collects a fixed number of
nodes, denoted as RWR (v). Note that numbers of different types
of nodes in RWR(v)are constrained to ensure that all node types
are sampled for v.
•Step-2: Grouping different types of neighbors. For each node type
t, we select top ktnodes from RWR(v)according to frequency
and take them as the set of t-type correlated neighbors of node v.
This strategy is able to avoid the aforementioned issues due to: (1)
RWR collects all types of neighbors for each node; (2) the sampled
neighbor size of each node is fixed and the most frequently visited
neighbors are selected; (3) neighbors of the same type (having the
same content features) are grouped such that type-based aggre-
gation can be deployed. Next, we design a heterogeneous graph
neural network architecture with two modules to aggregate feature
information of the sampled heterogeneous neighbors for each node.
3.2 Encoding Heterogeneous Contents (C2)
To solve the challenge C2, we design a module to extract hetero-
geneous contentsCvfrom node v∈Vand encode them as a fixed
size embedding via a neural network f1. Specifically, we denote
the feature representation of i-th content inCvasxi∈Rdf×1
(df: content feature dimension). Note that xican be pre-trained
using different techniques w.r.t.different types of contents. For
example, we can utilize Par2Vec [ 13] to pre-train text content or
employ CNNs [ 17] to pre-train image content. Unlike the previous
models [ 7,31] that concatenate different content features directly
or linearly transform them into an unified vector, we design a new
architecture based on bi-directional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) [ 9] to capture
“deep” feature interactions and obtain larger expressive capability.
Formally, the content embedding of vis computed as follows:
f1(v)=Í
i∈Cvh−−−−−→LST M
FCθx(xi)	É←−−−−−LST M
FCθx(xi)	i
|Cv|
(1)
where f1(v) ∈Rd×1(d: content embedding dimension), FCθx
denotes feature transformer which can be identity (no transforma-
tion), fully connected neural network with parameter θx,etc. The
operatorÉdenotes concatenation. The LSTM is formulated as:
zi=σ(UzFCθx(xi)+Wzhi−1+bz)
fi=σ(UfFCθx(xi)+Wfhi−1+bf)
oi=σ(UoFCθx(xi)+Wohi−1+bo)
ˆci=tanh(U cFCθx(xi)+Wchi−1+bc)
ci=fi◦ci−1+zi◦ˆci
hi=tanh(c i)◦oi(2)
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
795