3.3.2 Types Combination.
The previous step generates |OV|(OV: set of node types in the
graph) aggregated embeddings for node v. To combine these type-
based neighbor embeddings with v’s content embedding, we em-
ploy the attention mechanism [ 31]. The motivation is that different
types of neighbors will make different contributions to the final
representation of v. Thus the output embedding is formulated as:
Ev=αv,vf1(v)+Õ
t∈OVαv,tft
2(v)(5)
whereEv∈Rd×1(d: output embedding dimension), αv,∗indicates
the importance of different embeddings, f1(v)is the content em-
bedding of vobtained from Section 3.2, ft
2(v)is the type-based
aggregated embedding obtained from Section 3.3. We denote the
set of embeddings as F(v)=
f1(v)Ð(ft
2(v),t∈OV)	and re-
formulate the output embedding of vas:
Ev=Õ
fi∈F(v)αv,ifi
αv,i=exp
LeakyReLU(uT[fiÉf1(v)])	
Í
fj∈F(v)exp
LeakyReLU(uT[fjÉf1(v)])	(6)
where LeakyReLU denotes leaky version of a Rectified Linear Unit,
u∈R2d×1is the attention parameter. Figure 2(c) gives the illustra-
tion of this step.
In this framework, to make embedding dimension consistent
and model tuning easy, we use the same dimension dfor content
embedding in Section 3.2, aggregated content embedding in Section
3.3, and output node embedding in Section 3.3.
3.4 Objective and Model Training
To perform heterogeneous graph representation learning, we define
the following objective with parameters Θ:
o1=arg max
ΘÖ
v∈VÖ
t∈OVÖ
vc∈CNtvp(vc|v;Θ)(7)
where CNtvis the set of t-type context nodes of vsuch first/second
order neighbors [ 29] in the graph or local neighbors in short random
walks [ 20]. The conditional probability p(vc|v;Θ)is defined as the
heterogeneous softmax function:
p(vc|v;Θ)=exp
Evc·Ev	
Í
vk∈Vtexp
Evk·Ev	,Ev=FΘ(v) (8)
where Vtis the set of t-type nodes in the graph, Evis the output
node embedding formulated by the proposed graph neural network
Eq. (6) with all neural network parameters Θ. We leverage the
negative sampling technique (NS) [ 19] to optimize the objective
o1in Eq. (7). Specifically, by applying NS to the construction of
softmax function in Eq. (8), we can approximate the logarithm of
p(vc|v;Θ)as:
logσ(Evc·Ev)+MÕ
m=1Evc′∼Pt(vc′)logσ(−Evc′·Ev) (9)
where Mis the negative sample size and Pt(vc′)is the pre-defined
noise distribution w.r.t.thet-type nodes. In this model, we set M=1as it makes little impact when M>1. Thus Eq. (9) degenerates to
the cross entropy loss:
logσ(Evc·Ev)+logσ(−Evc′·Ev) (10)
In other words, for each context node vcofv, we sample a negative
nodevc′according to Pt(vc′). Therefore, we can reformulate the
objective o1in Eq. (7) as follows:
o2=Õ
⟨v,vc,vc′⟩∈Twalklogσ(Evc·Ev)+logσ(−Evc′·Ev)(11)
where Twalk denotes the set of triplets ⟨v,vc,vc′⟩collected by walk
sampling on the graph. Similar to DeepWalk [ 20], we employ the
random walk to generate Twalk . Specifically, first, we uniformly
generate a set of random walks Sin the heterogeneous graph. Then,
for each node vin a walk Si∈S, we collect context node vcwhich
satisfies: dist(v,vc) ≤τ,i.e.,vcis within distance τtovinSi.
Finally, for each vc, we sample a negative node vc′with the same
node type of vcaccording to Pt(vc′)∝dд3/4
vc′, where dдvc′is the
frequency of vc′inS. To optimize the model parameters of HetGNN,
at each iteration, we first sample a mini-batch of triplets in Twalk
and accumulate the objective according to Eq. (11). Then, we update
the model parameters via the Adam optimizer [ 11]. We repeat
the training iterations until the change between two consecutive
iterations is sufficiently small (see Section A.1 in supplement for
a pseudocode of this training procedure). With the learned model
parameters, we can infer node representations Efor various graph
mining tasks, as we will show in Section 4.
4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments with the aim of
answering the following research questions:
•(RQ1 ) How does HetGNN perform vs.state-of-the-art baselines
for various graph mining tasks, such as link prediction ( RQ1-1 ),
personalized recommendation ( RQ1-2 ), and node classification
& clustering (RQ1-3)?
•(RQ2 ) How does HetGNN perform vs.state-of-the-art baselines
for inductive graph mining tasks, such as inductive node classifi-
cation & clustering?
•(RQ3 ) How do different components, e.д., node heterogeneous
contents encoder or heterogeneous neighbors aggregator, affect
the model performance?
•(RQ4 ) How do various hyper-parameters, e.д., embedding dimen-
sion or the size of sampled heterogeneous neighbors set, impact
the model performance?
4.1 Experiment Design
4.1.1 Datasets.
We use four datasets of two kinds of HetG: academic graph and
review graph. For the academic graph, we extract two datasets,
i.e., A-I contains papers between year 1996 and 2005 and A-II con-
tains papers between year 2006 and 2015), from the public AMiner
[30] data1. For the review graph, we extract two datasets, i.e., R-I
(Movies category) and R-II (CDs category), from the public Amazon
[8] data2. The main statistics of four datasets are summarized in
1https://aminer.org/data
2http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/index.html
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
797