A SUPPLEMENT
A.1 Pseudocode of HetGNN Training
Procedure
The pseudocode of HetGNN training procedure is described in
Algorithm 1. The content features are pre-trained by different tech-
niques and Twalk is collected by random walk sampling in graph
(Section 3.4). After training, the optimized model parameters Θcan
be utilized to infer node embeddings Ewhich can be further used
in various graph mining tasks.
A.2 Dataset Description
We use four datasets of two types of heterogeneous graphs: aca-
demic graph and review graph. For the academic graph, we extract
two datasets from the public AMiner [ 30] data5. The first one (rep-
resented as A-I) contains publications information of the major
computer science venues from year 1996 to 2005. In addition, con-
sidering most of researchers pay attention to papers published in
top venues, we extract the second one (represented as A-II) which
includes publications in a number of selected top venues6related to
artificial intelligence and data science from year 2006 to 2015. Each
paper has various bibliographic content information: title, abstract,
authors, references, year, venue. For the review graph, we extract
two datasets from the public Amazon [ 8] data (Movies category
and CDs category)7. The dataset contains user review and item
metadata from Amazon spanning from 05/1996 to 07/2014. Each
item has various content information: title, description, genre, price,
and picture.
A.3 Baseline Description
We use five baseline methods which include heterogeneous graph
and attributed graph embedding models, as well as graph neural
network models.
•metapath2vec [4]: It is a heterogeneous graph embedding model
which leverages metapath guided walks and Skip-gram model to
learn node embeddings.
•ASNE [15]: It is an attributed graph embedding method that uses
both node “latent” features and attributed features to learn node
embeddings.
•SHNE [34]: It jointly optimizes graph structure closeness and text
semantic correlation to learn node embedding in text-associated
heterogeneous graphs.
•GraphSAGE [7]: It is a graph neural network model that ag-
gregates feature information of neighbors by different neural
networks, such as LSTM.
•GAT [31]: It is a graph attention network model that aggregates
neighbors’ feature information by self-attention neural network.
A.4 Reproducibility Settings
The detailed settings for reproducing experiments in this work
include:
5https://aminer.org/data
6ICML, AAAI, IJCAI, CVPR, ICCV, ECCV, ACL, EMNLP, NAACL, KDD, WSDM, ICDM,
SIGMOD, VLDB, ICDE, WWW, SIGIR, CIKM.
7http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/index.htmlAlgorithm 1: Training Procedure of HetGNN
input : pre-trained content features of v∈V, triplets set Twalk
output : optimized model parameters Θ(for inferring node
embeddingsE)
1while not done do
2 sample a batch of(v,vc,vc′)inTwalk
3 formulate embeddings of v,vc, andvc′by Eq. (6)
4 accumulate the objective by Eq. (11)
5 update the parameters Θby Adam
6end
7return optimized Θ
•Hyper-parameters. The embedding dimension of HetGNN is
set to 128. In Section 3.1, the return probability of RWR is set to
0.5 and the length of RWR for node v∈V(|RWR(v)|) equals 100.
The size of sampled neighbors set for each node equals 23 and
20 in academic data and review data, respectively. To be more
specific, sizes of different neighbor groups (types) are 10 (author),
10 (paper), 3 (venue) in academic data, and 10 (user), 10 (item) in
review data. In addition, we use random walk sampling to get
the triplets set Twalk of the graph context loss in Section 3.4. The
number of random walks rooted at each node equals 10, the walk
length is set to 30, the window distance τequals 5 for both data.
•Content features. In academic data, we use Par2Vec [ 19] to pre-
train paper title and abstract contents. Besides, the DeepWalk
[20] is employed to pre-train embeddings of author, paper, venue
nodes based on the academic heterogeneous graph. The author
node is associated with pre-trained author embedding, average
abstract and title embeddings of some sampled papers that are
written by the author. Thus the Bi-LSTM length of author con-
tent encoder equals 3. The paper node carries pre-trained paper
embedding, title embedding, abstract embedding, average of its
authors’ pre-trained embeddings, and pre-trained embeddings
of its venue. Therefore, the Bi-LSTM length of paper content
encoder is 5. The venue node contains pre-trained venue em-
bedding, average abstract and title embeddings of some sampled
papers that are included in the venue. In other words, the Bi-
LSTM length of venue content encoder equals 3. In review data,
we use Par2Vec to pre-train item title and description content.
The CNN [ 17] is utilized to pre-train item image (picture). Besides,
DeepWalk is employed to get pre-trained embeddings of user and
item nodes based on user-item review graph. The user node is
associated with pre-trained user embedding, average description
and image embeddings of items that are reviewed by the user.
Thus the Bi-LSTM length of user content encoder is 3. Besides,
the item node includes pre-trained item embedding, description
embedding, and image embedding. In other words, the Bi-LSTM
length of item content encoder equals 3.
•Baseline settings. For fair comparison, the embedding dimen-
siondof all baselines are set to 128 (same as HetGNN). For MP2V,
we employ three metapaths, i.e., APA (author-paper-author),
APVPA (author-paper-venue-paper-author) and APPA (author-
paper-paper-author), and one metapath, i.e., UIU (user-item-user),
in academic and review data, respectively. Besides, the number
of walks rooted at each node equals 10 and the walk length is
set to 30 (same as the training procedure of HetGNN). For ASNE,
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
802