neighborssamplingtype-basedneighbors
imagetextattributes
attributes
featureextraction
featuresaggregationNN-1neighborsaggregation
GraphContextLosstypesmixtureNN-2NN-3NN-1NN-2NN-3attributestext(a)
(b)(c)(d)attributestextimage
par2vecCNN.	.	.		one-hot.	.	.		BiLSTMBiLSTMBiLSTMMeanPoolingcontentfeaturespre-trainfeaturesaggregationBiLSTMBiLSTMBiLSTMMeanPoolingnodeheterogeneouscontentsencodingsametypeneighborsaggregationtypesmixturewithattentiontype-1type-2
.	.	.		.	.	.		.	.	.		.	.	.		.	.	.		.	.	.		selftype-K+++++.	.	.		!"!#!$!%.	.	.		type-baseneighborsKtypesneighborsa
ℱ'ℱ'ℱ'ℱ'aaFigure 2: (a) The overall architecture of HetGNN: it first samples fix sized heterogeneous neighbors for each node (node ain this
case), next encodes each node content embedding via NN-1, then aggregates content embeddings of the sampled heterogeneous
neighbors through NN-2 and NN-3, finally optimizes the model via a graph context loss; (b) NN-1: node heterogeneous contents
encoder; (c) NN-2: type-based neighbors aggregator; (d) NN-3: heterogeneous types combination.
where hi∈R(d/2)×1is the output hidden state of i-th content,◦
denotes Hadamard product, Uj∈R(d/2)×df,Wj∈R(d/2)×( d/2),
and bj∈R(d/2)×1(j∈{z,f,o,c}) are learnable parameters, zi,fi,
and oiare forget gate vector, input gate vector, and output gate
vector of i-th content feature, respectively. To be more specific,
the above architecture first uses different FClayers to transform
different content features, then employs the Bi-LSTM to capture
“deep” feature interactions and accumulate expression capability
of all content features, and finally utilizes a mean pooling layer
over all hidden states to obtain the general content embedding of
v, as illustrated in Figure 2(b). Note that the Bi-LSTM operates on
an unordered content set Cv, which is inspired by previous work
[7] for aggregating unordered neighbors. Besides, we use different
Bi-LSTMs to aggregate content features for different types of nodes
as their contents vary from each other.
There are three main advantages for this encoding architecture:
(1) it has concise structures with relative low complexity (less pa-
rameters), making the model implementation and tuning relatively
easy; (2) it is capable to fuse the heterogeneous contents informa-
tion, leading to a strong expression capability; (3) it is flexible to add
extra content features, making the model extension convenient.
3.3 Aggregating Heterogeneous Neighbors (C3)
To aggregate content embeddings (obtained from Section 3.2) of
heterogeneous neighbors for each node and solve the challenge
C3, we design another module which is a type-based neural net-
work. It includes two consecutive steps: (1) same type neighbors
aggregation; (2) types combination.3.3.1 Same Type Neighbors Aggregation.
In Section 3.1, we use RWR based strategy to sample fixed size
neighbor sets of different node types for each node. Accordingly,
we denote the t-type sampled neighbor set of v∈VasNt(v). Then,
we employ a neural network ft
2to aggregate content embeddings of
v′∈Nt(v). Formally, the aggregated t-type neighbors embedding
forvis formulated as follows:
ft
2(v)=AGt
v′∈Nt(v)
f1(v′)	
(3)
where ft
2(v)∈Rd×1(d: aggregated content embedding dimension),
f1(v′)is the content embedding of v′generated by the module in
Section 3.2,AGtis the t-type neighbors aggregator which can
be fully connected neural network, convolutional neural network,
recurrent neural network, etc. In this work, we use the Bi-LSTM
since it yields better performance in practise. Thus we re-formulate
ft
2(v)as follows:
ft
2(v)=Í
v′∈Nt(v)h−−−−−→LST M
f1(v′)	É←−−−−−LST M
f1(v′)	i
|Nt(v)|(4)
where LSTM module has the same formulation as Eq. (2) except
input and parameter set. Obviously, we employ Bi-LSTM to ag-
gregate content embeddings of all t-type neighbors and use the
average over all hidden states to represent the general aggregated
embedding, as illustrated in Figure 2(c). We use different Bi-LSTMs
to distinguish different node types for neighbors aggregation. Note
that the Bi-LSTM operates on an unordered neighbors set, which is
inspired by GraphSAGE [7].
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
796