attributestext
.	.	.		
image.	.	.		
attributesimage.	.	.		
text
heterogeneousgraphtype-1type-2type-kC1C2C3...abcdefg(b)(a)paperauthorvenue
a1a2
a3a4v1v2p1p2p3p4itemuser
i1i2i3i4u1u2u3u4academicgraphreviewgraphFigure 1: (a) HetG examples: an academic graph and a review
graph. (b) Challenges of graph neural network for HetG: C1
- sampling heterogeneous neighbors (for node ain this case,
node colors denote different types); C2 - encoding heteroge-
neous contents; C3 - aggregating heterogeneous neighbors.
[7], and GAT [ 31] employ convolutional operator, LSTM architec-
ture, and self-attention mechanism to aggregate feature information
of neighboring nodes, respectively. The advances and applications
of GNNs are largely concentrated on homogeneous graphs. Current
state-of-the-art GNNs have not well solved the following challenges
faced for HetG, which we address in this paper.
•(C1) Many nodes in HetG may not connect to all types of neigh-
bors. In addition, the number of neighboring nodes varies from
node to node. For example, in Figure 1(a), any author node has
no direct connection to a venue node. Meanwhile, in Figure 1(b),
node ahas 5 direct neighbors while node conly has 2. Most
existing GNNs only aggregate feature information of direct (first-
order) neighboring nodes and the feature propagation process
may weaken the effect of farther neighbors. Moreover, the embed-
ding generation of “hub” node is impaired by weakly correlated
neighbors (“noise” neighbors) and the embedding of “cold-start”
node is not sufficiently represented due to limited neighbor infor-
mation. Thus challenge 1 is: how to sample heterogeneous neighbors
that are strongly correlated to embedding generation for each node
in HetG, as indicated by C1 in Figure 1(b)?
•(C2) A node in HetG can carry unstructured heterogeneous con-
tents, e.д., attributes, text or image. In addition, content associated
with different types of nodes can be different. For example, in
Figure 1(b), type-1 nodes ( e.д.,borc) contain attributes and text
content, type-2 nodes ( e.д.,forд) carry attributes and image,
type-k nodes ( e.д.,dore) are associated with text and image.
The direct concatenation operation or linear transformation by
the current GNNs cannot model “deep” interactions among node
heterogeneous contents. Moreover, it is not applicable to use theTable 1: Model comparison: (1) RL - representation learning?
(2) HG - heterogeneous graph? (3) C - content aware? (4) HC
- heterogeneous contents aware? (5) I - inductive inference?
PropertyDW MP2V ASNE SHNE GSAGE GATHetGNN[20] [4] [15] [34] [7] [31]
RL ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
HG ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
C ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
HC ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
I ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
same feature transformation function for all node types as their
contents vary from each other. Thus challenge 2 is: how to de-
sign node content encoder for addressing content heterogeneity of
different nodes in HetG, as indicated by C2 in Figure 1(b)?
•(C3) Different types of neighbors contribute differently to the
node embeddings in HetG. For example, in the academic graph
of Figure 1(a), author and paper neighbors should have more
influence on the embedding of author node as a venue node
contains diverse topics thus has more general embedding. Most
of current GNNs mainly focus on homogeneous graphs and do not
consider node type impact. Thus challenge 3 is: how to aggregate
feature information of heterogeneous neighbors by considering the
impacts of different node types, as indicated by C3 in Figure 1(b).
To solve these challenges, we propose HetGNN, a heterogeneous
graph neural network model for representation learning in HetG.
First, we design a random walk with restart based strategy to sample
fixed size strongly correlated heterogeneous neighbors of each
node in HetG and group them according to node types. Next, we
design a heterogeneous graph neural network architecture with two
modules to aggregate feature information of sampled neighbors in
previous step. The first module employs recurrent neural network
to encode “deep” feature interactions of heterogeneous contents
and obtains content embedding of each node. The second module
utilizes another recurrent neural network to aggregate content
embeddings of different neighboring groups, which are further
combined by an attention mechanism for measuring the different
impacts of heterogeneous node types and obtaining the ultimate
node embedding. Finally, we leverage a graph context loss and
a mini-batch gradient descent procedure to train the model. To
summarize, the main contributions of our work are:
•We formalize the problem of heterogeneous graph representation
learning which involves both graph structure heterogeneity and
node content heterogeneity.
•We propose an innovative heterogeneous graph neural network
model, i.e., HetGNN, for representation learning on HetG. Het-
GNN is able to capture both structure and content heterogeneity
and is useful for both transductive and inductive tasks. Table 1
summarizes the key advantages of HetGNN, comparing to a num-
ber of recent models which include homogeneous, heterogeneous,
attributed graph models, and graph neural network models.
•We conduct extensive experiments on several public datasets and
our results demonstrate the superior performance of HetGNN
over state-of-the-art baselines for numerous graph mining tasks
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
794