Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 12 of 22
instance-based contrastive approach, they utilize a clustering algorithm to group similar
features together.
One of the most recent works that employ clustering methods, SwAV [ 13], is repre-
sented in Figure 14. The diagram points out the differences between other instance-based
contrastive learning architectures and the clustering-based methods. Here, the goal is not
only to make a pair of samples close to each other but also, make sure that all other features
that are similar to each other form clusters together. For example, in an embedded space of
images, the features of cats should be closer to the features of dogs (as both are animals)
but should be far from the features of houses (as both are distinct).
Figure 14. Conventional contrastive instance learning vs. contrastive clustering of feature representa-
tions in SwAV [13].
In instance-based learning, every sample is treated as a discrete class in the dataset.
This makes it unreliable in conditions where it compares an input sample against other
samples from the same class that the original sample belongs to. To explain it clearly,
imagine we have an image of a cat in the training batch that is the current input to
the model. During this pass, all other images in the batch are considered as negative.
The issue arises when there are images of other cats in the negative samples. This condition
forces the model to learn two images of cats as not similar during training despite both
being from the same class. This problem is implicitly addressed by a clustering-based
approach.
4. Encoders
Encoders play an integral role in any self-supervised learning pipeline as they are
responsible for mapping the input samples to a latent space. Figure 15 reﬂects the role of
an encoder in a self-supervised learning pipeline. Without effective feature representations,
a classiﬁcation model might have difﬁculty in learning to distinguish among different
classes. Most of the works in contrastive learning utilize some variant of the ResNet [ 41]
model. Among its variants, ResNet-50 has been the most widely used because of its balance
between size and learning capability.
Figure 15. Training an encoder and transferring knowledge for downstream tasks.
In an encoder, the output from a speciﬁc layer is pooled to get a single-dimensional
feature vector for every sample. Depending on the approach, they are either upsampled