Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 19 of 22
invariance that are crucial components for object recognition. Some of these issues are
further discussed below.
9.1. Lack of Theoretical Foundation
In an attempt to investigate the generalization ability of the contrastive objective
function, the empirical results from Arora et al. [ 77] show that architecture design and sam-
pling techniques also have a profound effect on the performance. Tsai et al. [ 84] pro-
vide an information-theoretical framework from a multi-view perspective to understand
the properties that encourage successful self-supervised learning. They demonstrate that
self-supervised learned representations can extract task-relevant information (with a po-
tential loss) and discard task-irrelevant information (with a ﬁxed gap). Ultimately, these
ﬁndings propel such methods towards being highly dependent on the pretext task chosen
during training. This afﬁrms the need for more theoretical analysis on different modules in
a contrastive pipeline.
9.2. Selection of Data Augmentation and Pretext Tasks
PIRL [ 17] emphasizes on methods that produce consistent results irrespective of
the pretext task selected, but works like SimCLR [ 42] and MoCo-v2 [ 47], and Tian et al. [ 19]
demonstrate that selecting robust pretext tasks along with suitable data augmentations
can highly boost the quality of the representations. Recently, SwAV [ 13] beat other self-
supervised methods by using multiple augmentations. It is difﬁcult to directly compare
these methods to choose speciﬁc tasks and transformations that can yield the best results
on any dataset.
9.3. Proper Negative Sampling during Training
During training, an original (positive) sample is compared against its negative counter-
parts that contribute towards a contrastive loss to train the model. In cases of easy negatives
(where the similarity between the original sample and a negative sample is very low), the con-
tribution towards the contrastive loss is minimal. This limits the ability of the model to
converge quickly. To get more meaningful negative samples, top self-supervised methods
either increase the batch sizes [ 15] or maintain a very large memory bank [ 17]. Recently,
Kalantidis et al. [ 85] proposed a few hard negative mixing strategies to facilitate faster
and better learning. However, this introduces a large number of hyperparameters that are
specific to the training set and are difficult to generalize for other datasets.
9.4. Dataset Biases
In any self-supervised learning task, the data provide supervision. In effect, the repre-
sentations learned using self-supervised objectives are inﬂuenced by the underlying data.
Such biases are difﬁcult to minimize with the increasing size of the datasets.
10. Conclusions
This paper has extensively reviewed recent top-performing self-supervised methods
that follow contrastive learning for both vision and NLP tasks. We clearly explain dif-
ferent modules in a contrastive learning pipeline; from choosing the right pretext task
and selecting an architectural design, to using the learned parameters for a downstream
task. The works based on contrastive learning have shown promising results on several
downstream tasks such as image/video classiﬁcation, object detection, and other NLP
tasks. Finally, this work concludes by discussing some of the open problems of current
approaches that are yet to be addressed. New techniques and paradigms are needed to
tackle these issues.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.J., A.R.B., and M.Z.Z.; introduction, A.J.; pretext
tasks, A.R.B.; architectures, A.J.; encoder, A.J. and A.R.B.; training, M.Z.Z.; downstream tasks,
A.J. and A.R.B.; benchmarks, A.J. and A.R.B., M.Z.Z. and D.B.; contrastive learning in nlp, D.B.;
discussions, A.J. and M.Z.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, A.J., A.R.B., M.Z.Z., and D.B.;