Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 6 of 22
sequence of semantically related frames. This implies that frames that are nearby with
respect to time are closely related and the ones that are far away are less likely to be
related. Intuitively, the motive for using such an approach is solving a pretext task that
allows the model to learn useful visual representations while trying to recover the temporal
coherence of a video. Here, a video with shufﬂed order in the sequence of its image frames
acts as a positive sample while all other videos in the batch/dataset would be negative
samples.
Similarly, other possible approaches include randomly sampling two clips of the same
length from a longer video or applying spatial augmentation for each video clip. The goal
is to use a contrastive loss to train the model such that clips taken from the same video are
arranged closer whereas clips from different videos are pushed away in the embedding
space. In the work proposed by Qian et al. [ 20], the framework contrasts the similarity
between two positive samples to those of negative samples. The positive pairs are two
augmented clips from the same video. As a result, it separates all encoded videos into non-
overlapping regions such that an augmentation used in the training perturbs an encoded
video only within a small region in the representation space.
2.3.3. Future Prediction
One of the most common strategies for data that extends through time is to predict
future or missing information. This is commonly used for sequential data such as sensory
data, audio signals, videos, etc. The goal of a future prediction task is to predict high-level
information of future time-step given a series of past ones. In [ 21,22], high-dimensional
data are compressed into a compact lower-dimensional latent embedding space. Powerful
autoregressive models are used to summarize the information in the latent space, and a
context latent representation Ctis produced as represented in Figure 7. When predicting
future information, the target (future) and context Ctare encoded into a compact dis-
tributed vector representation in a way that maximally preserves the mutual information
of the original signals.
Figure 7. Contrastive Predictive Coding: Although the ﬁgure shows audio as input, similar setup
can be used for videos, images, text etc. [21].
2.4. View Prediction (Cross-Modal-Based)
View prediction tasks are preferred for data that has multiple views of the same scene.
Following this approach, in [ 23] the anchor and its positive images taken from simultaneous
viewpoints are encouraged to be close in the embedding space while distant from negative
images taken from a different time within the same sequence. The model learns by trying to
simultaneously identify similar features between the frames from different angles and also
trying to ﬁnd the difference between frames that occur later in the sequence. Figure 8
represents their approach for view prediction. Similarly, recent work proposes an inter-intra