Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 9 of 22
Similarly, given a sentence, a model has to predict its previous and the next sentence
in “neighbor sentence prediction task”. This approach was inherited by Skip-Thought
Vectors [ 31] paper. It is similar to the skip-gram method but rather applied to sentences in
place of words.
2.6.3. Autoregressive Language Modeling
This task involves predicting the next word given previous words, or vice versa.
A sequence of words from a text document is provided and the model tries to predict
the next word that follows the sequence. This technique has been used by several n-gram
models and neural networks such as GPT [32] and its recent versions.
2.6.4. Sentence Permutation
A recent paper known as BART [ 33] used a pretext task where a continuous span
of text from the corpus is taken and broken into multiple sentences. The position of
the sentences are randomly reshufﬂed and the task of the model is to predict the original
order of the sentences.
3. Architectures
Contrastive learning methods rely on the number of negative samples for generating
good quality representations. Accessing negative samples can be seen as a dictionary-
lookup task where the dictionary is sometimes the whole training set and the rest of
the times some subset of the dataset. An interesting way to categorize these methods
would be based on the technique used to collect negative samples against a positive data
point during training. Based on the approach taken, we categorized the methods into four
major architectures as shown in Figure 11. Each architecture is explained separately along
with examples of successful methods that follow similar principles.
(a) End-to-End
 (b) Memory Bank
 (c) Momentum Encoder
 (d) Clustering
Figure 11. Different architecture pipelines for Contrastive Learning: ( a) End-to-End training of two encoders where one
generates representation for positive samples and the other for negative samples. ( b) Using a memory bank to store
and retrieve encodings of negative samples. ( c) Using a momentum encoder which acts as a dynamic dictionary lookup for
encodings of negative samples during training. ( d) Implementing a clustering mechanism by using swapped prediction of
the obtained representations from both the encoders using end-to-end architecture.
3.1. End-to-End Learning
End-to-end learning is a complex learning system that uses gradient-based learning
and is designed in such a way that all modules are differentiable [ 34]. This architecture
prefers large batch sizes to accumulate a greater number of negative samples. Except for
the original image and its augmented version, the rest of the images in the batch are
considered negative. The pipeline employs two encoders: a Query encoder (Q) and a Key
encoder (K) as shown in Figure 11. The two encoders can be different and are updated
end-to-end by backpropagation during training. The main idea behind training these