Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 8 of 22
Similarly, the authors of [ 27] focus on the importance of using the right pretext task.
The authors pointed out that in their scenario, except for rotation, other transformations
such as scaling and changing aspect ratio may not be appropriate for the pretext task
because they produce easily detectable visual artifacts. They also reveal that rotation does
not work well when the image in a target dataset is constructed by color textures as in DTD
dataset [28] as shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10. A sample from the DTD dataset [ 28]. An example of why rotation based pretext tasks may
not work well.
2.6. Pre-Text Tasks in NLP
While self-supervised learning has been making signiﬁcant progress in computer
vision tasks for the past few years, it has been an active area of research in NLP for
decades. Using a pretext task refers to generating labels such that supervised approaches
can be applied to unsupervised problems to pretrain models. In NLP , text representations
can be learned from large text corpora using any of the available pretext tasks that are
discussed below.
2.6.1. Center and Neighbor Word Prediction
Back in 2013, Word2Vec [ 29] ﬁrst introduced self-supervised methods to learn word
representations in vector space. The continuous bag-of-words version of the model used
“center word prediction” as the pretext task while the continuous skip-gram model im-
plemented the “neighbor word prediction” task. In center word prediction, the input to
the model is a sequence of words with a ﬁxed window size and one word missing from
the center of the sequence. The task of the model is to predict the missing word in the se-
quence. On the other hand, the input in skip-gram model is a single word where the model
predicts its neighbor words. By performing these particular tasks, the model is able to learn
word representations that can be further used to train models for downstream tasks.
2.6.2. Next and Neighbor Sentence Prediction
In “next sentence prediction”, the model predicts whether two inputs sentences can
be consecutive sentences or not. A positive sample in this case would be a sample that
follows the original sentence while a negative sample is a sentence from a random doc-
ument. BERT [ 30] used this method to drastically improve performance on downstream
tasks that required an understanding of sentence relations such as question answering
and language inference.