Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 10 of 22
encoders separately is to generate distinct representations of the same sample. Using a
contrastive loss, it converges to make positive samples closer and negative samples far
from the original sample. Here, the query encoder Q is trained on the original samples
and the key encoder K is trained on their augmented versions (positive samples) along
with the negative samples in the batch. The features q and k generated from these encoders
are used to calculate the similarity between the respective inputs using a similarity metric
(discussed later in Section 5). Most of the time, the similarity metric used is cosine similarity,
which is simply the inner product of two vectors normalized to have length 1 as deﬁned in
Equation (2).
Recently, a successful end-to-end model was proposed in SimCLR [ 15] where they
used a batch size of 4096 for 100 epochs. It has been veriﬁed that end-to-end architectures
are simple in complexity, but perform better with large batch sizes and a higher number
of epochs as represented in Figure 12. Another popular work that follows end-to-end
architecture was proposed by Oord et al. [ 21] where they learn feature representations
of high-dimensional time series data by predicting the future in latent space by using
powerful autoregressive models along with a contrastive loss. This approach makes
the model tractable by using negative sampling. Moreover, several other work follow this
approach [35–39].
Figure 12. Linear evaluation models (ResNet-50) trained with different batch size and epochs. Each
bar represents a single run from scratch [15].
The number of negative samples available in this approach is coupled with the batch
size as it accumulates negative samples from the current batch. As the batch size is
limited by the GPU memory size, the scalability factor with these methods remains an
issue. Furthermore, for larger batch sizes, the methods suffer from a large mini-batch
optimization problem and require effective optimization strategies as pointed out in [40].
3.2. Using a Memory Bank
With potential issues of having larger batch sizes that could inversely impact the opti-
mization during training, a possible solution is to maintain a separate dictionary called
Memory ank.
The aim of maintaining a memory bank is to accumulate a large number of feature
representations of samples that are used as negative samples during training. For this
purpose, a dictionary is created that stores and updates the embeddings of samples with
the most recent ones at regular intervals. The memory bank (M) contains a feature rep-
resentation mIfor each sample I in dataset D. The representation mIis an exponential
moving average of feature representations that were computed in prior epochs. It enables