Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 2 of 22
features using pseudolabels. Tasks such as image-inpainting, colorizing grayscale images,
jigsaw puzzles, super-resolution, video frame prediction, audio-visual correspondence, etc.
have proven to be effective for learning good representations.
Generative models gained their popularity after the introduction of Generative Ad-
versarial Networks (GANs) [ 3] in 2014. The work later became the foundation for many
successful architectures such as CycleGAN [ 4], StyleGAN [ 5], PixelRNN [ 6], Text2Image [ 7],
DiscoGAN [ 8], etc. These methods inspired more researchers to switch to training deep
learning models with unlabeled data in an self-supervised setup. Despite their success,
researchers started realizing some of the complications in GAN-based approaches. They are
harder to train because of two main reasons: (a) non-convergence—the model parameters
oscillate a lot and rarely converge, and (b) the discriminator gets too successful that the gen-
erator network fails to create real-like fakes due to which the learning cannot be continued.
Furthermore, proper synchronization is required between the generator and the discrimi-
nator that prevents the discriminator converging and the generator diverging.
Unlike generative models, contrastive learning (CL) is a discriminative approach
that aims at grouping similar samples closer and diverse samples far from each other
as shown in Figure 1. To achieve this, a similarity metric is used to measure how close
two embeddings are. Especially, for computer vision tasks, a contrastive loss is evaluated
based on the feature representations of the images extracted from an encoder network.
For instance, one sample from the training dataset is taken and a transformed version of
the sample is retrieved by applying appropriate data augmentation techniques. During
training, referring to Figure 2, the augmented version of the original sample is considered as
a positive sample, and the rest of the samples in the batch/dataset (depends on the method
being used) are considered negative samples. Next, the model is trained in a way that
it learns to differentiate positive samples from the negative ones. The differentiation is
achieved with the help of some pretext task (explained in Section 2). In doing so, the model
learns quality representations of the samples and is used later for transferring knowledge
to downstream tasks. This idea is advocated by an interesting experiment conducted by
Epstein [ 9] in 2016, where he asked his students to draw a dollar bill with and without
looking at the bill. The results from the experiment show that the brain does not require
complete information of a visual piece to differentiate one object from the other. Instead,
only a rough representation of an image is enough to do so.
Figure 1. Basic intuition behind contrastive learning paradigm: push original and augmented images
closer and push original and negative images away.