Technologies 2021 ,9, 2 14 of 22
should gradually be decreased over time. An improved version of SGD (with momentum)
is used in most deep learning approaches.
Another popular optimization method known as adaptive learning rate optimization
algorithm (Adam) [ 44] has been used in a few methods [ 21,45,46]. In Adam, momentum is
incorporated directly as an estimate of the ﬁrst-order moment. Furthermore, Adam includes
bias corrections to the estimates of both the ﬁrst-order moments and the second-order
moments to account for their initialization at the origin.
As some of the end-to-end methods [ 13,15,47] use a very large batch size, training
with standard SGD-based optimizers with a linear learning rate scaling becomes unstable.
In order to stabilize the training, a Layer-wise Adaptive Rate Scaling (LARS) [ 48] optimizer
along with cosine learning rate [ 49] was introduced. There are two main differences between
LARS and other adaptive algorithms such as Adam: First, LARS uses a different learning
rate for every layer, leading to better stability. Second, the magnitude of the update is
based on the weight norm for better control of training speed. Furthermore, employing
cosine learning rate involves periodically warm restarts of SGD, where in each restart,
the learning rate is initialized to some value and is scheduled to decrease over time.
6. Downstream Tasks
Generally, computer vision pipelines that employ self-supervised learning involve
performing two tasks: a pretext task and a downstream task. Downstream tasks are
application-speciﬁc tasks that utilize the knowledge that was learned during the pretext
task. Figure 16 represents the overview of how knowledge is transferred to a downstream
task. The learned parameters serve as a pretrained model and are transferred to other
downstream computer vision tasks by ﬁne-tuning. The performance of transfer learning on
these high-level vision tasks demonstrates the generalization ability of the learned features.
Some of the common downstream tasks in computer vision are classiﬁcation, detection,
segmentation, future prediction, etc as represented in Figure 17. Using one or more of these
tasks, the performance of models trained in an unsupervised or self-supervised way can be
tested and evaluated.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the features learned with a self-supervised approach
for downstream tasks, methods such as kernel visualization, feature map visualization,
and nearest-neighbor-based approaches are commonly used. These methods also help in
analyzing the contribution of a pretext task in efﬁciently training a model.