Figure 15: Left: Human evaluation of real CIFAR10 images (red) and samples from Goodfellow
et al.[18] (magenta), and LAPGAN [ 110] and a class conditional LAPGAN (green). Around
40% of the samples generated by the class conditional LAPGAN model are realistic enough to
fool a human into thinking they are real images. This compares with 10% of images from
the standard GAN model, but is still a lot lower than the > 90% rate for real images. Right:
The user-interface presented to the subjects. Figure from [110].
2.Rapid Scene Categorization. These measures are inspired by prior
studies who have shown that humans are capable of reporting certain
characteristics of scenes in a short glance ( e.g.scene category, visual
layout [116,117]). To obtain a quantitative measure of quality of samples,
Dentonet al.[110] asked volunteers to distinguish their generated samples
from real images. The subjects were presented with the user interface
shown in Fig. 15(right) and were asked to click the appropriate button
to indicate if they believed the image was real or generated. They varied
the viewing time from 50ms to 2000ms (11 durations). Fig. 15(left) shows
the results over samples generated by three GAN models. They concluded
that their model was better than the original GAN [ 18] since it did better
in fooling the subjects (lower bound here is 0% and upper bound is 100%).
See also Fig. 16 for another example of fake vs. real experiment but without
time constraints (conducted by Salimans et al.[3]).
This “Turing-like” test is very intuitive and seems inevitable to ultimately
answer the question of whether generative models are as good as the nature
in generating images. However, there are several concerns in conducting
such a test in practice (especially when dealing with models that are far
from perfect; See Fig. 15(left)). Aside from experimental conditions which
are hard to control in crowd-sourced platforms ( e.g.presentation time,
screen size, subject’s distance to the screen, subjects’ motivations, age,
mood, feedback, etc) and high cost, these tests fall short in evaluating
models in terms of diversity of generated samples and may be biased
towards models that overﬁt to training data.
3.Rating and Preference Judgment. These types of experiments ask
subjects to rate models in terms of the ﬁdelity of their generated im-
ages. For example, Snell et al., [ 118] studied whether observers prefer
33