3. Discussion
3.1. Other Evaluation Measures
In addition to measures discussed above, there exist some other non-trivial
or task-speciﬁc ways to evaluate GANs. Vedantam et al.[127] proposed a
model for visually grounded imagination to create images of novel semantic
concepts. To evaluate the quality of the generated images, they proposed three
measures including a) correctness: fraction of attributes for each generated image
that match those speciﬁed in the concept’s description, b) coverage: diversity
of values for the unspeciﬁed or missing attributes, measured as the diﬀerence
between the empirical distributions of attribute values in the generated set
and the true distribution for this attribute induced by the training set, and c)
compositionality: correctness of generated images in response to test concepts
that diﬀer in at least one attribute from the training concepts. To measure
diversity of generated samples, Zhu et al.[131] randomly sampled from their
model and computed the average pair-wise distance in a deep feature space using
cosine distance and compared it with the same measure calculated from ground
truth real images. This is akin to the image retrieval performance measure
described above. Im et al.[132] proposed to evaluate GANs by exploring the
divergence and distance measures that were used during training GANs. They
showed that rankings produced by four measures including 1) Jensen-Shannon
Divergence, 2) Constrained Pearson 2, 3) Maximum Mean Discrepancy, and 4)
Wasserstein Distance, are consistent and robust across measures.
3.2. Sample and Computational Eﬃciencies
Here, I provide more details on two items in the list of desired properties
of GAN evaluation measures. They will be used in the next subsection for
assessing the measures. Huang et al.[26] argue that a practical GAN evaluation
measure should be computed using a reasonable number of samples and within an
aﬀordable computation cost. This is particularly important during monitoring
the training process of models. They proposed the following ways to assess
evaluation measures:
1.Sample eﬃciency: It regards the number of samples needed for a measure
to discriminate a set of generated samples Sgfrom a set of real samples
S0
r. To do this, a reference set Sris uniformly sampled from the real
training data (but disjoint with S0
r). All three sets have the same size
(i.e.jSrj=jS0
rj=jSgj=n). An ideal measure is expected to correctly
score(Sr;S0
r)lower than (Sr;Sg)with a relatively small n. In other
words, the number of samples nneeded for a measure to distinguish S0
r
andSgcan be viewed as its sample complexity.
2.Computational eﬃciency: Fast computation of the empirical measure is
of practical concern as it helps researchers monitor the training process
and diagnose problems early on ( e.g.for early stopping). This can be
measured in terms of seconds per number of evaluated samples.
39