Figure 12: Samples from a model trained on gray-scale triangles. These triangles belong to
a low-dimensional manifold embedded in Rdd. A good generative model should be able to
capture the factors of variation in this manifold ( e.g.rotation, translation, minimum angle
size). a) high recall and precision, b) high precision, but low recall (lacking in diversity), c)
low precision, but high recall (can decently reproduce triangles, but fails to capture convexity),
and d) low precision and low recall. Figure from [23].
samples to the manifold can be computed. An example of such dataset
is the manifold of convex shapes (See Fig. 12). To compute these scores,
ﬁrst the latent representation zof each test sample xis estimated, through
gradient descent, by inverting the generator G. Precision is deﬁned as the
fraction of the generated samples whose distance to the manifold is below a
certain threshold. Recall, on the other hand, is given by the fraction of test
samples whose L2distance to G(z)is below the threshold. If the samples
from the model distribution Pgare (on average) close to the manifold
(see [23] for details), its precision is high. Simlarly, high recall implies that
the generator can recover ( i.e.generate something close to) any sample
from the manifold, thus capturing most of the manifold.
The major drawback of these scores is that they are impractical for real
images where the data manifold is unknown, and their use is limited to eval-
uations on synthetic data. In a recent eﬀort, Sajjadi et al. [ 72] introduced
a novel deﬁnition of precision and recall to address this limitation.
2.3. Qualitative Measures
Visual examination of samples by human ratersis one of the common and
most intuitive ways to evaluate GANs ( e.g.[110,3,111]). While it greatly
helps inspect and tune models, it suﬀers from the following drawbacks. First,
evaluating the quality of generated images with human vision is expensive
and cumbersome, biased ( e.g.depends on the structure and pay of the task,
community reputation of the experimenter, etc in crowd sourcing setups [ 112])
diﬃcult to reproduce, and does not fully reﬂect the capacity of models. Second,
human inspectors may have high variance which makes it necessary to average
over a large number of subjects. Third, an evaluation based on samples could
be biased towards models that overﬁt and therefore a poor indicator of a good
density model in a log-likelihood sense [ 22] For instance, it fails to tell whether a
model drops modes. In fact, mode dropping generally helps visual sample quality
30