Figure 4: FID measure is sensitive to image distortions. From upper left to lower right:
Gaussian noise, Gaussian blur, implanted black rectangles, swirled images, salt and pepper
noise, and CelebA dataset contaminated by ImageNet images. Figure from [37].
where (r;r)and(g;g)are the mean and covariance of the real data
and model distributions, respectively. Lower FID means smaller distances
between synthetic and real data distributions.
FID performs well in terms of discriminability, robustness and computa-
tional eﬃciency. It appears to be a good measure, even though it only
takes into consideration the ﬁrst two order moments of the distributions.
However, it assumes that features are of Gaussian distribution which is
often not guaranteed. It has been shown that FID is consistent with human
judgments and is more robust to noise than IS [ 37] (e.g.negative corre-
lation between the FID and visual quality of generated samples). Unlike
IS however, it is able to detect intra-class mode dropping3,i.e.a model
that generates only one image per class can score a high IS but will have a
bad FID. Also, unlike IS, the FID worsens as various types of artifacts are
added to images (See Fig. 4). IS and AM scores measure the diversity and
quality of generated samples, while FID measures the distance between
the generated and real distributions. An empirical analysis of FID can be
found in [23]. See also [73] for a class-aware version of FID.
8.Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD). This measure computes the
dissimilarity between two probability distributions4PrandPgusing sam-
ples drawn independently from each [ 74]. A lower MMD hence means that
Pgis closer to Pr. MMD can be regarded as two-sample testing since,
as in classiﬁer two samples test, it tests whether one model or another
is closer to the true data distribution [ 75,76,77]. Such hypothesis tests
3On the contrary, Sajjadi et al. [ 72] show that FID is sensitive to both the addition of
spurious modes as well as to mode dropping.
4Distinguishingtwodistributionsbyﬁnitesamplesisknownas Two-Sample Test instatistics.
10