diﬀerent measures might be more appropriate. For example, the likeli-
hood is good for measuring compression methods [7] while psychophysics
and user ratings are ﬁt for evaluating image reconstruction and synthesis
methods [ 8,133]. Some measures are suitable for evaluating generic GANs
(when input is a noise vector), while some others are suitable for evaluating
conditional GANs ( e.g.FCN score) where correspondences are available
(e.g.generating an image corresponding to a segmentation map).
Despite having diﬀerent formulations, several scores are based on similar
concepts. C2ST, adversarial accuracy, and classiﬁcation performance
employ classiﬁers to determine how separable generated images are from
realimages(onavalidationdataset). FID,WassersteinandMMDmeasures
compute the distance between two distributions. Inception score and its
variants including m-IS, Mode and AM scores use conditional and marginal
distributions over generated data or real data to evaluate diversity and
ﬁdelity of samples. Average log likelihood and coverage metric estimate the
probability distributions. Reconstruction error and some quality measures
determine how dissimilar generated images are from their corresponding
(or closest) images in the train set. Some measures use individual samples
(e.g.IS) while others need pairs of samples ( e.g.MMD). One important
concern regarding many measures is that they are sensitive to the choice
of the feature space ( e.g.diﬀerent CNNs) as well as the distance type
(e.g.L2vs.L1).
Fidelity, diversity and controllable sampling are the main aspects of a model
that a measure should capture. A good score should have well deﬁned
bounds and also be sensitive to image distortions and transformations (See
Fig. 21 and 4). One major problem with qualitative measures such as
SSIM and PSNR is that they only tap visual ﬁdelity and not diversity
of samples. Humans are also often biased towards the visual quality of
generated images and are less aﬀected by the lack of image diversity. On the
other hand, some quantitative measures mostly concentrate on evaluating
diversity ( e.g.Birthday Paradox Test) and discard ﬁdelity. Ideally, a good
measure should take both into account.
Fig. 22 shows a comparison of GAN evaluation measures in terms of
sample and computational eﬃciency. While some measures are practical
to compute for a small sample size (about 2000 images), some others
(e.g.Wasserstein distance) do not scale to large sample sizes. Please
see [26] for further details.
4. Summary and Future Work
In this work, I provided a critical review of the strengths and limitations
of 24 quantitative and 5 qualitative measures that have been introduced so far
for evaluating GANs. Seeking appropriate measures for this purpose continues
to be an important open problem, not only for fair model comparison but also
for understanding, improving, and developing generative models. Lack of a
42