3.3. What is the Best GAN Evaluation Measure?
To answer this question, lets ﬁrst take a look at how well the measures
perform with respect to the desired properties mentioned in Section 2.1.
Results are shown in Table 2. I ﬁnd that:
(a) only two measures are designed to explicitly address overﬁtting,
(b)the majority of the measures do not consider disentangled representa-
tions,
(c) few measures have both lower and upper bounds,
(d)the agreement between the measures and human perceptual judgments
is less clear,
(e)several highly regarded measures have high sample and computational
eﬃciencies, and
(f) the sensitivity of measures to image distortions is less explored.
A detailed discussion and comparison of GAN evaluation measures comes
next.
As of yet, there is no consensus regarding the best score. Diﬀerent scores
assess various aspects of the image generation process, and it is unlikely
that a single score can cover all aspects. Nevertheless, some measures seem
more plausible than others ( e.g.FID score). Detailed analyses by Theis
et al.[22] showed that average likelihood is not a good measure. Parzen
windows estimation of likelihood favors trivial models and is irrelevant
to visual ﬁdelity of samples. Further, it fails to approximate the true
likelihood in high dimensional spaces or to rank models (Fig. 14). Similarly,
the Wasserstein distance between generated samples and the training data
is also intractable in high dimensions [ 53]. Two widely accepted scores,
Inception Score and Fréchet Inception Distance, rely on pre-trained deep
networks to represent and statistically compare original and generated
samples. This brings along two signiﬁcant drawbacks. First, the deep
network is trained to be invariant to image transformations and artifacts
making the evaluation method also insensitive to those distortions. Second,
since the deep network is often trained on large scale natural scene datasets
(e.g.ImageNet), applying them to other domains ( e.g.faces, digits) is
questionable. Some evaluation methods ( e.g.MS-SSIM [ 2], Birthday
Paradox Test) aim to assess the diversity of the generated samples, regard-
less of the data distribution. While being able to detect severe cases of
mode collapse, these methods fall short in measuring how well a generator
captures the true data distribution [53].
Quality measures such as nearest neighbor visualizations or rapid catego-
rization tasks may favor models that overﬁt. Overall, it seems that the
main challenge is to have a measure that evaluates both diversity andvisual
ﬁdelitysimultaneously. The former implies that all modes are covered while
the latter implies that the generated samples should have high likelihood.
Perhaps due to these challenges, Theis et al.[22] argued against evaluating
models for task-independent image generation and proposed to evaluate
GANs with respect to speciﬁc applications. For diﬀerent applications then,
41