(b)Adversarial Divergence: ComputestheKLdivergencebetween Pg(yjx)
andPr(yjx). The lower the adversarial divergence, the closer the two
distributions. The lower bound for this measure is exactly zero, which
meansPg(yjx) =Pr(yjx)for all samples in the validation set.
One drawback of these measures is that a lot of human eﬀort is needed to
label the real and generated samples. To mitigate this, Yang et al.[46]
ﬁrst trained one generator per category using a labeled training set and
then generated samples from all categories. Notice that these measures
overlap with classiﬁcation performance discussed above.
20.Geometry Score. Khrulkov and Oseledets [ 47] proposed to compare
geometrical properties of the underlying data manifold between real and
generated data. This score, however, involves a lot of technical details
making it hard to understand and compute. Here, we provide an intuitive
description.
The core idea is to build a simplicial complex from data using proximity
information ( e.g.pairwise distances between samples). To investigate the
structure of the manifold, a threshold is varied and generated simplices
are added into the approximation. An example is shown in Fig. 10.A.
For each value of , topological properties of the corresponding simplicial
complex, namely homologies, are computed. A homology encodes the
number of holes of various dimensions in a space. Eventually, a barcode
(signature) is constructed reﬂecting how long generated holes (homologies)
persist in simplicial complexes (Fig. 10.B). In general, to ﬁnd the rank of a
k-homology ( i.e.the number of k-dimensional holes) at some ﬁxed value ,
one has to count intersections of the vertical line = 0with the intervals
at the desired block Hk.
Since computing the barcode using all data is intractable, in practice often
subsets of data ( e.g.by randomly selecting points) are used. For each
subset, Relative Living Times (RLT) of each number of holes is computed
which is deﬁned as the ratio of the total time when this number was present
and of the value maxwhen points connect into a single blob. The RLT
over random subsets are then averaged to give the Mean Relative Living
Times (MRLT). By construction, they add up to 1. To quantitatively
evaluate the topological diﬀerence between two datasets, the L2distance
between these distributions is computed.
Fig. 10.C shows an example over synthetic data. Intuitively, the value at
locationiin the bar chart (on xaxis), indicates that for that amount of
time, the 1D hole existed by varying the threshold. For example, in the left
most histogram, nearly never none, 2 or 3 1D holes were observed and most
of the time only one hole appeared. Similarly, for the 4th pattern from the
left, most of the time one 1D hole is observed. Comparing the MRLTs of
the patterns with the ground truth pattern (leftmost one) reveals that this
one is indeed the closest to the ground truth.
Fig. 10.D shows comparison of two GANs, WGAN [ 39] and WGAN-GP [ 91],
over the MNIST dataset using the method above over single digits and the
entire dataset. It shows that both models produce distributions that are
23