and grounded ways to quantitatively and qualitatively assess them are still
missing.
Generative models can be classiﬁed into two broad categories of explicitand
implicit approaches. The former class assumes access to the model likelihood
function, whereas the latter uses a sampling mechanism to generate data. Ex-
amples of explicit models are variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [ 19,20] and
PixelCNN [ 21]. Examples of implicit generative models are GANs. Explicit
models are typically trained by maximizing the likelihood or its lower bound.
GANs aim to approximate a data distribution P, using a parameterized model
distribution Q. They achieve this by jointly optimizing two adversarial networks:
a generator and a discriminator. The generator Gis trained to synthesize from
a noise vector an image that is close to the true data distribution. The discrimi-
natorDis optimized to accurately distinguish between the synthesized images
coming from the generator and the real images from the data distribution. GANs
have shown a dramatic ability to generate realistic high resolution images.
Several evaluation measures have surfaced with the emergence of new models.
Some of them attempt to quantitatively evaluate models while some others
emphasize on qualitative ways such as user studies or analyzing internals of
models. Both of these approaches have strengths and limitations. For example,
one may think that fooling a person in distinguishing generated images from real
ones can be the ultimate test. Such a measure, however, may favor models that
concentrate on limited sections of the data ( i.e.overﬁtting or memorizing; low
diversity; mode dropping). Quantitative measures, while being less subjective,
may not directly correspond to how humans perceive and judge generated images.
These, along with other issues such as the variety of probability criteria and
the lack of a perceptually meaningful image similarity measures, have made
evaluating generative models notoriously diﬃcult [ 22]. In spite of no agreement
regarding the best GAN evolution measure, few works have already started to
benchmark GANs ( e.g.[23,24,25]). While such studies are indeed helpful,
further research is needed to understand GAN evaluation measures and assess
their strengths and limitations ( e.g.[22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30]).
My main goal in this paper is to critically review available GAN measures
and help the researchers objectively assess them. At the end, I will oﬀer some
suggestions for designing more eﬃcient measures for fair GAN evaluation and
comparison.
2. GAN Evaluation Measures
I will enumerate the GAN evaluation measures while discussing their pros
and cons. They will be organized in two categories: quantitative andqualitative .
Notice that some of these measures ( e.g.Wasserstein distance, reconstruction
error or SSIM) can also be used for model optimization during training. In the
next subsection, I will ﬁrst provide a set of desired properties for GAN measures
(a.k.ameta measures or desiderata) followed by an evaluation of whether a given
measure or a family of measures is compatible with them.
2