Figure 1: A schematic layout of the typical approach for sample based GAN evaluation. Sr
andSgrepresent real and generated samples, respectively. Figure from [26].
Table 1 shows the list of measures. Majority of the measures return a single
value while few (GAM [ 31] and NRDS [ 32]) perform relative comparison. The
rationale behind the latter is that if it is diﬃcult to obtain the perfect measure,
at least we can evaluate which model generates better images than others.
2.1. Desiderata
Before delving into the explanation of evaluation measures, ﬁrst I list a
number of desired properties that an eﬃcient GAN evaluation measure should
fulﬁll. These properties can serve as meta measures to evaluate and compare the
GAN evaluation measures. Here, I emphasize on the qualitative aspects of these
measures. As will be discussed in Section 3, some recent works have attempted
to compare the meta measures quantitatively ( e.g.computational complexity of
a measure). An eﬃcient GAN evaluation measure should:
1.favor models that generate high ﬁdelity samples ( i.e.ability to distinguish
generated samples from real ones; discriminability),
2.favor models that generate diverse samples (and thus is sensitive to over-
ﬁtting, mode collapse and mode drop, and can undermine trivial models
such as the memory GAN),
3.favor models with disentangled latent spaces as well as space continuity
(a.k.acontrollable sampling),
4. have well-deﬁned bounds (lower, upper, and chance),
5.be sensitive to image distortions and transformations. GANs are often
applied to image datasets where certain transformations to the input do
not change semantic meanings. Thus, an ideal measure should be invariant
to such transformations. For instance, score of a generator trained on
CelebA face dataset should not change much if its generated faces are
shifted by a few pixels or rotated by a small angle.
6.agree with human perceptual judgments and human rankings of models,
and
7. have low sample and computational complexity.
In what follows, GAN measures will be discussed and assessed with respect
to the above desiderata, and a summary will be presented eventually in Section 3.
See Table 2.
3