Figure 7: Illustration of the Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM). During the training phase,
G1andG2compete with D1andD2, respectively. At test time, model M1 plays against M2
by havingG1try to foolD2, and vice-versa. M1 is better than M2 if G1foolsD2more than
G2foolsD1(and vice versa). Figure from [31].
and skill rating. Evaluations are useful in diﬀerent contexts, including a)
monitoring the progress of a single model as it learns during the training
process, and b) comparing the capabilities of two diﬀerent fully trained
models. The former regards a single model playing against past and
future versions of itself producing a useful measure of training progress
(a.k.awithin trajectory tournament). The latter regards multiple separate
models (using diﬀerent seeds, hyperparameters, and architectures) and
provides a useful relative comparison between diﬀerent trained GANs
(a.k.amultiple trajectory tournament). Each player in a tournament is
either a discriminator that attempts to distinguish between real and fake
data or a generator that attempts to fool the discriminators into accepting
fake data as real.
Tournament Win Rate: To determine the outcome of a match between
discriminator Dand generator G, the discriminator Djudges two batches:
one batch of samples from generator G, and one batch of real data. Every
sample xthat is not judged correctly by the discriminator ( e.g.D(x)0:5
for the generated data or D(x)0:5for the real data) counts as a win for
the generator and is used to compute its win rate. A match win rate of
0:5forGmeans that D’s performance against Gis no better than chance.
The tournament win rate for generator Gis computed as its average win
rate over all discriminators in D. Tournament win rates are interpretable
only within the context of the tournament they were produced from, and
cannot be directly compared with those from other tournaments.
Olsson et al. ran a tournament between 20 saved checkpoints of discrimi-
nators and generators from the same training run of a DCGAN trained on
SVHN [89] using an evaluation batch size of 64. Fig. 8.A shows the raw
tournament outcomes from the within-trajectory tournament, alongside
the same tournament outcomes summarized using tournament win rate and
skill rating, as well as SVHN classiﬁer score and SVHN Fréchet distance
computed from 10,000 samples, for comparison8. It shows that tournament
8To compute these score, a pre-trained SVHN classiﬁer is used rather than an ImageNet
19