byPginto a single mode, possibly located at a midpoint. An ideal GAN
evaluation measure should be sensitive to these two phenomena.
Detecting mode collapse in GANs trained on large scale image datasets is
very challenging11. However, it can be accurately measured on synthetic
datasetswherethetruedistributionanditsmodesareknown( e.g.Gaussian
mixtures). Srivastava et al.[58] proposed a measure to quantify mode
collapse behavior as follows:
(a)First, some points are sampled from the generator. A sample is
counted as high quality , if it is within a certain distance of its nearest
mode center ( e.g. 3over a 2D dataset, or 10over a 1200D dataset).
(b)Then, the number of modes captured is the number of mixture com-
ponents whose mean is nearest to at least one high quality sample.
Accordingly, a mode is considered lost if there is no sample in the
generated test data within a certain standard deviations from the
center of that mode. This is illustrated in Fig. 19.
Santurkar et al. [ 42], to investigate mode distribution/collapse over natural
datasets, propose to train GANs over a well-balanced dataset ( i.e.a
dataset that contains equal number of samples from each class) and then
test whether generated data also generates a well-balanced dataset. Steps
are as follows:
(a)Train the GAN unconditionally (without class labels) on the chosen
balanced multi-class dataset D.
(b)Train a multi-class classiﬁer on the same dataset D (to be used as an
annotator).
(c)Generate a synthetic dataset by sampling N images from the GAN.
Then use the classiﬁer trained in Step 2 above to obtain labels for
this synthetic dataset.
An example is shown in Fig. 18. It reveals that GANs often exhibit mode
collapse.
The reverse KL divergence over the modes has been used in [ 59] to measure
the quality of mode collapse as follows. Each generated sample is assigned
to its closest mode. This induces an empirical, discrete distribution with
an alphabet size equal to the number of observed modes in the generated
samples. A similar induced discrete distribution is computed from the real
data samples. The reverse KL divergence between the induced distribution
from generated samples and the induced distribution from the real samples
is used as a measure.
The shortcoming of the described measures is that they only work for
datasets with known modes ( e.g.synthetic or labeled datasets). Overall,
it is hard to quantitatively measure mode collapse and mode drop since
they are poorly understood. Further, ﬁnding nearest neighbors and nearest
mode center is non-trivial in high dimensional spaces is non-trivial. Active
research is ongoing in this direction.
11See [58, 26] for analysis of mode drop and mode collapse over real datasets.
35