win rate and skill rating both provide a comparable measure of training
progress to SVHN classiﬁer score.
Skill Rating: Here the idea is to use a skill rating system to summarize
tournament outcomes in a way that takes into account the amount of new
informationeachmatchprovides. Olssonetal. usedtheGlicko2system[ 90].
In a nutshell, a player’s skill rating is represented as a Gaussian distribution,
with a mean and standard deviation, representing the current state of the
evidence about their “true” skill rating. See [ 45] for details of the algorithm.
Olsson et al. constructed a tournament from saved snapshots from six
SVHN GANs that diﬀer slightly from one another, including diﬀerent
loss functions and architectures. They included 20 saved checkpoints of
discriminatorsandgeneratorsfromeachGANexperiment, asinglesnapshot
of 6-auto, and a generator player that produces batches of real data as a
benchmark. Fig. 8.B shows the results compared to Inception and Fréchet
distances.
One advantage of these scores is that they are not limited to ﬁxed feature
sets and players can learn to attend to any features that are useful to
win. Another advantage is that human judges are eligible to play as
discriminators, and could participate to receive a skill rating. This allows
a principled method to incorporate human perceptual judgments in model
evaluation. The downside is providing relative rather than absolute score
of a model’s ability thus making reproducing results challenging and
expensive.
18.Normalized Relative Discriminative Score (NRDS). The main idea
behind this measure proposed by Zhang et al.[32] is that more epochs
would be needed to distinguish good generated samples from real samples
(compared to separating poor ones from real samples). They used a bi-
nary classiﬁer (discriminator) to separate the real samples from fake ones
generated by all the models in comparison. In each training epoch, the
discriminator’s output for each sample is recorded. The average discrimina-
tor output of real samples will increase with epoch (approaching 1), while
that of generated samples from each model will decrease (approaching
0). However, the decrement rate of each model varies based on how close
the generated samples are to the real ones. The samples closer to real
ones show slower decrement rate whereas poor samples will show a faster
decrement rate. Therefore, comparing the “decrement rate” of each model
can be an indication of how well it performs relative to other models.
There are three steps to compute the NRDS:
(a)Obtain the curve Ci(i= 1;2;;n) of discriminator average output
versus epoch (or mini-batch) for each model (assuming nmodels in
comparison) during training,
(b)Compute the area under each curve A(Ci)(as the decrement rate),
and
classiﬁer.
20