Figure 18: Illustration of mode collapse in GANs trained on select subsets of CelebA and
LSUN datasets using the technique in [ 42]. Left panel shows the relative distribution of modes
in samples drawn from the GANs, and compares is to the true data distribution (leftmost
plots). Right panel shows the evolution of class distributions in diﬀerent GANs over the course
of training. It can be seen that these GANs introduce covariate shift through mode collapse.
Figure compiled from [42].
5.Investigating and Visualizing the Internals of Networks. Other
ways of evaluating generative models are studying how and what they
learn, exploring their internal dynamics, and understanding the landscape
of their latent spaces. While this is a broad topic and many papers fall
under it, here I bring few examples to give the reader some insights.
(a)Disentangled representations . “Disentanglement” regards the align-
ment of “semantic” visual concepts to axes in the latent space. Some
tests can check the existence of semantically meaningful directions in
the latent space, meaning that varying the seed along those directions
leads to predictable changes ( e.g.changes in facial hair, or pose).
Some others ( e.g.[60,61,62,123]) assess the quality of internal repre-
sentations by checking whether they satisfy certain properties, such as
being “disentangled”. A measure of disentanglement proposed in [ 61]
checks whether the latent space captures the true factors of variation
in a simulated dataset where parameters are known by construction
(e.g.using a graphics engine). Radford et al.[1] investigated their
trained generators and discriminators in a variety of ways. They
proposed that walking on the learned manifold can tell us about signs
of memorization (if there are sharp transitions) and about the way in
which the space is hierarchically collapsed. If walking in this latent
space results in semantic changes to the image generations (such as
objects being added and removed), one can reason that the model has
learned relevant and interesting representations. They also showed
interesting results of performing vector arithmetic on the zvectors
of sets of exemplar samples for visual concepts ( e.g.smiling woman
36