Classiﬁer two-sample tests can be considered a diﬀerent form of two-sample
test to MMD. MMD has the advantage of a U-statistic estimator with
Gaussian asymptotic distribution, while the classiﬁer 2-sample test has
a diﬀerent form (cf. [75]). MMD can be better when the U-statistic
convergence outweighs the potentially more powerful classiﬁer ( e.g.from a
deep network), while a classiﬁer based test could be better if the classiﬁer
is better than the choice of kernel.
12.Classiﬁcation Performance. One common indirect technique for eval-
uating the quality of unsupervised representation learning algorithms is
to apply them as feature extractors on labeled datasets and evaluate the
performance of linear models ﬁtted on top of the learned features. For
example, to evaluate the quality of the representations learned by DC-
GANs, Radford et al.[1] trained their model on ImageNet dataset and
then used the discriminator’s convolutional features from all layers to train
a regularized linear L2-SVM to classify CIFAR-10 images. They achieved
82.8% accuracy on par with or better than several baselines trained directly
on CIFAR-10 data.
A similar strategy has also been followed in evaluating conditional GANs
(e.g.the ones proposed for style transfer). For example, an oﬀ-the-shelf
classiﬁer is utilized by Zhang et al.[84] to assess the realism of synthesized
images. They fed their fake colorized images to a VGG network that was
trained on real color photos. If the classiﬁer performs well, this indicates
that the colorizations are accurate enough to be informative about object
class. They call this “semantic interpretability”. Similarly, Isola et al.[15]
proposed the “FCN score” to measure the quality of the generated images
conditioned on an input segmentation map. They fed the generated images
to the fully-convolutional semantic segmentation network (FCN) [ 85] and
then measured the error between the output segmentation map and the
ground truth segmentation mask.
Ye et al. [ 41] proposed an objective measure known as the GAN Quality
Index (GQI) to evaluate GANs. First, a generator Gis trained on a
labeled real dataset with Nclasses. Next, a classiﬁer Crealis trained on
the real dataset. The generated images are then fed to this classiﬁer to
obtain labels. A second classiﬁer, called the GAN-induced classiﬁer CGAN,
is trained on the generated data. Finally, the GQI is deﬁned as the ratio
of the accuracies of the two classiﬁers:
GQI =ACC (CGAN)
ACC (Creal)100 (11)
GQI is an integer in the range of 0 to 100. Higher GQI means that the
GAN distribution better matches the real data distribution.
Data Augmentation Utility: Some works measure the utility of GANs
for generating additional training samples. This can be interpreted as a
measure of the diversity of the generated images. Similar to Ye et al. [ 41],
Lesort et al. [ 86] proposed to use a mixture of real and generated data to
train a classiﬁer and then test it on a labeled test dataset. The result is
14