Figure 9: A) Illustration of NRDS. Gnindicates the nth generative model. Its corresponding
fake samples are Fake n, which are sampled randomly. The fake samples from nmodels, as
well as the real samples, are used to train the binary classiﬁer Dduring training (bottom
left). Testing only uses fake samples and performs alternatively with the training process.
The bottom right shows an example of average output of Dfor fake samples of each model.
B) A toy example of computing NRDS. Left: the real and fake samples randomly sampled
from 2D normal distributions with diﬀerent means but with the same (identity) covariance.
The real samples (blue circles) have with zero mean. The red “x” and yellow “+” denote
fake samples with the mean of [0.5, 0] and [1.5, 0], respectively. The notation fake-close
(fake-far) indicates that the mean of correspondingly fake samples is close to (far from) that
of the real samples. Right: the curves of epoch vs. averaged output of discriminator on
corresponding sets (colors) of samples. In this example, the area under the curves of fake-close
(C1) and fake-far (C2) areA(C1) = 145:4955andA(C2) = 71:1057, respectively. From Eq. 14,
NRDS 1=A(C1)P2
i=1A(Ci)= 0:6717andNRDS 2=A(C2)P2
i=1A(Ci)= 0:3283. Therefore, the model
generating fake-close is relatively better. Figure compiled from [32].
(c) Compute NRDS of the ith model by
NRDSi=A(Ci)Pn
j=1A(Cj): (14)
The higher the NRDS, the better. Fig. 9 illustrates the computation of
NRDS over a toy example.
19.AdversarialAccuracyandAdversarialDivergence. Yanget al.[46]
proposed two measures based on the intuition that a suﬃcient, but un-
necessary, condition for closeness of generated data distribution Pg(x)
and the real data distribution Pr(x)is closeness of Pg(xjy)andPr(xjy),
i.e.distributions of generated data and real data conditioned on all pos-
sible variables of interest y,e.g.category labels. One way to obtain the
variable of interest yis by asking human participants to annotate the
images (sampled from Pg(x)andPr(x)).
Since it is not feasible to directly compare Pg(xjy)andPr(xjy), they
proposed to compare Pg(yjx)andPr(yjx)instead (following the Bayes rule)
which is a much easier task. Two classiﬁers are then trained from human
annotations to approximate Pg(yjx)andPr(yjx)for diﬀerent categories.
These classiﬁers are used to compute the following evaluation measures:
(a)Adversarial Accuracy: Computes the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved
by the two classiﬁers on a validation set ( i.e.another set of real im-
ages). IfPg(x)is close toPr(x), then similar accuracies are expected.
22