then compared with the score of the same classiﬁer trained on the real
training data mixed with noise. Along the same line, recently, Shmelkov
et al. [25] proposed to compare class-conditional GANs with GAN-train
and GAN-test scores using a neural net classiﬁer. GAN-train is a network
trained on GAN generated images and is evaluated on real-world images.
GAN-test, on the other hand, is the accuracy of a network trained on
real images and evaluated on the generated images. They analyzed the
diversity of the generated images by evaluating GAN-train accuracy with
varying amounts of generated data. The intuition is that a model with low
diversity generates redundant samples, and thus increasing the quantity of
data generated in this case does not result in better GAN-train accuracy.
In contrast, generating more samples from a model with high diversity
produces a better GAN-train score.
Above mentioned measures are indirect and rely heavily on the choice
of the classiﬁer. Nonetheless, they are useful for evaluating generative
models based on the notion that a better generative model should result in
better representations for surrogate tasks ( e.g.supervised classiﬁcation).
This, however, does not necessary imply that generated images have high
diversity.
13.Boundary Distortion. Santurkar et al. [ 42] aimed to measure diversity
of generated samples using classiﬁcation methods. This phenomenon
can be viewed as a form of covariate shift in GANs wherein the generator
concentratesalargeprobabilitymassonafewmodesofthetruedistribution.
It is illustrated using two toy examples in Fig. 5. The ﬁrst example
regards learning a unimodal spherical Gaussian distribution using a vanilla
GAN [18]. As can be seen in Fig. 5.A, the spectrum (eigenvalues of the
covariance matrix) of GAN data shows a decaying behavior (unlike true
data). The second example considers binary classiﬁcation using logistic
regression where the true distribution for each class is a unimodal spherical
Gaussian. The synthetic distribution for one of the classes undergoes
boundary distortion which causes a skew between the classiﬁers trained
on true and synthetic data (Fig. 5.B). Naturally, such errors would lead
to poor generalization performance on true data as well. Taken together,
these examples show that a) boundary distortion is a form of covariate
shift that GANs can realistically introduce, and b) this form of diversity
loss can be detected and quantiﬁed even using classiﬁcation.
Speciﬁcally, Santurkar et al. proposed the following method to measure
boundary distortion introduced by a GAN:
(a)Train two separate instances of the given unconditional GAN, one for
each class in true dataset D (assume two classes).
(b)Generate a balanced dataset by drawing N/2 from each of these
GANs.
(c)Train a binary classiﬁer based on the labeled GAN dataset obtained
in Step 2 above.
(d)Train an identical, in terms of architecture and hyperparameters,
classiﬁer on the true data D for comparison.
15