Figure 16: Web interface given to annotators in the experiments conducted by Salimans et
al.[3]. Annotators are asked to distinguish computer generated images from real ones (left)
and are provided with feedback (right). Figure compiled from [3].
Figure 17: An example of a user judgment study by Snell et al.[118]. Left) Human judgments
of generated images (a) Fully connected network: Proportion of participants preferring SSIM
to MSE for each of 100 image triplets. (b) Deterministic conv. network: Distribution of image
quality ranking for MS-SSIM, MSE, and MAE for 1000 images from the STL-10 hold-out
set. Right) Image triplets consisting of—from left to right—the MSE reconstruction, the
original image, and the SSIM reconstruction. Image triplets are ordered, from top to bottom
and left to right, by the percentage of participants preferring SSIM. (c) Eight images for
which participants strongly preferred SSIM over MSE. (d) Eight images for which the smallest
proportion of participants preferred SSIM. Figure compiled from [118].
reconstructions produced by perceptually-optimized networks or by the
pixelwise-loss optimized networks. Participants were shown image triplets
with the original (reference) image in the center and the SSIM- and MSE-
optimized reconstructions on either side with the locations counterbalanced.
Participants were instructed to select which of the two reconstructed im-
ages they preferred (See Fig. 17). Similar approaches have been followed
in [54,55,56,57,84,119,120,121,122]. Often the ﬁrst few trials in these
experiments are spared for practice.
4.Evaluating Mode Drop and Mode Collapse. GANs have been re-
peatedly criticized for failing to model the entire data distribution, while
being able to generate realistically looking images. Mode collapse, a.k.athe
Helvetica scenario, is the phenomenon when the generator learns to map
several diﬀerent input zvectors to the same output (possibly due to low
model capacity or inadequate optimization [ 27]). It causes lack of diversity
in the generated samples as the generator assigns low probability mass to
signiﬁcant subsets of the data distribution’s support. Mode drop occurs
when some hard-to-represent modes of Prare simply “ignored” by Pg. This
is diﬀerent than mode collapse where several modes of Prare “averaged”
34