Wasserstein-1 distance between real and generated images, and is computed
as the statistical similarity between local image patches extracted from
Laplacian pyramid representations of these images [ 53]. We will discuss
SWD in more detail later under scores that utilize low-level image statistics.
This measure addresses both overﬁtting and mode collapse. If the generator
memorizes the training set, the critic trained on test data can distinguish
between samples and data. If mode collapse occurs, the critic will have
an easy job in distinguishing between data and samples. Further, it does
not saturate when the two distributions do not overlap. The magnitude of
the distance indicates how easy it is for the critic to distinguish between
samples and data.
The Wasserstein distance works well when the base distance is computed in
a suitable feature space. A key limitation of this distance is its high sample
and time complexity. These make Wasserstein distance less appealing as a
practical evaluation measure, compared to other ones (See [27]).
10.Birthday Paradox Test. This test approximates the support size6of a
discrete distribution. Arora and Zhang [ 27] proposed to use the birthday
paradox7test to evaluate GANs as follows:
(a) Pick a sample of size Sfrom the generated distribution
(b)Use an automated measure of image similarity to ﬂag the k(e.g.k=
20) most similar pairs in the sample
(c) Visually inspect the ﬂagged pairs and check for duplicates
(d) Repeat.
The suggested plan is to manually check for duplicates in a sample of
sizeS. If a duplicate exists, then the estimated support size is S2. It
is not possible to ﬁnd exact duplicates as the distribution of generated
images is continuous. Instead, a distance measure can be used to ﬁnd
near-duplicates ( e.g.using theL2norm). In practice, they ﬁrst created a
candidate pool of potential near-duplicates by choosing the 20 closest pairs
according to some heuristic measure, and then visually identiﬁed the near
duplicated. Following this procedure and using Euclidean distance in pixel
space, Arora and Zhang [ 27] found that with probability 50%, a batch
of about 400samples generated from the CelebA dataset [ 82] contains at
least one pair of duplicates for both DCGAN and MIX+DCGAN (thus
leading to support size of 4002). The birthday theorem assumes uniform
sampling. Arora and Zhang [ 27], however, claim that the birthday paradox
holds even if data are distributed in a highly nonuniform way. This test
can be used to detect mode collapse in GANs.
11.Classiﬁer Two-sample Tests (C2ST). The goal of two-sample tests is
to assess whether two samples are drawn from the same distribution [ 40].
6The support of a real-valued function fis the subset of the domain containing those
elements which are not mapped to zero.
7The “Birthday theorem” states that with probability at least 50%, a uniform sample (with
replacement) of size Sfrom a set of Nelements will have a duplicate given S >p
N.
12