gories: approximation-based and optimization-based ap-
proaches. Methods in the ﬁrst category approximate the
full-precision (32-bit) values with discrete low-bit ( e.g., bi-
nary) values via step functions in the forward pass [27, 30,
33, 19, 34, 15, 21, 22, 1]. Because the gradients of such
approximations are saturated, additional approximations in
the backward process are needed. As a consequence, the
use of different forward and backward approximations re-
sults in a gradient mismatch problem, which makes the op-
timization unstable. To avoid the approximation of gradi-
ents, some methods formulate the quantization of neural
networks as a discretely constrained optimization problem,
where the losses of the networks are incorporated [20, 10].
Unfortunately, optimization-based methods are only suit-
able for the quantization of weights. Moreover, the iterative
solution of the optimization problem suffers from a high
computational complexity during training.
Intuitively, if we can formulate the quantization opera-
tion as a simple non-linear function similar to common acti-
vation functions ( e.g., Sigmoid [17], ReLU [25] and Maxout
[6]), no approximation of gradients would be needed, and
the quantization of any learnable parameters in the DNNs,
including activations and weights, can be learned straight-
forwardly and efﬁciently. Inspired by this, we present a
novel perspective for interpreting and implementing quan-
tization in neural networks. Speciﬁcally, we formulate
quantization as a differentiable non-linear mapping func-
tion, termed the quantization function. As shown in Fig. 1,
the quantization function is formed as a linear combina-
tion of several Sigmoid functions with learnable biases and
scales. In this way, the proposed quantization function can
be learned in a lossless and end-to-end manner and works
for any weights and activations in neural networks, thereby
avoiding the gradient mismatch problem. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, the quantization function can be trained via continu-
ous relaxation of the steepness of the Sigmoid functions.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
•In contrast to existing low-bit quantization methods,
we are the ﬁrst to formulate quantization as a differen-
tiable non-linear mapping function, thereby providing
asimple/straightforward andgeneral/uniform solution
for any-bit weight and activation quantization without
suffering the severe gradient mismatch problem.
•We implement a simple and effective form of quanti-
zation networks that can be learned in a lossless and
end-to-end manner and that outperforms state-of-the-
art quantization methods on both image classiﬁcation
and object detection tasks.
2. Related Work
In this paper, we propose formulating the quantization
operation as a differentiable non-linear function. In thissection, we give a brief review of both low-bit quantization
methods and non-linear functions used in neural networks.
2.1. Low­Bit Quantization of Neural Networks
Approaches for quantizing full-precision networks into
low-bit networks can be roughly divided into two cate-
gories: approximation-based and optimization-based ap-
proaches. The ﬁrst approach is to approximate the 32-
bit full-precision values with discrete low-bit values in the
forward pass of the networks. BinaryConnect [4] directly
optimizes the loss of the network with weights Wre-
placed by sign( W), and it approximates the sign function
with the “hard tanh” function in the backward process to
avoid the zero-gradient problem. The binary weight net-
work (BWN) [27] adds scale factors for the weights during
binarization. Ternary weight network (TWN) [21] intro-
duces ternary weights and achieves improved performance.
Trained ternary quantization (TTQ) [34] proposes learning
both ternary values and scaled gradients for 32-bit weights.
DoReFa-Net [33] proposes quantizing 32-bit weights, ac-
tivations and gradients using different bit widths. Gradi-
ents are approximated by a customized form based on the
mean of the absolute values of the full-precision weights.
In [30], weights, activations, gradients and errors are all
approximated by low-bitwidth integers based on rounding
and shifting operations. Jacob et al. [15] propose an afﬁne
mapping of integers to real numbers that allows inference to
be performed using integer-only arithmetic. As discussed
before, approximation-based methods use different forward
and backward approximations, which causes a gradient mis-
match problem. Friesen and Domingos [5] observe that
setting targets for hard-threshold hidden units to minimize
losses is a discrete optimization problem. Zhuang et al. [35]
propose a two-stage approach to quantize the weights and
activations in a two-step manner. Lin et al. [23] approx-
imate full-precision weights with a linear combination of
multiple binary weight bases. Zhang et al. [31] propose a
ﬂexible non-uniform quantization method to quantize both
network weights and activations. Cai et al. [1] use several
piece-wise backward approximators to overcome the gradi-
ent mismatch problem. Zhou et al. [32] propose a step-
by-step decoupling operation to efﬁciently convert a pre-
trained full-precision convolutional neural network (CNN)
model into a low-precision version. As a speciﬁc quanti-
zation, HashNet [2] adopts a similar continuous relaxation
to train the hash function, where a single tanh function is
used for binarization. However, our training case (multi-
bit quantization of both activations and weights in multiple
layers) is substantially more complicated and challenging.
To avoid the gradient approximation problem,
optimization-based quantization methods have recently
been proposed. Such methods directly formulate the
quantization of neural networks as a discretely constrained
7309