Quantization Networks
Jiwei Yang1,2∗, Xu Shen2, Jun Xing3, Xinmei Tian1†, Houqiang Li1,
Bing Deng2, Jianqiang Huang2, Xian-sheng Hua2‡
1Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science,
University of Science and Technology of China
2Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
3Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
yjiwei@mail.ustc.edu.cn, junxnui@gmail.com, {xinmei,lihq }@ustc.edu.cn,
{shenxu.sx,dengbing.db,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs }@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Although deep neural networks are highly effective, their
high computational and memory costs severely hinder their
applications to portable devices. As a consequence, low-
bit quantization, which converts a full-precision neural net-
work into a low-bitwidth integer version, has been an active
and promising research topic. Existing methods formulate
the low-bit quantization of networks as an approximation or
optimization problem. Approximation-based methods con-
front the gradient mismatch problem, while optimization-
based methods are only suitable for quantizing weights and
can introduce high computational cost during the training
stage. In this paper, we provide a simple and uniform way
for weights and activations quantization by formulating it
as a differentiable non-linear function. The quantization
function is represented as a linear combination of several
Sigmoid functions with learnable biases and scales that
could be learned in a lossless and end-to-end manner via
continuous relaxation of the steepness of Sigmoid functions.
Extensive experiments on image classiﬁcation and object
detection tasks show that our quantization networks outper-
form state-of-the-art methods. We believe that the proposed
method will shed new lights on the interpretation of neural
network quantization.
1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
huge success in various domains, their high computational
and memory costs prohibit their deployment in scenarios
∗This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a re-
search intern.
†Corresponding author.
‡Corresponding author.
(a) Sigmoid
 (b) ReLU
(c) Maxout
 (d) Quantization
Figure 1: Non-linear functions used in neural networks.
where both computational and storage resources are limited.
Thus, the democratization of deep learning hinges on the
development of efﬁcient DNNs. Various techniques have
been proposed to lighten DNNs by either reducing the num-
ber of weights and connections or by quantizing the weights
and activations to lower bits. As exempliﬁed by ResNet
[8], SqueezeNet [13] and MobileNet [11], numerous efforts
have been devoted to designing networks with compact lay-
ers and architectures. Once trained, these networks can be
further compressed with techniques such as network prun-
ing [7], weight sharing [3] or matrix factorization [16].
Approaches for quantizing full-precision networks into
low-bit networks can be roughly divided into two cate-
1
7308