Figure 5: Boosting GPT-3.5 to ChatGPT using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback.
realize the pretraining of lexical, grammar, and semantics. ERNIE 2.0 uses seven different pretraining tasks,
covering three aspects: word level, sentence level, and semantic level. It uses continual learning, making the
knowledge in the previous training task retained and enabling the model to acquire long-distance memory. It
uses a Transformer encoder and introduces task embedding, enabling the model to distinguish different tasks
in the continual learning process. UniLM [60] uses three pretraining tasks: unidirectional LM, bidirectional
LM, and encoder-decoder LM. It can simultaneously complete three kinds of target tasks in the pretraining
stage through the self-attention layer mask mechanism. In the training stage, UniLM adopts the small-
segment mask strategy proposed by SpanBERT, and the loss function is composed of the loss functions of
the above three pretraining tasks. To maintain the contribution consistency on all loss functions, the three
pretraining tasks are trained simultaneously. Modeling and parameter sharing of multiple tasks make LMs
achieve good generalization ability in Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and NLG tasks.
Boosting for Different Downstream Tasks The pretraining models tend to be large-sized, so how to
match different downstream tasks is equally important. Some pretraining models that are trained on spe-
cialized corpora have appeared [63, 64, 65]. Cui et al. [63] propose the BERT-whole word masking model
(BERT-WWM). They directly use BERT in Chinese to be masked randomly according to the original MLM
training, resulting in the loss of semantic information. Since there is no explicit language boundary in
Chinese, it is easy to lose signiﬁcant meaning. ZEN [64] is a text encoder based on BERT, which adopts
N-gram to enhance performance and effectively integrates considerable granular text information with fast
convergence speed and good performance. Tsai et al. [65] propose an oriented multilingual sequence la-
beling model for sequence labeling tasks. The knowledge distillation method is adopted to achieve better
performance in the two tasks: part of speech labeling and morphological attribute prediction for multiple
low-resource languages. The inference time is shortened by 27 times.
Examples: ChatGPT and Bard As shown in Fig. 5, ChatGPT is ﬁne-tuned based on the PFM GPT-3.5
using RLHF. ChatGPT uses a different data collection setup compared to InstructGPT. First, a large dataset
with prompts and the desired output behaviors is collected. The dataset is used to ﬁne-tune GPT-3.5 with
supervised learning. Second, given the ﬁne-tuned model and a prompt, the model will generate several
model outputs. A labeler gives the desired score and ranks the output to compose a comparison dataset,
which is used to train the reward model. Finally, the ﬁne-tuned model (ChatGPT) is optimized against the
reward model using the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)[66] RL algorithm.
Another experimental conversational PFM, the Bard2, is developed by Google. Bard is based on the
LM for Dialogue Applications (LaMDA). LaMDA [67] is built upon the Transformer, which is pretrained
on 1.56T words of dialog data and web text. Safety and factual grounding are two main challenges for
2https://blog.google/technology/ai/bard-google-ai-search-updates/
15