relationship between the node’s k-order neighbor distribution (as positive examples) and non-adjacent nodes
(as negative examples), and use this to train the graph model. LINE [193] respectively proposes ﬁrst- and
second-order proximity to describe the local similarity between pairs of nodes in the graph from different
perspectives, and uses it to optimize node representation. Meanwhile, LINE uses negative sampling and
edge sampling techniques to optimize the second-order traversal and excessive training storage overhead.
VGAE [194] introduces a variational autoencoder to encode graph structure data, and model the node ﬁrst-
order neighbor through a GCN encoder and a simple inner product decoder.
Self Consistency In the ﬁeld of NLP and CV , contrastive learning as an efﬁcient self-supervised mech-
anism is widely used in the pretraining of models. In fact, the internal comparison mechanism of such
methods is based on the mutual information estimation of the original graph data and the augmented graph
data to maintain the consistency of the data itself, as shown in Fig. 14 (b). Inspired by contrastive learn-
ing, some studies have begun to generate augmented samples of original data samples in the graph model.
Among them, two augmented samples from the same original sample are regarded as positive pairs, and two
augmented samples from different original samples are regarded as negative pairs.
For node-level tasks, GCC [195] devises the pretext task as subgraph instance discrimination in and
across networks. And GCC also enhances the ability of GNNs to learn the intrinsic and transferable struc-
tural representations by introducing contrastive learning. Speciﬁcally, GCC samples subgraphs from the
whole graph as augmentations via random walk with restart and artiﬁcially designs positional node em-
bedding as node initial features. As a novel graph representation learning model, GCA [196] incorporates
various priors for topological and semantic aspects of the graph to achieve adaptive contrastive augmen-
tation. Speciﬁcally, GCA devises an enhancement scheme based on node centrality measures to highlight
important connection structures, while corrupting node features by adding noise to speciﬁc nodes to lead the
pretraining model to recognize underlying semantic information.
For graph-level tasks, some studies have attempted to introduce more diverse contrastive learning strate-
gies. Among them, You et al. [197] introduce four common graph augmentation tasks (i.e., node dropping,
edge perturbation, attribute masking, and subgraph sampling) into the GL model based on underlying prior
and propose a uniﬁed comparative learning framework: GraphCL. Meanwhile, GraphCL discusses in depth
the role of data augmentation in comparative learning and gives experimental demonstration that joint mul-
tiple augmentation strategies can improve model performance.
Cross Scale Consistency Unlike the above two methods that consider the consistency of elements in the
same scale, contrasting elements in graph data of different scales can also be used to train graph models,
e.g., node-subgraphs. Most of such methods have the idea of maximizing mutual information [198, 199].
Speciﬁcally, the readout function is usually used to obtain the summary of the graph/subgraph, and the MI
estimator can be calculated using the Jensen-Shannon divergence.
As a representative method, DGI [200] relies on maximizing the MI between the patch representation
and the summary of the corresponding high-level graphs, which are all derived using the established graph
convolutional network architecture, to learn the node representation. To generate negative samples on a
single graph, DGI corrupts the original graph by randomly scrambling node features while keeping the
structure unchanged. Similarly, Hassani and Khasahmadi propose CMVRL [201], which generates an addi-
tional structural view of a sample graph based on graph diffusion. The sample graph and a regular view are
sub-sampled together, and the node representation and graph representation are learned based on two shared
MLPs, and then contrast learning is achieved through the consistency loss provided by the discriminator.
SUBG-CON [202] samples a series of context subgraphs from the original graph and inputs them to
29