based on contrastive learning, encoder networks are used for pretraining on various data augmentation.
The parameters are trained by maximizing the distance between negative pairs (e.g., pairs with different
labels) and minimizing the distance between positive pairs (e.g., pairs with the same labels). To pretrain
the parameters of the backbone network, the DeepClustering [49] method divides the representations into
various clusters and labels these clusters as supervised signals.
2.3.3 Pretraining Tasks for GL
The pre-set tasks in GL are similar to other pretext tasks. However, they can be supervised or unsupervised
depending on the design. According to the pretraining purpose and potential motivation in GL, such tasks
can be divided into the following categories:
Graph Information Completion. This task refers to ﬁrstly masking part of the information in the
input graph, and then recovering the masked information based on the analysis of the remaining information
distribution. Similar tasks also exist in CV and NLP, and their goals are to ﬁll in hidden pixels or words,
respectively.
Graph Property Prediction. Different from directly modeling the information of the input graph, this
task aims to provide a variety of self-supervised signals by mining the potential properties of the input graph.
Speciﬁcally, on the one hand, it considers node attributes, local substructure, and connectivity information to
provide predictive regression tasks; on the other hand, it assigns pseudo-labels to nodes through information
such as clusters, structure density, and attribute similarity to provide classiﬁcation tasks.
Graph Consistency Analysis. The goal of this task is to maximize the consistency between samples
with similar semantic information in the graph embedding and minimize the agreement between samples
with unrelated semantic information. In the actual scenario, it can be divided into consistency analysis of
context/self/cross-scale according to different model training strategies.
Miscellaneous. Compared with using only one pretext task, some methods have designed some integra-
tion mechanisms to incorporate the advantages of multiple pretext tasks into a uniﬁed framework. Besides,
some graph data in speciﬁc ﬁelds have unique self-supervised signals with practical signiﬁcance that can be
used for pretraining under targeted design.
In summary, the transformer is an important component of the large model architecture, which helps
learn the important features and mine intrinsic structure in data. Different learning mechanisms can be used
for training PFMs according to the datasets and speciﬁc tasks. Especially, SSL is a promising mechanism
to learn knowledge embeddings from the data considering the large scale of unlabeled data in various areas.
RL provides a new way to ﬁne-tune the PFMs for downstream tasks by optimizing a policy (model) against
the reward model. How to design effective and efﬁcient tasks for PFMs to master the knowledge behind the
data is an important research topic.
3 PFMs for Natural Language Processing
NLP is a research ﬁeld that integrates linguistics and computer science. Its main research tasks include
part-of-speech tagging, named entity recognition, semantic role labeling, machine translation, question an-
swering, sentiment analysis, text summarization, text classiﬁcation, relationship extraction, event extraction,
etc. The idea of PFM ﬁrst gained popularity in NLP. Then CV and GL adopt the promising pretraining tech-
nology. The PFM trains on a large benchmark dataset and is ﬁne-tuned on the primary task dataset to obtain
a model which can solve new similar tasks. It models syntactic and semantic representations of words si-
10