Super Bowl championTrm Trm TrmTrm Trm Trm2T1T12T
50 wasTrm TrmTrm Trm4T3T
MASKTrmTrman
MASK MASKTrm TrmTrm TrmAmericanfootball
MASKTrmTrmgame
to determineTrm TrmTrm Trm10T9T
theTrmTrm11TFigure 4: The architecture of SpanBERT [44].
Joshi et al. [44] propose SpanBERT based on RoBERTa, which adopts the idea of dynamic masking
and single segment pretraining, as shown in Fig. 4 from [44]. The span mask and the Span Boundary
Objective (SBO) are also proposed to mask words of a certain length. The target task of the span-boundary
is to restore all the masked span (tokens) by the observed tokens at both ends. The training stage uses the
dynamic mask strategy proposed in the RoBERTa, instead of the mask during the data preprocessing. Unlike
BERT, SpanBERT randomly covers up a continuous text and adds the SBO training target. It predicts the
span using the token closest to the span boundary and eliminates the NSP pretraining task.
The BERT and GPT can only separate the training encoder and decoder without joint training in the
NLG task. Song et al. [59] propose the masked seq2seq pretraining model MASS. In the training stage,
the input sequence of the encoder is randomly masked as a continuous segment of length k. The masked
segment will be recovered through the MASS decoder. UniLM [60] completes the learning of the NLG
model by designing a different mask for two sentences in the input data. For the ﬁrst sentence, UniLM uses
the same structure as the Transformer encoder making each word notice its preceding and following words.
For the second sentence, each word can only notice all the words in the ﬁrst sentence and the preceding
words in the current sentence. Thus, the ﬁrst and second sentences of the model input form the classic
seq2seq pattern.
3.4 Boosting Methods
Boosting on Model Performance Most of the popular pretraining models need lots of pretraining data,
which imposes huge requirements on the hardware, making it challenging to retrain, and only ﬁne-tuning
can be done to the model. To solve these problems, some models appear. For example, ERNIE Tiny released
by Baidu is a miniaturized ERNIE [61], that reduces the number of layers and increases the prediction speed
by 4.3 times with a slight decrease in accuracy. Lan et al. propose the ALBERT [47] to reduce memory
consumption and training speed. However, it is undeniable that no matter what kind of compression is
done for these large-scale models, the performance of the models in these tasks will deteriorate sharply. It
requires paying attention to the efﬁcient representation of high-level semantic and grammatical information
and lossless compression in future works. By using word-embedded parameter factorization and hidden
parameter sharing between layers, ALBERT signiﬁcantly reduces the number of parameters of the model
without performance loss. It proposes the training task of SOP, which predicts the order of the two sentences
to improve the performance.
Boosting for Multi-task Learning ERNIE(Baidu) [61] is mainly composed of two parts, the Transformer
encoder and task embedding. In the Transformer encoder, the self-attention mechanism is used to capture
the context information of each token and generate context representation embedding. Task embedding is a
technique that applies different characteristics to a task. ERNIE 2.0 [62] introduces multi-task learning to
14