Figure 1: The history and evolution of PFMs.
is a growing trend in PFMs that deals with multimodal data, known as uniﬁed PFMs. This term refers to
models that can handle different types of data such as text, images, and audio. In this regard, we provide a
deﬁnition of uniﬁed PFMs and a review of the current state-of-the-art models in recent research. Notable
examples include OFA [26], UNIFIED-IO [27], FLA V A [28], BEiT-3 [29], and others.
According to the features of existing PFMs, we conclude that the PFMs have the following two major
advantages. First, minor ﬁne-tuning is required to enhance the model performance on downstream tasks.
Second, the PFMs have already been vetted on the quality aspect. Instead of building a model from scratch to
solve a similar problem, we can apply PFMs to task-related datasets. The great promise of PFMs has inspired
a wealth of related work to focus on the model efﬁciency [30], security [31, 32, 33, 34] and compression [35,
36].
1.2 Contribution and Organization
There are several survey studies [37, 8, 5, 6, 7, 1] that have reviewed the pretrained models for some speciﬁc
areas such as text generation [6], visual transformer [7], objection detection [8].
Bommasani et.al. [1] summarize the opportunities and risks of the foundation model. However, existing
works did not achieve a comprehensive review of PFMs in different areas (e.g., CV , NLP, GL, Speech,
Video) and different aspects such as pretraining tasks, efﬁciency, efﬁcacy, and privacy. In this survey, we
speciﬁcally track the evolution of PFMs in the NLP domain, as well as how pretraining is transferred to and
adopted by CV and GL. Compared with other surveys, there is no comprehensive introduction and analysis
of existing PFMs from all three ﬁelds. Unlike reviews of previous pretrained models, we summarize existing
models ranging from traditional models to PFMs with recent works in the three domains. Traditional models
emphasize static feature learning. Dynamic PFMs give an introduction to structures, which is the mainstream
research. We further present some other research for PFMs, including other advanced and uniﬁed PFMs,
model efﬁciency and compression, security, and privacy. Finally, we summarize future research challenges
and open problems in different domains. We also comprehensively present the related evaluation metrics
and datasets in Appendix F and G . In summary, the main contributions are as follows:
• We present a solid and up-to-date review of the development of PFM in NLP, CV , and GL. Over the re-
view, we discuss and provide insights about the generalized PFM design and pretraining methodology
among the three major application domains.
• We summarize the development of PFMs in other multimedia areas such as speech and video. Besides,
we discuss advanced topics about PFMs, including uniﬁed PFMs, model efﬁciency and compression,
and security and privacy.
5