Non-Contrastive Learning While contrastive learning shows an effect by capturing the similarity and
dissimilarity among the unlabelled examples, and further converging to an average local optimum which
represents the general representations, recent non-contrastive SSL methods such as BYOL and SimSiam
also shows the SOTA performance without the design of comparison between negative pairs. Based on the
analysis of the eigenspaces, Tian et al. [182] study the behavior of non-contrastive SSL training and prove
that the effects are from both the predictor and stop-gradient signal. Based on this theory, a novel and simple
DirectPred method is proposed as a by-product of this theoretical exploration.
D Pretext Task Taxonomy on CV
Pretext tasks are always designed to use pseudo labels generated from the data itself to pretrain the proxy
model. There are ﬁve categories of pretext tasks for self-supervised: 1) generation-based methods; 2)
transformation-based methods; 3) context-based methods; 4) semantic-based methods; 5) view-based meth-
ods.
Generation-Based Methods This type of method is GAN-based in the deep learning era. For image gen-
eration, there are several applications including image colorization [138, 359], image super-resolution [360],
image editing [361], context encoders [137], image-to-image translation [324], etc. On the other hand,
video generation tasks contains future prediction [145], video action recoginition [241], video genera-
tion [362, 363], and video representaion [364].
Transformation-Based Methods Transformation is a typical technology that serves as a data augmen-
tation method to enlarge the training dataset in traditional DL. However, if transformations of the same
image are labeled as positive samples and others as negative samples, this pretext task can be used for
self-supervised pretraining [166]. Popular transformation in self-supervised learning (SSL) contains color
transformation (such as Jitter, Gaussian blur, and adjusting brightness) and geometric transformation (such
as ﬂipping, cropping, scaling, and rotation).
Context-Based Methods Basically, the design and construction of many artiﬁcial tasks, such as solving
Jigsaw puzzles [140], comparing context similarity, and discriminating sequence order. Solving Jigsaw
puzzles is deﬁned as identifying the correct position of patches from an image. This task can help the model
to learn an encoder for transfer learning [365, 141], and the feature representations are effective after the
pretrained dataset is big enough. In addition, the design of video Jigsaw is also proposed for unsupervised
learning [366]. Differently, context similarity tries to label the patches from the same images as positive
samples and others as negative samples, then use a predeﬁned similarity function to scale the distance
between different pairs [49].
Semantic-Based Methods Semantic-based methods contain object detection, semantic segmentation,
and depth prediction. These tasks also involve pretext tasks because their pixel-based labels can learn
a more robust feature representation than simpler tasks. These pre-text tasks always establish on video
dataset [367, 368].
View-Based Methods This type of method contains both single-modal data and multi-modal data. For
the single-modal data, the original data is treated as the anchor and different viewpoints generate its positive
pair samples. Sometimes the time slices in sequence-based data are treated as negative pairs because the
scene is changed as time goes [369]. In addition, multi-modal data is usual in view-based methods, which
are also called cross-modal-based methods here. Such as audio-video cooperative learning [370], RGB and
optical ﬂow cross-modal distance training [250].
52