performing masked data modeling on both unimodal and multimodal data. To process different modalities,
every Multiway Transformer block has a shared self-attention module, and a pool of feed-forward networks.
It is a giant-size foundation model that contains 1.9B parameters. Experimental results show that BEIT-3
can outperform SOTA models on both vision and vision-language tasks.
Multi-transformer Model FLA V A [28] is an alignment model that targets all modalities at once and
aims at solving vision and language tasks, and vision-language tasks. It utilizes a common transformer
model architecture to learn strong representations from unimodal and multimodal data. An image encoder
transformer is used to capture unimodal image representations. A text encoder transformer is adopted to
process unimodal text information. A multimodal encoder transformer takes both encoded unimodal images
and text as inputs and integrates their representations for multimodal reasoning. During pretraining, masked
image modeling (MIM) and MLM losses are applied to the image and text encoders, respectively. On the
other hand, masked multimodal modeling (MMM) and image-text matching (ITM) loss are used over paired
image-text data. For downstream tasks, classiﬁcation heads are applied to the outputs from the image, text,
and multimodal encoders, respectively, for visual recognition, language understanding, and multimodal
reasoning tasks. FLA V A shows good performance on 35 tasks across different domains. A noticeable
advantage is that smaller datasets it used compared with other models.
Comb-transformer Model UNIMO [260] can learn both single modality and multimodalities with one
model to achieve robust and generalizable representations. It employs multi-layer self-attention Transform-
ers to learn general textual and visual representations simultaneously and uniﬁes them into the same se-
mantic space via cross-modal contrastive learning (CMCL). The main idea behind CMCL is to keep paired
image and text representations close to the representation space while keeping non-paired representations
far away. All of them are encoded by the same uniﬁed-modal Transformer in pairs or individually, and the
representations of images and texts are extracted to compute the contrastive loss.
7 Other Advanced Topics on PFMs
As the number of parameters of the pretraining model increases, the pretraining model requires more mem-
ory and computing resources. It increases the training cost of PFMs and limits their deployment on resource-
constrained devices. Therefore, to improve the efﬁciency of the pretraining model, PFM improves compu-
tational efﬁciency from the following two aspects: model efﬁciency and model compression. The model
efﬁciency and compression of the PFM refer to simplifying the redundancy of model parameters and struc-
ture. Under the condition that the task completion degree is not affected, the model with fewer parameters
and a more concise structure is obtained.
7.1 Model Efﬁciency
Model efﬁciency devotes to exploring more efﬁcient pretraining methods to pretrain large-scale PFMs with
a lower-cost solution. More efﬁcient learning algorithms require more effective training methods and more
efﬁcient model architecture. Traditional pretraining tasks may be inefﬁcient. For example, the commonly
used masked token prediction task requires the model to predict masked tokens based on context. However,
the masked tokens in the samples are usually a subset of the input tokens, and the model can only learn from
this part of the tokens, so the training efﬁciency is low. To solve this problem, ELECTRA [30] proposes an
RTD task that predicts whether each input marker is replaced by other tokens, which enables the ELECTRA
37