Labelled (Ground Truth ) Unlabelled Labelled (Pseudo  Label )
Supervised Semi -Supervised Unsupervised Self-SupervisedFigure 16: Schematic of different supervision modes.
labeled data is provided, only the attributes and structure distribution of graph data (i.e., (ci;Gci)) can be
used. Self-supervised GL is a special case of both supervised and unsupervised learning. Speciﬁcally,
self-supervised learning mainly uses pretext tasks (e.g., clustering, completion, and partition) to mine its
own supervised information (i.e., pseudo-labels) from large-scale unsupervised graph data, and trains the
GL modelMGLthrough the self-supervised information, so that it can learn to the valuable features of
downstream tasks. In other words, the supervised information of self-supervised learning is not manually
labeled, but the pretext tasks automatically construct supervised information from large-scale unsupervised
data for supervised learning or training. Semi-supervised learning is a combination of unsupervised and
supervised learning, who aims at learning data distribution to predict unlabeled data to solve the problem of
difﬁculty in obtaining labeled data in real scenarios. In GL, semi-supervised learning refers to the realization
of pattern recognition given a few labeled data and mass unlabeled data.
Learning Mode The GL model MGLis optimized by the given training samples, and adjusted on the
validation samples to participate in the test. According to the visibility of the graph data at different stages,
the learning settings of GL model MGLcan be classiﬁed into two categories: inductive learning and trans-
ductive learning.
Deﬁnition 7. Inductive Learning , which is the most common setting in machine learning tasks, trains the
model on labeled data and then tests on samples that have never appeared in the training stage. For-
mally, given a training sample f(ci;Gci;yi)gNl
i=1,f(cj;Gcj)gNu
j=1, whereNlandNuare the numbers of
labeled/unlabeled samples. Inductive learning learns a function find:G7!Y so thatfindis expected to
be a good classiﬁer on the future graph data f(ck;Gck)g, beyondf(cj;Gcj)gNu
j=1.
Deﬁnition 8. Transductive Learning is different from inductive learning in that all samples are visi-
ble during both the training and testing stages. Formally, given a training sample f(ci;Gci;yi)gNl
i=1,
f(cj;Gcj)gNu
j=1, transductive learning learns a function ftrans:Gl+u7!Yl+uso thatftransis expected to
be a good classiﬁer on the unlabeled data f(cj;Gcj)gNu
j=1.
Under the supervised setting (including semi-/self-supervised), the uniﬁed classiﬁer optimization meth-
ods of inductive learning and transductive learning can be written as:
L=1
KKX
i=1L(f()
(ci;Gci);yi); (19)
whereLis the cross-entropy loss, cican be node, edge or subgraph of its associated graph Gci, andf()

denotes inductive/transductive function with parameter .
Compared with using only one pretext task, some methods have designed some integration mechanisms
to incorporate the advantages of multiple pretext tasks into a uniﬁed framework.
46