Big Data in the Wild
Data Augmentation or Self-labeling strategyEncoder
(ConvNet, 
RNN, ···)Pretext Task
Unlabeled imagesPre-training
Labelling InformationBackbone
(ConvNet, 
RNN, ···)Transferred
Labeled imagesAverage
RepresentationDownstream
TaskMLPDownstream Supervised Learning…
…
Data in the Domain
Figure 6: The general pipeline for SSL. The top part represents the pretraining, and the bottom stream
obtains transferred parameters from above to learn downstream supervised tasks.
such as Jigsaw puzzles, or the comparison of different patches from images as pretext tasks. This allows for
learned representations to be generalized to various downstream tasks, including classiﬁcation, detection,
recognition, segmentation, etc.
However, it is costly to rely on data annotations when the learning tasks become more complicated,
making the labeling process more arduous and time-consuming than the actual learning. This is where
SSL is urgently needed and how it can further fuel the progress of deep learning methods. To reduce the
dependency on data labeling, unlabeled data are trained with self-supervision by matching, contrasting, or
generating in SSL.
The general pipeline of SSL is shown in Fig. 6. During the pretraining stage, a pretext task is designed
for the encoder networks to solve. The artiﬁcial labels for this pretext task are automatically generated based
on speciﬁc attributes of the data, such as image patches from the same origin being labeled as “positive” and
those from different origins as “negative”. Then, the encoder networks are trained to solve the pretext task
by supervised learning methods. Since shallow layers extract ﬁne-grained details such as edges, angles, and
textures, while deeper layers capture task-related high-level features such as semantic information or image
contents, learned encoders on pretext tasks can be transferred to downstream supervised tasks. During this
stage, the parameters of the backbone are ﬁxed, and only a simple classiﬁer, such as a two-layer Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), needs to be learned. Considering the limited workload in the downstream training stage,
this learning process is commonly referred to as ﬁne-tuning. In summary, the representations learned during
the pretraining stage in SSL can be reused on other downstream tasks and achieve comparable results.
In this section, we introduce different tasks for pretraining PFMs in CV . The PFMs can be trained by
speciﬁc pretext tasks, frame order, generation, reconstruction, memory bank, sharing, clustering and so on.
We summarize the PFMs proposed in CV in Table 2 .
4.1 Learning by Speciﬁc Pretext Task
In the early stage of unsupervised learning, the network is trained by designing a special pretext task and
predicting the answer to this task. Dosovitskiy et al. [134, 135] pretrain the Exemplar CNN to discriminate
the different patches from the unlabelled data. The experiments prove the designs can learn useful represen-
tations transferred to the standard recognition assignments. In the method based on context prediction [136],
a handcrafted supervised signal about the position information serves as the label for the pair classiﬁcation.
Inpainting [137] aims to pretrain models by predicting the missed center part. Because inpainting is a
19