B Traditional Learning Methods
B.1 Traditional Text Learning
NLP is a research ﬁeld that integrates linguistics and computer science. Its main research tasks include
part-of-speech tagging, named entity recognition, semantic role labeling, machine translation, question an-
swering, sentiment analysis, text summarization, text classiﬁcation, relationship extraction, event extraction,
etc. The LM can be considered the cornerstone of the downstream NLP tasks. It experiences four processes:
grammar rule LM, probabilistic LM, neural network LM, and pretraining LM. A PFM trains on a large
benchmark dataset to obtain a model which can solve new similar tasks, which has become a new hotspot
in current LM research.
Word representations play a signiﬁcant role in downstream tasks, which is the basis of NLP. The N-gram
model preprocesses text features and encodes adjacent Nwords as a group, which makes it overly depen-
dent on the richness of the training corpus. Otherwise, data-sparse is likely to occur, and the computational
complexity will increase exponentially with the increase of N. Neural Network LM (NNLM) [11] adopts
the idea of word vector for the ﬁrst time, and the low-dimensional word vector of distributed representation
can solve the discrete problem caused by word embedding well. However, it is still challenging to solve
the problem of high computational complexity. The computational complexity of the word2vec model is
independent of the selected window size but is determined by the dictionary size and the word vector di-
mension. Many downstream tasks can be signiﬁcantly improved by training on a large corpus using word
vector embedding after initial training. However, the problem of polysemy for the static word vector is still
unsolved, and it still belongs to the shallow LM [276] [277]. Therefore, more effective models are urgently
needed to deal with the dataset more ﬂexibly. To capture high-level concepts of context, such as polysemy
elimination, syntactic structure, etc. Neelakantan et al. [278] propose to learn multiple embeddings per word
type. Zhou et al. [279] integrate the features on both dimensions of the matrix to enrich semantics by using
subword information. Based on the Continuous Bag Of Words (CBOW) [12] in word2vec, Hui et al. [280]
ﬁne-tune the generated word vectors for emotion and obtain the word vectors containing both semantic
meaning and emotional tendency, which signiﬁcantly improved the performance in the Weibo sentiment
classiﬁcation task. Liu et al. [281] propose a model of hierarchical translation for machine translation. It
uses the neural LM based on RNN as the word vector generation model. Liang et al. [282] propose an
approach based on the double-layer self-attention mechanism for machine reading comprehension, and the
model is divided into three parts: single document encoder, multi-document encoder, and answer predic-
tion. In the single document encoder, the problem of the context information is represented by the Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) model. Zhang et al. [283] propose an INDependent RNN (INDRNN) and attention
mechanism for user intention classiﬁcation, using word vectors generated by word2vec as input. The model
introduces a word-level attention mechanism to effectively quantify the contribution of domain vocabulary
to the intention category.
B.2 Traditional Image Learning
There are several types of neural networks in the deep learning era, from the beginning of most famous
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to the subsequent Attention- and Transformer-based networks. A
deep neural network refers to an artiﬁcial neural network with more hidden layers, and more parameters are
used to represent the target model, which leads to the SOTA performance on the benchmark dataset from
image to video. Here, we introduce the milestone networks in CV chronologically.
47