Saturation Phenomena Google Research [274] observed the nonlinear relationship between the perfor-
mance of upstream and downstream tasks. The higher training accuracy with more data on the upstream
tasks does not always lead to better performance on the target downstream tasks. This observation challenges
the most intuitive understanding of the pretraining process. Even in the most extreme case, the performance
of upstream and downstream is at odds.
Pretext Task There are too many self-supervised tasks, also known as pretext tasks. The pretext task can
be used for any downstream tasks, such as detection and classiﬁcation. It is difﬁcult to match the relationship
between pretext tasks and downstream tasks.
Task-based Graph Much of the pretraining on the graph is based on the task graph. Different tasks
construct different graphs, where nodes need to be reused. This makes it impossible to pretrain on the graph
by introducing as much data as NLP and CV .
8.5 Open Problems for Future PFMs
First of all, a big convergence of text, image, graph, and multimodal pretraining is expected. Till the survey
is written, no work has considered the graph in their uniﬁed PFMs. All of the SOTA uniﬁed models mainly
focus on the language, vision, and language-vision tasks, while neglecting the importance of the graph in the
data domain. Second, a uniﬁed backbone architecture for uniﬁed PFMs in future research will become more
popular. It can be seen that a uniﬁed PFM model which only has a large-scale transformer as its backbone,
i.e., a single-transformer model, is more focused by researchers than other types of uniﬁed PFMs. Third, a
uniﬁed PFM is expected to achieve SOTA transfer performance for all different tasks in all data domains,
including text, image, graph, and multimodalities. Most uniﬁed PFMs are only outstanding in a single data
domain, whereas the performance in other domains is not competitive. BEiT-3 [29] shows a great example
in both vision and vision-language tasks towards this research direction. Besides, in terms of RL usage
in PFMs, even though ChatGPT build the milestone in NLP, CV and GL do not have signiﬁcant research
published yet. More work in this direction is expected in the future.
9 Conclusion
Existing PFMs in text, image, and graph domains are principally summarized in this survey. Firstly, we
introduce the basic components of NLP, CV , and GL. Then, we provide a summary of existing models
designed for pretraining in the three domains and summarize the necessary information in terms of model
structures. Furthermore, we study some other research for PFMs, including other advanced and uniﬁed
PFMs, model efﬁciency and compression, and security and privacy. Finally, we present the main challenges
and open problems in PFM research.
42