A Comprehensive Survey on Pretrained Foundation Models: A
History from BERT to ChatGPT
Ce Zhou1* Qian Li2Chen Li2Jun Yu3Yixin Liu3Guangjing Wang1
Kai Zhang3Cheng Ji2Qiben Yan1Lifang He3Hao Peng2Jianxin Li2
Jia Wu4Ziwei Liu5Pengtao Xie6Caiming Xiong7Jian Pei8
Philip S. Yu9Lichao Sun3
1Michigan State University,2Beihang University,3Lehigh University,
4Macquarie University,5Nanyang Technological University,6University of California San Diego,
7Salesforce AI Research,8Duke University,9University of Illinois at Chicago
Abstract
Pretrained Foundation Models (PFMs) are regarded as the foundation for various downstream tasks
with different data modalities. A PFM (e.g., BERT, ChatGPT, and GPT-4) is trained on large-scale data
which provides a reasonable parameter initialization for a wide range of downstream applications. In
contrast to earlier approaches that utilize convolution and recurrent modules to extract features, BERT
learns bidirectional encoder representations from Transformers, which are trained on large datasets as
contextual language models. Similarly, the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) method employs
Transformers as the feature extractor and is trained using an autoregressive paradigm on large datasets.
Recently, ChatGPT shows promising success on large language models, which applies an autoregres-
sive language model with zero shot or few shot prompting. The remarkable achievements of PFM have
brought signiﬁcant breakthroughs to various ﬁelds of AI in recent years. Numerous studies have pro-
posed different methods, datasets, and evaluation metrics, raising the demand for an updated survey.
This study provides a comprehensive review of recent research advancements, challenges, and op-
portunities for PFMs in text, image, graph, as well as other data modalities. The review covers the
basic components and existing pretraining methods used in natural language processing, computer vi-
sion, and graph learning. Additionally, it explores advanced PFMs used for different data modalities and
uniﬁed PFMs that consider data quality and quantity. The review also discusses research related to the
fundamentals of PFMs, such as model efﬁciency and compression, security, and privacy. Finally, the
study provides key implications, future research directions, challenges, and open problems in the ﬁeld of
PFMs. Overall, this survey aims to shed light on the research of the PFMs on scalability, security, logi-
cal reasoning ability, cross-domain learning ability, and the user-friendly interactive ability for artiﬁcial
general intelligence.
*The authors contributed equally to this research. Correspondence to Ce Zhou( zhouce@msu.edu ) and Qian Li ( liqian@
act.buaa.edu.cn ).
1arXiv:2302.09419v3  [cs.AI]  1 May 2023