6.3 PFMs for Multimodal
The multimodal PFM among text and image can be divided into two categories: single-stream model and
cross-stream model. The single-stream model refers to integrating text information and visual information
at the beginning of the model. The Cross-stream model refers to text information and visual information
encoded by two independent coding modules, respectively. Then different modal information is fused by
mutual attention mechanism.
Single-Stream Model VisualBERT [243] inputs text and images into the model simultaneously, which
are aligned and fused using Transformer’s self-attention mechanism. The input of the text is the same
as BERT, and the input of the image is the image features extracted by Fasters-RCNN. VisualBERT also
does pretraining and then ﬁne-tuning the speciﬁc task. It adopts two pretraining tasks, namely MLM and
sentence-image prediction, determining whether the input sentence describes the corresponding image. The
structure of Unicoder-VL [244] is very similar to VisualBERT, except for the processing of the image.
Unicoder-VL extracts the image feature through Faster-RCNN and concatenates the feature with image
position-encoding mapping to the same space. It enhances the image label prediction task, which predicts
the categories of images. The pretraining task of VL-BERT [245] is the same as Unicoder-VL. The image
input of VL-BERT includes four parts: the image region features extracted by Fasters-RCNN, the location
of the region in the original image, location coding, fragment encoding, and [IMG] encoding.
Cross-Stream Model In ViLBERT [246], the text and image modes are ﬁrst encoded separately, and
their outputs go through a standard attention module. This module is based on the Transformer structure.
Still, in the self-attention mechanism, each module uses its query to calculate attention with the value and
key of another module to integrate the information between different modules. The model is pretrained on
two tasks. The ﬁrst task is the mask task, which is the same as BERT. On the image side, the goal of the
task is that when the region image is masked, the classiﬁcation distribution of the output of the model can
be as consistent as possible with the output distribution of the model used to extract the region features
(such as Faster-RCNN). The second task is the language image matching task. DALL-E is a series of deep
learning models developed by OpenAI to generate images from natural language prompts. The ﬁrst version
of DALL-E uses a transformer-based architecture, similar to the one used in the GPT LMs, to process the
textual prompts and generate image-like representations. The model is trained on a dataset of images and
their associated textual descriptions based on GPT-3. DALL-E 2 [247] is the improved version by employing
contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) [248] for capturing semantic association between image-
text pairs and GLIDE diffusion model [249] for text-conditional image synthesis. Furthermore, GPT-4 is
proposed by OpenAI recently. It is a large-scale multimodal model which adopts RLHF and demonstrates
human-level performance on various professional and academic benchmarks.
Based on the multi-modal data containing more available information than previous single-modality
data, thus the performance of these models gets enhanced by combining with the SSL on the benchmark
dataset. Cross and Learn [250] is the ﬁrst method that reveals crossmodal information as an alternative
source of supervision and obtains powerful feature representations from combining crossmodal loss and
diversity loss in both RGB and optical ﬂow modalities. Different from the existing methods that learn
feature representations from only a single task in cross-domain datasets, Ren and Lee et al. [251] propose
a novel deep multi-task network to learn more generalizable visual representations to overcome the domain
difference and further utilize the cross-domain information in different tasks. In that paper, the cross-domain
datasets are real and synthetic datasets generated by a GAN-based network, while the multiple tasks are the
predictions of the surface normal, depth, and instance contour in RGB images. This model performs better
34