6.1 PFMs for Speech
In the ﬁeld of speech, wav2vec [226] obtains speech representation by capturing contextual information on
large-scale unlabeled datasets, and ﬁne-tuning on a few samples by noise comparison binary classiﬁcation
task, which greatly improves the performance of downstream tasks. Furthermore, vq-wav2vec [227] and
wav2vec 2.0 [228] propose a discrete unsupervised pretraining method on the basis of wav2vec, discretizing
the original continuous speech signal, so that the methods in the mature NLP community can be migrated
and applied. Meanwhile, lots of research have tried to design different mechanisms to use the representation
obtained by speech pretraining as the initial input, and apply it to different tasks, e.g., automatic speech
recognition [229, 228], phoneme recognition [230], and speech synthesis [231]. In particular, the extensive
application of spoken language understanding has promoted the research of joint pretraining of speech and
text. For example, SpeechBERT [229] applies MLM to speech and text pairs to perform representation
learning on discrete information. Unlike [232], which relies on a large amount of labeled data for joint pre-
training, SPLAT [233] uses unlabeled speech data to pretrain the speech embedding module, and proposes a
label-level alignment method suitable for label-level downstream tasks based on sequence alignment. Mu-
sicBERT [234] is a pretrained model designed for processing music data. It was developed by training on
a vast symbolic music corpus consisting of over one million songs. To improve the pretraining process
with symbolic music data, MusicBERT employs several mechanisms, such as OctupleMIDI encoding and a
bar-level masking strategy. Huang et al. [235] suggest incorporating a metrical structure in the input data,
which allows Transformers to better recognize the hierarchical structure of music at the beat-bar-phrase
level. AudioTransformer [236] is a model that enhances the performance of Transformer architectures by
implementing certain techniques, such as pooling, which were previously used in convolutional networks.
Verma et al. [236] demonstrate how they leverage multi-rate signal processing ideas based on wavelets to
improve the Transformer embeddings and obtain better results.
6.2 PFMs for Video
Video is similar to the RGB features of image and sequence information of the text. Many meaningful
explorations in self-supervised video representation learning can not only perform efﬁciently well in video
datasets but also generalize to the learning in other areas. Odd-One-Out Networks (O3N) [237] is a tech-
nique that targets to predict the odd video subsequence among real subsequences sampled from a video in
a training dataset. The experiments are conducted by using different video-clip encoders for O3N to prove
consistent improvements of this pretraining design. Similarly, Shufﬂe and Learn [238] aims to learn the
correct temporal order from a sequence of frames in a video. However, Kim et al. [239] designed a new
self-supervised task called Space-Time Cubic Puzzles to train 3D CNNs. This task requires a pretrained
backbone to arrange permuted 3D spatiotemporal crops. The performance of downstream tasks proves that
effective video representations have been learned while solving such puzzles.
Inspired by the contrastive learning in images, many pretraining models in the video also utilize the con-
trastive loss to learn video presentations for downstream tasks. Inter-Intra Contrastive (IIC) framework [240]
can learn video representations by using positive and negative pairs generated from different videos. Specif-
ically, different modalities in the same video are treated as positive pairs, and video clips from different
videos as negative ones. Temporal Contrastive Pretraining (TCP) [241] is another contrastive method based
on CPC to learn video representations. Different from the existing GAN-based method that generates fu-
ture frames for the video directly, TCP can predict the latent representation of future frames of the video,
which is better for long-term predictions. Sequence Contrastive Learning (SeCo) [242] is a novel method
considering both intra- and inter-frame instance discrimination in sequence order-based task.
33