the encoder to obtain the pooled central node and subgraph representation. For the speciﬁed node, the
context subgraph is expressed as a positive sample, and other randomly sampled subgraphs are expressed as
a negative sample. The contrast loss of the latent space will force the encoder to identify positive samples
and negative samples in order to distinguish different nodes based on regional structure information.
5.3 Learning by Graph Property Prediction
Considering the attribute and structural information of the graph as the target of information completion,
pretraining based on graph property prediction (GPP) can also be used to build the graph model in different
forms. One of the most common methods is to generate self-supervised signals by exploring the auxiliary
property in the graph data and to take the graph property prediction task as the pretraining task of the graph
model. According to the different settings of the pretext task, it can roughly classify two categories: property
regression and property classiﬁcation.
Property Regression (PR) In the graph model, different from the GIC mentioned above, property re-
gression primarily focuses on mining the relationship between the broader numerical structure and property
attributes within the graph. Speciﬁcally, this branch of methods extracts richer self-supervised signals in
graph data for pretraining graph models.
For example, similar but different from masking node attributes, the goal of NodeProperty [189] is to
predict each node’s auxiliary property in the graph, e.g., degree, local node importance, and local clustering
coefﬁcient. In other words, NodeProperty is used to encourage GNN to capture richer local structural infor-
mation while optimizing the speciﬁc downstream tasks. Speciﬁcally, NodeProperty regards the node degree
as a representative local node property, i.e., self-supervised signal, and takes other node properties as future
work. Meanwhile, NodeProperty emphasizes that the intuition of devising self-supervised pretext tasks re-
lated to local node property is to ultimately guide the feature embedding of GNN (i.e., node representation)
to save this information, which relies on the assumption that the node property information is relevant to the
particular task.
Property Classiﬁcation (PC) Different from the property regression task, the task of property classiﬁ-
cation is usually implemented by deﬁning pseudo-labels based on a certain distribution in the graph data,
which is a typical self-supervised method. Among them, the structure density, similarity of node attributes,
and difference between local and global distributions are the most commonly used. We will brieﬂy introduce
the application of such methods in GL pretraining.
Among these methods, clustering is the most common and effective source of pseudo-labels. Among
them, M3S [203] designs a multi-stage training strategy, using the idea of graph clustering to iteratively
train the graph encoder, achieving enlarged labeled data with virtual labels in the case of very small sam-
ples. You et al. [188] further propose two pretraining strategies. Among them, Node Clustering assigns K
(hyper-parameter) pseudo labels to nodes based on attribute clustering and pretrain node representation by
node classiﬁcation. In addition, You et al. also present Graph Partitioning based on the topology density
assumption. In Graph Partitioning, the nodes of a graph are divided into approximately equal K(hyper-
parameter) subsets to minimize the number of edges connecting nodes among subsets, and then pseudo
labels are provided for nodes.
In addition to clustering methods, some researchers generate pseudo labels based on other statistical
characteristics of graph data. For instance, in the molecular ﬁeld, Rong et al. [204] use the molecular bonds
of subgraphs and related statistical information to guide GNN to learn Context-Sensitive Properties (CSP)
30