and then apply them to prediction. Rong et al. [204] propose a Motif Prediction (MP) task, which can be
expressed as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem, in which each motif corresponds to a label. Speciﬁcally,
let’s assume that Kmotifs in molecular data are considered. For a speciﬁc molecule (abstracted as graph
G), they use RDKit to detect whether each motif appears in G, and then take it as the target of the motif
prediction task.
5.4 Learning by Masked Autoencoder
The masked autoencoder (MAE) is ﬁrst applied in MAGE [205], the masked autoencoders for self-supervised
learning on graphs. Following MAE [154], MGAE operates on a partial network structure (without masked
edges) that is based on convolutions. Besides, the decoder of MGAE is designed to model the cross-
correlation between the head and tail nodes of an anchor edge. Empirical results demonstrate that MGAE
performs better than traditional graph autoencoders and graph SSL approaches. Furthermore, GMAE [206]
extends this approach by using a transformer instead of convolutions and reconstructing the features of
masked nodes rather than masked edges. In addition to empirical improvements, MaskGAE [207] further
provides theoretical justiﬁcations for the potential beneﬁts of masked graph modeling. Designing algorithms
to accommodate graphs of various complex properties is a promising direction. For instance, to tackle the
heterogeneous graphs scenario, HGMAE [208] proposes meta-path masking and adaptive attribute masking
with a dynamic mask to enable effective and stable learning on complex graph structure. Moreover, several
training strategies are developed, including meta-path-based edge reconstruction to incorporate complex
structural information, target attribute restoration to utilize various node attributes, and positional feature
prediction to encode node positional information. Besides dealing with more complex graph structures, how
to improve the learning efﬁciency of MAE on graph data remains an open question.
5.5 Other Learning Strategies on Graph Data
In addition to the above methods, there are lots of pretraining methods that use relatively novel or hy-
brid strategies. For example, CG3[209] generates an improved node representation by designing a semi-
supervised consistency loss to maximize the consistency between different views of the same data or data
from the same category. Next, CG3uses the graph generation loss related to the input feature to extract the
potential deterministic relationship between the data feature and the input graph topology as a supplementary
supervision signal for SSL.
Based on the attention mechanism, Graph-Bert [210] trains itself to reconstruct node attributes and
topological structure with sampled linkless subgraphs within their local contexts. GMI [211] extends the
traditional mutual information computing idea from the vector space to the graph domain and proposes to
jointly maximize feature mutual information (between the node’s embedding and raw features of its neigh-
bors) and edge mutual information (embedding of two adjacent nodes) for graph representation learning.
GPT-GNN [212] proposes a self-supervised graph generation task to guide itself to capture the topological
and semantic attributes of the graph. GPT-GNN roughly divides the possibility of graph generation into
attribute generation and edge generation to untangle the intrinsic dependence between node attributes and
graph topology.
5.6 Summary
In the graph model, as traditional feature learning methods are often accompanied by information loss in
the process of feature learning, and the information taken into consideration is relatively one-sided, the
31