B.2.4 Attention-Based Networks
Based on the success of CNNs in the area of CV , the attention module is designed to equip with the popular
CNNs. For example, SENet [330] proposes a channel attention module, which won ﬁrst place in the com-
petition of ILSVRC2017. In addition, CBAM [331] sequentially infers attention maps along both channel
and spatial dimensions. Many innovative works, such as GCNet [332] and CCNet [333], are inspired by
this idea of soft-attention mechanism, which outperforms the traditional CNNs on major benchmarks for
both recognition and segmentation tasks. In particular, the self-attention mechanism [334], calculating the
response at a position among all entities in a sequence by attending to all positions within the same se-
quence, is proposed to estimate the relevance of one position to other positions in feature maps. To control
the expected entities and model more complex relations among different elements in the sequence, masked
self-attention and multi-head attention [38] are the key components proposed to substitute the function of
convolutions in the era of transformers.
B.2.5 Transformer-Based Networks
Recently, inspired by the self-attention mechanism and subsequent success of the transformer in NLP,
researchers in CV also try to use the transformer as an alternative to the convolution. Self-attention-
based transformer models always operate in a two-stage training mechanism: 1) pretraining on a primitive
dataset (always big but not well labeled) by deﬁning pretext tasks; 2) transferring the pretrained weights
to the downstream tasks and adjusting the parameters on the target domain dataset by ﬁnetuning. Vi-
sion Transformer (ViT) [40] is applied on CV and achieves the SOTA performance on major benchmark
datasets. Data-efﬁcient image Transformers (DeiT) [335]was proposed by Facebook AI to train image
transformers more efﬁciently and maintain the SOTA performance simultaneously. DEtection TRansformer
(DETR) [336] signiﬁcantly outperforms competitive baselines in both object detection and semantic seg-
mentation. LeViT [337] outperforms existing benchmarks with respect to balancing the accuracy and train-
ing speed. Image GPT [149] is inspired by a sequence transformer in NLP, which can compete with several
self-supervised benchmarks on ImageNet. On the basis of this research, DeepViT [338] explores a deeper
architecture to improve performance consistently by making the transformer go deeper. Moreover, many
researchers try to apply the transformer to more speciﬁc tasks. Pyramid Vision Transformer (PVT) [339]
introduces the pyramid structure to overcome the difﬁculties of porting the transformer to various dense pre-
diction tasks, and achieves the SOTA performance on major benchmark datasets. M3DeTR [340] is a novel
research on multi-representation, multi-scale, and mutual-relation 3D object detection with transformers.
Medical Transformer (MedT) [341] has focused on medical image segmentation and outperforms previous
CNN-based and transformer-based architecture. In conclusion, the transformer has become a novel and
popular research area in CV and its performance is proved by many existing works.
B.3 Traditional Graph Learning
GL aims to embed the graph as a low-dimensional representation while preserving the desired properties
of the original graph data. Classical GL methods are usually implemented using statistical methods or
artiﬁcially designed components.
Dimension Reduction As a commonly used method in feature engineering, dimension reduction aims to
reduce the dimension of high-dimensional attribute graph data into a lower-dimensional representation. In
GL, it highlights the remaining information at the cost of losing part of the attributes. According to different
dimensionality reduction strategies, such methods can be classiﬁed into two types. The ﬁrst type is subspace
49