Text Summarization Text summarization is a summary of given single or multiple documents. It is kept
as concise as possible while ensuring that it reﬂects the critical content of the original document. It can be
divided into extractive summarization and generative summarization. Extractive summarization is generated
by extracting and splicing the critical sentences in documents. Generative summarization is generated by a
model, which summarizes documents according to the required content expressed in documents.
NYT [454] The dataset comes from the corpus annotated by the New York Time. The named entities are
annotated using the Stanford NER tool in conjunction with the Freebase knowledge base. It contains 9,076
articles, with the remaining 100,834 divided into a training set (96,834 examples) and a validation set (4,000
samples).
CNN/Daily Mail [456] It is used for the passage-based question-answering task, and it is popular in
assessing ATS systems. The dataset consists of CNN/Daily Mail news stories paired with multi-sentence
human-generated summaries. There are 287,226 training instances, 13,368 validation instances, and 11,490
testing instances in total.
Gigaword [463] This is a dataset of English news chapters consisting of nearly 950 pieces. Headlines –
stories from multiple sources, including the New York Times – include some articles with a one-sentence,
short news feed.
Machine Translation (MT) It refers to the task of translation from one language to another with its
semantic equivalence by a computer. There are three categories, rule-based machine translation, statistics-
based machine translation, and neural network-based machine translation.
WMT14 [464] It is a grouping of datasets used in the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
shared tasks, including a news translation task, a quality estimation task, a metrics task, and a medical text
translation task.
WMT16 [465] This dataset is a grouping of datasets used in the First Conference on Machine Translation
shared tasks. It has ten shared tasks, including a news translation task, an IT domain translation task, a
biomedical translation task, an automatic post-editing task, a metrics task, a quality estimation task, a tuning
task, a pronoun translation task, a bilingual document alignment task, and a multimodal translation task.
WMT17 [464] The dataset includes three MT tasks (news, biomedical, and multimodal), an automatic
post-editing task, a quality estimation task, a task dedicated to the training of neural MT systems, a task on
bandit learning for MT, an automatic post-editing task, and a metrics task.
WMT18 [467] It mainly features six shared tasks: a news translation task, a biomedical translation
task, an automatic post-editing task, a metrics task, a quality estimation task, and a multimodal translation
task. Participants must evaluate their approaches to the machine translation topic using the standard datasets
created for the shared tasks.
Dialogue As an essential way of man-machine interaction, the dialogue system offers a wide range of
applications. The existing dialogue systems can be grouped into task-oriented dialogue systems and non-
task-oriented dialogue systems from application scenarios. Among them, the non-task type of conversation
system can also be called a chatbot.
DSTC2 [470] This is a multi-round dialogue dataset of restaurant reservation ﬁelds, including 1,612
training data, 506 veriﬁcation data, and 1,117 test data. It allows the user’s goals to change compared to
61