Besides human feedback, one of the latest dialogue agents – Claude favors Constitutional AI [131] where
the reward model is learned via RL from AI Feedback (RLAIF). Both the critiques and the AI feedback are
steered by a small set of principles drawn from a ‘constitution’, the speciﬁcation of a short list of principles or
instructions, which is the only thing provided by humans in Claude. The AI feedback focuses on controlling
the outputs to be less harmful by explaining its objections to dangerous queries.
Chain-of-Thoughts Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting is a technique for improving the reasoning ability
of LLMs by prompting them to generate a series of intermediate steps that lead to the ﬁnal answer of a multi-
step problem. The CoT is a series of intermediate reasoning steps, which can signiﬁcantly improve the ability
of LLMs to perform complex reasoning [24, 132, 133]. Besides, ﬁne-tuning with CoT shows slightly more
harmless compared to without CoT [131]. CoT prompting is an emergent property of model scale, meaning
it works better with larger and more powerful language models. It is also possible to ﬁne-tune models on
CoT reasoning datasets to enhance this capability further and stimulate better interpretability.
In a CoT prompting experiment, a prompt is provided to the model that outlines a multi-step problem.
The prompt might pose a question such as “After selling 30 out of his 100 chickens and 10 out of his 20 pigs,
how many animals does a farmer have left?” The model then generates a sequence of intermediate reasoning
steps, for example, “The farmer has 100-30=70 chickens remaining” and “The farmer has 20-10=10 pigs
remaining,” before generating the ﬁnal answer, such as “The farmer has 70+10=80 animals remaining.” CoT
prompting has demonstrated its efﬁcacy in improving the performance of LLMs on various reasoning tasks,
such as arithmetic, symbolic reasoning, and common sense. It is a promising technique that can enhance the
ability of language models to reason about complicated problems.
3.6 Summary
The neural probabilistic LM uses a neural network to estimate the parameters of the probabilistic LM, which
reduces the size of the model parameters while enlarging the number of context windows. With the help of
a neural network, the LM does not need to improve the smoothing algorithm to alleviate the performance
bottleneck continuously. Since the training target is unsupervised, a corpus with a large amount of data
is enough for training. The negative sampling technique in the training process provides a new idea for
the follow-up study of the target task in the LM. Furthermore, the neural probabilistic LM promotes the
further development of downstream task research because of its good representation capability and training
efﬁciency. After the pretraining LM, especially the BERT model, is proposed, the research in language
modeling has entered a new phase. The bidirectional LM, the hidden LM, and the sorted LM adopted by the
bidirectional LM have successfully modeled the grammatical and semantic information in natural language
at a deeper level. ChatGPT is another milestone work in PFMs using RL. The presentation ability of PFMs
is qualitatively better than that of the neural probabilistic LM. It even exceeds that of humans in some tasks.
4 PFMs for Computer Vision
With the popularity of PFM used in NLP, it motivates researchers to start exploring PFM in CV . The term
“pretraining” has not been clearly deﬁned within the realm of deep learning research in CV . This word is
ﬁrst used in convolution-based networks when we adjust the parameters on a more general dataset such as
ImageNet, which can make other tasks train to start with a warm-up initialization and thus converge with
faster speed. In contrast to early CNN-based transfer learning techniques that rely on pretrained datasets
with supervised signals, our examination of PFM centers on SSL which utilizes human-designed labels,
18