1E2ETrm Trm TrmTrm Trm Trm
………
NE2T…
1TNT
1E2ETrm Trm TrmTrm Trm Trm
………
NE2T …
1T NT
3ETrmTrm3T
TrmTrm
3E3T
BERT Encoder GPT DecoderFigure 3: The architectures of BART [45]: generalizing BERT (due to the bidirectional encoder), GPT (with
the left-to-right decoder). An autoregressive decoder is used to determine the likelihood of the original
document after the corrupted document (on the left) has been encoded using a bidirectional model.
language modeling to predict token dependencies, using auxiliary position information as input to enable the
model to view a complete sentence and reduce position differences. These two models represent signiﬁcant
advancements in the ﬁeld of PFMs.
3.2 Model Architecture Designing Methods
ELMO adopts a multi-layer RNN structure. Each layer is a bi-directional LSTM structure composed of
a forward and backward LM. The maximum likelihood of these two directions is taken as the objective
function. Compared with the word vector method, ELMO introduces contextual information and improves
the polysemy problem, but ELMO’s overall ability to extract linguistic features is weak.
The application research of PFMs has two main directions. One is PFMs with ﬁne-tuning (e.g., BERT),
and the other one is PFMs with zero/few-shot prompts (e.g., GPT). BERT uses a bi-directional encoder
in Transformer to predict which words are masked and determine whether two sentences are contextual.
However, the document is encoded bidirectionally and missing tokens are predicted independently, which
reduces the generation ability [45]. GPT uses an autoregressive decoder as a feature extractor to predict the
next word based on the ﬁrst few words and solve downstream tasks using ﬁne-tuning, so it is more suitable
for text-generation tasks. However, GPT only uses the former words for prediction, which cannot learn
bidirectional interaction information.
Different from these models, BART [45] is a noise-reducing autoencoder built by seq2seq model adopt-
ing the encoder-decoder structure, as shown in Fig. 3 from [45]. Pretraining mainly includes using noise
to destroy text and using the seq2seq model to rebuild the original text. The encoding layer adopts a bi-
directional Transformer. It adopts ﬁve modes of adding noise: (1) single word mask; (2) word deletion; (3)
span mask; (4) sentence rearrangement; (5) document rearrangement. In the encoder part, the sequence has
been masked before inputting it into the encoder. Then, the decoder restores the original sequence accord-
ing to the encoding representation output by the encoder and the sequence that has not been masked. The
addition of a series of noise patterns makes the performance of BART in sequence generation and natural
language reasoning tasks signiﬁcantly improved.
3.3 Masking Designing Methods
The attention mechanism ﬁrst aggregates essential words into sentence vectors, and vital sentence vectors
into text vectors, which allows the model to pay different attention to different inputs [58]. For BERT, as a
bidirectional encoding LM, any two words in an input sentence can see each other. However, it hinders the
ability of BERT model to learn NLG tasks.
13