relatively small datasets. The models cannot reach a better level of stability and match different downstream
tasks. This means that the model cannot serve the real purpose of human language use.
8.3 Challenges on Model Design
Most existing structures of PFMs are tried for text, image, and graph. The primary method is to increase
data, improve computation power, and design training procedures to achieve better results. How to make a
trade-off between data, computing resources, and predictive performance is worth studying.
Model Variety There are many attempts at model design, such as generation-based models in the CV
area. However, GAN-based approaches are not popular for the following two reasons: 1) the discriminator
has learned meaningful feature representations, but they are forgotten during training [273]; 2) the mode
collapse causes the generator to output samples in singular mode to cheat the discriminator. As a result,
although researchers attempt to apply GAN-based approaches on SSL for pretraining, the difﬁculties in the
convergence of discriminator and divergence of generator hinder development and progress in this area.
Model Compression With the wide application of the Transformer and the pretraining model showing a
general trend of growth, the computational complexity of the pretraining model has become the focus of
attention. Due to the huge hardware requirements of model training and other reasons, the high threshold
makes it difﬁcult for researchers to train from scratch. BERT-base and GPT-3 contain about 108 million
parameters and 175 billion parameters, respectively. It is not conducive to the development of relevant
research work. There are some works for pretraining model compression, such as ALBERT having fewer
parameters and better effect than BERT-base. The improvement models still require powerful computing
equipment, making them difﬁcult to apply universally. Reducing the high computing cost is one of the main
challenges in future research.
Model Robustness Although many researchers have designed different pretext tasks for the pretraining,
the main problem remains on how to design robust pretext tasks and judge the performance before large-
scale computations. In addition, how to compare these proposed methods fairly is also a big issue. As
for NLP, deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial inputs because of their linear characteristics.
Although pretraining models perform well on different NLP tasks, most are based on deep neural networks,
which generally have poor robustness. Operations such as cutting and rotating do not change the nature of
the image in CV . In contrast, operations such as adding, deleting, and substituting a word in the text are
likely to affect the semantics of the text. Therefore, how to improve the robustness of the PFM in NLP is a
technical challenge.
Model Anti-attack The PFMs are vulnerable to attack by adversarial examples, which can easily mislead
the model to produce speciﬁc false predictions. It is difﬁcult to process due to the unique discreteness of
language in the NLP ﬁeld. Thus, the current PFMs have huge room for improvement in model anti-attack.
8.4 Challenges on Finetuning and Prompt
The pretrained model in NLP, CV , and GL ﬁelds can achieve good performance in most upstream tasks,
but not all good in downstream tasks for ﬁne-tuning and prompt. How to achieve consistent results both on
upstream and downstream tasks is still a challenge for the PFMs.
41