Figure 2: The general conceptual architecture of PFMs: data, model, and system.
• Through the review of PFMs in various modalities for different tasks, we discuss the main challenges
and opportunities for future research of very large models in the big data era, which guides a new
generation of collaborative and interactive intelligence based on PFMs.
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic components. Sections 3, 4
and 5 summarize the existing PFMs in NLP, CV and GL, respectively. Sections 6, 7 introduce other advanced
research for PFMs, including advanced and uniﬁed PFMs, model efﬁciency and compression, as well as
security and privacy, respectively. Furthermore, we summarize the main challenges for PFMs in Section 8
before concluding the survey in Section 9.
2 Basic Components
The general conceptual architecture of PFMs is shown in Fig. 2. The PFMs are huge neural network models,
which are all about neural information processing. The speciﬁc designs of PFMs vary according to the data
modality and task requirements in different areas. Transformer is a mainstream model architecture design
for PFMs in many areas such as NLP and CV . Training large models need to have various datasets for model
pretraining. After training the PFMs, the model should be ﬁne-tuned to satisfy downstream requirements
such as efﬁcacy, efﬁciency, and privacy. In this section, we introduce the basic model architectures, concepts,
and settings of PFMs in NLP, CV , and GL domains. For the introduction of a more detailed component,
please refer to Appendix A .
2.1 Transformer for PFMs
The Transformer [38] is an innovative architecture that facilitates the transfer of weighted representation
knowledge between various neural units. It relies solely on attention mechanisms and doesn’t use recur-
rent or convolutional architectures. The attention mechanism is a crucial component of the Transformer as
it assigns weights to all the encoded input representations and learns the most important part of the input
data. The output of the attention is obtained by taking the weighted sum of the values, and the weights are
calculated using the compatibility function of the query with the corresponding key [38]. Numerous atten-
tion mechanisms [39] have been developed in large models. For instance, in natural language processing,
self-attention is created to connect various positions in a single sequence for generating a representation
6