GIC
Masked Attribute Masked Edge(a) Graph Information Completion (GIC).
Auxiliary Property
•Degree
•Node Importance
•…
Pseudo Labels
•Cluster
•Attribute Similarity
•…Node Degree
Node Cluster (b) Graph Property Prediction (GPP).
Figure 13: Graph Information Completion (GIC) and Graph Property Prediction (GPP).
believe the powerful generalization ability of PFMs would extremely reduce training computation overhead
by “pretraining once and transferring forever”. Recent transformer-based PFMs have gradually outper-
formed traditional training from scratch on target datasets. This discovery will spur further exploration and
research into this exciting ﬁeld.
5 PFMs for Graph Learning
With the development of deep learning in graphs, the parameters (i.e., graph embedding) of the model
began to increase rapidly. Therefore, large-scale labeled data is needed for training the models to avoid
under-ﬁtting or over-ﬁtting. However, the cost of constructing large-scale labeled datasets for graphs is
too subjective, expensive, and time-consuming, especially in domains that require professional knowledge
and timeliness. While some semi-supervised approaches have temporarily mitigated the reliance of graph
embedding models on label scale, they have not fundamentally resolved this problem. In recent times,
researchers have turned their attention towards the application of PFMs in the ﬁeld of graphs, inspired by
their success in CV and NLP. However, for most graphs, obtaining large-scale pretraining data directly is
challenging due to the unique nature of information such as nodes and edges. Therefore, recent studies have
focused on utilizing the inherent information of a graph’s attributes, topology, and community to enhance
the effectiveness of the node’s features. We have summarized the graph-related PFMs in Table 3 .
5.1 Learning by Graph Information Completion
The essential motivation of pretraining based on graph information completion (GIC) is to mask part of the
information of the input graph data and recover the masked information based on the unmasked graph data,
so as to pretrain the graph embedding, as shown in Fig. 13. Similar ideas appeared earlier in the ﬁeld of
image and text processing. For instance, in image processing, information such as image pixels and colors
are recovered to pretrain the image encoder; in text processing, many methods implement pretraining of
word embeddings and encoders by recovering part of the information in a sentence based on context words.
These methods inspire the design of graph completion tasks on graph PFMs.
Among them, You et al. [188] are inspired by image inpainting, and ﬁrst propose to cover them by
removing the features of the target nodes, and then recover/predict the features of the masked nodes. In order
27