of the same sequence. Transformer leverages a mask matrix to provide an attention mechanism based on
self-attention, in which the mask matrix speciﬁes which words can “see” each other.
Transformer is an important structure for PFMs in NLP, CV , and GL areas. For NLP, the Transformer can
help solve the long-range dependency issues when processing sequential input data. For example, the GPT-
3 [20] is a generative model based on the transformer. For CV , the Vision Transformer (ViT) [40] is proposed
to represent an image to a series of image patches, which is similar to a series of word embeddings. For
GL, the Graph Transformer Networks (GTN) [41] are employed to learn new graph structures and powerful
node representations without domain knowledge. Transformers become scalable enough to drive ground-
breaking capabilities for PFMs thanks to the transformer structures to achieve higher parallelization. The
ViT-22B model [42], for instance, has about 22B parameters, and the largest language models can have
upwards of 100B parameters (e.g., GPT-3 has 175B and PaLM [43] has 540B parameters).
2.2 Learning Mechanisms for PFMs
Deep learning models in CV have been shown a large margin to outperform traditional learning models
in most tasks, including the common classiﬁcation, recognition, detection, and segmentation tasks and the
speciﬁc matching, tracking, and sequence prediction. These learning methods are not only available in CV ,
but also in NLP and GL.
Supervised Learning Suppose we are given a training dataset Xcontainingf(xi;yi)gn
i=1to represent the
original data in training dataset, where xidenotes thei-th training sample, and yidenotes the corresponding
label. The complete network is to learn a function f(x;)by minimizing the objective function as follows.
arg min
1
nXn
i=1L(f(xi;);yi) +
(); (1)
whereLand
represent the predeﬁned loss function and a regularization term, respectively. The function
fhas a nested form like
h1(xi) =g(x>
i!1+b1);
hl+1(xi) =g(hl(xi)>!l+bl);l= 1;2;;N(2)
wherelis the index of layer in deep learning model and Nis the number of layers, which means that
=f!l;bl;l= 1;2;;Ng.
Semi-Supervised Learning Assume we are given another unlabelled dataset Z=fzigm
i=1in addition to
the previous dataset with human labels. If we want to utilize both datasets to learn an ideal network, the
learning process can be formulated as
arg min
1
nXn
i=1L(f(xi;);yi) +1
mXm
i=1L0(f0(zi;0);R(zi;X)) +
(); (3)
whereRis a relation function deﬁning the targets for unlabelled data, and then these pseudo-labels are
integrated into the end-to-end training process. f0is an encoder to learn a new representation for the original
data in the dataset Z. Speciﬁcally, if there is no label to any data in the training process, we can learn
from the properties inside the data itself via the internal distance or the designed pretext tasks, which are
known as unsupervised learning and self-supervised learning(SSL), respectively. The latter is our main
focus discussed in detail in Section 4.3.
7