E PFMs for Reinforcement Learning
The success of pretraining learning methods in the supervised learning domain has spurred interest in the
reinforcement learning (RL) domain to study whether the same paradigms can be adapted to RL algorithms.
General pretraining RL can include broad directions, such as Reward-Free RL [371, 372, 373, 374], Goal-
condition RL [375, 376, 377], and Representation Learning in RL [378, 379, 380, 381]. Here we focus the
Representation Learning in RL. Speciﬁcally, this direction seeks to improve the performance by pretraining
the visual perception competent of RL agent, i.e., the state encoder, with some large-scale datasets using
unsupervised/self-supervised data augmentation techniques . The pretraining process empowers the state
encoder to capture the essential structure information from the raw inputs (pixel-level input for CV). An RL
policy network is built based on the pretrained state encoder to learn the speciﬁc downstream control tasks
in the ﬁne-tuning stage. Recent studies have demonstrated that can greatly beneﬁt both in sample efﬁciency
and learning effectiveness from unsupervised [382, 383, 384], semi-supervised [385], and self-supervised
[386, 387] learning techniques. Speciﬁcally, this direction could be roughly classiﬁed into the following two
categories: Model-based Pretraining RL and Contrastive-like Pretraining RL.
Model-based Pretraining RL Model-based Pretraining RL aims to ﬁrst pretrain a generative world model
to capture the underlying structure of the environment and then leverage the world model as a state encoder
or simulator during ﬁne-tuning. World Models [382] is the ﬁrst work that proposes to learn a compressed
spatial and temporal representation of the environment in an unsupervised manner using a simple Variational
Autoencoder, which greatly improves the sample efﬁciency compared to training from scratch. However,
learning the world model without being aware of the environment’s dynamic might lead to ignorance of some
key information in the environment. Dreamer [388, 389] proposed to learn latent dynamics by approximat-
ing the representation, transition, and reward model. They then train RL agents purely by imagination in a
latent space, which is more efﬁcient since it brings a low memory footprint and enables fast predictions of
thousands of imagined trajectories in parallel. Furthermore, DreamerPro [390] proposes a reconstruction-
free approach based on prototypical representations to migrate the task-irrelevant visual distractions problem
in the latent dynamics modeling. DreamerPro signiﬁcantly outperforms previous SOTA methods when there
are complex background distractions. To verify whether learning accurate world models for the real world
is promising, Daydreamer [391] applies Dreamer to the real-world physical robots problem and empirically
demonstrates signiﬁcant learning efﬁciency gains.
Contrastive-like Pretraining RL Contrastive-like Pretraining RL techniques seek to improve the repre-
sentation ability of state encoders by pretraining the state encoder with a large amount of out-of-domain data
or adding some auxiliary loss using unsupervised learning or data augmentation techniques. CURL [392]
combines instance contrastive learning and by using MoCo [163] mechanism, which signiﬁcantly improves
the data efﬁciency of RL agents. Furthermore, RAD [393] proposes an implicit approach that directly trains
the RL objective on multiple augmented observations views, which outperforms CURL on some of the
environments in the DeepMind Control Suite. Concurrent to RAD, DrQ [394] introduces a simple regular-
ization term, which applies image augmentation to compute current and target Q values. They demonstrate
that data efﬁciency can be signiﬁcantly improved after applying it to DQN. DrQ-v2 [395] further extends
this approach to solve complex humanoid locomotion tasks by inserting similar techniques into the DDPG
algorithm. Orthogonal to this direction, [379, 378, 396, 397] demonstrate that pretraining the vision part of
RL agent using supervised or unsupervised methods on out-of-domain data can improve the learning efﬁ-
ciency of downstream RL control tasks. Besides ensuring consistency across different views of observation,
SPR [381] additionally trains a dynamics model which enforces the representations to be temporally predic-
53