2.3.1 Pretraining Tasks for NLP
The pretraining tasks can be divided into ﬁve categories according to the learning methods: Mask Language
Modeling (MLM), Denoising AutoEncoder (DAE), Replaced Token Detection (RTD), Next Sentence Pre-
diction (NSP), Sentence Order Prediction (SOP). RTD, NSP, and SOP are contrastive learning methods,
which assume that the observed samples are more semantically similar than the random samples.
Mask Language Modeling (MLM). MLM erases some words randomly in the input sequence and then
predicts these erased words during pretraining. Typical examples include BERT [13] and SpanBERT [44].
Denoising AutoEncoder (DAE). DAE is used to add noise to the original corpus and reconstruct the
original input using the corpus containing noise. BART [45] is a representative example.
Replaced Token Detection (RTD). RTD is a discriminant task that determines whether the LM has
replaced the current token. This task is introduced in ELECTRA [46]. By training the model to distinguish
whether a token has been replaced or not, the model can acquire language knowledge.
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). In order to make the model understand the correlation between the
two sentences and capture sentence-level representations, a NSP task is introduced. The PFM inputs two
sentences from different documents and checks whether the order of the sentences is correct. A typical
example is BERT.
Sentence Order Prediction (SOP). Different from NSP, SOP uses two contiguous fragments from a
document as positive samples and the exchange order of the two fragments as negative samples. The PFMs
can better model the correlation between sentences, such as ALBERT [47].
2.3.2 Pretraining Tasks for CV
There are many pretraining tasks created for CV to learn the feature space, which is based on SSL. It utilizes
pretext tasks that contain human-designed labels, like jigsaw puzzles or the comparison of various patches
from images. This enables the generalization of learned representations to a range of downstream tasks.
Speciﬁc Pretext Task. A pretext task also referred to as a predeﬁned task, is created for the encoder
networks to perform during the pretraining phase. The network is trained by predicting the answer to a
special pretext task. Based on particular features of the data, pseudo labels are generated for the ﬁctitious
task. Then, using guided learning techniques, the encoder networks are trained to solve the pretext task. For
example, inpainting aims to pretrain models by predicting the missed center part.
Frame Order Learning Task. Learning frame order from videos involves frame processing through
time steps, which can serve as the pretraining task for CV . This issue usually relates to completing pretextual
exercises that can aid in the acquisition of visual temporal representations.
Data Generation Task. The representational capabilities within the generative adversarial networks
(GANs) can also be used in the pretraining tasks. Projecting data back into the latent space, as demonstrated
by BiGANs [48], is helpful for auxiliary supervised discrimination tasks by acting as feature representations.
Data Reconstruction Task. Since the images can be divided into patches inspired by the natural lan-
guage, some pretraining tasks for NLP can also be used in CV , e.g., the autoencoder-based masked predic-
tion. The original image is ﬁrst divided into a few patches and discrete visual tokens are used to encode
each patch. The visual tokens from the masked patches are outputted in the second stage to match the
corresponding visual tokens from the ﬁxed tokenizer.
Miscellaneous. To train the PFMs in CV , additional pretraining tasks are suggested. For instance,
9