multimedia websites, APP, or search engines such as Instagram, Flickr, Google Images, etc. I think pictures
in the wild will play a major role in the future study of CV because of the quantity of data, the computation
source, and the learning power of PFM.
G.3 Downstream Tasks and Datasets on Graph
The purpose of the pretraining graph model is to improve the performance of downstream tasks. According
to the different analysis objects of the downstream tasks, they can be divided into nodes, edges, and graphs.
Meanwhile, the PFMs of GL have been widely used in a mass of ﬁelds. In this section, we combine the
downstream tasks to conduct statistics on the pretraining datasets and the downstream task datasets.
Node-Level Tasks Nodes are the most basic element of the graph, so lots of downstream tasks mainly
focus on the analysis of nodes.
Node Classiﬁcation Node ClassiFication (NCF) is one of the most prevalent graph-based tasks, which
has important analytical value in most of the different types of graph data. Different from the pseudo-labels
assigned to nodes in the graph in self-supervised methods, the labels in NCF often come from external in-
formation such as manual annotation. Based on Deﬁnition 7 and 8, NCF can be divided into two types:
transductive and inductive according to the visibility during training, veriﬁcation, and testing. In addition,
the result of NCF can be single-label or multi-label according to the mutual exclusion of labels. The statis-
tical results of common NFC datasets are shown in Table 7.
Node Clustering The goal of Node ClusterIng (NCI) is to divide a graph into different classes or clusters
according to a certain standard so that the correlation of nodes in the same cluster is as large as possible, and
the irrelevance of nodes that are not in the same cluster is also minimized. Although in the above-mentioned
pretraining tasks, NCI is used as a pretext task has appeared, NCI can still test pretraining graph models
based on other pretext tasks.
Top-K Search The goal of task Top-K Search (TKS) is to search the K nodes with the highest predeﬁned
associations for a given node in the graph. Usually, TKS is used for search tasks such as recommendation
and alignment. The detailed statistical results of the datasets are shown in Table 7.
Link-Level Tasks The edge is also an important part of the graph structure, which associates independent
nodes and is the key to distinguishing graph data from non-relational data. Especially in some speciﬁc ﬁelds
(e.g., molecules, proteins), edges contain real information, so there are various tasks related to edges.
Link Classiﬁcation Similar to the NCF, the Link Classiﬁcation (LC) also assigns one or more labels to a
given edge. In fact, in LC, the nodes at both ends of the edge are still taken into consideration.
Link Prediction Link Prediction (LP) is a common graph task (e.g., knowledge graph). The goal of LP
is to predict edges that are removed or may exist in the graph. Similar to NCI, LP is also one of the pretext
tasks in self-supervised learning, and its statistic results as shown in Table 8.
Top-K Recommendation Top-K Recommendation (TKR) is exactly the same as the deﬁnition of TKS,
the difference lies in the sorting goal.
Graph-Level Tasks The graph-level task generally focuses on the distribution of nodes, edges, and at-
tributes in a given graph, in order to infer the possible properties of the entire graph.
66