Figure 10: Summary of all two-stream models, including contrastive learning and memory-bank-based
methods.
its probability of being recognized as i-th example is:
P(ijv) =exp(vT
iv=)=Xn
j=1exp(vT
jv=); (12)
where viorvjis the representation of i-th orj-th sample, which serves as a substitute for the parametric
class prototype (i.e., weights of a classiﬁer). Addtionally, is the temperature parameter borrowed from the
knowledege distillation [160].
Local Aggregation (LA) [161] is another method that trains a CNN encoder to embed raw images into a
lower dimension space – embedding space. When a metric of local aggregation is maximized, similar data
instances move together in the embedding space while dissimilar instances move apart.
Based on NPID, Pretext Invariant Representation Learning (PIRL, pronounced as “pearl”) [162] is
proposed to argue that semantic representations are invariant under pretext transformation tasks. Suppose
the original view and transformed view of images are denoted as IandIt, respectively. These sample views
are fed into a CNN encoder, and the total empirical loss on the training dataset Dcan be deﬁned as:
Ltotal(;D) = EtT1
jDjX
I2DL(VI;VIt)
; (13)
whereTdenotes the different transformations of images. The loss encourages the representation of image I
to be similar to that of It, and the representation of Itto be dissimilar to that of different images I0, as shown
in the dotted box of Fig. 10. Therefore, more negative sample pairs contribute to improving the scalability
of the gradient and lead to the ﬁnal learned encoder with stronger representation ability. That is the reason
why the memory bank is introduced to store more previous representations for subsequent comparison.
4.6 Learning by Sharing
SSL prefers using two encoder networks for the different data augmentation, and then pretrains the param-
eters by maximizing the distance between negative pairs or minimizing the distance between positive pairs.
Fig. 10 shows the two-stream models for all contrastive learning frameworks. The transformation ton the
orginal input image Igenerates the view v, similarly, its counterpart t0generatesv0. In general, two different
or same encoders fandf0
are used to extract contrastive representations. The subsequent MLP heads g
andg0
are used to learn more combinations that are beneﬁcial to the contrastive loss. It is noticed that MLP
and memory bank could be removed or preserved under different settings. In terms of the shared encoder,
SSL can be divided into two categories: 1) Soft Sharing that two encoders share with similar but different
parameters ( f6=f0
); 2) Hard Sharing that two encoders maintain the same architectures and parameters
(f=f0
).
23