kernel based on calculating the number of common synchronization between two graph structures, To reduce
the computational complexity and optimize the random walk strategy, a graph kernel based on comparing the
shortest path information between two graph structures is proposed. To capture more complex topological
information, the Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree graph kernel is proposed, which is based on a one-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test algorithm to ﬁnd isomorphic subtree structures in a bunch of graph
structures [353].
C PFMs Theory
Since pretraining has received great attention from the research community, the investigation in the theory-
backed explanation is similarly eye-catching. During the unsupervised pretraining era before SSL, Erhan
et al. [354, 355] shed some light on the theoretical explanation for the conﬁrmation and clarity of learning
difﬁculties. [354] researches the inﬂuence of pretraining with respect to architecture depth, model capacity,
and the number of training samples, and demonstrates the robustness of pretraining from the perspective of
both the optimization and the regularization. [355] further prove the regularizer role of the unsupervised
pretraining in the downstream supervised tasks.
C.1 Different Perspectives
Pretext Tasks [356] posits a mechanism based on approximate conditional independence (CI) to connect
pretext and downstream task data distributions, which suggests that pretext tasks can self-supervisedly learn
the representations from unlabelled data that reduce the sample complexity of downstream supervised tasks.
The experiments both on CV and NLP task supports this theory. Representation Learning via Invariant
Causal Mechanisms (R ELIC) [181] also provides a theoretical understanding from the perspective that the
explicit invariance constraints across augmentations can yield improved generalization guarantees.
Multi-View Redundancy From the perspective of a multi-view setting, [357] understands contrastive
learning as exploiting multiple views of data for representation learning. This theory provides a theoreti-
cal analysis that the linear functions of these representations from pretraining are still competitive compared
with the non-linear optimal predictor of the label. In other words, the linear functions of the learned represen-
tations are nearly optimal on downstream prediction tasks whenever the different views provide redundant
information about the label.
C.2 Different Categories
Contrastive Learning Although experimental results show us that previous designs such as contrastive loss
or momentum updating can produce impressive performance in SSL. However, one of the most important
questions that remain in SSL is why these methods can maintain representation consistency during the
pretraining process. A naive view is the minimization between positive pairs can boost invariance learning,
while the maximization between negative pairs contributes to avoiding representational collapse. [358]
shows that contrastive learning can achieve competitive bound via intra-class concentration, thus leading
to the reduction of sample complexity on downstream tasks from the beneﬁt of transferred representations.
This research also provides a framework that can be utilized both on the guarantees of the quality of learning
representations during the pretraining phase and the future assumptions added to the framework that allow
tighter guarantees.
51