than any previous single-task-based SSL methods by learning general-purpose visual representations from
cross-domain multi-task feature learning. Tian et al. [252] believe that a powerful representation is one that
models cross-view factors from the perspective of humans view to understand the world. They propose
Contrastive Multiview Coding (CMC) to learn a video representation by maximizing mutual information
between different views of the same scene.
6.4 PFM for Code Generation
Code generation with LLMs involves using pretrained language models to automatically generate code based
on natural language descriptions of a desired program. This approach has the potential to greatly improve
the efﬁciency of software development by reducing the need for manual coding and allowing developers to
focus on higher-level tasks.
The technique involves training large-scale language models on vast amounts of natural language text
and then ﬁne-tuning the models on speciﬁc programming tasks. By inputting natural language descriptions
of code, the model can generate code snippets that are syntactically and semantically correct. Code gen-
eration with LLMs has been applied in various programming domains, including web development, NLP,
and data analysis. The models used for code generation include GPT-4, T5, and Codex, among others.
For example, Andrei et al. [253] have investigated and assessed the ﬁne-tuning of transformer models for
personalized code generation. Speciﬁcally, they have evaluated the effectiveness of various personalization
techniques in the domain of generating unit tests for Java methods and learning to personalize for a speciﬁc
software project. Shailja et al. [254] assess the capacity of LLMs to generate Verilog that is useful. To
achieve this, pretrained LLMs are ﬁne-tuned on Verilog datasets collected from GitHub and Verilog text-
books. An evaluation framework is then constructed, consisting of test benches for functional analysis and a
ﬂow for testing the syntax of Verilog code generated in response to problems of varying degrees of difﬁculty.
An open-source CodeGen LLM that has undergone ﬁne-tuning has been shown to outperform the current
leading commercial Codex LLM. The CodeGen [255] is a group of LLMs that have up to 16.1B parameters
and can handle both natural language and programming language data. Additionally, they have released the
training library JAX FORMER as open-source. Their work demonstrates that the model can perform as well
as the previous state-of-the-art zero-shot Python code generation on HumanEval, showcasing the practical
applications of the trained model. Synchromesh, introduced in the study by Poesia et al. [256], adopts a
novel approach called Target Similarity Tuning (TST) to retrieve a small set of examples from a training
bank. Then, Synchromesh utilizes these examples to train a pretrained language model and generates pro-
grams by applying Constrained Semantic Decoding (CSD). CSD is a general framework that can restrict
the output to valid programs in the target language. In this work, the authors show that the combined use
of CSD and TST results in signiﬁcant improvements in prediction accuracy, as well as preventing runtime
errors.
However, there are still some limitations to code generation with LLMs, such as the models’ tendency to
generate overly verbose or inefﬁcient code and their inability to handle complex programming tasks. Nev-
ertheless, the technology has shown signiﬁcant promise and has the potential to revolutionize the software
development industry.
6.5 SOTA Uniﬁed PFMs
A big convergence of PFMs handling multiple modalities is emerging, such as backbone architecture, pre-
training task, and model scaling up [29]. Therefore, many uniﬁed PFMs proposed by researchers arise. A
uniﬁed PFM is a uniﬁed model pretrained on unimodal and multimodal data with single or multiple trans-
35