to train against all input tokens. In addition to effective training methods, more efﬁcient architecture can
also improve the efﬁciency of PFMS. For most PFMS based on the Transformer algorithm, a more efﬁcient
model architecture can be obtained by reducing the complexity of the Transformer algorithm.
7.2 Model Compression
Model compression requires less computing resources and memory. It is a potential approach to reduce the
model size and enhance computation efﬁciency. The model compression strategy can be divided into two
ways: parameter compression and structure compression.
The methods of parameter compression include parameter pruning, parameter quantization, low-rank
decomposition, and parameter sharing. Parameter pruning refers to designing evaluation criteria for model
parameters to delete redundant parameters based on a sizeable PFM. For example, Compressing BERT [35]
prunes BERT before training while maintaining the performance equivalent to that of the original model.
Parameter quantization is the quantization of model parameters from 32-bit full-precision ﬂoating-point
numbers to lower-order numbers. For example, Q8BERT [84] uses 8-bit quantization to compress parame-
ters fourfold with little impact on model performance. Low-rank decomposition is to reduce the dimension
of a high-dimensional parameter vector into a sparse low-dimensional vector. Parameter sharing refers to
the structured matrix or clustering methods to map model parameters and reduce the number of parameters.
For example, the ALBERT [36] uses decomposition-embedded parameterization and cross-layer parameter
sharing to reduce the parameters in the model.
Structure compression refers to compact networks and knowledge distillation. A compact network
means reducing the number of parameters and calculations by designing a new compact network struc-
ture. Knowledge distillation refers to the transfer of knowledge from the larger teacher model to the smaller
student model through the use of a soft label, etc. DistilBERT [261], for example, uses the knowledge dis-
tillation method to compress BERT, reducing the size of the BERT model by 40% while retaining 97% of
its language comprehension.
7.3 Security and Privacy
The security risks, social bias, and data privacy in PFMs become an important research topic. Qiu et al. [5]
recognize that deep neural networks can be attacked by adversarial samples, which mislead the model to
produce false predictions. Due to the excellent portability of pretraining models, they have been widely used
in NLP, CV , and GL. However, it has been found that the pretraining model is susceptible to the inﬂuence of
adversarial samples. A tiny interference of the original input may mislead the pretraining model to produce
speciﬁc false predictions. Meanwhile, it is possible to recover the data samples by querying the PFMs which
can cause privacy leakage.
Generation Adversarial Samples The adversarial sample originates from the image. The adversarial
samples of the image are hard to recognize with an invisible change. For example, only one pixel of the
image is modiﬁed. Human beings do not easily detect such disturbance, but the neural network can identify
the modiﬁed image, which is the original purpose of the adversarial sample. Some work has found that pre-
trained LMs are vulnerable in some scenarios. Jin et al. [262] successfully attack the three target models of
BERT, CNN, and RNN by generating natural adversarial samples, which indicates that the current language
processing model still has a large room for improvement in terms of security. However, it is difﬁcult to
achieve due to the distinct discreteness of languages in NLP. In particular, the generation of adversarial sam-
38