ples in the text must take into account linguistic characteristics to ensure that the sample’s syntax and ﬂuency
are not harmed while affecting the model’s output. For example, [263] uses adversarial samples to attack
the ﬁne-tuning stage of the BERT model for text classiﬁcation and entailment successfully. [264] combines
the sememe-based word substitution method and search algorithm based on particle swarm optimization to
generate adversarial samples.
Model Defects Some unrelated human factors can also mislead the PFM to make wrong predictions. For
example, [33] discovers that the performance of BERT is limited in the reasoning task due to utilizing
false statistical information in the dataset, which dramatically affects the performance by destroying this
property. [265] deﬁnes universal adversarial triggers. When triggers are connected to any input, it can
induce the model to generate speciﬁc predictions.
Backdoor Attacks There are still many methods to manipulate the predicted results of the pretraining
model employing a backdoor attack. [266] demonstrates that it is possible to construct a weight poisoning
attack in which pretrained weights are injected. After the ﬁne-tuning stage, the backdoor is exposed. At-
tackers manipulate model predictions easily by injecting arbitrary keywords. [267] shows that PFMs in NLP
can be manipulated by modifying the model corpus. The “meaning” of new words or existing words can be
controlled by changing their weight parameters.
Defense Against Attacks The human-in-the-loop method [31, 32] has been proposed and applied to gen-
erate more natural, efﬁcient, and diversiﬁed adversarial samples. Some defense approaches have been pro-
posed to defend against such attacks. [268] designs an auxiliary anomaly detection classiﬁer and uses a
multi-task learning procedure to defend against adversarial samples. On the other hand, some defects in the
PFM may be inherited by the custom models in transfer learning, such as the adversarial vulnerabilities and
backdoors mentioned above. To mitigate this issue, [269] proposes a relevant model slicing technique to
reduce defect inheritance during transfer learning while retaining useful knowledge from the PFM.
Data Privacy in PFMs LLMs and other PFMs have been trained on private datasets [270]. The re-
searchers have discovered that by querying the massive LMs, it is feasible to recover speciﬁc training sam-
ples. An adversary may, for instance, obtain IRC discussions and personally identiﬁable information. Even
worse, because large models have so many parameters, it is simple for PFM to memorize or learn private
information, making larger models more prone to attack than smaller ones. Many PFMs such as the LLMs
have been trained on private datasets. The researchers have found that it is possible to recover individual
training examples by querying the LLMs. For instance, an adversary can extract examples including per-
sonally identiﬁable information, and Internet Relay Chat (IRC) conversations. Even worse, because of the
billion parameters of large models, it is easy for PFM to learn private information, making the larger model
more vulnerable than smaller models. We must take privacy-preserving measures into account during all
PFM processes, including data processing, model training, model inference, and system deployment, in
order to reduce the risks of privacy leakage.
8 Future Research Challenges and Open Problems
The PFM can avoid training models from the scratch, which is a breakthrough from weak AI to general AI.
At present, due to the characteristics of PFM such as large-scale parameters, a large amount of training data,
39