whereWis the candidate translation, Mis the length of the candidate translation, Pis the LM obtained
according to the reference translation, and P(w1;w2;:::;wM)is the score calculated by the LM for the
candidate translation. The Perplexity assessment indicator is based on a LM. The lower the degree of confu-
sion, the better the translation quality, which is often used in machine translation and LMs. Its disadvantages
are as follows: the larger the dataset is, the faster the degree of confusion decreases; the punctuation in the
data will impact the PPL of the model; and the interference of common words.
G Datasets
G.1 Downstream Tasks and Datasets on NLP
There are many available datasets in the NLP domain, divided according to different tasks. We summarize
them in Table 5. It mainly comprises two categories: the task of classiﬁcation of texts and the task of gener-
ating texts. The text classiﬁcation tasks mainly include Sentiment Analysis (SA), News Classiﬁcation (NC),
Topic Labelling (TL), Natural Language Inference (NLI), Named Entity Recognition (NER), Question An-
swering (QA), Dialogue Act Classiﬁcation (DAC), etc. The generation tasks mainly include text summaries
and machine translation.
Sentiment Analysis (SA) It consists of judging the emotional polarity and dividing it into several classes.
Depending on the granularity of sentiments, the SA is divided into three categories: dichotomy (positive and
negative), trichotomy (positive, negative, and neutral), and multiple categories. Here we introduce several
datasets in detail.
Stanford sentiment treebank (SST) [473] The dataset is an extension of MR [474]. SST-1 is a version of
SST. It is divided into ﬁve categories and the number of training texts and testing texts is 8,544 and 2,210,
respectively. It also consists of 20 average tokens. The SST-2 [475] contains 9,613 movie reviews including
6,920 training texts, 872 development texts, and 1,821 testing texts.
Semantic textual similarity benchmark (STS-B) [476] It is used in semantic textual similarity tasks orga-
nized in the SemEval context between 2012 and 2017 [477]. It consists of text from image titles, news titles
and forums. On a scale of 1 to 5, STS-B displays the semantic similarity of two sentences. It includes 5,749
training sets, 1,379 development sets, and 1,377 testing sets.
Multi-Perspective Question Answering (MPQA) [478, 479] This is an opinion dataset which has two
categories. It contains 10,606 sentences from various news sources that have been manually annotated for
opinions and other private states. It is worth noting that there are 3,311 positive articles and 7,293 negative
articles, having no labels for each article.
IMDB reviews [480] The dataset is the world’s most authoritative source for binary sentiment classiﬁ-
cation of ﬁlm reviews. The number of content in each class is the same and it can be divided into training
and testing sets whose number of comments is 25,000 on average.
News Classiﬁcation (NC) As one of the most vital information sources, news content exerts a critical
effect on people. The NC facilitates users to acquire essential knowledge in real time. Its applications
mainly include news topic identiﬁcation and recommendation of relevant news based on user interests. Here
we introduce several datasets in detail.
57