formers as the backbone, which has the ability to perform a large variety of downstream AI tasks, includ-
ing unimodal tasks and multimodal tasks. There are currently three types of SOTA uniﬁed models based
on model architectures. We deﬁned them as the single-transformer model, multi-transformer model, and
comb-transformer model. A single-transformer model refers to a PFM model which only has a large-scale
transformer as its backbone, whereas a multi-transformer model refers to a PFM model having multiple
transformers. A comb-transformer model is the PFM model with the combination of both single and multi-
ple transformer structures.
Single-transformer Model UNITER [257] is a large-scale PFM for joint image-text embedding, which
consists of an Image Embedder, a Text Embedder, and a multi-layer Transformer. It ﬁrst encodes visual
features and bounding box features for image regions using Image Embedder and tokens and positions using
Text Embedder. Then, a Transformer module is applied to learn generalizable contextualized embeddings for
images and text through four pretraining tasks. Instead of applying random joint masking to both modalities,
conditional masking on pretraining tasks is used. Six vision-language tasks are selected as the downstream
tasks.
Uni-Perceiver [258] is a single siamese model with shared parameters having the ability to process dif-
ferent modalities regarding vision and language tasks. Different task inputs and targets are encoded into
uniﬁed token sequences with modality-speciﬁc tokenizers, which are then decoded by a modality-agnostic
weight-sharing Transformer encoder into the shared representation space. Any perception task is modeled
as ﬁnding the maximum likelihood target for each input through the similarity of their representations. Uni-
Perceiver is pretrained on unimodal and multimodal tasks. The evaluation results on various downstream
tasks show that the performance is close to SOTA methods by conducting prompt tuning on 1% of down-
stream task data.
Gato [259] builds a single large transformer sequence model that works as a multimodal, multi-task,
multi-embodiment generalist policy. It can perform various tasks using a single neural network with the
same set of weights. Gato is trained on 604 tasks, where different types of data, such as images, text,
proprioception, joint torques, and other discrete and continuous observations and actions, are serialized into
a ﬂat sequence of tokens, batched, and processed by the transformer. During deployment, sampled tokens
are assembled into different actions based on the context.
OFA [26] is a simple sequence-to-sequence learning framework with a uniﬁed instruction-based task
representation that uniﬁes various tasks. In the pretraining and ﬁnetuning stages, OFA requires no extra
task-speciﬁc layers for downstream tasks to achieve Task-Agnostic. The Modality-Agnostic compute engine
is a Transformer with the constraint that no learnable task- or modality-speciﬁc components are added to
downstream tasks. OFA is pretrained on small-size image-text pairs to achieve crossmodal tasks while
attaining highly competitive performances on unimodal tasks.
UNIFIED-IO [27] is a sequence-to-sequence model using a uniﬁed architecture that performs large and
diverse tasks. UNIFIED-IO is a transformer model where both the encoder and decoder are composed of
stacked transformer layers. The uniﬁed architecture does not need speciﬁc task or modality branches, which
is accomplished by homogenizing the input and output of each task into a sequence of discrete vocabulary
tokens. It trains a single transformer-based architecture on over 90 diverse datasets in the vision and language
ﬁelds. UNIFIED-IO is the ﬁrst model to perform various tasks and produce strong results across 16 diverse
benchmarks without ﬁnetuning.
BEiT-3 [29] is a general-purpose multimodal pretrained model on language, vision, and vision-language
tasks. The big convergence of BEiT-3 can be seen from three aspects, including backbone architecture,
pretraining task, and model scaling up. It introduces a shared Multiway Transformer as backbone network
36