graph attributes, structures, and other information into node representations from multiple perspectives by
designing different pretext tasks, which are used to optimize downstream tasks. In this section, we introduce
the deﬁnition of the basic concepts of graphs, and then provide a formal deﬁnition of the PFM on the graph.
A.2.1 Notations and Deﬁnitions of Graphs
Unless particularly speciﬁed, the notations used in this article are illustrated in Table 4. We use G=fGigN
i
to represent a set of graphs, where Nrepresents the number of graphs. Depending to the graph’s deﬁnition
of the edges and nodes, graph data can be classiﬁed into the following types.
Deﬁnition 1. Anunattributed graph isG= (V;E), wherev2Vis a node,e2Eis an edge, and naturally
EVV. Adjacency matrix A2Rnnrepresents the topology of graph G, wheren=jVj.Ai;j= 1
denotes there is an edge between node viandvj, otherwiseAi;j= 0.
Deﬁnition 2. Anattributed graph isG= (V;E;Xv;Xe), whereXv2RndvandXe2Rmdeare the
feature matrices of nodes and edges, jVj=n,jEj=m,dvanddedenotes the feature dimensions of node
and edge. In fact, in most application scenarios, only nodes have attributes, and edges have no attributes or
only weights.
Deﬁnition 3. Anundirected graph isG= (V;E), whereei;j2Emeans an unordered node pair (vi;vj).
In particular, the adjacency matrix Aof the undirected graph is a symmetric matrix (i.e., Ai;j=Aj;i).
Deﬁnition 4. Adirected graph isG= (V;E), whereei;j2Emeans an ordered node pair (vi;vj).
Deﬁnition 5. Ghas a node-type mapping function fv:V! Tvand an edge-type mapping function
fe:E!Te. WhenjTvj=jTej= 1, the graphG= (V;E)is ahomogeneous graph . In other words, all
nodes inGbelong to a type, and all edges also belong to one type.
Deﬁnition 6. WhenjTvj>1and/orjTej>1, the graph G= (V;E)is aheterogeneous graph . In
particular, a heterogeneous graph must be an attributed graph.
A.2.2 Learning Settings on Graphs
GL methods are usually used to solve machine learning tasks on graph data, and we introduce different
settings (supervision mode and learning mode) for GL.
Before that, we ﬁrst provide the notations of the corresponding mathematical formulation of GL. C=
fc1;c2;;cKgis a set of target components deﬁned in a graph set G(Gci2G), andciis associated with
a corresponding ground truth label yi2Y =f1;2;;Nyg, whereKdenotes the total number of target
components, and Nyis the number of classes being predicted. Then the graph data can be represented as
D=fci;Gci;yigK
i, and a complete GL model MGLcan also be determined by yi=MGL(ci;Gci). For
instance, in a node classiﬁcation task, ciis the node to be classiﬁed, yidenotesci’s label in graph Gci.
Similarly, in a node clustering task, ciis the node to be clustered, yidenotes the corresponding cluster label
in graphGci.
Supervision Mode Depending on the source and scale of the training data, the supervision settings of GL
can be divided into four types as shown in Figure 16. Supervised GL is the most common mode in the real
scenario. Given the target component ciand the corresponding ground truth label yi, the goal is to minimize
the loss function between the predicted label of the GL model (i.e., ypred
i=MGL(ci;Gci)) and the expected
labelyiof allci. Compared with supervised learning, unsupervised GL refers to situations in which no
45