𝑛5
𝑛1𝑛3
𝑛6
𝑛7𝑛2𝑛9
𝑛8𝑛4 GNN P retrain
𝑛1𝑛2
𝑛6𝑛4
𝑛5𝑛3𝑛7 𝑛8𝑛9GCA(CC)
Hidden Space(a) Context Consistency.
GCA( SC)
Different
Perturbations… 
Multi -View GraphXX
Self Consistency Node Dropping XNoisy Edge (b) Self Consistency.
Figure 14: Graph Consistency Analysis (GCA).
to recover/predict the masked information, GraphCompetion [188] is achieved by providing GCNs with
unmasked node features (limited to the 2-layer GCNs of the second-order neighbors of each target node).
The purpose of GraphCompetion’s pretraining is to help the model better perform feature representation
and teach the model to extract features from the context. You et al. [188] propose the attribute mask task
(namely, AttributeMask), which masks node attributes randomly, and then requires the self-supervising
module to reconstruct the masked attributes. Jin et al. [189] think deeply about SSL on graph data, and
propose the edge mask task (namely, EdgeMask), seeking to develop self-supervision in pairs based not
only on a single node itself but on the connection between two nodes in the graph. In particular, EdgeMask
randomly masks some edges and then asks the model to reconstruct the masked edges. In short, EdgeMask
is expected to help GNN learn local connectivity information. Hu et al. [190] propose a PFM that masks
node and edge attributes and then predicts this masked information based on the adjacent structure.
5.2 Learning by Graph Consistency Analysis
Different from the aforementioned methods that focus on individual elements in the graph, graph consis-
tency analysis (GCA) mainly explores the consistency of the distribution of two elements in the graph.
Speciﬁcally, the consistency of two elements with similar semantics should be signiﬁcantly stronger than
two elements with unrelated semantics, and this characteristic can be used to pretrain the graph model. Ac-
cording to the judgment object of consistency, such methods can be roughly divided into the following three
categories.
Context Consistency Based on the early homogeneity assumption, a mass of graph models tends to
project contextual nodes to similar positions in semantic space. Such consistency of the context in the
graph is also applied to the pretraining graph model, which attempts to adjust the node representation by
capturing the distribution characteristics of the nodes in the context, as shown in Fig. 14 (a).
Random walk is an efﬁcient method to acquire context. It can capture the distribution characteristics of
different perspectives in the context by designing a variety of walk strategies. The DeepWalk [191] adopts
a truncated random walk strategy to represent the node context as the form of a sequence of nodes. By
introducing the idea of NLP into the network embedding model, DeepWalk regards the node sequence as
a “sentence” and models it based on the skip-gram model, providing an unsupervised and scalable training
method for node representation. Furthermore, on the basis of DeepWalk, node2vec [192] uses two different
parameter-controlled random walk strategies to obtain deviated node sequences to fully capture the context
information.
Different from randomly sampling nodes from the context, some recent methods directly consider the
28