and high computational complexity, there are still many technical challenges in PFMs. We summarize the
future research challenges of PFMs from four perspectives: data, foundation, model design, and upstream
and downstream tasks. Meanwhile, we point out some open problems in the future research direction.
8.1 Challenges on Data
Most pretrained datasets are for single modes and single languages. It is very important for the development
of PFMs to construct pretrained datasets for multimodal, multi-lingual, and graph data. For the characteris-
tics of these data, the existing technical challenges are as follows:
Data Deﬁciencies Unlike NLP and CV , except for the reusable nodes in a few molecular and protein
networks, most of the nodes and edges in the graph data do not have a large amount of unlabeled data for
pretraining. Meanwhile, the pretraining research of the graph model is still in its initial state. Besides,
data from the Internet of Things (IoT) will be enormous and contains rich physical world information. For
example, inertial measurement unit sensor data can capture users’ social activity information [271, 272]. The
theoretical basis, various deﬁnitions of the pretext task, and the augmented design of contrastive learning
are all imperfect, and new research urgently needs to be supplemented.
Multimodal PFM Some research work has been done on multimodal PFMs, such as text and image, text
and audio, etc. These are mostly PFMs between two modalities. At present, the learning of multimodal
PFMs requires new multimodal datasets, which demand the establishment of the data between different
modes. Thus, the construction of multimodal datasets is also an urgent problem to be solved.
Multi-lingual PFM The multi-lingual PFM solves the resource shortage problem in multiple languages,
and it aids in the achievement of new improvements in QA, text summarization, low-resource neural machine
translation, and so on. However, the current PFM is still a mask LM. To improve the performance of the
multi-LM, some suitable new tasks need to be added. In addition, multi-lingual vocabularies are much larger
than single-language vocabularies, resulting in a sharp increase in model parameters to be learned.
8.2 Challenges on Foundation
For a PFM, a theoretical foundation is essential to model performance, whether it is a “black box” or “white
box” method. The foundation studied mainly includes theoretical foundation, semantic understanding, and
explicable exploration.
Lack of Theoretical Foundation SSL in CV learns the experience from the NLP. There is no profound
theory to support all kinds of tentative experiments, and further exploration has no handbook. Although
there are several theoretical analysis that tries to understand the collapse of pretraining or the generalization
ability of the learning representation, the lack of theoretical foundation is still a huge cloud upon the head
of SSL.
Semantic Understanding Does the pretrained LM learn the meaning of the language, or just rely on cor-
pus learning? Many models perform well on various datasets with helpful information that can be extracted,
where some approaches even exceed human levels. However, the performance is poor on domain datasets or
40