II. R ELATED WORK
The main challenge in sequence learning tasks is to ﬁnd an
appropriate alignment between input and output sequences of
variable length. For unconstrained HTR, one needs to identify
the correct characters at each time step without any prior
knowledge about the alignment between the image pixels and
the target characters. The two major methods in deep learning
that overcome this problem are CTC- and Seq2Seq-based
approaches, the latter usually with attention.
CTC-based models compute a probability distribution over
all possible output sequences, given an input sequence. They
do so by dividing the input sequence into frames and emitting,
for each frame, the likelihood of each character of the target
alphabet.The probability distribution can be used to infer
the actual output greedily, either by taking the most likely
character at each time step or using beam search.
In the last years, the main CTC-based architectures for HTR
were Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [17] networks, in
many cases using the bidirectional variant (BLSTM) [18].
Others, like [19], [20], proposed deep networks based on
Multidimensional LSTMs (MDLSTMs) [21], that exploit the
two-dimensional nature of handwritten images. The current
state-of-the-art in many text recognition tasks additionally
integrate CNNs for an improved low-level feature extraction
prior to the recurrent layers. This approach is applied to ofﬂine
HTR by [4]. Recently there have been developments towards
fully convolutional architectures, i.e. recurrence-free, as in
[22], that reach competitive HTR performance.
Alternatively, the idea of Seq2Seq architectures that follow
the encoder-decoder framework, is to decouple the decoding
from the feature extraction. The models consist of two main
parts. First, an encoder reads and builds a feature represen-
tation of the input sequence, then a decoder emits the output
sequence one token at a time. Usually an attention mechanism
is employed by the decoder to gather context information and
search for relevant parts of the encoded features.
Without any line segmentation, [23] uses MDLSTMs for full
paragraph recognition. Many authors combine a CNN as a fea-
ture extractor with an RNN encoder and unidirectional decoder
for use in HTR. In particular, [12] and [13] use BLSTMs for
the recurrent encoder. Some works, like [14], [15], use similar
architectures, but limit their work on recognizing isolated
handwritten words. A bidirectional decoder is incorporated in
[24], by integrating a length estimation procedure.
III. P ROPOSED METHODOLOGY
Our Seq2Seq model follows the standard encoder-decoder
framework with attention. The model consists of three main
parts: an encoder that combines a CNN as a generic feature
extractor with recurrent layers to introduce temporal context
in the feature representation, a decoder that utilizes a recurrent
layer to interpret those features and an attention mechanism
that enables the decoder to focus on the most relevant encoded
features at each decoding time step. In the following, these
three components are described in more detail. A general
overview of the architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
Encoder Attention Decoder
ICNNX
x1x2 xM· · ·LSTM LSTM · · · LSTM1D ConvH · · ·h1h2 hM
Att
Σ
FCH
αt
ctst
ctLSTM LSTM · · · LSTMs1 s2 sT−1FC FC · · · FC
s1 s2 sT c1 c2 cTy1 y2 /angbracketlefteos/angbracketright
Embed Embed · · · Embed
/angbracketleftsos/angbracketright y1 yT−1 0
c1 cT−1YFig. 1. General architecture of the attention-based Seq2Seq model. The
encoder converts an input image Iinto a sequence of constant feature vectors
H. The decoder emits the output sequence Yone character at a time. At each
time step t, it employs an attention mechanism Att to generate a context
vector ctbased on the encoded feature vectors and the time-dependant decoder
hidden state st. This context vector is used to produce the decoders output
ytfor the current time step. A concatenation of the context vector and the
embedded output serves as the decoders next input.
A. Encoder
The encoder starts with a deep CNN, as those have proven
to be effective in extracting visual features from images. The
CNN converts segmented text line images of variable length
and ﬁxed height into a sequence of visual feature vectors.
It comprises three successive convolutional layers with inter-
leaved pooling layers and reduces the spatial dimensions of
the image while simultaneously increasing the representative
depth of the feature vectors.
Next, we introduce a deep RNN that reads the sequence of
convolutional features and tries to encode temporal context be-
tween them. We use BLSTM layers, that combine two LSTM
layers which process the sequence in opposite directions to
encode both forward and backward dependencies, in order to
capture the natural relationship of written text. The encoder-
RNN comprises three such BLSTM layers.
Formally, the encoder-CNN processes an input image Iand
transfers it into an intermediate-level feature map X, which
can be thought of as a sequence of column vectors X
px1;:::;x Mq, whereMis the subsampled input sequence
length. This sequence is then processed by the BLSTM layers
and we get the combined state sequence as the sum of the
forward and backward hidden states. A 1D convolutional layer
over the state sequence of the third BLSTM layer produces the
ﬁnal encoded feature map Hph1;:::;h Mq, that models the
visual information of the input image on the one hand and the
temporal context of the sequence on the other hand. Note that
a suitable choice for the convolutional output layer parameters
makes this encoder ﬁt the framework of a purely CTC-
based architecture. This can be beneﬁcial, as it preserves an
interpretable and usable encoder representation. Furthermore,
it opens up possibilities to integrate CTC-pretrained model
weights into the system to potentially increase the models
performance.