Evaluating Sequence-to-Sequence Models for
Handwritten Text Recognition
Johannes Michael, Roger Labahn
Computational Intelligence Technology Lab
University of Rostock
18057 Rostock, Germany
fjohannes.michael,roger.labahn g@uni-rostock.deTobias Gr ¨uning, Jochen Z ¨ollner
PLANET artiﬁcial intelligence GmbH
Warnowufer 60
18057 Rostock, Germany
ftobias.gruening,jochen.zoellner g@planet.de
Abstract —Encoder-decoder models have become an effective
approach for sequence learning tasks like machine translation,
image captioning and speech recognition, but have yet to show
competitive results for handwritten text recognition. To this end,
we propose an attention-based sequence-to-sequence model. It
combines a convolutional neural network as a generic feature
extractor with a recurrent neural network to encode both the
visual information, as well as the temporal context between
characters in the input image, and uses a separate recurrent neu-
ral network to decode the actual character sequence. We make
experimental comparisons between various attention mechanisms
and positional encodings, in order to ﬁnd an appropriate align-
ment between the input and output sequence. The model can
be trained end-to-end and the optional integration of a hybrid
loss allows the encoder to retain an interpretable and usable
output, if desired. We achieve competitive results on the IAM
and ICFHR2016 READ data sets compared to the state-of-the-
art without the use of a language model, and we signiﬁcantly
improve over any recent sequence-to-sequence approaches.
Keywords —sequence-to-sequence, Seq2Seq, encoder-decoder,
attention, handwritten text recognition, HTR
I. I NTRODUCTION
Numerous historical collections from different time periods
and locations were digitized at a great expense during the
last decades. Millions of pages are scanned and available as
images. To enable humanists, historians, genealogists as well
as ordinary people to efﬁciently work with these documents, it
is subject to current research and scientiﬁc discussion to make
the content of these documents digitally available.
Since 2009, tremendous progress in the ﬁeld of Handwritten
Text Recognition (HTR) and Keyword Spotting (KWS) was
achieved. Nowadays performance of deep learning based state-
of-the-art systems reaches character error rates below 10 %
for HTR [1] and mean average precisions above 0:9for KWS
[2]. Nevertheless, due to inherent differences in the writing of
individuals and the vague nature of handwritten characters,
HTR remains a challenging open research problem, where
robustness and adaptivity require further improvement.
Generally, the de facto standard for HTR tasks have been
systems based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [3], [4], which are
utilizing the Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) [5]
objective function. However, CTC-based architectures are sub-
ject to inherent limitations like strict monotonic input-outputalignments and an output sequence length that is bound by the,
possibly subsampled, input length. On the contrary, sequence-
to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models that follow the encoder-decoder
framework [6] are more ﬂexible, suit the temporal nature of
text and are able to focus on the most relevant features of the
input by incorporating attention mechanisms [7]. Additionally,
attention enables the networks to potentially model language
structures, rather than simply mapping an input to an output
[8]. Moreover, the latest advances in machine translation [6],
[7], image captioning [9] and speech recognition [10] motivate
a systematic investigation of such models in the context of
HTR tasks.
We propose a Seq2Seq model consisting of a deep CNN-
RNN-encoder and an RNN-decoder that can be trained end-
to-end on full line or word labels. The encoder extracts
low-level features from the written text line and sequentially
encodes temporal context between them. The decoder outputs
a character sequence one step at a time, using an attention
mechanism to focus on the most relevant encoded features at
each decoding step. The model can be built and trained in a
way, that preserves an interpretable and usable encoder output,
e.g. for KWS purposes without prior indexing [11]. Though,
evaluating KWS performance for our proposed model is out
of the scope of this paper. We show that our Seq2Seq model
reaches competitive results on various HTR data sets, beating
any Seq2Seq-based architectures that we know of [12]–[15].
This is achieved by a thorough evaluation of various at-
tention mechanisms and ideas from positional encodings as
well as deeply-supervised networks [16], in combination with
a performant encoder which has proven its applicability for
HTR tasks. The proposed model sets a solid foundation for
Seq2Seq models in HTR and allows for future research on
the direct integration of external memory modules as well as
language models in the decoder, which has not been done for
purely CTC-based architectures.
The paper is structured as follows: Sec. II reviews relevant
works for HTR and related topics. Sec. III describes the pro-
posed methodology and Sec. IV explains the implementation
details. Afterwards, Sec. V presents different experimental
setups, provides results and compares against the state-of-the-
art. Finally, Sec. VI concludes and contemplates future work.arXiv:1903.07377v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jul 2019