not provide any noticeable beneﬁts. The target sequences are
expanded by artiﬁcal xsosyandxeosytokens, representing
the start and end of the sequence respectively. At train time,
teacher forcing ensures that the decoder sees the correct char-
acter of the previous timestep, i.e. we feed in the embedded
target token instead of the decoders last output. Nevertheless,
we integrate some teacher noise to improve generalization,
where this mechanism is skipped with a probability of 10 % .
In this case a character from the decoders output probability
distribution is sampled and its embedding is fed in as the next
input.
E. Preprocessing and data augmentation
Preprocessing of the text line images includes a contrast
normalization without any binarization of the image, a skew
correction and a slant normalizer. Additionally, all images
are scaled to a ﬁxed height of 64 pixel while maintaining
their aspect ratio. This ensures that all vectors in the feature
sequence conform to the same dimensionality without putting
any restrictions on the sequence length. To artiﬁcially increase
the amount of training data, we augment the existing pre-
processed images by applying minor alterations to them. To
simulate naturally occuring variations in handwritten text line
images, we combine dilation, erosion and grid-like distortions
[37]. These methods are applied to the original line image
randomly with an independent probability of 50 % .
V. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
This section is divided into four subsections. First, we
present the data sets on which we evaluated our models.
In Sec. V-B we investigate the performance of the Seq2Seq
architecture for a pretrained encoder with ﬁxed parameters,
i.e. the encoder parameters are not adjusted during training of
the decoder. Such a setup ensures an interpretable and usable
encoder representation. Since the results in this setup are not
satisfying at all, Sec. V-C provides results of a hybrid loss
approach, inspired by the recent success of deeply-supervised
networks. The ﬁrst two experimental setups help us to de-
termine a general setup concerning the attention mechanism
and positional encoding. Finally, in Sec. V-D the ﬁnal results
achieved by the investigated architecture are presented and
compared to the current state-of-the-art. For the ﬁrst two
experimental subsections, we limit ourselves to the IAM data
set and rank our systems based on the validation error. Of note,
since we train our systems for a ﬁxed number of epochs and do
not perform any early stopping based on the validation error,
this is a valid procedure. Evaluation is made by comparing the
estimated transcription of the model with the target character
sequence. It should be noted, that we do not use a language
model to improve the ﬁnal prediction. Since we focus on
the raw performance of the optical models, we measure the
Character Error Rate (CER), i.e. the edit distance (Levenshtein
distance) normalized by the number of characters in the target,
instead of the Word Error Rate.TABLE I
DATA SETS USED FOR EVALUATION –THE NUMBER OF SEGMENTED
LINES FOR EACH SUBSET IS SHOWN .
SetNumber of segmented lines
IAM-A IAM-B IAM-C Bozen StAZH
Training 6161 6482 6161 8367 12628
Validation 966 976 940 1043 1624
Test 2915 2915 1861 1140 1650
A. Data sets
The IAM Handwriting Database [38] contains forms of
unconstrained handwritten text. We use the so called Aachen’s
partition1(IAM-A) of the data set. This is not the ofﬁcial
partition, but it is widely used for HTR experiments. Other
partitions, which we call IAM-B and IAM-C2, differ slightly
in the number of included text lines.
TheICFHR2016 READ data set (Bozen) [39] is based on
the collection of the state archive of Bozen. It arised from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 READ project and is openly
available. The data set consists of a subset of documents
from the Ratsprotokolle collection composed of minutes of
the council meetings held from 1470 to 1805. This data set
was the basis for a HTR competition at the ICFHR2016 [40].
The StAZH data set is based on the collection of the
state archive of the canton of Zurich. This is an internal data
set of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 READ project
and thus not openly available yet, but we included it for
additonal results on historical handwritings. The documents
contain resolutions and enactments of the cabinet as well as
the parliament of the canton of Zurich from 1803 to 1882.
The data sets are divided into training, validation and test
sets, with the number of segmented lines depicted in Tab. I.
B. Fixed Encoder
In a ﬁrst experimental setup we compare different attention
mechanisms and possibilities to directly encode the positional
information in the encoder output. This is done for a ﬁxed en-
coder, i.e. we feed the weights of a CTC-pretrained model into
the encoder part of the Seq2Seq model and ﬁxate them during
training. Consequently, the encoder CER remains constant in
those experiments. Tab. II lists the CER performance for our
encoders trained as a stand-alone system, using solely the CTC
loss and a greedy output. We investigate the different attention
mechanisms and positional encoding methods (sinusoid PE s,
learned PE l) for our Seq2Seq model, which were presented
in Sec. III. For these experiments, we trained each setup just
once, since the results can not compete with the stand-alone
encoder, as shown by Tab. III.
Because of the purely content-aware attention mechanism in
the ﬁrst setup, the CER of 64:92 % is in the range of expecta-
tion. The decoder is not aware of where the content it attends
to is positioned in the sequence and because the encoder is
1taken from https://github.com/jpuigcerver/Laia/tree/master/egs/iam
2http://www.fki.inf.unibe.ch/databases/iam-handwriting-database