Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
PRUNING NEURAL NETWORKS AT INITIALIZATION :
WHYAREWEMISSING THE MARK?
Jonathan Frankle
MIT CSAILGintare Karolina Dziugaite
Element AIDaniel M. Roy
University of Toronto
Vector InstituteMichael Carbin
MIT CSAIL
ABSTRACT
Recent work has explored the possibility of pruning neural networks at initializa-
tion. We assess proposals for doing so: SNIP (Lee et al., 2019), GraSP (Wang
et al., 2020), SynFlow (Tanaka et al., 2020), and magnitude pruning. Although
these methods surpass the trivial baseline of random pruning, we ﬁnd that they
remain below the accuracy of magnitude pruning after training. We show that, un-
like magnitude pruning after training, randomly shufﬂing the weights these meth-
ods prune within each layer or sampling new initial values preserves or improves
accuracy. As such, the per-weight pruning decisions made by these methods can
be replaced by a per-layer choice of the fraction of weights to prune. This property
suggests broader challenges with the underlying pruning heuristics, the desire to
prune at initialization, or both.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Since the 1980s, we have known that it is possible to eliminate a signiﬁcant number of parameters
from neural networks without affecting accuracy at inference-time (Reed, 1993; Han et al., 2015).
Such neural network pruning can substantially reduce the computational demands of inference when
conducted in a fashion amenable to hardware (Li et al., 2017) or combined with libraries (Elsen et al.,
2020) and hardware designed to exploit sparsity (Cerebras, 2019; NVIDIA, 2020; Toon, 2020).
When the goal is to reduce inference costs, pruning often occurs late in training (Zhu & Gupta, 2018;
Gale et al., 2019) or after training (LeCun et al., 1990; Han et al., 2015). However, as the ﬁnancial,
computational, and environmental demands of training (Strubell et al., 2019) have exploded, re-
searchers have begun to investigate the possibility that networks can be pruned early in training or
even before training. Doing so could reduce the cost of training existing models and make it possible
to continue exploring the phenomena that emerge at larger scales (Brown et al., 2020).
There is reason to believe it may be possible to prune early in training without affecting ﬁnal accu-
racy. Work on the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019; Frankle et al., 2020a) shows
that, from early in training (although often after initialization), there exist subnetworks that can train
in isolation to full accuracy (Figure 1, red line). These subnetworks are as small as those found
by inference-focused pruning methods after training (Appendix E; Renda et al., 2020), raising the
prospect that it may be possible to maintain this level of sparsity for much or all of training. However,
this work does not suggest a way to ﬁnd these subnetworks without ﬁrst training the full network.
The pruning literature offers a starting point for ﬁnding such subnetworks efﬁciently. Standard
networks are often so overparameterized that pruning randomly has little effect on ﬁnal accuracy at
lower sparsities (green line). Moreover, many existing pruning methods prune during training (Zhu
& Gupta, 2018; Gale et al., 2019), even if they were designed with inference in mind (orange line).
Recently, several methods have been proposed speciﬁcally for pruning at initialization. SNIP (Lee
et al., 2019) aims to prune weights that are least salient for the loss. GraSP (Wang et al., 2020) aims
to prune weights that most harm or least beneﬁt gradient ﬂow. SynFlow (Tanaka et al., 2020) aims
to iteratively prune weights with the lowest “synaptic strengths” in a data-independent manner with
the goal of avoiding layer collapse (where pruning concentrates on certain layers).
In this paper, we assess the efﬁcacy of these pruning methods at initialization. How do SNIP, GraSP,
and SynFlow perform relative to each other and naive baselines like random and magnitude pruning?
1arXiv:2009.08576v2  [cs.LG]  21 Mar 2021