Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 3: Accuracy of early pruning methods when pruning at initialization to various sparsities.
methods reach full accuracy at non-trivial sparsities; one possible explanation for this behavior is
that these settings are more challenging and less overparameterized in the sense that magnitude
pruning after training drops below full accuracy at lower sparsities.
Extreme sparsities. At extreme sparsities,3the ordering of methods is the same on VGG-16 but
changes on the ResNets. On ResNet-20, magnitude and SNIP drop off, GraSP overtakes the other
methods at 98.2% sparsity, and SynFlow performs worst; ResNet-50 shows similar behavior except
that SynFlow performs best. On ResNet-18, GraSP overtakes magnitude and SynFlow but not SNIP.
Summary. No one method is SOTA in all settings and sparsities. SNIP consistently performs well,
with SynFlow frequently competitive. Magnitude is surprisingly effective against more compli-
cated heuristics. GraSP performs worst at matching sparsities but does better at extreme sparsities.
Overall, the methods generally outperform random pruning; however, they cannot match magnitude
pruning after training in terms of either accuracy or the sparsities at which they match full accuracy.
5 A BLATIONS AT INITIALIZATION
In this section, we evaluate the information that each method extracts about the network at initial-
ization in the process of pruning. Our goal is to understand how these methods behave in practice
and gain insight into why they perform differently than magnitude pruning after training.
Randomly shufﬂing. We ﬁrst consider whether these pruning methods prune speciﬁc connections.
To do so, we randomly shufﬂe the pruning mask m`within each layer. If accuracy is the same
after shufﬂing, then the per-weight decisions made by the method can be replaced by the per-layer
fraction of weights it pruned. If accuracy changes, then the method has determined which parts of
the network to prune at a smaller granularity than layers, e.g., neurons or individual connections.
Overall. All methods maintain accuracy or improve when randomly shufﬂed (Figure 4, orange line).
In other words, the useful information these techniques extract is not which individual weights to re-
move, but rather the layerwise proportions by which to prune the network.4Although layerwise pro-
portions are an important hyperparameter for inference-focused pruning methods (He et al., 2018;
Gale et al., 2019), proportions alone are not sufﬁcient to explain the performance of those methods.
For example, as the bottom row of Figure 4 shows, magnitude pruning after training makes pruning
decisions speciﬁc to particular weights; shufﬂing in this manner reduces performance (Frankle &
Carbin, 2019). In general, we know of no state-of-the-art weight-pruning methods (among the many
that exist (Blalock et al., 2020)) with accuracy robust to this ablation. This raises the question of
whether the insensitivity to shufﬂing for the early pruning methods may limit their performance.
3Extreme sparsities are those beyond which magnitude pruning after training reaches full accuracy.
4Note that there are certainly pathological cases where these proportions alone are not sufﬁcient to match
the accuracy of the pruning techniques. For example, at the extreme sparsities studied by Tanaka et al. (2020),
pruning randomly could lead the network to become disconnected. An unlucky random draw could also lead
the network to become disconnected. However, we do not observe these behaviors in any of our experiments.
5