Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
K L ENET-300-100 FOR MNIST
In this appendix, we show selected experiments from the main body of the paper and the appen-
dices on the fully-connected LeNet-300-100 for MNIST. We did not include this setting in the main
body of the paper because results on MNIST often do not translate to other, larger-scale settings.
The reason why we include this experiment here is to evaluate our ablations in the context of a
fully-connected network. Unlike a convolutional network, each weight of the ﬁrst layer of a fully-
connected network is tied to a speciﬁc pixel of the input, so it is possible that randomly shufﬂing the
pruned weights may have a different effect in this setting.
K.1 F IGURE 3
For the standard versions of the methods, SNIP performs best and magnitude pruning at initialization
performs worst, although all of the methods perform similarly at lower sparsities. Compared to
the larger convolutional networks, there is little distinction between the performance of magnitude
pruning after training and the early pruning methods—just a small fraction of a percent. This result
is further evidence that LeNet-300-100 on MNIST is not representative of larger-scale settings.
K.2 F IGURE 4
The ablations vary by network. For magnitude pruning, shufﬂing and reinitializing do not affect
accuracy. For SNIP, shufﬂing and reinitializing do not affect accuracy except at the higher sparsities.
For GraSP, shufﬂing and reinitializing increase accuracy at lower sparsities and hurt accuracy at
higher sparsities; unlike the other networks, inverting GraSP does hurt accuracy. Finally, SynFlow
is unaffected by shufﬂing at lower sparsities and is unaffected by reinitializing at all sparsities.
Recall that the motivating research question for this section was whether random shufﬂing would
have a different effect on a fully-connected network in which each connection in the ﬁrst hidden
layer is speciﬁc to a particular pixel of the input. For this reason, one possible hypothesis is that
random shufﬂing will hurt accuracy in a manner that it did not for the convolutional networks.
These ablations show that randomly shufﬂing only hurts accuracy (compared to the unmodiﬁed
pruning strategies) at the highest sparsities if at all. At these sparsities, the network has been pruned
to the point where accuracy begins to plummet. We conclude that the hypothesis about the effect
of shufﬂing on a fully-connected network does hold, but only at the most extreme sparsities. For
comparison, shufﬂing affects the accuracy of magnitude pruning after training (Figure 9 below,
upper left plot) at much lower sparsities.
Magnitude
SNIP
GraSP
SynFlow
34