Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
cases if we discard path information by shufﬂing and is maintained if we alter the “synaptic strengths
ﬂowing through each parameter” by reinitializing. In addition to these concerns, GraSP performs
identically when inverted. Future early pruning research should use these and other ablations to
evaluate whether the proposed heuristics behave according to the claimed justiﬁcations.
6 P RUNING AFTER INITIALIZATION
In Section 4, we showed that pruning at initialization leads to lower accuracy than magnitude pruning
after training. In Section 5, we showed that this accuracy is invariant to ablations that hurt the
accuracy of magnitude pruning after training. In this section, we seek to distinguish whether these
behaviors are (1) intrinsic to the pruning methods or (2) speciﬁc to using the pruning methods
at initialization. We have already shown evidence in support of (2) for magnitude pruning: the
subnetworks it ﬁnds are less accurate and maintain their accuracy under shufﬂing and reinitialization
at initialization but not when pruning after training (Figure 4 in Section 5). Moreover, LTR performs
best when pruning early in training rather than at initialization (Frankle et al., 2020a), potentially
pointing to broader difﬁculties speciﬁc to pruning at initialization.
To eliminate possibility (1), we need to demonstrate that there are circumstances where these meth-
ods reach higher accuracy than they do when pruning at initialization and where they are sensitive to
the ablations. We do so by using these methods to prune later in training: we train for kiterations,
prune using each technique, and then train further for the entire learning rate schedule (Renda et al.,
2020).7If accuracy improves when pruning at iteration k >0and the methods become sensitive to
the ablations, then we know that the behaviors we observe in Sections 4 and 5 are not intrinsic to the
methods. We note that SNIP, GraSP, and SynFlow were not designed to prune after initialization; as
such, we focus on whether accuracy improves rather than the speciﬁc accuracy itself.
Figure 6 shows the effect of this experiment on accuracy. We include random pruning as a lower
baseline and LTR is the best accuracy we know to be possible when applying a pruning mask early
in training. Random pruning also provides a control to show that pruning after the network has
trained for longer (and has reached higher accuracy) does not necessarily cause the pruned network
to reach higher accuracy; no matter when in training we randomly prune, accuracy is the same.
Magnitude, SNIP, and SynFlow improve as training progresses, with magnitude and SNIP approach-
ing LTR and SynFlow close behind. This means that the performance gap in Section 4 is not intrinsic
to these methods, but rather is due to using them at initialization. Moreover, in Appendix F, we show
that, as accuracy improves, the subnetworks are increasingly sensitive to the ablations, further evi-
dence that these behaviors are speciﬁc to initialization.
Interestingly, LTR reaches higher accuracy than the pruning methods early in training: magnitude
pruning does not match the accuracy of LTR at iterations 1K, 2K, and 1K until iterations 25K, 26K,
and 36K on ResNet-20, VGG-16, and ResNet-18. If this gap in accuracy reﬂects a broader challenge
inherent to pruning early in training, then these results suggest it may be difﬁcult to prune, not just
at initialization, but for a large period after.
7 D ISCUSSION
The state of the art. We establish the following ﬁndings about pruning at initialization.
Surpassing random pruning. All methods surpass random pruning at some or all matching sparsities,
and, in certain settings, some methods maintain full accuracy at non-trivial sparsities.
No single method is SOTA at initialization. Depending on the network, dataset, and sparsity, there
is a setting where each early pruning method reaches the highest accuracy. Our enhancements to
GraSP (Figure 13 in Appendix H) and SynFlow (Figure 4) further tighten the competition.
Data is not currently essential at initialization. SynFlow and magnitude pruning are competitive
at initialization without using any training data. Like robustness to shufﬂing and reinitialization,
however, data-independence may only be possible for the limited performance of current methods.
In contrast, magnitude pruning after training and LTR rely on data for both pruning and initialization.
7Due to the expense of this experiment, we examine a single sparsity: the most extreme matching sparsity.
8