Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 1: Weights remaining at each training step for methods that reach accuracy within one per-
centage point of ResNet-50 on ImageNet. Dashed line is a result that is achieved retroactively.
How does this performance compare to methods for pruning after training? Looking ahead, are
there broader challenges particular to pruning at initialization? Our purpose is to clarify the state of
the art, shed light on the strengths and weaknesses of existing methods, understand their behavior
in practice, set baselines, and outline an agenda for the future. We focus at and near matching
sparsities : those where magnitude pruning after training matches full accuracy.1We do so because:
(1) these are the sparsities typically studied in the pruning literature, and (2) for magnitude pruning
after training, this is a tradeoff-free regime where we do not have to balance the beneﬁts of sparsity
with sacriﬁces in accuracy. Our experiments (summarized in Figure 2) and ﬁndings are as follows:
The state of the art for pruning at initialization. The methods for pruning at initialization (SNIP,
GraSP, SynFlow, and magnitude pruning) generally outperform random pruning. No single method
is SOTA: there is a network, dataset, and sparsity where each pruning method (including magnitude
pruning) reaches the highest accuracy. SNIP consistently performs well, magnitude pruning is sur-
prisingly effective, and competition increases with improvements we make to GraSP and SynFlow.
Magnitude pruning after training outperforms these methods. Although this result is not nec-
essarily surprising (after all, these methods have less readily available information upon which to
prune), it raises the question of whether there may be broader limitations to the performance achiev-
able when pruning at initialization. In the rest of the paper, we study this question, investigating how
these methods differ behaviorally from standard results about pruning after training.
Methods prune layers, not weights. The subnetworks that these methods produce perform equally
well (or better) when we randomly shufﬂe the weights they prune in each layer; it is therefore pos-
sible to describe a family of equally effective pruning techniques that randomly prune the network
in these per-layer proportions. The subnetworks that these methods produce also perform equally
well when we randomly reinitialize the unpruned weights. These behaviors are not shared by state-
of-the-art weight-pruning methods that operate after training; both of these ablations (shufﬂing and
reinitialization) lead to lower accuracy (Appendix F; Han et al., 2015; Frankle & Carbin, 2019).
These results appear speciﬁc to pruning at initialization. There are two possible reasons for the
comparatively lower accuracy of these methods and for the fact that the resulting networks are insen-
sitive to the ablations: (1) these behaviors are intrinsic to subnetworks produced by these methods
or (2) these behaviors are speciﬁc to subnetworks produced by these methods at initialization. We
eliminate possibility (1) by showing that using SNIP, SynFlow, and magnitude to prune the network
after initialization leads to higher accuracy (Section 6) and sensitivity to the ablations (Appendix F).
This result means that these methods encounter particular difﬁculties when pruning at initialization.
Looking ahead. These results raise the question of whether it is generally difﬁcult to prune at
initialization in a way that is sensitive to the shufﬂing or reinitialization ablations. If methods that
maintain their accuracy under these ablations are inherently limited in their performance, then there
may be broader limits on the accuracy attainable when pruning at initialization. Even work on
lottery tickets, which has the beneﬁt of seeing the network after training, reaches lower accuracy
and is unaffected by these ablations when pruning occurs at initialization (Frankle et al., 2020a).
Although accuracy improves when using SNIP, SynFlow, and magnitude after initialization, it does
not match that of the full network unless pruning occurs nearly halfway into training (if at all). This
means that (1) it may be difﬁcult to prune until much later in training or (2) we need new methods
designed to prune early in training (since SNIP, GraSP, and SynFlow were not intended to do so).
1Tanaka et al. design SynFlow to avert layer collapse , which occurs at higher sparsities than we consider.
However, they also evaluate at our sparsities, so we believe this is a reasonable setting to study SynFlow.
2