Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 5: Percent of neurons (conv. channels) with sparsity s%at the highest matching sparsity.
Figure 6: Accuracy of early pruning methods when pruning at the iteration on the x-axis. Sparsities
are the highest matching sparsities. LTR prunes after training and initializes to the weights from the
speciﬁed iteration. Vertical lines are iterations where the learning rate drops by 10x.
initialization for the pruned network from the same distribution as the original network? Magnitude
pruning after training and LTR are known to be sensitive this ablation: when reinitialized, pruned
networks train to lower accuracy (Figure 4 bottom row; Appendix F; Han et al., 2015; Frankle &
Carbin, 2019), and we know of no state-of-the-art weight-pruning methods with accuracy robust
to this ablation. However, all early pruning techniques are unaffected by reinitialization (green
line): accuracy is the same whether the network is trained with the original initialization or a newly
sampled initialization. As with random shufﬂing, this raises the question of whether this insensitivity
to initialization may pose a limit to these methods that restricts performance.
Inversion. SNIP, GraSP, and SynFlow are each based on a hypothesis about properties of the net-
work or training that allow a sparse network to reach high accuracy. Scoring functions should rank
weights from most important to least important according to these hypotheses, making it possible
to preserve the most important weights when pruning to any sparsity. In this ablation, we assess
whether the scoring functions successfully do so: we prune the most important weights and retain
theleast important weights. If the hypotheses behind these methods are correct and they are accu-
rately instantiated as scoring functions, then inverting in this manner should lower performance.
Magnitude, SNIP, and SynFlow behave as expected: when pruning the most important weights,
accuracy decreases (red line). In contrast, GraSP’s accuracy does not change when pruning the most
important weights. This result calls into question the premise behind GraSP’s heuristic: one can
keep the weights that, according to Wang et al. (2020), decrease gradient ﬂow the most and get the
same accuracy as keeping those that purportedly increase it the most. Moreover, we ﬁnd that pruning
weights with the lowest-magnitude GraSP scores improves accuracy (Appendix H).
Summary. When using the methods for pruning at initialization, it is possible to reinitialize or
layerwise shufﬂe the unpruned weights without hurting accuracy. This suggests that the useful part
of the pruning decisions of SNIP, GraSP, SynFlow, and magnitude at initialization are the layerwise
proportions rather than the speciﬁc weights or values. In the broader pruning literature, shufﬂing
and reinitialization are associated with lower accuracy, and—as an example—we show that this is
the case for magnitude pruning after training. Since these ablations do not hurt the accuracy of
the methods for pruning at initialization, this raises the question of whether these methods may be
conﬁned to this lower stratum of performance.
This behavior under the ablations also raises questions about the reasons why SNIP, GraSP, and
SynFlow are able to reach the accuracies in Section 4. Each paper poses a hypothesis about the
qualities that would allow a pruned network to train effectively and derives a heuristic to determine
which speciﬁc weights should be pruned based on this hypothesis. In light of our ablations, it is
unclear whether the results achieved by these methods are attributable to these hypotheses. For
example, SNIP aims to “identify important connections” (Lee et al., 2019); however, accuracy does
not change if the pruned weights are randomly shufﬂed. SynFlow focuses on paths, “taking the
inter-layer interactions of parameters into account” (Tanaka et al., 2020); accuracy improves in some
7