Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Below the performance of pruning after training. All methods for pruning at initialization reach
lower accuracy than magnitude pruning after training.
The challenge of pruning at initialization. It is striking that methods that use such different signals
(magnitudes; gradients; Hessian; data or lack thereof) reach similar accuracy, behave similarly under
ablations, and improve similarly (except GraSP) when pruning after initialization.
Ablations. None of the methods we examine are sensitive to the speciﬁc weights that are pruned or
their speciﬁc values when pruning at initialization. When pruning after training, these ablations are
associated with lower accuracy. This contrast raises the question of whether methods that maintain
accuracy under these ablations are inherently limited in the accuracy they can reach, and whether
this is a property of these methods or of pruning at initialization in general. It may yet be possible to
design a method that reaches higher accuracy and is sensitive to these ablations at initialization, but
it may also be that the failures of four methods to do so (and their improvements after initialization
in Section 6 and Appendix F) point to broader challenges in pruning at initialization.
Why is it challenging? We do not identify a cause for why these methods struggle to prune in
a speciﬁc fashion at initialization (and often only at initialization), and we believe that this is an
important question for future work. Perhaps there are properties of optimization that make pruning
speciﬁc weights difﬁcult or impossible at initialization (Evci et al., 2019). For example, training
occurs in multiple phases (Gur-Ari et al., 2018; Jastrzebski et al., 2020; Frankle et al., 2020b);
perhaps it is challenging to prune during this initial phase. Further study of this question may reveal
whether this challenge is related to shared characteristics of these methods or whether it is intrinsic
to pruning at initialization.
Looking ahead. We close by discussing the implications of our ﬁndings for future pruning research.
Why prune early in training? There are many reasons to do so. This includes the scientiﬁc goals of
studying the capacity needed for learning (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) and the information needed to
prune (Tanaka et al., 2020) and the practical goals of reducing the cost of ﬁnding pruned networks
for inference (Lee et al., 2019) and “saving resources at training time” (Wang et al., 2020).
We focus on the practical goal of reducing the cost of training, since our results show that pruning at
initialization is not a drop-in replacement for pruning after training. We ﬁnd that existing methods
for pruning at initialization require making a tradeoff: reducing the cost of training entails sacriﬁcing
some amount of accuracy. Looking ahead, we believe the most compelling next step for pruning
research is developing tradeoff-free ways to reduce the cost of training.
Pruning after initialization. In Section 6, we show that SNIP, SynFlow, and magnitude improve
gradually after initialization but LTR improves much faster. However, these methods were designed
for initialization; focusing early in training may require new approaches. Alternatively, it may be
that, even at iterations where LTR succeeds in Section 6, the readily available information is not
sufﬁcient reach this performance without consulting the state of the network after training. One way
to avoid this challenge is to dynamically change the mask to exploit signals from later in training
(Mocanu et al., 2018; Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2019; Evci et al., 2020).
New signals for pruning. It may be possible to prune at initialization or early in training, but signals
like magnitudes and gradients (which sufﬁce late in training) may not be effective. Are there differ-
ent signals we should use early in training? Should we expect signals that work early in training to
work late in training (or vice versa)? For example, second order information should behave differ-
ently at initialization and convergence, which may explain why GraSP struggles after initialization.
Measuring progress. We typically evaluate pruning methods by comparing their accuracies at certain
sparsities. In the future, we will need to extend this framework to account for tradeoffs in differ-
ent parts of the design space. At initialization, we must weigh the beneﬁts of extreme sparsities
against decreases in accuracy. This is especially important for methods like SynFlow and FORCE
(de Jorge et al., 2020), which are designed to maintain diminished but non-random accuracy at the
most extreme sparsities. In this paper, we defer this tradeoff by focusing on matching sparsities.
When pruning after initialization, we will need to address an additional challenge: comparing a
method that prunes to sparsity sat steptagainst a method that prunes to sparsity s0>s at step
t0>t. To do so, we will need to measure overall training cost. That might include measuring the
area under the curve in Figure 1, FLOPs (as, e.g., Evci et al. (2019) do), or real-world training time
and energy consumption on software and hardware optimized for pruned neural networks.
9