Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 12 of 26
3.2. Sample Selection
Deep metric learning consists of three main parts, which are informative input samples, the
structure of the network model, and a metric loss function. Although deep metric learning especially
deals with metric loss function, informative sample selection also plays a very important role in
classiﬁcation or clustering. Informative samples are one of the most substantial elements that increase
the success of deep metric learning. The sampling strategy is capable of increasing both the success of
the network and the training speed of the network. The easiest way to determine train samples in
contrastive loss is by means of randomly chosen positive or negative pairs of objects. In the beginning,
some papers tend to use easy sample pairs for the Siamese network in embedding learning [ 29,88].
However, the authors in [ 89] emphasized that the learning process could be slowed down and
negatively a ected after the network reached an acceptable performance level. To address this problem,
more discriminative models were obtained while using hard negative mining [ 89,90]. Triplet network
uses an anchor, a positive, and a negative sample to train a network for classiﬁcation. In [ 91], it was
observed that some easy triplets had no e ect in updating a model due to their poor discriminative
power. These triplets cause a waste of time and resources. For this reason, to overcome these problems,
it is very convenient to use informative sample triplets, and more feasible train models with a better
sample strategy could be provided instead of selecting random samples [91,92].
Hard negative samples correspond to false-positive samples that are determined by training data.
Semi-hard negative mining used for the ﬁrst time in [ 32] aims to ﬁnd negative samples within the
margin. Negative samples are farther from the anchor sample when compared with hard negative
mining. There is also a softer transition between positive and negative samples in this approach.
The negative mining relationship according to the distance among anchor, positive, and negative
samples was illustrated for triplet mining [ 85], as seen in Figure 4. If the negative samples are too
close to the anchor, we can see that the gradient has a high variance and a low signal to the noise ratio,
according to [ 93]. Hence, distance weighted sampling was suggested to avoid noisy samples in [ 93].
Thanks to this method, a wider range of examples as compared with semi-hard negative mining was
also o ered. Negative class mining can also be found in the literature instead of negative sample
mining [ 70]. This approach uses one of each class samples for a negative sample of the triple network.
To achieve this, the authors chose multiple negative samples with a greedy search strategy.
 
 
Symmetry  2019 , 11, x; doi: FOR PEER REVIEW  www.mdpi.com/journal/ symmetry  
 
 
3.2. Sample Selection  
Deep metric learning consists of three main parts , which are informative input samples, the 
structure of the network model, and a metric loss function. Although deep metric learning  especially 
deals with metric loss function, informative sample s election also plays a very important role in 
classification or clustering. Informative samples are one of the most substantial elements that 
increase the success of deep metric learning. The sampling strategy is capable of increasing both the 
success of th e network and the training speed of the network. The easiest way to determine train 
samples in contrastive loss is by means of randomly chosen positive or negative pairs of objects. In 
the beginning, some papers tend to use easy sample pairs for the Siames e network in embedding 
learning [29,88] . However, the authors in [90] emphasized that the learning process could be slowed 
down and negatively affected after the network reached an acceptable performance level. To address 
this pr oblem, more discriminative models were obtained  while  using hard negative mining [90,91] . 
Triplet network uses an anchor, a positive, and a negative sample to train a network for 
classification. In [92], it was observed that some easy triplets had no effect in updating a model due 
to their poor discriminative power. These triplets cause a waste of time and resources. For this 
reason, to ov ercome these problems, it is very convenient to use informative sample triplets , and 
more feasible train models with a better sample strategy could be provided instead of selecting 
random samples [92,93].  
Hard negative samples correspond to false -positive samples that are determined by training 
data. Semi -hard negative mining used for the first time in [32] aims to find negative samples within 
the margin. Negati ve samples are farther from the anchor sample when compared with hard 
negative mining. There is also a softer transition between positive and negative samples in this 
approach. The negative mining relationship according to the distance among anchor, positi ve, and 
negative samples was illustrated  for triplet mining [87] , as seen  in Figure 4. If the negative samples 
are too close to the anchor, we can see that the gradient has a high variance and a low signal to the 
noise ratio , according to [94]. Hence, distance weighted sampli ng was suggested to avoid noisy 
samples in [94]. Thanks to this method, a wider range of examples as compared with semi -hard 
negative mining was also offered. Negative class mining can also be found in the literature instead of 
negative sample mining [81]. This approach uses one of each class samples for a negative sample of 
the triple network. To achieve th is, the authors chose multiple negative samples with a greedy 
search strategy.  
  
  
 
Hard Negative Mining  
 
( , ) ( , )d a n d a p  
 
 
Semi -Hard Negative Mining  
( , ) ( , ) ( , )d a p d a n d a p margin  +
  
 
Easy Negative Mining  
( , ) ( , )d a p margin d a n+
 
 
Figure 4.  Negative Mining.  
Figure 4. Negative Mining.
To summarize, even if we create good mathematical models and architectures, the learning ability
of the network will be limited, depending on the discriminating power of the samples that are presented
to the network. Distinguishing training examples should be presented to the network so that the
network can learn better and gain better representation. For this reason, the e ect of the relationship