Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 2 of 26
to a new space. The e ect of each feature is not equal in terms of classiﬁcation. Therefore, feature
weighting might be used before classiﬁcation. The dataset can also be transformed from original space
to a new space. To realize this, data transformation algorithms, like Principal Component Analysis
and Linear Discriminant Analysis, have been beneﬁted. The dataset can be classiﬁed after the data
transformation using these algorithms.
Metric learning is an approach based directly on a distance metric that aims to establish similarity
or dissimilarity between objects. While metric learning aims to reduce the distance between similar
objects, it also aims to increase the distance between dissimilar objects. For this reason, there are
approaches, such as k-nearest neighbors, which calculate distance information, and approaches
where the data is transformed into a new representation. While the metric learning approaches are
moved to the transformation space with distance information, the method is basically based on a
Wprojection matrix. Current studies are directly related to Mahalanobis distance in general [ 4–6].
When Mahalanobis distance is transformed into the Euclidean distance, the metric learning approach
is presented based on the decomposition of the covariance matrix and the use of symmetric positive
deﬁnite matrices while performing these operations.
Data volume has been increasing day by day, which provides signiﬁcant advantages for more
accurate classiﬁcation. However, this also brings a large number of calculations with it. It is essential
to carry out operations in pieces and together due to many computing requirements. Therefore, it is
possible to come up with fast and successful solutions in machine learning thanks to the power of
parallel computing. Deep learning with multi-layered structure has become one of the most popular
topics of our time in computer science with the development of GPU technology in recent years [ 7].
Deep learning, which provides a new representation of the data over raw data, obtains the automatic
extraction of features where the goal is to achieve higher abstraction levels when transforming data [ 8,9].
Deep learning o ers a compact structure on its own and it includes the classiﬁcation in the architecture.
It has also a nonlinear structure that can provide us more realistic approaches to detect real-world
problems with the power of activation functions.
In the last few years, deep learning and metric learning have been brought together to introduce
the concept of deep metric learning [ 10]. Deep metric learning is based on the principle of similarity
between samples. In 2017, Lu et al. [ 10] summarized the concept of deep metric learning for visual
understanding tasks. The concept of deep metric learning has been shown in Figure 1. In this study,
more recent approaches for Image, Video, Speech, and Text tasks were dealt with. The network
structure, loss function, and sample selection are important factors for the success of the network in
deep metric learning. All of the details of these main factors were mentioned in light of recent studies.
Besides, a general framework was presented with quantitative experiments in comparing the methods.
In this study, ﬁrstly metric learning was focused on. After giving some details about the
background of metric learning in Section 2, recent improvements in deep learning were discussed.
Subsequently, the relationship between deep learning and metric learning was addressed. After that,
deep metric learning problems, sample selection, and metric loss functions were explained in detail in
Section 3. Finally, some conclusions about the current situation and the future of deep metric learning
were presented.
This paper attempts to put forward the signiﬁcance of deep metric learning and the issues handled
in this ﬁeld. This research is considered to be important, as it is the ﬁrst comprehensive study where
these factors are systematically examined and evaluated as a whole while comparing the quantitative
results of the methods.
2. Metric Learning
Each dataset has speciﬁc problems in terms of classiﬁcation and clustering. Distance metrics
that do not have a good learning ability independent of the problem can be claimed not to yield
successful results in the classiﬁcation of data. Therefore, a good distance metric is required to achieve
successful results on the input data [ 11,12]. To address this problem, several works have been conducted