Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 13 of 26
between the samples for deep metric learning should be carefully examined. Thus, sample selection
will be very useful as a preprocessing step to increase the success of network model before applying the
deep metric learning model. The results in the literature point out that studies for negative mining in
deep metric learning have a high impact value. When considering the beneﬁt of choosing informative
samples; on the other hand, the main one could be to avoid overﬁtting, because similar patterns have
similar interaction when the network is being trained, because overﬁtting may cause slower learning or
local optimal learning. Moreover, the number of all possible triplets corresponds O (n3) time complexity
when we consider a problem with two classes, which results in a waste of time and unnecessary use of
resources. To overcome this problem, it is enough to only deal with valuable triple samples. Thus,
signiﬁcant improvements in performance can be achieved after selecting informative samples.
3.3. Loss functions for Deep Metric Learning
In this section, some loss functions that have been used to apply deep metric learning in the
literature will be highlighted. The way that these functions are used will also be introduced and some
details about their di erences will be given. These functions provide us to increase or decrease the
distance between the objects by looking at their similarity. The goal is to achieve the highest feature
representation between di erent objects.
Initially, the Siamese network was used with neural networks for signature veriﬁcation [ 33].
Dierent from [ 33], the Siamese network is based on learning from a discriminative learning framework
for energy-based models [ 94]. In this approach, two identical images are taken into the Siamese
network and a binary value is obtained as a result of learning from these images. The images are
considered as the same class when they are “0”; if they are “1”, they are considered as a di erent class.
The Siamese network, as a metric learning approach, receives pair images, including positive and
negative samples to train a network model (Figure 5) [ 95]. The distance between these pair images
is calculated via a loss function (Equation (5)). Contrastive Loss has been beneﬁted for the Siamese
network in the literature [ 29,96]. This approach is a study that provides inspiration for researchers
working in the ﬁeld of deep metric learning. As can be seen in Figure 6a, the siamese network is a
very successful model to maximize or minimize the distance between objects to improve classiﬁcation
performance. Shared weights that positively a ect the performance of a neural network are used
to obtain a meaningful pattern among images in deep metric learning, as shown in Figure 5. These
weights also have important advantages in terms of time and memory. It is also possible to combine
the Siamese network and Convolutional neural network, which has important advantages [ 97], which
include similarity learning from direct image pixels, color and texture information at the same time,
and its ﬂexible structure. In the deep metric learning model [ 98], two Siamese Convolutional neural
network and Mahalanobis metric were combined for person re-identiﬁcation, where the Mahalanobis
metric was used to classify the data. The deep metric learning model was created by limiting the
weights to a C constant while calculating the L2 norm. The authors in [ 99] combined softmax loss and
center loss for face recognition. While the center loss aims to ﬁnd a center for deep features of each
class to minimize the distances between deep features and their class center, like the contrastive loss,
the softmax loss aims to ﬁnd deep features that maximize the distances between di erent classes