Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 6 of 26
residual networks-based metric learning for this task. When the method was compared with popular
deep metric learning methods, it was found to outperform the others. Predeﬁned distance metrics
may be insu cient for visual tasks because of signiﬁcant variations on visual objects. To address this
problem, Hu et al. [ 36] also used deep metric learning based on a distance metric instead of employing
a predeﬁned similarity metric to maximize the distance between the positive samples and minimize
the distance between negative samples for visual tracking. The success of these studies indicates the
advantages of working in metric space.
Another important problem in machine learning is person re-identiﬁcation. Convolutional neural
network-based approaches have come into question with the success of deep learning methods in recent
years [ 37]. Person re-identiﬁcation tasks aim to identify di erent images of the same person taken in
dierent situations. Thus, it is possible to learn a suitable distance metric to solve these issues [ 38,39].
There are some kinds of benchmark person re-identiﬁcation datasets, such as CUHK01, CUHK03,
Market-1501, MARS, and VIPER, in the literature. Deep metric learning for person re-identiﬁcation
provides us to use end-to-end learning between the input image and the transformed feature space [ 40].
In [41], the authors obtained a score value for body similarity of the two images based on metric
similarity. The model that is based on this approach begins with two layers of tied convolution and
maximum pooling. Subsequently, cross-input neighborhood di erences are computed. In the last
step, patch summation attributes, cross-patch attributes, and softmax function are utilized to identify
a person as the same or di erent. In another study, Ding et al. [ 42] aimed to maximize the relative
distance between two dissimilar images for triplet loss. However, one image could be included in
several triplet units, which can increase the number of triplet units. For this reason, they improved
the eective triplet generation scheme and optimized gradient descent algorithm, depending on the
number of original images instead of the number of triplets.
Disease patterns should be similar in medical images to make a diagnosis of a patient. Recently,
deep learning has rapidly become a trending topic to solve the problems of medical images. There are
some medical image problems, such as classiﬁcation, detection, segmentation, and registration [ 43].
Deep metric learning algorithms that are based on the similarity approach can help to solve these
problems. Using a deep metric, a higher representation level of data could be provided for the
analysis of medical images. Unlike Triplet Network, the authors in [ 44] take the global structure
of the embedding space and overlapping labels into account while using ML2 loss. The proposed
approach allows us to distinguish normal radiological images from abnormal ones through the metric
loss function.
Currently, studies have tended towards deep metric learning, which has an e cient discrimination
power for 3D shape retrieval [ 23,30,45–48]. Both sketch and 3D shape of images beneﬁted for 3D shape
retrieval while using shared weights and a metric loss function in [ 23,45,47]. A network model that was
based on CNN +Siamese network on three large datasets aimed to achieve e cient 3D image retrieval.
To carry out 3D image retrieval, a metric loss that combines correlation and discrimination loss was
used in [ 23,46]. Dierent from [ 23], the metric loss was also used in the hidden layer during training.
The authors in [ 48] attempted to ﬁnd a more robust and discriminative feature that was embedded with
a novel loss function that combined triplet loss and center loss for 3D image retrieval task. In another
3D image retrieval task, Lim et al. [ 30] used the triplet network model to detect the styles of 3D images.
They compared the triplet loss value with the distances of similar and dissimilar images.
Deep metric learning introduces the-state-of-the-art methods that have very discriminative
information for face recognition and veriﬁcation in recent years [ 27,31,32,49,50]. Hu et al. [ 31] proposed
a novel deep discriminative metric learning model that had a hierarchical nonlinear transformation
with face pairs taking advantage of neural network for face veriﬁcation. In addition, the same authors
aimed to reveal the kinship relation between people by examining the image of two di erent faces while
using model-based discriminative deep metric learning method [ 49]. The authors in [ 32] suggested
a system, called FaceNet, using a novel online triplet learning model by focusing on face similarity
under the cover of Euclidean space. The system was designed to deal with face problems, such as