Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 5 of 26
data [ 21]. For this reason, the expected outcomes could not be obtained while using metric learning.
Although a solution with a kernel-based approach was provided to overcome this problem, there is no
obvious success due to some issues such as scaling [ 22]. Unlike traditional metric learning methods,
deep learning solves this problem using activation functions that have nonlinear structure.
Most of the existing deep learning approaches are based on the deep architectural background
rather than the distance metric in a new representation space of the data. However, distance-based
approaches have recently become one of the most interesting topics in deep learning [ 15,23–26]. While
decreasing the distance between dissimilar samples [ 27,28], deep metric learning, which aims to
increase the distance between similar samples, is directly related to the distance between samples.
To execute this process, the metric loss function has been beneﬁted in deep learning. While aiming to
bring the samples from the same classes closer to each other, we pushed the samples from di erent
classes apart from each other (Figure 2a). To illustrate this process with a ﬁgure, some experiments on
the MNIST image dataset were conducted while using contrastive loss [ 29]. Distance values represent
the mean of distances among similar or dissimilar images in Figure 2b. As can be seen in the Figure,
the distance value for similar images decreased step by step after each epoch. On the other hand, the
distance value for dissimilar images also increased at the same. The distance relationship for Siamese
network has been successfully applied in each epoch for similar or dissimilar images (Figure 2b).
This experiment proves to us that the purpose of the approach can be successfully implemented.
Symmetry 2019 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 25 
provided to overcome this problem, there is no obvious success due to some issues such as scaling 
[22]. Unlike traditional metric learning methods, deep learning solves this problem using activation 
functions that have nonlinear structure. 
Most of the existing deep learning approaches are based on the deep architectural background 
rather than the distance metric in a new represen tation space of the data. However, distance-based 
approaches have recently become one of the most interesting topics in deep learning [15,23–26]. 
While decreasing the distance between dissimilar sa mples [27,28], deep metric learning, which aims 
to increase the distance between similar samples, is  directly related to the distance between samples. 
To execute this process, the metric loss function ha s been benefited in deep learning. While aiming to 
bring the samples from the same classes closer to each other, we pushed the samples from different 
classes apart from each other (Figure 2a). To illust rate this process with a figure, some experiments 
on the MNIST image dataset were conducted while using contrastive loss [29]. Distance values represent the mean of distances among similar or di ssimilar images in Figure 2b. As can be seen in 
the Figure, the distance value for similar images de creased step by step after each epoch. On the 
other hand, the distance value fo r dissimilar images also increased at the same. The distance 
relationship for Siamese network has been succe ssfully applied in each epoch for similar or 
dissimilar images (Figure 2b). This experiment prov es to us that the purpose of the approach can be 
successfully implemented.  
 
00,20,40,60,811,2
00,20,40,60,811,2
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0Siamese Network
Dissimilar images Similar imagesThe distance mean between dissimilar imagesThe distance mean between similar images
EpochSimila r images
Dissimilar images
 
               ( a)                          ( b) 
Figure 2. Distance Relationship for a Siamese Network  (a) Desired handwritten data discrimination 
for three and eight digits (b) after Siamese network applied to MNIST data for three and eight digits. 
3.1. Deep Metric Learning Problems 
Deep metric learning, which utilizes deep architectures by obtaining embedded feature 
similarity through nonlinear subspace learning, de velops problem-based solu tions that are caused 
by learning from raw data. When the scope of deep metric learning is considered, it has a wide range 
from video understanding to others including person re-identification, medical problems, three-dimensional (3D) modelling [23,30], face verification and recognition [27,31,32], and signature 
verification [33]. 
There are many kinds of problems in unders tanding videos, including video annotation, 
recommendation, and search. When encountered with su ch problems, it is possible to make use of a 
metric space to come up with solutions. To illustrate, Lee et al. extracted audio and visual features from videos to benefit from these useful contents at  first [34]. After feature extraction, they presented 
a deep neural network embedding model that is based on triplet learning, which is also a source of inspiration for similar studies. The purpose of [35] is to learn a metric that is based on deep metric 
learning for moving human localization in video surveillance where the authors conducted a deep 
multi-channel residual networks-based metric learning for this task. When the method was 
Figure 2. Distance Relationship for a Siamese Network ( a) Desired handwritten data discrimination for
three and eight digits ( b) after Siamese network applied to MNIST data for three and eight digits.
3.1. Deep Metric Learning Problems
Deep metric learning, which utilizes deep architectures by obtaining embedded feature similarity
through nonlinear subspace learning, develops problem-based solutions that are caused by learning
from raw data. When the scope of deep metric learning is considered, it has a wide range from video
understanding to others including person re-identiﬁcation, medical problems, three-dimensional (3D)
modelling [23,30], face veriﬁcation and recognition [27,31,32], and signature veriﬁcation [33].
There are many kinds of problems in understanding videos, including video annotation,
recommendation, and search. When encountered with such problems, it is possible to make use of a
metric space to come up with solutions. To illustrate, Lee et al. extracted audio and visual features from
videos to beneﬁt from these useful contents at ﬁrst [ 34]. After feature extraction, they presented a deep
neural network embedding model that is based on triplet learning, which is also a source of inspiration
for similar studies. The purpose of [ 35] is to learn a metric that is based on deep metric learning for
moving human localization in video surveillance where the authors conducted a deep multi-channel