Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 4 of 26
Symmetry 2019 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 25 
mi nimize the di stance
maximize the distancexy
2
1(,) ( )k
ii
idxy x y
==−Distance metricSimilarity(,)dxy
W
*Siamese Network
Figure 1. Deep Metric Learning.  
3. Deep Metric Learning 
Traditional machine learning techniques are limited by their ability to process data on raw data. 
Therefore, they need feature engineering, such as preprocessing and feature extraction steps before classification or clustering tasks. All of these step s require expertise and they are not directly within 
the classification structure. However, deep learning learns the higher level of data directly in the 
classification structure. This perspective show s the fundamental difference between traditional 
machine learning methods and deep learning. Unlike traditional machine learning methods, deep learning needs a high size  of data to achieve successful results, since it is not successful enough in 
low data size. Besides, deep learning algorithms requ ire a lot of time to train data because of the high 
data size and a large number of parameters of the algorithm. Therefore, NVIDIA introduced a 
cuDNN GPU-accelerated library for deep neural networks to perform these high-performance 
calculations. Thanks to this library, a lot of deep learning frameworks, such as Caffe, Caffe2, 
Chainer, Microsoft CNTK, Matlab, Mxnet, Paddle Paddle, PyTorch, TensorFlow, and Theano [17], 
have been developed while using the power of GPU.  
Basic similarity metrics that are used for data classification are the distances of Euclidean, 
Mahalanobis, Matusita [18], Bhattacharyya [1 9], and Kullback-Leibler [20]. However, these 
pre-defined metrics have limited capabilities in data classification. Hence, an approach based on the Mahalanobis metric was proposed to classify the data  into traditional metric learning to address this 
problem. In this approach, the data is tran sformed into a new feature space with higher 
discrimination power. Usua lly, metric learning approaches are related to the linear transformation 
of the data without any kernel function. However,  these approaches are not successful enough to 
reveal nonlinear knowledge of the data [21]. For this reason, the expected  outcomes could not be 
obtained while using metric learning. Although a solution with a kernel-based approach was 
Figure 1. Deep Metric Learning.
3. Deep Metric Learning
Traditional machine learning techniques are limited by their ability to process data on raw data.
Therefore, they need feature engineering, such as preprocessing and feature extraction steps before
classiﬁcation or clustering tasks. All of these steps require expertise and they are not directly within
the classiﬁcation structure. However, deep learning learns the higher level of data directly in the
classiﬁcation structure. This perspective shows the fundamental di erence between traditional machine
learning methods and deep learning. Unlike traditional machine learning methods, deep learning
needs a high size of data to achieve successful results, since it is not successful enough in low data
size. Besides, deep learning algorithms require a lot of time to train data because of the high data
size and a large number of parameters of the algorithm. Therefore, NVIDIA introduced a cuDNN
GPU-accelerated library for deep neural networks to perform these high-performance calculations.
Thanks to this library, a lot of deep learning frameworks, such as Ca e, Ca e2, Chainer, Microsoft
CNTK, Matlab, Mxnet, PaddlePaddle, PyTorch, TensorFlow, and Theano [ 17], have been developed
while using the power of GPU.
Basic similarity metrics that are used for data classiﬁcation are the distances of Euclidean,
Mahalanobis, Matusita [ 18], Bhattacharyya [ 19], and Kullback-Leibler [ 20]. However, these pre-deﬁned
metrics have limited capabilities in data classiﬁcation. Hence, an approach based on the Mahalanobis
metric was proposed to classify the data into traditional metric learning to address this problem. In this
approach, the data is transformed into a new feature space with higher discrimination power. Usually,
metric learning approaches are related to the linear transformation of the data without any kernel
function. However, these approaches are not successful enough to reveal nonlinear knowledge of the