Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 19 of 26
4. Discussion
As mentioned earlier in Section 3, Deep metric learning (DML) have been used for face veriﬁcation,
recognition, person re-identiﬁcation, and 3D shape retrieval tasks. These tasks consist of very large
number of categories and limited training samples for single categories. An insu cient number of
samples for any category can complicate a successful training process. However, DML algorithms can
handle two, three, or more samples at the same network structure, such as Siamese network, Triplet
network, and Quadruple network. These network structures allow for users to signiﬁcantly increase
the size of data training. Thus, it is possible to improve the training performance of the network even
if the number of samples for a single category is small. As can be seen in Table 1, DML algorithms
have proved to be useful with remarkable results for these tasks where both the number of categories
is high and the number of samples for a single category is small.
DML, which basically consists of metric loss function, sampling strategy, and network structure,
should be considered as a whole with all of the components of the network. Samples to be presented to
the network and the relationship between them are related to the metric loss function. The metric loss
functions such as contrastive loss [ 29], triplet loss [ 85], quadruple loss [ 100], n-pair loss [ 70], and so on
allow for us to increase the data sample size (n), such as n2(paired samples), n3(triplet samples), and n4
(quadruple samples). Ine cient paired samples or triple samples cause time consumption and too much
memory space in the network training. The time complexity of network training may exponentially
increase, depending on this situation. To overcome these problems, hard negative mining [ 89,90] and
semi-hard negative mining [ 32,100] oers informative samples for training. The correct sampling
strategy plays very important role for fast convergence [32].
Although hard mining or semi-hard mining strategies obtain the desired results in speciﬁc
tasks, they still have very expensive time and memory space compared to traditional deep learning
approaches [ 71]. Moreover, it is not always possible while using a large batch size due to the GPU
memory limit. To get over these issues, clustering loss [ 71] oers a good metric function, which does
not need any data preparation step. Although deep metric learning approaches are usually carried out
on a GPU, the authors in [32] applied their mining strategy on CPU clusters to use a huge batch.
Deep metric learning approaches are highly dependent on data. The metric loss function might not
provide fast convergence between the samples for some speciﬁc datasets. To overcome this problem,
the weights that are obtained from pre-trained network models may ensure a fast convergence and
more discriminative learning in embedding space [70].
5. Conclusions
In recent years, deep metric learning based on distance metric seems to be an important study
ﬁeld for researchers. At present, academic studies on this topic provide invaluable contributions to the
literature. The goal of deep metric learning is to learn a similarity metric that computes the similarity
or dissimilarity of two or more objects while using samples. There are notable similarity problems that
are applied to face recognition, face veriﬁcation, person re-Identiﬁcation, 3D shape retrieval, semantic
textual similarity, speaker veriﬁcation, patient similarity, etc. in image, video, text and audio tasks.
The aim of this article is to present a comprehensive study, in which all aspects of deep metric learning
are evaluated to ﬁll the gap in the literature.
Most of the recent studies in the literature were inspired by Siamese and Triplet networks in
deep metric learning. These network structures have proved their high e ectiveness on benchmark
datasets and speciﬁc problem tasks. These studies contain three main parts, including informative
input samples, the structure of the network model, and a metric loss function.
Firstly, If the data-dependent sampling strategy is not initially well-adjusted, the desired results
may not be achieved for speciﬁc problem tasks. Additionally, poor sampling strategy might cause
convergence to slow down. To address these problems, hard or semi-hard negative mining strategy
provides substantial contributions to obtain informative input samples. This technique needs a
margin value to separate more valuable input examples to be presented to a network. In future