Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 16 of 26
where Xcis in the middle of XandXp.Xcis,
Xc= (X+Xp)/2 (9)
Traditional deep metric learning models, like Siamese and Triplet Networks, neglect the structural
information of training samples in each training step [ 101]. However, it is a disadvantage for a dataset
that has limited training samples. Deep structural metric learning approach proposes lifting the vector
of pairwise distances within the batch to the matrix of pairwise distances through a special structured
loss in the deep network [ 69]. Therefore, it is possible to use the full advantage of contextual information
within the training batch. As can be seen in Figure 6d, it deals with the similarity relationship among
many samples at the same time. The power of the proposed algorithm comes from evaluating a
sucient number of samples together. Sohn [ 70] proposed a multi-class N-pair loss to address the
slow convergence and poor local optima of Siamese and Triplet Networks. Triplet loss deals with just a
negative sample in every training stage update and it does not interact with other negative samples.
Dierent from Triplet loss, N pair loss beneﬁts from N-1 negative class samples to compare the anchor
sample (Figure 6e). If the number of classes is limited, it can be unnecessary to use N-pair loss, because,
if the number of classes decreases, the number of comparisons with an anchor sample will also decrease.
The advantage of N-pair loss will be lost in this situation. Unlike all other loss metrics in the literature,
the authors in [ 102] beneﬁted from multi-similarity loss while using self-similarity, negative relative
similarity, and positive relative similarity under the general pair weighting framework to capture the
similarity between samples. This loss takes both self-similarity and relative similarities into account,
which make possible the model to gather and weight informative pair samples more e ciently.
The preparation of the training data has to be done for Siamese, Triplet, and n-double networks
before the training phase. This process needs more space on disk and it is time-consuming. Song et
al. [71] claim that these networks also deal with the local view of the data. To overcome these problems,
they proposed a new deep metric learning method while using clustering loss. As can be seen in
Figure 6g, clustering loss aims to bring the samples together in a cluster while using cluster centers.
It also prevents di erent clusters from approaching each other. The suggested method, based on
structured prediction, beneﬁts from the normalized mutual metric. Rippel et al. [ 103] emphasize that
triplet loss evaluates a triplet sample at a time to train a dataset. This reduces the learning time of the
network. However, this approach causes poor performance and insu cient training. For this reason,
they suggested magnet loss, which penalizes cluster overlaps and evaluates the closest neighbors in a
cluster to separate multiple clusters. The proposed method has local discrimination and it is globally
consistent with the optimization procedure. Figure 6f illustrates how similar samples approach in the
closest cluster while using local neighborhoods. Mixed loss [ 104], which is inspired by triplet loss,
uses three positive samples and three negative samples to establish similarity relationship among
samples, in addition to the anchor and negative sample. Figure 6h shows us that the metric loss
function brings positive samples closer to anchor, while pushing negative samples away from the
anchor. State-of-the-art loss metrics in the literature are summarized in Table 2 in details.