Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1066 8 of 26
Deep metric learning provides us with very e ective results on a wide variety of topics. Table 1
was created to demonstrate the studies published in the top journals /conferences in recent years and a
similar evaluation protocol for the benchmark datasets were used for di erent topics. The comparative
results presented in Table 1 indicate that deep metric learning has attained very successful results in
many di erent disciplines. As can be seen in Table 1, there are speciﬁc evaluation metrics for each
problem in the literature. For example, F1, which takes both false positive and false negative into
account, and Normalized Mutual Information (NMI), which determines the quality of clustering using
the entropy of class labels and the entropy of cluster labels, have been used for image clustering tasks;
on the other hand, recall @R (rank accuracy) performance metric has been used for image retrieval
tasks [ 67]. While the rank values are evaluated to measure the performance of person re-Identiﬁcation
tasks, accuracy is utilized to measure face veriﬁcation. To measure 3D shape retrieval performances,
First Tier (FT), Nearest Neighbor (NN), which is the percentage of the ﬁrst-closest matches belonging to
the query class, Emeasure (E), Second Tier (ST), Discounted Cumulated Gain (DCG), and mean Average
Precision (mAP), which calculate the mean of average precision for each query, are preferred [ 48].
FT is the ratio of the relevant matches to the size of the query class C when the number of retrieved
models is |C|for top K matches. If K =2|C|, ST is obtained. E-measure is equal to the 1-F1 measure.
Semantic textual similarity task uses Pearson correlation ( r), which is a measure of the linear correlation,
Spearman’s ( ), which assesses monotonic relationships of two variables, and mean squared error
(MSE) to evaluate the performance of the task [ 53]. Equal Error Rate (EER), which shows that the
rate of false acceptances is equal to the rate of false rejections, and Minimum Decision Cost Function
(MDCF), which is a simultaneous measure of discrimination and calibration are used to measure the
performance of the speaker veriﬁcation task [50].