In this paper, Izza, Ignatiev, and Marques-Silva investigate the interpretability of decision trees (DTs) in the context of classification problems. They highlight that many DTs contain paths that are proper supersets of Partial Irredundant (PI) explanations, which are minimal sets of feature-value pairs that entail the prediction. The authors refer to these paths as explanation-redundant paths, indicating that a significant number of paths in DTs can be unnecessary or excessive in terms of the information they provide.

The experimental results reveal that in several datasets, a large proportion of the paths in the constructed DTs are explanation-redundant, with some trees showing that up to 98% of the feature space can be explained by such paths. This redundancy undermines the interpretability of the DTs, prompting the authors to propose a new approach to compute PI-explanations. They introduce a hitting set formulation that distinguishes between explanations restricted to tree paths and those that are not. Furthermore, they provide a polynomial-time algorithm for computing a single PI-explanation for any given instance.

The paper also connects the enumeration of PI-explanations to the problem of finding minimal hitting sets (MHSes) and presents a solution that relies on iterative calls to an NP oracle, such as SAT or a 0-1 Integer Linear Programming (ILP) oracle.

The structure of the paper includes an introduction to notation and definitions, a study of functions that lead to poor DT interpretability, the proposed polynomial-time algorithm, the reduction of PI-explanation enumeration to MHS computation, and an empirical analysis of DTs generated by state-of-the-art tools on publicly available datasets. The results confirm that many learned decision trees contain paths that exceed the necessary information for explanations, and the time required to extract PI-explanations is negligible. The paper concludes with a summary of findings and implications for the field of machine learning interpretability.