T. Hoefler et al.
Such schemes can also be applied to lters in convolutional networks. Luo et al. (2017)
phrase the lter pruning problem in terms of its output sensitivity to the following layer.
They prune lters that, across the whole minibatch, change the output of a layer least.
They dene an optimization problem and solve it using a simple greedy strategy. Yu et al.
(2018) dene an importance metric that aims to minimize the error in the input to the
fully connected classication layers (the \nal response layer") in CNNs. This captures
information 
ows that span multiple layers. Ding et al. (2019a) use \centripetal SGD" to
train the network towards similar lter weights that can later be pruned. One could also
use a geometric interpretation and nd lters that are close to the geometric median of all
lters (He et al., 2019).
A simple generalization is to consider the sensitivity of neuron outputs (either model or
layer) with respect to elements in earlier layers (including inputs). Zeng and Yeung (2006)
dene a direct measure of the output sensitivity of a neuron with respect to deviations in
its inputs. They multiply this sensitivity by the sum of the absolute outgoing weights of
the neuron to compute the relevance for pruning. The weights are included because they
amplify the sensitivity as input to the next layer. Engelbrecht and Cloete (1996) dene
dierent measure using a sensitivity matrix Sthat captures the change of a neuron iin
a layerkwith respect to small perturbations of a neuron jin an earlier layer l. They
rst dene the sensitivity with respect to a single example as Sij;lk=@fk;i
@fl;j, wherefk;iis
the output of neuron iin layerk. To consider all training examples, they summarize the
matrix using a mean square method into an average sensitivity matrix, which is then used
to prune neurons that have low signicance with respect to all output neurons. Tartaglione
et al. (2018) later apply a similar scheme to weights but instead of determining the output
sensitivity at the end of training, they use a weight update rule that penalizes a weight's
absolute magnitude by output sensitivity during training. These simple sensitivity metrics
can be seen as early predecessors of the methods basing on a rst order Taylor expansion
of the loss function (see Section 3.4).
A related scheme is contribution variance which is based on the observation that some
connections have very similar outputs across examples in the whole training set (Thimm and
Fiesler, 1995). Thus, if a connection (a source neuron multiplied by the weight) has little
variance across all training examples, then it can be removed and added to the bias of the
target neuron. Hagiwara (1993, 1994) proposes an even simpler scheme to prune neurons
based on their \energy consumption", basically the value of activations throughout training.
They prune \low-energy" neurons during training and rene the network with a simple
magnitude-based weight pruning. A similar scheme prunes neurons whose activations are
mostly zero for many examples|Hu et al. (2016) dene the intuitive \Average Percentage
of Zeros" (APoZ) pruning criterion. This scheme works well for ReLU activation functions
that set negative values to zero. This scheme only distinguishes zero and non-zero values.
DropNet (Tan and Motani, 2020) uses the average magnitude of activations for pruning to
achieve higher delity.
One could also consider the variation of model output depending on variation of each
weight in a spectral sense. Here, the relevance of a weight can be assessed by its contribution
to the variance of the model output. Lauret et al. (2006) propose to use the \Fourier
Amplitude Sensitivity Test" (FAST) for determining the relevance of weights. The main
idea is to simulate periodic oscillation with frequency !iof each weight iin a xed interval
30