Sparsity in Deep Learning
quality because we can always compare the sparsied model quality with the original dense
model. Furthermore, since we are starting from a dense model, training does not change
such that existing hyperparameter settings and learning schedules can be re-used. Some
early works even show that pruning before the model has converged can reduce the nal
accuracy (Engelbrecht and Cloete, 1996).
2.4.2 Sparsify during training
Thesparsify-during-training schedule starts sparsication of the model before it has
been trained to convergence and is usually cheaper than the train-then-sparsify schedule.
Schedules that gradually sparsify during training may follow a pruning schedule that also
corrects for approximation errors due to premature pruning in early iterations. Such schemes
often train the dense model for some iterations before sparsication starts and end with a
sparse trained model. Early work (Finno et al., 1993) advocates a xed schedule to sparsify
during the training before the model converges to improve the quality of solutions using early
stopping. Zhu and Gupta (2017) report an extensive study of various pruning schedules
and their hyperparameters. In general, sparsifying during training already reaps potential
performance benet of sparsity early on but could lead to less ecient convergence and is
often more brittle to congure via hyperparameters (Ghosh and Tumer, 1994). Furthermore,
this approach needs to hold the dense model in memory at the beginning of the operation
and thus does not enable the use of smaller-capacity devices.
Some methods take advantage of this limitation and do not reduce the memory con-
sumption during the training process. Instead of deleting pruned weights and gradients,
they use binary masks to determine the presence or absence of weights and update even
masked weights during backpropagation to enable better weight regrowth/selection (see
Section 5). For example, Wortsman et al. (2019) and Lin et al. (2020) keep the full weights
around to implement an ecient search through dierent sparse architectures by turning
weights on and o during training.
The sparsication schedule, i.e., how fast to prune how many elements, is of central
importance to this method. Prechelt (1997) observes that a xed pruning schedule can
reduce the generalization ability of the network substantially. He also observes that the
distribution of weight values during training is roughly normal with the mean and variance
increasing during the process. Pruning reduces the variance and raises the mean, then dur-
ing early training the variance increases and the mean decreases before training proceeds
as before with increasing mean and variance. Prechelt uses the generalization loss to char-
acterize the amount of overtting and adjust the pruning rate dynamically during training.
The pruning rate increases with growing generalization loss and saturates at a maximum
value. This method demonstrates a signicant gain in generalization ability for well-tuned
static-dynamic schedules.
Another approach, Iterative hard thresholding (IHT), is a technique where training
schedules of dense and sparse iterations are combined (Jin et al., 2016). IHT iterates the
following two steps: (1) prune all but the top- kweights by magnitude (implements an L0
constraint, see Section 3.6) and ne-tune the sparsied network to the task for siterations,
and (2) re-enable the pruned weights and train the dense network for diterations. The outer
loop is running for iiterations with a total of sisparsied and didense training steps. The
17