T. Hoefler et al.
6. Sparsifying Particular Neural Network Architectures
After describing the building blocks of sparsication methods, we continue to highlight
specic applications and results that were achieved applying these methods. Many works
prune for a specic goal such as performance/inference latency (Gordon et al., 2018), mem-
ory consumption (Li et al., 2020c), or energy eciency (Yang et al., 2017). There, several
sparsifying techniques are often combined, for example, regularization and magnitude prun-
ing (Yang et al., 2017; He et al., 2017). Layer-wise sensitivity schemes or data-free methods
can then be used to improve the performance further. Many schemes iterate over a mix
of such techniques and their carefully engineered combinations with pruning schedules can
result in impressive gains for specic purposes (Han et al., 2016b; Yang et al., 2017).
Each methodology represents a combination of specic elements to sparsify, a sparsi-
cation schedule, a removal method, and (optionally), a re-addition method. Each result
is measured by the authors of the original work and can be reproduced through the de-
scription in the original paper. As pointed out by Blalock et al. (2020), these works do not
always follow a consistent experimental discipline and thus many results are unclear, and
may not be fully interpretable from both an accuracy and performance perspective (Hoe
er
and Belli, 2015). Thus, when comparing works, we rely on the author's results and only
do so to provide a rough overview of the relative accuracy of these methods. Moreover,
we would emphasize the fact that, although we present these methods in conjunction to
enable a global overview, they can dier signicantly in terms of their computational and
implementation cost. Dierent setups are likely to shift the balance between accuracy and
sparsity|however, we believe that one can still derive interesting observations from these
quantitative results. Yet, we believe the presented results provide a good cursory view of
the state of the eld.
In the following, we focus on more recent results after 2015 when broader interest in deep
neural networks emerged and works solved large-scale data-driven problems from computer
vision, natural language processing, and related domains, that are still relevant today.
6.1 Sparsifying convolutional neural networks
CNNs with diverse structures have recently become the primary target for sparsication,
and diverse architectures were successfully pruned. As opposed to MLPs, CNNs contain
combinations of convolutional operators (Section 1.2.4), fully connected layers, skip con-
nections, and other statistical normalization operators such as batch normalization. The
composition of these operators determine which sparsication strategies would be eective.
Convolutions are used from the inputs onwards to compute feature maps, whereas the fully
connected layers are used as classiers. The convolutional operators can be pruned in a
structured or unstructured manner, but typically less than fully connected layers, due to
the fewer and structured connections between the inputs and the output.
In Fig. 20 we see the development of accuracy in CNNs over time (Fig. 20a) and sparsity
(Fig. 20b), where in the former we highlight the two extremes on the Pareto front of sparsity
| best validation accuracy and highest compression ratio | for every year and every
strategy. We note that the results shown in the gure are reported numbers from works
cited in this section. Thus, results may vary in accuracy due to dierent experimental setup
(e.g., data augmentation strategy, hyperparameter schedule).
62