Sparsity in Deep Learning
Li et al. (2018) show that much of the optimization happens in a relatively small sub-
space of the parameter space. They call this space the \intrinsic dimension". This relates
intricately with the complexity of the model and thus sparsication. This idea gives rise to
a simple \dense plus sparse" scheme that only stores the dierences from the randomly ini-
tialized starting parameters. This dierence can eciently be pruned to very high sparsity.
Bartoldson et al. (2020) model pruning as \noise injection" to explain improved gen-
eralization capabilities, which would t this mental framework. They specically consider
the drop of test accuracy right after pruning in iterative pruning schemes. They show
empirically that a higher drop relates to better generalization of the nal model. They
suggest that smaller models may not be the only reason for improved generalization and
carefully tuned magnitude pruning schedules can improve generalization by \
attening" the
loss landscape.
8.6 Emerging Benchmarks
Interpreting pruning results and comparing dierent methods is dicult due to the wide
range of experimental setups, tasks, techniques, and hyperparameters used. This issue
has already been identied by Blalock et al. (2020) who propose a standard methodology
together with a set of benchmarks to solve this issue. One could imagine standard setups
such as MLPerf (Mattson et al., 2020) or the Deep500 infrastructure (Ben-Nun et al., 2019)
for performance measurements. We note that even before such a benchmark is widely
accepted by the community, some datasets, tasks, and network architectures are emerging
asde-facto benchmarks for pruning. We recommend researchers to use those as comparison
points. As we point out above, ResNet-50 on ImageNet and BERT on the GLUE tasks
seem excellent candidates for such standard benchmark sets for both model sparsity and
performance.
We observe that the achieved sparsity at high accuracies strongly correlates with the
attention that certain models received in the literature. For example, ResNet-50 is well
tuned and thus shows higher achieved parameter eciencies relative to other models. Thus,
they eectively dene the state of the art|however, this observation also means that one
cannot easily reason about the \prunability" of a certain architecture without extensive
experiments on a level playing eld.
For toy examples, the MNIST dataset with the LeNet-300-100 and LeNet-5 networks
can act as a good calibration. The state of the art is above 98% accuracy with less than 1%
of the original parameters. However, we insist that this task alone is not indicative of good
performance of a method. More meaningful tasks are larger convolutional networks on more
complex tasks such as CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. In order to track progress, we recommend
that those should always be reported when analyzing new pruning methodologies even
though better architectures for these tasks (or better tasks) may exist. Additionally, in our
experience and as shown in many comparative studies, global magnitude pruning is a good
baseline method for a wide range of scenarios.
8.7 Parameter Eciency
When using or constructing models for sparse training, it is important to estimate how
amenable a model is to sparsication, for example, in order to determine target sparsity
83