Sparsity in Deep Learning
unstructured 1d blocked block -balanced strided 2d blocked
Figure 23: Overview of sparse structures in deep learning|non-zero elements are colored.
store the non-zeros in blocks of size four with 50% sparsity. The gure above shows blocks
of size seven with exactly three non-zero elements each. The strided format (Anwar et al.,
2017) in Fig. 23 shows the most compact but also most constrained format. It xes each 5th
element of the matrix to have a non-zero value and all others zero, leading to a constant-
size representation. In general, sparse matrix storage formats can use arbitrary encodings
to minimize the representational overhead. MPI datatypes (Gropp et al., 2014) form an
elegant hierarchy with clear performance properties (Gropp et al., 2011) and can provide
further inspiration for specic designs.
7.1.2 Tuned block sparsity in practice
Elsen et al. (2020) demonstrate speedups with sparse representation for inference on mobile
devices. They focus on unstructured and block sparsity and optimized implementations of
CNNs on ARM CPUs and WebAssembly and release the XNNPACK library. They primarily
focus on a medium sparsity range between 70{95% and they optimize for caches and data
movement, which has been shown to be a major bottleneck in deep learning systems (Ivanov
et al., 2021). They investigate the in
uence of various block-sizes on model accuracy and
show that the shape of blocks (e.g., 1 4, 22, or 41) is irrelevant and just the size
matters. They also show that larger models suer less from large block sizes.
Scalpel (Yu et al., 2017) combines weight-blocking and neuron pruning into a scheme
to support SIMD platforms. They sparsify weights in blocks the same size as the width
of SIMD units and use a modied CSR format for storing the sparse weights. They prune
by root mean square magnitude of weight blocks. For ARM microprocessors, their pruning
scheme reduces the necessary sparsity required to achieve a speedup from 70% to 50%
and on Intel CPUs, their scheme reduces the necessary sparsity from 50% to less than
10%. DeftNN (Hill et al., 2017) optimizes a whole row or column pruning scheme based on
similarity for inference on GPUs achieving a 1.5x speedup.
Han et al. (2017) introduce block-balanced pruning that restricts blocks (\sub-matrices")
to the same sparsity ratio. Thus, when loading blocks in parallel, the accelerator can process
them in approximately the same time avoiding load imbalance. They nd such pruning
does not reduce the model quality signicantly for large enough blocks. In an even simpler
approach, Dey et al. (2019) x the degree of each neuron in an MLP, leading to balanced
row and column sparsity of the weight matrix. Similarly, Kundu et al. (2020) pre-dene
sparsity patterns with periodicity in convolutional lters.
PruneTrain (Lym et al., 2019) focuses on accelerating training using a group-lasso regu-
larization method and pruning during training. The authors mention that the freed memory
73