T. Hoefler et al.
\Lottery Ticket Hypothesis": \dense, randomly-initialized, feed-forward networks contain
subnetworks (winning tickets) that|when trained in isolation|reach test accuracy compa-
rable to the original network in a similar number of iterations." For shallow vision networks,
they nd winning tickets by magnitude pruning and show that re-training them with static
sparsity starting from the initial weights, they reach similar or higher accuracy in the same
number of iterations. They also demonstrate that random initialization, with the same
structure, does not suce. Zhou et al. (2019) empirically show that one may not need the
exact weights at initialization to train lottery tickets but the signs may be sucient.
8.3.1 Pruning is all you need - networks without weight training
Several researchers argue that initial subnetworks with their random weights can perform
well (Ramanujan et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2019). Furthermore, winning tickets already
identify sub-networks with non-random accuracies even without training. In fact, training
to nd such a \supermask" can produce a network that achieves 93.5% accuracy in MNIST
and 65.4% accuracy on CIFAR-10 at around 50% sparsity without changing the random
initial weights. In \pruning is all you need", Malach et al. (2020) prove that, with high
probability, any network can be approximated with accuracy by pruning a polynomially
larger network. This means that pruning could be used to train a network without changing
the weights at all. Earlier work on Weight Agnostic Networks (Gaier and Ha, 2019) also
searches for network architectures without changing the weights. Orseau et al. (2020) and
Pensia et al. (2020) later prove that a logarithmically larger network (except depth) suces.
Specically, any ReLU network of width nand depthdcan be-approximated by sparsifying
aO(log(nd)) wider and two times deeper random network, with high probability (Pensia
et al., 2020).
8.3.2 Lottery tickets in large networks
Analysis of the original lottery ticket hypothesis already indicated problems with validating
the hypothesis on larger CNNs, which could be xed with a decreased learning rate. Liu
et al. (2019b) showed that with the best learning rate for larger networks, keeping the
original initialization does not improve the nal accuracy over random initialization. Gale
et al. (2019) also could not reproduce the hypothesis for larger networks. Frankle et al.
(2020b) later argue that a variant of the hypothesis \with rewinding" applies also to larger
networks if one uses the values after some initial optimization steps at iteration r. They
demonstrated that 0.1{7% of the total iterations are sucient for 50{99% sparse networks.
In line with early structure adaptation (see Section 2.4.2), they conclude that early pruning
could be a promising approach. However, the procedure for nding the right value of r
remains unclear, and the authors investigate the in
uence of \noise" through the ordering
of batches on the training process and result (Frankle et al., 2020a). Specically, they
investigate the dierence in test accuracy for a model that is a smooth interpolation between
two models trained with dierent orders. They consider networks with small such error and
allow the orders to only diverge after iteration r. The empirical results show that rrelates
to the iteration for which a working lottery ticket can be derived by rewinding. Frankle
et al. (2020) empirically analyze the early iterations of training large networks.
80