Sparsity in Deep Learning
earlier methods (Han et al., 2016b) that use iterative retraining | specically, they show
that the number of iterations to prune AlexNet can be reduced from 4.8M to 0.7M (6.9 )
while improving the sparsity from 89% to 94% (2 ). Using the same method, they compress
LeNet-5 and LeNet-300-100 by 99% and 98%, respectively. They again show that convolu-
tional layers that already share weights compress less (46-97%) relative to fully-connected
layers (93-99%).
Kundu and Sundaresan (2021) propose to combine pruning and knowledge distillation
in every training step in order to train sparse CNNs for vision tasks. For distillation, the
paper uses dense ResNets as teachers and self-attention ResNets as sparse students. The
student model is initialized with a random pruning mask, which is updated during training
according to the contribution of the parameters to the momentum. The authors report
30.3parameter reduction and 0.6% accuracy drop on CIFAR-10, and 11 parameter
reduction for 1.2% accuracy drop on Tiny ImageNet.
Sparse training As noted, early attempts at fully-sparse training schemes tended to
yield lower accuracy for the same sparsity. Due to growing CNN memory footprints, sev-
eral recent works attempt to improve such schemes to produce usable networks. Bellec et al.
(2018) use a fully-sparse training schedule to enable training higher-dimensional models that
would not t in a dense conguration. They use a variant of magnitude-based pruning and
random weight addition and show that this method outperforms densely-trained methods
if the target sparsity is very high ( >95%). They showed that longer training leads to im-
proving generalization. The paper also studies aspects of transfer learning and pre-training,
in that the sparsied architecture quickly adapts to similar learning tasks. Mocanu et al.
(2018) use a similar training schedule and show that it can improve accuracy while prun-
ing by more than 96%. They also observe that the degree distribution of sparsely learned
connections follows a power law. Mostafa and Wang (2019) rene fully-sparse training for
CNNs by automatically adjusting the parameter budget across layers. Their method may
require more operations to converge than hand-tuned schedules, as sparsity may only slowly
be redistributed to the later fully-connected layers. Their sparsely-trained models achieved
signicantly better performance than dense models of the same size. Dettmers and Zettle-
moyer (2019) perform fully-sparse training and point out that parameter redistribution is
especially important for larger layers. They use a cosine decay schedule for the pruning
rate across iterations and achieve similar performance with a 95% sparse VGG on CIFAR-
10, and slightly outperform prior approaches with a 90% sparse ResNet-50 on ImageNet,
achieving 72.3% accuracy, while reducing the required theoretical computation by between
2.7and 5.6.
Sparsifying parameter-ecient networks In more recent, parameter-ecient net-
works, highly-accurate pruning techniques become more adaptive to the training process.
Azarian et al. (2020) propose soft pruning, where sparsifying a weight is a continuously
dierentiable function, and L0regularization. The authors prune ResNet and EcientNet-
B0, where the latter attains 76.1% accuracy, compared with a 77.1% accuracy for the dense
counterpart. He et al. (2018) use a reinforcement learning approach combined with a CNN
embedding scheme to prune the network. Their rst-order approach to sparsication is
able to sparsify ResNet-50 to 80%, keeping the same baseline top-1 validation accuracy of
76.1%. Evci et al. (2020a) train networks fully-sparse with pruning based on magnitude and
65