Sparsity in Deep Learning
nrand stores the osets of each row in the value array in dlog2mebits. The overhead is
o=mdlog2nce+nrdlog2meand other dimension-aware schemes are similar.
Let us consider an example with nc=nr= 104!n= 108,k= 8 andmranging from
100{0%. The storage overhead for bitmaps is lowest for rather dense representations. No
sparse storage scheme oers benets for less than 10% sparsity. The bitmap index fares
best between 10{70% sparsity and the delta encoded scheme (assuming ^d <1000) is best
for sparsity higher than 80%. The oset index and dimension-aware schemes could work
best in very high sparsity and hyper-sparse environments with very high dbut it is unclear
if such high sparsity is to be expected for deep models. The highest sparsity reported in
the literature to date is up to 99.9% (Lin et al., 2020).
2.3 What can be sparsied?
We now provide a summary of which elements of a deep learning model can be sparsi-
ed. Fig. 6 shows an overview. First, we dierentiate between model (also structural )
and ephemeral sparsication. Model sparsication changes the model and can be consid-
ered as a form of neural architecture search (NAS). NAS summarizes a class of methods to
automatically nd better deep learning models and Elsken et al. (2019) provide an overview.
Sparsification
Model Sparsity
(per model)Ephemeral Sparsity
(per example)
Weights Neurons Neuron -like
(filters/channels/heads )Dropout
(Activations/Weights)Gradients Errors Optimizer 
State
unstructured
(e.g., fine -grained)structured
(e.g., blocked/ strided )
affects inference + forward passstructured sparsity affects traininggradient -based optimization𝒆𝟏𝒈𝟏
Conditional computation
(route each example through a 
Different sparse subnetwork)inference + forward pass
Activations
(e.g., ReLU )
Figure 6: Overview of DNN elements to sparsify.
Model sparsication changes the model but does not change the sparsity pattern across
multiple inference or forward passes. The two main elements, weights and neurons, can be
sparsied. Weight sparsication \is very ne-grained and makes pruning particularly pow-
erful." (Prechelt, 1997). Yet, if we sparsify individual weights, the resulting model may be
unstructured and we may need to store indices as described before. This adds overheads for
index structures and the dierent computational structure leads to less ecient execution on
hardware that is optimized for dense computations. Thus, approaches for structured weight
sparsication have been developed to reduce indexing overheads and improve eciency of
execution. These approaches typically store contiguous blocks of the weights instead of
single elements. We overview model sparsication techniques in Sections 3 and 4. Elements
in specialized layers, such as lters in convolutional layers or heads in attention layers are
similar to neurons in the context of pruning and can be removed as well. Neuron, lter,
and head sparsication reduces simple parameters of the model, can shrink it substantially,
15