Sparsity in Deep Learning
use the sum of both regularization terms with carefully tuned parameters liandloas
penalties to further sparsify after a magnitude pruning step on the weights.
A somewhat similar scheme adds scaling factors, which are related to gating variables, to
each lter (Liu et al., 2017). Those scaling factors can be merged into a batch normalization
layer and thus do not lead to additional values. Liu et al. then penalize the factors with an
L1 norm before pruning them by magnitude globally. Gordon et al. (2018) use this scheme
in a grow/prune algorithm for neurons and Kang and Han (2020) extend the scheme to
consider the eects of ReLU operations and the bias of batch normalization to also prune
neurons that are mostly zero. Huang and Wang (2018) generalize this scheme and add
scaling factors to neurons, groups, or whole layer blocks in various convolutional networks.
They train the factors with an Accelerated Proximal Gradient method. Ye et al. (2018)
use a similar scheme by adding factors to the batch normalization of lter outputs. They
use ISTA (Beck and Teboulle, 2009) as a sparsier for those factors, eventually pulling the
output of each lter to a constant. They then remove the corresponding lter and merge
the removed constant into the biases of the next-layer elements.
3.6.4 Other regularization techniques
Similar regularization approaches can also be used to promote low-rank matrices for the
weights such that a later compression by factorization is more eective (Alvarez and Salz-
mann, 2017) or promote similarity of weights and lters (Ding et al., 2019a). Yet, such
schemes are outside the scope of our work.
Chauvin (1989) adds an neuron energy penalty termP(o) =enP
i=1::joje(o2
i) over
the output neurons. The positive monotonic energy function e() and the scaler enare
parameters to the method. This penalty will decrease the magnitude of the neurons and
implicitly the weights, which can then be used to sparsify the network.
Tartaglione et al. (2018) use a penalty term that is based on the output sensitivity of
each neuron to the parameters. This sensitivity measures the relevance of the parameters to
a specic output. If the sensitivity of an output neuron with respect to a specic parameter
is small, then setting it to zero will change the output little. They use a regularization
term to gradually decrease the absolute value of low sensitivity parameters and eventually
set them to zero once they pass a certain threshold. This method can be applied during
training but the authors suggest to start from a pretrained network.
Pruning can be modeled as a special case of weight quantization by breaking the error
down to the contributions of the quantization error at each bit width (van Baalen et al.,
2020). They use powers-of-two bit-widths with a gating term ifor each width i, including
a general gating term for zero bits (pruned weights): w=2(w2+4(4+88))), where
wiandiare the weights quantized to ibits and the quantization error with respect to the
ith bit-width, respectively; 2prunes the whole weight.
3.6.5 Potential issues
Azarian et al. (2020) observe that grouped L1(andL2) regularization fails to prune networks
with batch normalization layers. This is because batch normalization layers can rescale the
output of previous layers arbitrarily and thus eliminate any regularization penalty. In prac-
tice, such weights would become simply very small while keeping their original relative values
45