Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2021) 1-124 Submitted 4/21; Revised 6/21; Published 9/21
Sparsity in Deep Learning: Pruning and growth for ecient
inference and training in neural networks
Torsten Hoe
er htor@inf.ethz.ch
ETH Z urich
Z urich, Switzerland, 8092
Dan Alistarh dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria, 3400
Tal Ben-Nun talbn@inf.ethz.ch
Nikoli Dryden ndryden@inf.ethz.ch
ETH Z urich
Z urich, Switzerland, 8092
Alexandra Peste alexandra.peste@ist.ac.at
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria, 3400
Editor: Samy Bengio
Abstract
The growing energy and performance costs of deep learning have driven the community to
reduce the size of neural networks by selectively pruning components. Similarly to their
biological counterparts, sparse networks generalize just as well, sometimes even better than,
the original dense networks. Sparsity promises to reduce the memory footprint of regular
networks to t mobile devices, as well as shorten training time for ever growing networks.
In this paper, we survey prior work on sparsity in deep learning and provide an extensive
tutorial of sparsication for both inference and training. We describe approaches to remove
and add elements of neural networks, dierent training strategies to achieve model sparsity,
and mechanisms to exploit sparsity in practice. Our work distills ideas from more than
300 research papers and provides guidance to practitioners who wish to utilize sparsity
today, as well as to researchers whose goal is to push the frontier forward. We include
the necessary background on mathematical methods in sparsication, describe phenomena
such as early structure adaptation, the intricate relations between sparsity and the training
process, and show techniques for achieving acceleration on real hardware. We also dene
a metric of pruned parameter eciency that could serve as a baseline for comparison of
dierent sparse networks. We close by speculating on how sparsity can improve future
workloads and outline major open problems in the eld.
Keywords: Sparsity, Deep Learning, Performance, Low Memory, Generalization
.The supreme goal of all theory is to make the irreducible basic elements as simple and as
few as possible without having to surrender the adequate representation of a single datum
of experience.
Albert Einstein, 1933
c
2021 T. Hoe
er, D. Alistarh, T. Ben-Nun, N. Dryden, A. Peste.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0366.html .