T. Hoefler et al.
Fig. 22b presents an overview of sparsity results for pruning BERT-base (Devlin et al.,
2019) for four downstream natural language understanding tasks from the General Lan-
guage Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) (Wang et al., 2019) benchmark: the Stanford
Sentiment Treebank (SST-2) (Socher et al., 2013), the Microsoft Research Paraphrase
Corpus (MRPC) (Dolan and Brockett, 2005), the Multi-Genre Natural Language Infer-
ence corpus (MNLI) (Williams et al., 2018), and the Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability
(CoLA) (Warstadt et al., 2019). BERT-base consists of 110M parameters (including em-
bedding layers), with twelve transformer layers, each with twelve attention heads.
Compared to results on pruning CNNs (Fig. 20), there are two qualitative dierences:
There are relatively few results with large accuracy degradation, and there are relatively few
results with very high sparsity levels. This stems from much of the work on pruning BERT
being focused either on understanding what the model has learned or on the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis (see Section 8.3). In many of these works, iterative pruning only continues while
the pruned model remains close to the original accuracy.
We can observe several qualitative trends among methods, which generally agree with
the results on CNNs. For very low sparsity levels, structured head pruning performs very
well, but it rapidly degrades as important heads are pruned. At moderate sparsity levels
(40{80%), unstructured magnitude pruning performs very well, and outperforms structured
pruning. When >90% sparsity is desired, however, only the rst-order movement pruning
method (Sanh et al., 2020) reports results, and achieves high accuracy on MNLI.
6.2.1 Structured sparsification
There has been much study of the importance of dierent components of transformers;
for BERT, this is referred to as \BERTology" (Rogers et al., 2021). For example, while
attention heads are important for training, several works showed that most of the heads
can be pruned after training with only minor accuracy loss. Michel et al. (2019) and Voita
et al. (2019) study the importance of heads in two concurrent and complementary works.
Voita et al. (2019) analyze the linguistic properties and importance of each head and
conclude that specic heads take on specic roles, such as representing \positional", \syn-
tactic", and \rare words" functions. Using a simple stochastic gating scheme (Louizos et al.,
2018) to prune heads, they can remove 80% of heads and lose only 0.15 BLEU on a English-
Russian translation task (Jan et al., 2019) and 92% of heads at a loss of 0.25 BLEU on
OpenSubtitles (Lison et al., 2019).
Michel et al. (2019) show similar results with a rst-order head importance score for
pruning. Using an iterative greedy process to test model quality with each head removed,
they are able to prune 20{40% of attention heads with an insignicant decrease in quality.
They also nd that the importance of heads is transferable across tasks and that the im-
portance of heads is determined early in the training process, hinting that early structure
adaptation may also apply to heads.
However, multi-head attention layers account for only about a third of the parameters in
BERT , which limits the overall compression level, and for some tasks, Michel et al. (2019)
show that pruning too many heads is detrimental to accuracy. Prasanna et al. (2020)
extended the importance metric of Michel et al. (2019) to also prune entire feedforward
networks in a layer, using a similar iterative pruning process that continues for as long as
68