T. Hoefler et al.
9. Challenges and Open Questions
We now outline ten central challenges and open questions in the eld to inspire future
research.
1.Sparse training. Can we use sparsity to train gigantic models whose dense version
would not t into the hardware budget? How do we sparsely train models without
accuracy loss?
2.Structured vs. unstructured. How does a structural bias in
uence the accuracy
performance and model size tradeo?
3.Hardware co-design. How do we co-design hardware architectures and pruned
models? What is the tradeo between cost, accuracy, and structured sparsity?
4.Multi-objective pruning. What is the best way to prune for multiple objectives
simultaneously, e.g., lowest energy consumption for a certain memory size?
5.Architecture design. Should one use neural architecture search (NAS) for nding
ecient networks or can pruning replace or complement NAS?
6.Theory of sparse learning. What is the relationship between sparsity, learning
dynamics, and generalization?
7.Sparse representations. What is the representational power of sparse neural net-
works? Could parameter eciency be dened rigorously?
8.Method generalization. Which of the pruning methods for MLPs or CNNs gener-
alize to transformers or other neural architectures?
9.Data-free sparsity. Can we design one-shot or data-free methods that rival the
accuracy of data-dependent methods?
10.Fairness, bias and robustness. How do we design more robust sparse models
and sparsication approaches? How do we prevent adversarial attacks on sparsied
models?
We do not explicitly list brain-related research challenges because our work focuses
primarily on the engineering aspects of sparsity for which biological analogies are certainly
a major inspiration but act mainly as a means to an end.
10. Conclusions and Outlook
We surveyed results showing that sparsity can already lead to a theoretical 10{100x im-
provement in eciency. Furthermore, larger networks appear to provide more opportunity
for pruning (Sanh et al., 2020; Gale et al., 2019) so the compression trend is likely to con-
tinue as architectures get larger. Specically, training extremely large models with sparse
methods will provide many opportunities. Our detailed analysis of data science and en-
gineering aspects enables a targeted hardware-software co-design for next-generation deep
learning architectures that exploit the potentially huge speedups.
88