Sparsity in Deep Learning
maximize the latter, they prune based on their KL-divergence. Engelbrecht (2001) prunes
based on the variance of sensitivity of inputs and neurons, and could therefore be seen as
variational. Specically, their method dictates that if the sensitivity of a parameter varies
very little across the training set, then it can be pruned.
3.8 Other selection schemes
3.8.1 Sampling-based pruning with guarantees
Another method for selecting candidate elements for pruning relies on an approach dierent
from the Bayesian framework. Namely, Baykal et al. (2019), propose using a subset of the
data to estimate the relative importance, or \empirical sensitivity" of incoming edges to a
neuron; this allows the denition of an importance sampling distribution over the incoming
edges, which in turn leads to sparse weight matrices. The proposed algorithm has theoretical
guarantees in terms of the sparsity level obtained, as well as generalization guarantees for
the sparse network. Furthermore, the framework can be improved to allow for structured
pruning of neurons. Following work (Liebenwein et al., 2020) has extended the idea of
sampling-based pruning to removing lters from CNNs, while also providing guarantees on
the size and nal output of the pruned network.
3.8.2 Genetic algorithms
Like any optimization problem, pruning can also be modeled using genetic algorithms (Whit-
ley and Bogart, 1990; White and Ligomenides, 1993). The population is created from
multiple pruned versions of the neural network and each is trained separately. New net-
works are created using mutation, reproduction, and cross-over parameter selection. These
populations are then rewarded for smaller numbers of parameters and for improved gen-
eralization. However, this approach is not practical for modern large compute-intensive
training due to the high complexity of training ensembles of models. Weight Agnostic Neu-
ral Networks (Gaier and Ha, 2019) use genetic algorithms to search a good architecture
while keeping the weight values constant.
3.8.3 Diversity and quantized networks
Diversity networks (Mariet and Sra, 2016) employ Determinantal Point Processes to select
a subset of \diverse neurons" in each layer while fusing other similar neurons. It starts from
fully-trained networks and does not require ne-tuning.
Quantized neural networks already employ an approximation function that could also
be used to guide pruning decisions. Guerra et al. (2020) use a metric related to the distance
between quantized and full-precision weights (i.e., the rounding error) in binary or quantized
networks for selecting lters to prune.
Some neurons or lters may learn properties of the training set distribution that are not
relevant to distinguish between classes within that distribution. Tang et al. (2020b) propose
to generate \knocko" features that draw from the same distribution but are independent
of the example's label. They feed the example and the knock-o into the same network and
compare scaling factors for lters (cf. lter sensitivity). Then they prune the features that
have a large sensitivity for knocko inputs and a relatively small sensitivity for real inputs.
49