T. Hoefler et al.
the SWAT method that uses a simple top- kselection to remove small weights during the
forward pass and both small weights and activations during the backward pass.
2.4.5 Sparsity for transfer learning and fine tuning
In transfer learning, large pre-trained and somewhat generic networks are specialized to
an often narrower task than the original broad training goal. This specialization is an-
other opportunity for pruning and potentially parameters can be pruned during the pro-
cess (Molchanov et al., 2017; Mehta, 2019). The schedule for such pruning during ne-
tuning is similar to the train and prune schedule: a model is trained to convergence and
then pruned. However, the dierence is in the training dataset and corresponding distri-
bution. The dataset used for ne-tuning is dierent from the original dataset|often it
corresponds to a specic subset, but sometimes it could represent a distributional shift. So
in some sense, the pre-trained network can be seen as a more tting (non-random) weight
initialization as basis for a shorter learning process. Also, data sets for ne-tuning are often
much smaller.
Given these characteristics, dierent pruning mechanisms are used in practice. Specif-
ically, Molchanov et al. (2017) and Sanh et al. (2020) use rst order (gradient-based, see
Section 3.4) pruning for transfer learning to capture the change from the pre-trained weights
to the new weights. Mehta (2019) use magnitude-based pruning to transfer sparse networks
during ne-tuning. These and related methods are summarized in Section 3.4. Chen et al.
(2020) showed that task-specic ne-tuning of the BERT transformer network can result in
40-90% sparsity in nal weights using iterative magnitude pruning. They found that most
ne-tuned networks have a task-specic structure while the masked language modeling task
that was used for pre-training generates universal sparse networks that even transfer well to
other tasks. Morcos et al. (2019) show that pruned network structures can transfer across
dierent datasets and optimizers.
Di pruning (Guo et al., 2020) supports many tasks by dening task-specic model
parameters as dierence over the pretrained parameters: w=wpretrained +wtask. Then,
they sparsify the task-specic dierences wtaskby up to 99 :5% without loss of accuracy
in natural language tasks (e.g., GLUE) while keeping the pretrained parameter set dense.
This scheme supports many dierent tasks at low overheads during inference and moderate
increase in training resources.
Manessi et al. (2018) investigate how well sparse models can be used to transfer their
knowledge to other tasks. They show that for various image recognition tasks, moderately
sparse models transfer well with either negligible accuracy loss or even a small gain in one
example.
2.4.6 General Sparse Deep Learning Schedules
Fig. 8 shows a prototypical training algorithm for a pruned network. The sparse training
process can be roughly described as a series of the following steps; however, we note that
each can be skipped and some steps can be iterated multiple times. Step (1) initializes the
network structure, this can either load a description of the network structure from disk or
be built using a framework as is usually done for dense networks. However, it could also
22