T. Hoefler et al.
rst step regularizes the network while the second step relaxes the optimization to \learn
better representations" (Jin et al., 2016). Han et al. (2017) use a similar scheme where
they run three steps during training: (1) (traditional) dense training to convergence, (2)
magnitude-pruning followed by retraining, and (3) dense training. All steps are performed
for multiple iterations but the overall scheme is not repeated. They show that this dense-
sparse-dense scheme leads to signicantly higher generalization performance. Carreira-
Perpinan and Idelbayev (2018) use a similar scheme of sparsication followed by training.
They only re-enable a subset of the weights while others are masked out by a learned mask
using a penalty term. They argue that magnitude-based pruning (see Section 3.2) arises
naturally in their scheme but the \soft pruning" approach selects better weights allowing
for higher sparsity. All those schemes aim to improve the \learnability" of the model by
supporting the standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm.
SGD training dynamics and sparsity Similarly to reduced neuroplasticity as biolog-
ical brains age (Jones et al., 2006), studies of deep neural networks argue that the impor-
tance of elements is determined relatively early on in training. Specically, Shwartz-Ziv
and Tishby (2017) claim that SGD-based training of deep neural networks happens in two
phases: (1) a drift phase that quickly minimizes the empirical risk (training error), and
(2) a diusion phase that compresses the internal representation. Similarly, Achille et al.
(2019) describe two phases of training where the rst phase discovers the important con-
nections and their topology between layers and the second phase ne-tunes this relatively
xed pattern. While these theories remain debated in the community, much empirical evi-
dence supports the phased view. Michel et al. (2019) show that the most important heads
in transformers (see Section 6.2) are identied in the rst 10 epochs. Ding et al. (2019b)
observe that identifying weights for later elimination happens early in the training process
and weights are rarely re-added late in the process. We call this phenomenon early structure
adaptation in the following.
You et al. (2020) and Golub et al. (2019) directly utilize early structure adaptation
during the training process where they freeze the sparsity pattern after some iterations.
You et al. (2020) propose to use low-cost approximate training to identify the best sparse
structure before starting the actual training of the network. Their work is inspired by Li
et al. (2020d), who show that a large learning rate in earlier iterations helps the model to
memorize easy to t patterns that are later rened. Specically, they show that for struc-
tured pruning of feature maps in convolutional networks, quick training at low precision
and large learning rates leads to a good approximation of the sparse network structure. In
general, early structure adaptation is re
ected in learning rate schedules and most sparsi-
cation schemes use large learning rates for denser models and drastically reduce the rate
with growing sparsity.
Beyond early structure adaptation, it has been observed that sparsity may naturally
emerge from the optimization process. Yaguchi et al. (2018) and Mehta et al. (2019) nd
that adaptive optimizers, such as Adam, when used in combination with methods like L2
regularization or weight decay, induce lter-level sparsity in CNNs with ReLU activations.
Interestingly, this behavior appears not to occur when using standard SGD or momentum.
18