T. Hoefler et al.
a similar result in the context of the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (see Section 8.3). They nd
that magnitude pruning can prune a pretrained BERT model to up to 70% sparsity without
compromising performance on the pretraining objective, and that such networks transfer
universally to downstream tasks. In contrast, they nd that while pruning for a particular
downstream task may result in higher sparsity levels without compromising performance
on that task, such networks do not transfer as well.
Guo et al. (2019a) conduct experiments showing that using L1orL2regularization can
cause divergence during training, and that the regularization should be decoupled from the
gradient update, in line with prior work on optimization (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019).
To prune, they instead develop Reweighted Proximal Pruning, which uses reweighted L1
minimization instead of regularization, and use a proximal algorithm to nd the sparsity
pattern, rather than backpropagation.
Sanh et al. (2020) argue that for transfer learning, what matters is not the magnitude of a
parameter, but whether it is important for the downstream task. They introduce movement
pruning (see Section 3.4), a rst-order method which prunes parameters that shrink during
ne-tuning, regardless of their magnitude. Movement pruning is able to achieve signicantly
higher performance than magnitude- or L0-based pruning for very high levels of sparsity
(e.g., 97% sparse), and can be combined with distillation to further improve performance.
6.2.3 Sparse attention
Scaled dot-product attention requires a dot-product between two sequences of length s
(QK>), which produces an alignment matrix for the two sequences. Producing this matrix
requires bothO(s2) time and memory; as sequence lengths in transformers range from 128
to 2,048, this can be a large bottleneck. This, combined with the intuition that one does not
need to compute full attention to get good model performance, has resulted in a large body
of work on so-called ecient transformers. Tay et al. (2020) provide a survey of this eld;
we focus here on sparsity. Recent work has also started to develop benchmarks focused
specically on ecient transformers (Tay et al., 2021).
Yun et al. (2020) provide broad theoretical results showing that O(s) connections in an
attention layer is sucient to universally approximate any sequence-to-sequence function if
the following properties are met: (1) every token attends to itself; (2) a chain of connections
covers all tokens; and (3) each token connects to all other tokens after a xed number of
transformer layers. This provides a rigorous basis for the intuition that each input token
need only be able to route to each other token through successive layers.
Many approaches to sparse attention satisfy these requirements by sparsifying the QK>
computation, including restricting attention to local neighborhoods (Parmar et al., 2018),
star topologies (Guo et al., 2019b), combinations of strided and xed sparsity patterns (Child
et al., 2019), sliding windows (Beltagy et al., 2020), and local attention plus a xed num-
ber of tokens that attend globally (Zaheer et al., 2020). SAC (Li et al., 2020a) learns a
task-specic sparsity structure using an LSTM edge predictor.
The SoftMax computation in each attention head can also be modied to maintain
its ranking while inducing sparsity and satisfying the above requirements. Zhao et al.
(2019a) take a direct route and apply top- ksparsication to the attention weights. The
sparsity patterns can also be learned directly using generalizations of SoftMax, such as
70