Sparsity in Deep Learning
Similar to layer-wise pruning, layer-wise addition can also lead to improved accuracy.
The main idea is to add parameters preferentially in layers that would be sparsied less.
Mostafa and Wang (2019) initially distribute all parameters according to a xed fraction to
all layers. After magnitude pruning, they add new parameters proportionally to the number
of parameters retained in each layer to strengthen the signicant layers.
Uniformly adding lters or neurons via a \width multiplier" to layers as part of an
iterative grow/prune methodology has also been shown to be eective (Gordon et al., 2018).
Based on the observation that the optimization process benets from large dense models
(see Section 8.5), one could argue that learning in a dense space should be benecial. Golub
et al. (2019) realize that the initial (random) weight values that were pruned in
uence the
non-pruned weights during the optimization process (not at inference, where they are re-
moved). Since those weights have been generated with a pseudo-random number generator,
the authors propose to simply recompute them on demand for training.
4.2 Gradient information based
One simple way to determine which weights should be added is to observe the gradients
during the backwards pass, including those gradients for zero weights. While this immensely
increases memory and computation overheads and removes some of the benets of sparse
computations, it provides good information about the importance of specic weights: if the
gradients are large, then those weights would be important. Dai et al. (2018a) show that
adding weights by largest gradient is biologically plausible and related to Hebbian learning.
They show that this scheme is mathematically identical to adding a new synapse between
two highly stimulated neurons in adjacent layers.
The simplest version of this scheme to compute gradients for all parameters. Lin et al.
(2020) keep a full copy of all weights up to date during training and only deactivate them
with a mask in the forward pass. This enables an ecient search through dierent archi-
tectures with various pruning methods for the dense model. They show good results using
simple magnitude pruning every kiterations. Wortsman et al. (2019) uses a similar scheme
and but restricts the 
ow of gradient information through pruned weights. In this scheme,
gradients 
ow topruned weights but their contribution is not forwarded to other weights.
Dettmers and Zettlemoyer (2019) compute a momentum term that captures gradients over
multiple iterations as a criterion for growing weights. While the memory and compute
overheads are signicant, these methods still reduce the number of arithmetic operations
substantially compared to dense training. They can be combined with layer-wise redistribu-
tion strategies to focus the addition of new neurons to more ecient layers. Dettmers and
Zettlemoyer (2019) nd in an ablation study that updating pruned weights during training
is critical for nal model accuracy.
One way to reduce gradient storage is to compute it only layer-by-layer and discard it
after layer-wise regrowth decisions (Evci et al., 2020a). This reduces the memory overheads
but potentially decreases the accuracy due to noise in the instantaneous gradients. They
use three dierent schemes to determine the number of parameters per layer: (1) the same
uniform fraction for each layer, (2) scaling the number of weights with the number of neu-
ron's (\Erd} os R enyi", cf. Mocanu et al., 2018), and (3) incorporating the kernel dimension
into the scaling factor. Another way to reduce gradient storage is to only compute the
53