Sparsity in Deep Learning
scribed with low-overhead representations such as strides or blocks. This reduces the index
storage overhead and simplies processing (see Section 7). Structured sparsity promises
highest performance and lowest storage overheads but it may lead to worse models because
it may limit the degrees of freedom in the sparsication process (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018).
One simple example of structured sparsity is the removal of whole neurons in a fully-
connected layer: the resulting computations for the forward or backward pass after removing
a neuron are simple dense matrix multiplications from which a whole row/column was
removed (weights of all incoming and outgoing connections). A similar argument applies to
the removal of convolutional lters (Polyak and Wolf, 2015) and transformer heads (Michel
et al., 2019).
Strided sparsity (Anwar et al., 2017) considers structured weight sparsication at the
granularity of channels (removing whole feature maps in a layer), kernels (removing all
connection between two features in consecutive layers), or a strided kernel structure (remove
all connections between features with a particular stride). For example a stride-2 weight
vector could be w= [0:2;1:9;0;1:3;0;0:3;0;1:2;0;0:4] where after an initial oset of one,
every other element is zero. The storage of this vector would simply require to memoize
the oset, stride, and non-zero elements, e.g., ^ w= [1;2;0:2;1:9;1:3;0:3;1:2;0:4].
Convolutional layers cannot only benet from structured sparsity by dropping whole
lters or kernels. If we write the convolution operator in matrix form (sometimes called
im2col, Chellapilla et al., 2006), we can sparsify groups in those matrices. Here, each input
map may have a dierent non-zero structure which is shared across all output maps. Lebe-
dev and Lempitsky (2016) showed that this scheme, together with a regularizing training
procedure and magnitude-based pruning, can sparsify lters eectively. They also nd that
the resulting lters are shrunk towards the center and remain largely circular. Meng et al.
(2020) learn lter shapes using L1regularization. A similar scheme sparsies the connec-
tions between lters|not all output lters in layer iare connected to all input lters in
layeri+1. Specically, Changpinyo et al. (2017) choose xed random connectivity between
the lters at each layer.
Structured pruning often uses similar schemes to unstructured pruning, sometimes with
minor modications to prune whole sets of weights. For each of the following pruning
methods, we will outline its extension to structured sparsity if it is not obvious.
3.2 Data-free selection based on magnitude
One of the simplest, but also most eective, selection schemes is removing weights with
the smallest absolute magnitude. This intuitive approach of removing small weights has
been discussed ever since in the early 90's as a simple and eective technique (Hagiwara,
1993) and always fares surprisingly well (Thimm and Fiesler, 1995; Gale et al., 2019). It is
often used together with re-training the sparsied network (Han et al., 2016b) and training
schedules where the sparsity is gradually increased over time (Zhu and Gupta, 2017). It
can be applied to either individual weights or arbitrary groups of weights usingPjWijfor
structured pruning (e.g., blocks or rows/columns for whole neuron pruning). As we will
see in the next section, this scheme even has a strong theoretical justication, under some
assumptions.
27