T. Hoefler et al.
cation, the aggregated gradient is also sparsied before being communicated back to the
workers. This situation is common in practice, but was neglected in previous analyses.
5.3.5 Runtime support for sparse gradient summation
Sparse communication was rst implemented in the parameter server setting, where all
workers communicate with a single central parameter server. However, many scalable high-
performance distributed training systems perform communication without a central store
using allreduces. Extending sparse communication to this case is challenging. Dryden et al.
(2016) implements a ring-based allreduce that includes custom reduction operators that
uncompress vectors, sum them, and recompress them with the same hyperparameters. Shi
et al. (2019a) proposes a similar mechanism, global top- k, where instead of using the top
kgradients from each worker, only the top kgradients among all workers are used. Shi
et al. (2019b) provides convergence results for this approach. Renggli et al. (2019) propose
SparCML, a framework for eciently performing distributed aggregations of sparse vectors.
They combine sparse vectors and retain all non-sparse coordinates; as this may eventually
result in dense vectors, SparCML includes a mechanism to switch from sparse to dense or
even dense-quantized representations.
5.3.6 Gradient sparsification for better accuracy
The prior approaches have primarily focused on sparsication in order to reduce communi-
cation bandwidth. Shokri and Shmatikov (2015) investigate such methods in the context of
privacy, while Sinha et al. (2020) study top- ksparsication to improve the training quality
for GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014). When training a GAN, a critic network is used to
identify whether samples produced by the generator are \bad". This work uses the critic
to select the best ksamples in each mini-batch to perform updates with.
Note that the core idea behind parallelizing mini-batch SGD consists essentially of com-
puting an average of the gradients of the samples within a mini-batch, which functions as a
lower-variance estimate of the full gradient. Computing this average is a special case of the
more general distributed mean estimation problem. Several works have tried to achieve op-
timal communication bounds for this and related problems (Kone cn y and Richt arik, 2018;
Suresh et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2019; Davies et al., 2021). We note however that the
above gradient sparsication approaches do not solve exact distributed mean estimation,
since the approximation to the true mean is inherently lower-dimensional; instead, they use
error feedback to correct for the inherent error.
5.4 Errors and optimizer state
In addition to the gradients of parameters, the gradients of a layer's input, or the \errors",
can also be sparsied. Sun et al. (2017) introduces meProp (\minimal eort backpropaga-
tion") which applies top- ksparsication to the errors to reduce 
ops. This also necessarily
leads to sparse gradient updates, as only krows (or columns) of the resulting gradient ma-
trix are non-zero. The top- ksparsication is rst applied to the gradient of the loss initially
computed in backpropagation, and then reapplied after every fully-connected layer to keep
the errors sparse. Wei et al. (2017) demonstrate that this scheme can lead to 95% gradient
sparsity.
60