Sparsity in Deep Learning
an attractive formulation with a Bayesian interpretation and a clear interpretation as data
compression (Gr unwald, 2007), as we discuss later.
Many, especially older, works centered on improved generalization through sparsica-
tion. Early research (Mozer and Smolensky, 1988) focused on models with tens to hundreds
of parameters also describe better interpretability of their sparsied versions. However,
with today's models using millions or billions of parameters, it is to be seen if sparsity
improves explainability and interpretability signicantly. The recent work of Bartoldson
et al. (2020) models pruning as \noise" similar to dropout or data augmentation to explain
generalization. Other recent works found that sparsity can improve robustness against ad-
versarial attacks (Guo et al., 2018; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2018; Cosentino et al., 2019; Ye
et al., 2019; Gui et al., 2019; Rakin et al., 2020; Sehwag et al., 2020; Verdenius et al., 2020;
Madaan et al., 2020; Kundu et al., 2021).
A larger group of works recently focused on improving the computational eciency while
maintaining the model accuracy. Modern networks are computationally expensive to use |
for example, Inception-V3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), a highly-accurate object recognition net-
work, requires 5.7 billion arithmetic operations and 27 million parameters to be evaluated;
and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), an experimental state of the art natural language process-
ing network, requires 175 billion parameters (350 GiB assuming 16 bits per parameter) to be
evaluated. Furthermore, training such deep neural models becomes increasingly expensive
and the largest language models already require supercomputers for training, potentially
costing millions of dollars per training run (Brown et al., 2020). Thus, it is important to
investigate sparsity during the training process to manage the costs of training.
The results we survey show that today's sparsication methods can lead to a 10{100x
reduction in model size, and to corresponding theoretical gains in computational, storage,
and energy eciency, all without signicant loss of accuracy . If those speedups are realized
in ecient hardware implementations, then the gained performance may lead to a phase
change in enabling more complex and possibly revolutionary tasks to be solved practically.
Furthermore, we observe that the pace of progress in sparsication methods is accelerating,
such that even during the last months while we worked on this report, several new methods
that improve upon the state of the art have been published.
We aim to provide an overview of the key techniques and ideas, while covering some of
the necessary mathematical background. Due to space constraints, we keep our descriptions
brief|we always refer the interested reader to the original papers which describe the ideas
in full detail. We structure the discussion along various axes: which elements of a neural
network are sparsied, when are they sparsied, and how can they be sparsied. Further-
more, we consider sparse training and the need to re-add connections during training to
maintain a constant model complexity after sparsication. We also outline the development
of results in various areas of sparsication.
In general, the 
urry of dierent techniques, tasks, models, and evaluation settings
causes a wide spread in the community. This leads to many incomparable results and
makes it hard to determine the state of the art and whether method A is better than
method B. Furthermore, we found that nearly every basic approach has been invented at
least twice. Blalock et al. (2020) also point at these problems and they propose a common
benchmark and methodology to go forward. We aim at summarizing the existing techniques,
and rst focus on purely qualitative aspects of designing models in Sections 2{5. Then, in
3