Sparsity in Deep Learning
Whether the optimizer state can be sparsied and the benets of sparse optimizer states
have yet to be explored. We expect it to lead to more memory ecient training algorithms.
5.5 Dynamic networks with conditional computation
Dynamic networks where outputs of previous layers determine a path through the network
increase model capacity without increasing the computational cost. Conditional computa-
tion achieves this by routing the computation through the network without touching all
weights. It can also be interpreted as some special form of (often structured) activation
sparsity. PackNet (Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018) and Supermasks (Wortsman et al., 2020)
encode many tasks into the same dense network while circumventing catastrophic forgetting
by using task-specic sparse subnetworks. While these networks are xed as masks for each
task during training, they can be combined for inference. Other practical approaches use
various trained (data dependent) gating techniques (binary or continuous, deterministic or
stochastic) (Bengio et al., 2013, 2016; Almahairi et al., 2016) or use switching methods that
explicitly select the next \expert" (Shazeer et al., 2017; Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan and
Jacobs, 1994). Both approaches lead to ephemeral sparsity during the execution.
Recently, mixture of experts models have achieved impressive success in natural language
processing. Shazeer et al. (2017) dene a Mixture of Experts (MoE) layer to contain nexpert
subnetworks E1;:::;Enand a gating network Gthat outputs a sparse ndimensional vector.
The function of this layer can be written as y=Pn
i=1G(x)iEi(x), whereG(x) selects (gates)
the relevant experts. One way to implement a k-sparse gating function is to use a top- k
method. Shazeer et al. (2017) use a noisy top- kgating where they add tunable Gaussian
noise to the selection function to improve load balancing the experts. A typical basic gating
function is G(x) = softmax( Wgx) with learned weights Wg. Lepikhin et al. (2021) apply
this idea to transformer networks to train a model with 600 billion parameters by using a
similar gating function for k= 2 and stochastic load balancing across the experts to enable
large-scale parallel training. Switch transformers (Fedus et al., 2021) evolve the model
further and show that MoE sparsity can improve pretraining speed by up to 7x compared
to a dense model and supports models with extreme capacity of up to a trillion parameters.
They show that k= 1 (a single expert) performs best and they design a load balancing loss
term for the gating function.
Conditional computation during inference requires quick decision making at low over-
head. Runtime Neural Pruning (Lin et al., 2017), uses a Markov decision process to de-
termine the path through the network. Its parameters learned by a reinforcement learner,
the path through the network is determined at inference time. Here specically, the agent
determines which channels are important to be considered for a specic input. During train-
ing, two networks are trained in tandem: the original (\backbone") convolutional network
and the decision network that guides lter selection at runtime. Chen et al. (2020) show
a reinforcement learner used at runtime to select convolutional channels during runtime
with low storage. Several similar approaches use gating modules (Liu and Deng, 2018) or
routing (Rosenbaum et al., 2017).
Other similar approaches, such as product key networks (Lample et al., 2019) increase
model capacity without increasing the computation using key-value store-like memory lay-
ers. This vast topic of dynamic (memory) networks is outside the scope of this overview.
61