T. Hoefler et al.
Sections 6 and 7, we explain a selection of architectures implementing combinations of those
designs including performance results. Sections 8{10 provide a general discussion, list open
problems, and conclude the overview. Section 1.1.1 provides an overview of this paper and
recommendations for various types of readers.
1.1 Overview of Model Compression Techniques
We rst present the landscape of approaches to compress models in order to improve com-
putational and memory eciency in order to understand techniques that follow a similar
goal as sparsication and can be combined with it. We dierentiate between six main
techniques:
Down-sizing models creates smaller dense networks to solve the same task. Model
distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) or Neural Architecture Search (Elsken et al., 2019)
are typical examples of techniques to nd small dense models.
Operator factorization decomposes operators, for example the matrix multiplica-
tion of dense layers, into smaller operators. For matrices, operators can be decomposed
via singular value decomposition (Sainath et al., 2013), while more general tensors
can be decomposed via tensor train decomposition (Zhao et al., 2019b; Kanjilal et al.,
1993).
Value quantization seeks to nd a good low-precision encoding for values in the
networks, such as weights, activations, or gradients. Various 
oating point and integer
formats can be used to encode data eciently leading to a smaller number of bits than
standard 32 or 64 bit datatypes.
Value compression can be used to compress model structures and values (e.g.,
weights) either with generic entropy-based methods (Han et al., 2016b) or loss-bounded
type-specic methods using correlation across values (Jin et al., 2019).
Parameter sharing can lead to model compression by exploiting redundancy in
the parameter space. Such redundancy can also be fostered during the training pro-
cess (Plummer et al., 2020).
Sparsication can lead to more ecient models that continue to operate in high-
dimensional feature spaces but reduce the representational complexity using only a
subset of the dimensions at a time. Practically, such methods can reduce complexity
by zeroing out subsets of the model parameters.
All of these methods lead to reduced memory requirements and all schemes, except
for parameter sharing, can also reduce the computational cost. These schemes can be
combined into an ecient inference and training approach and various surveys cover subsets
of this space in detail (Deng et al., 2020; Choudhary et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2020).
In this paper, we focus on the most complex and, in our view, most powerful of those
techniques: sparsication, also known as \pruning" in some contexts. Reed (1993) provides
an overview of early sparsication techniques until 1993|since then, the literature has
evolved signicantly. A second \AI winter" in the late 1980s and early 1990s appears to
4