Sparsity in Deep Learning
initialize structure (re)initialize weights training prune / regrow retrain1 2 3 4 5iterate6
reset / rewind7
Figure 8: Overview of sparsication schedules. Dierent weight values are indicated by
dierent colors, the darker the lower the magnitude (black=zero), red indicates positive
weights, green indicates negative weights.
generate a random network structure or use a sparse network construction strategy such as
SNIP (see Section 2.4.3).
Step (2) initializes the weights of the network, typically randomly or in transfer learning
settings with pre-trained weights. For sparse networks, one could use specialized initializa-
tion strategies such as synaptic 
ow (see Section 2.4.3). Dierent weight values are indicated
by dierent colors in Fig. 8, the darker the lower the magnitude (black=zero), red indicates
positive weights, green indicates negative weights.
Step (3) trains the network for a dened number of iterations or until convergence.
This training can be done with an unmodied dense training schedule or with a sparsity-
inducing schedule (e.g., regularization, see Section 3.6). This initial training may be run
until convergence or stop early for iterative methods.
Step (4) prunes and regrows various elements (see Section 2.3) using the dierent tech-
niques explained in Sections 3 and 4, respectively.
Step (5) may retrain the network either for a xed number of iterations or to convergence
(this step is relatively often skipped but generally improves model accuracy).
Steps (6) and (7) indicate possible loops in the training process. Step (6) is often used
in iterative training/sparsication schedules to achieve highest quality. Step (7) could be
used to reset weight values, which is sometimes done (see Section 8.3).
Why retraining? Even though many pruning schemes pick the least important elements,
the degradation of model quality greatly varies (see Section 6). Janowsky (1989) point out
that \There is no a priori reason why their initial values should remain optimal after the
pruning process". In fact, many works have shown that retraining immediately following
each pruning step and ne-tuning after the last pruning step are both crucial for well-
performing sparsication schedules.
In particular, we observe that many methods follow the pruning (or weight masking)
step with re-training the resulting sparse network, a process also known as \ne-tuning."
When the sparsication is performed in multiple steps (usually called gradual or iterative
pruning), then several ne-tuning periods may be applied.
The approach of choosing which elements to remove based on the dierence in loss
immediately observed after removal inherently assumes that the accuracy after ne-tuning
correlates perfectly with the accuracy before ne-tuning, i.e., immediately after pruning
was applied. This assumption was validated to some extent in the analysis of (He et al.,
2018), which exhibited a correlation between the two accuracies. Other works (Singh and
23