Sparsity in Deep Learning
8.9 Best practices
We now focus more on the practical aspects of pruning and conclude the discussion with a set
of recommendations we identied based on the body of literature in the eld. We rst note
that a 
urry of simple approaches enables reaching moderate sparsity levels (e.g., 50{90%)
at the same or even increased accuracy. It seems that any non-silly scheme achieves some
sparsication and that there is an inherent robustness in the networks themselves. However,
reaching higher sparsity levels (e.g., >95%) requires more elaborate pruning techniques
where we may be reaching the limit of gradient-based optimization techniques for learning.
We now provide best practices in ve categories that we recommend everyone to follow
when performing pruning in practice.
1. Pruning strategy In general, highest sparsity is achieved using regularization meth-
ods in combination with iterative pruning and growth schedules. These methods have
high computational costs, sometimes causing a ve-fold increase in training overheads,
e.g., Savarese et al. (2020). Regularization methods are relatively hard to control and
require numerous hyperparameters. The simplest training method, magnitude pruning, is
easiest to control for target sparsity and accuracy in many practical settings. In most train-
ing methods, it is important for the structure search to enable weights to regrow, especially
in phase of early structure adaptation at the beginning of training.
2. Retraining/ne-tuning If the focus of sparsity is to improve inference, then re-
training and ne-tuning is an essential part of a sparsication schedule. Gradually pruned
sparsication schedules perform best and it is most ecient to start each iteration from the
most trained or the last set of weights.
3. Structure Structured pruning seems to provide a great tradeo between accuracy
and performance on today's architectures. This is partly due to the fact that hardware and
frameworks are tuned for dense blocked computations. Furthermore, structural pruning can
form a strong bias towards powerful mechanisms like locally connected layers that, together
with weight sharing, yield convolutional layers.
4. Distribution The sparsity distribution across layers/operators needs to be considered
carefully both in terms of memory size (numbers of parameters) and computational intensity
(required 
ops). For this, one could hand-tune the sparsity levels for each operator type
and position in the network. For example, dense layers can often be pruned more than
convolutional layers and the rst layer in a convolutional network can hardly be pruned. A
simpler scheme may use a global sparsity and a learned allocation strategy.
5. Combined ephemeral and model sparsity Any sparse deep neural network should
combine both ephemeral and model sparsity. For example, dropout often functions as a \pre-
regularizer" and can benet generalization greatly if enough data is available. Furthermore,
ephemeral and model sparsity lead to a multiplicative benet in terms of needed arithmetic
operations.
87