Sparsity in Deep Learning
convergence. To alleviate this issue, Wangni et al. (2018) rst propose rand- ksparsication,
wherekgradients are retained at random, biased by their absolute value, and the rest zeroed;
the remaining gradients are then rescaled to ensure the gradient is unbiased. They then
develop algorithms to select the optimal sparsication strategy given a variance budget. In
practice this turns out to be similar to choosing an appropriate kfor top-ksparsication.
Similarly, Wang et al. (2018) considers the problem of minimizing variance subject to a
sparsity budget. They also consider the more general problem of sparsifying arbitrary
atomic decompositions, rather than just element-wise sparsication. Concurrently, Tsuzuku
et al. (2018) also identify variance as a key metric, and use the variance of gradients within
a mini-batch, rather than their magnitude, as a criterion for sparsication. The variance
can be computed for relatively little extra cost during standard backpropagation. Using
variance as a sparsication criteria thus has attractive theoretical properties, and Tsuzuku
et al. (2018) show that it matches or outperforms Strom (2015)'s threshold sparsication
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet.
5.3.3 Other methods for gradient sparsification
A variety of other approaches to sparsication have also been studied. Ivkin et al. (2019)
use count sketches on each worker to approximate large gradients, and the sketches are
communicated. Lim et al. (2019) combine sparsication with ternary quantization, and use
a tunable sparsity factor to control how many values are rounded to zero. Basu et al. (2020)
studies the convergence of the combination of sparsity, quantization, and local updates,
showing this converges at the same rate as SGD in certain settings. Wang et al. (2020b)
apply top-ksparsication in the frequency domain after applying an FFT to gradients.
5.3.4 Convergence of sparsified gradient methods
There have been several theoretical analyses of the convergence of sparsied gradient meth-
ods. Concurrently, Stich et al. (2018); Alistarh et al. (2018); Jiang and Agrawal (2018)
show that sparsied gradient methods converge at roughly the same rate as standard SGD,
provided error feedback is used. These works dier in terms of the assumptions made and
guarantees provided: for instance, Stich et al. (2018) consider the case where a single node
compresses its gradient via sparsication with error correction (\memory"), assuming a con-
vex objective function, and provides very strong convergence guarantees, similar to those of
regular SGD. As a comparison, Alistarh et al. (2018) consider non-convex objectives, and
the multi-node case, but require an additional analytic assumption for their convergence
bounds. Overall, these works provide a strong theoretical justication to the previous em-
pirical results, in particular highlighting the importance of error feedback for convergence.
Karimireddy et al. (2019) extend these results to more general settings. However, these
results are for sparsifying an entire model's gradients, as opposed to layer-wise operation.
Dutta et al. (2020) further extend these convergence results and show that layer-wise com-
pression is theoretically better. They also experiments and show that, while this usually
holds in practice, there do exist cases in practice where sparsifying an entire model out-
performs layer-wise sparsication. Tang et al. (2019) provide a convergence analysis for the
case where, in addition to workers sparsiying their individual gradients before communi-
59