Sparsity in Deep Learning
2.1 Generalization
Generalization performance is one of the most important aspects of a deep learning model.
It measures how well the model performs for unseen data drawn from the same distribution
as the training data but was not used for training. Some sparsication schemes follow
Occam's Hill (Rasmussen and Ghahramani, 2000), shown as a sketch (green line) in Fig. 4:
As we start to sparsify, initially the accuracy increases due to the reduction of learned
noise. This phenomenon has been observed both in NLP (Michel et al., 2019) and computer
vision (Frankle and Carbin, 2019) tasks, see for example Fig. 22b, CoLA task. Intuitively,
the smaller model forms a stronger regularizer forcing the learning algorithm to \focus"
on more important and general aspects of the model (Part A in the gure). This eect
may be less pronounced in large-scale deep learning models. Then, the model reaches
an often extended range of sparsities where the performance remains stable and maybe
slightly decreases (Part B). Eventually, with high sparsity, the quality quickly degrades (Part
C). Improved generalization has been a central topic on the early works on sparsication,
before somewhat overparameterized deep learning models became a standard tool. Yet,
sparsication continues to play a central role in training generalizable models using dropout
(see Section 5.2). Later works focused mainly on the computational performance aspects
that we will discuss next.
Accuracy
Performance
A B CBaseline Accuracy
Figure 4: Sketch of test accuracy vs. sparsity demonstrating Occam's Hill.
If we observe the computational performance of the model, we often see a curve similar
to the (cartoon) red line in Fig. 4: initially, for low sparsity, performance grows slowly due
to overheads in storing sparse structures and controlling sparse computations. Then, for
moderate and high sparsity, we see a sustained growth of performance before it usually
levels o at extremely high sparsities where storage and control overheads dominate. For
most practical purposes and sparsities, the performance increases with growing sparsity, the
area of diminishing returns only applies to extreme sparsities which deep learning models
have yet to reach. In general, achieving highest performance at a specic sparsity level is
complex|most techniques to store and exploit sparsity are only ecient within a limited
sparsity interval and/or distribution of non-zero elements.
13