Sparsity in Deep Learning
We also expect that there remains potential in the data science aspects of sparsity,
especially in the areas of very high sparsity ( >99%) as well as sparse training of large
models in very high-dimensional spaces. Both could lead to signicant breakthroughs in
future deep learning systems.
Acknowledgments
We thank Doug Burger, Steve Scott, Marco Heddes, and the respective teams at Microsoft
for inspiring discussions on the topic. We thank Angelika Steger for uplifting debates about
the connections to biological brains, Sidak Pal Singh for his support regarding experimental
results, and Utku Evci as well as Xin Wang for comments on previous versions of this
work. Special thanks go to Bernhard Sch olkopf, our JMLR editor Samy Bengio, and the
three anonymous reviewers who provided excellent comprehensive, pointed, and deep review
comments that improved the quality of our manuscript signicantly.
References
When available, we include an arXiv reference to promote open access.
We maintain a public repository with the full bibliography of this paper to the benet
of the community at https://github.com/spcl/sparsity-in-deep-learning .
Alessandro Achille, Matteo Rovere, and Stefano Soatto. 2019. Critical Learning Periods in
Deep Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
arXiv:cs.LG/1711.08856
Sher Afghan and Uwe Naumann. 2020. Interval Adjoint Signicance Analysis for Neural
Networks. In International Conference on Computational Science . 365{378.
Alireza Aghasi, Afshin Abdi, Nam Nguyen, and Justin Romberg. 2017. Net-Trim: Convex
Pruning of Deep Neural Networks with Performance Guarantee. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . arXiv:cs.LG/1611.05162
Subutai Ahmad and Luiz Scheinkman. 2019. How Can We Be So Dense? The Benets of
Using Highly Sparse Representations. (2019). arXiv:cs.LG/1903.11257
Alham Fikriand Aji and Kenneth Heaeld. 2017. Sparse Communication for Distributed
Gradient Descent. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) . arXiv:cs.CL/1704.05021
Jorge Albericio, Patrick Judd, Tayler Hetherington, Tor Aamodt, Natalie Enright Jerger,
and Andreas Moshovos. 2016. Cnvlutin: Ineectual-Neuron-Free Deep Neural Network
Computing. In International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) .
Dan Alistarh, Demjan Grubic, Jerry Li, Ryota Tomioka, and Milan Vojnovic. 2017. QSGD:
Communication-Ecient SGD via Gradient Quantization and Encoding. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . arXiv:cs.LG/1610.02132
89