T. Hoefler et al.
image classication, uses NAS to construct their base EcientNet-B0 network, and denes
a compound method to scale it up while retaining parameter eciency.
6.1.2 CNN sparsification techniques
On existing networks, applying the techniques presented in Fig. 20 can lead to a widely
varied set of results, in terms of sparsity versus accuracy. Below, we perform an anecdotal
review of in
uential early works, categorized by their training scheme (see Section 2.4),
followed by a discussion of challenges and solutions for sparsifying modern DNNs, which
exhibit higher baseline parameter eciency, and can therefore be harder to prune.
Sparsify after training The popular paper on model compression by Han et al. (2016b)
combines magnitude-based sparsication, quantization, weight sharing, and Human cod-
ing into a compression scheme able to reduce the number of weights of the classic AlexNet
and VGG-16 models trained on the ImageNet dataset by 35 and 49, respectively, with-
out loss of accuracy. They were able to sparsify those models by more than 90% when
manually tuning each layer, showing that convolutional layers should be sparsied less (15{
65%) than fully connected layers (91{96%). Sun et al. (2015) also discuss sparsication
and re-training, using neuron output correlation to demonstrate 33% improved accuracy
for the DeepID2+ face recognition CNN when sparsied by 74%, and retaining the same
accuracy with sparsication of up to 88%. The authors show that a fully-sparse training
approach could not match the performance of the dense-trained, then sparsied network.
They conjecture that, with a sparser model, the randomized initial values of the weights
play a more signicant role than in a dense model. Thus, training a sparse model appears
to be more prone to converge to suboptimal local minima than a dense network, which is
in agreement with a theory later proposed by Frankle and Carbin (2019).
Sparsify during training Several works advocate for training the sparse network in tan-
dem with the dense network, or by modifying the training process to promote sparsity. One
example is the eect of dropout on sparse networks (see Section 5.2). Zhou et al. (2016)
propose a forward-backward splitting method to enforce sparsity as regularization, pruning
61.3% of VGG-13 and 65.4% of AlexNet parameters with 1.7% and 0.53% accuracy degrada-
tion respectively. Tartaglione et al. (2018) use sensitivity-driven pruning until the network
drops below the required accuracy. They achieve higher sparsity than earlier magnitude-
based mechanisms. Molchanov et al. (2017) use variational dropout (see Section 3.7) to
prune weights starting from relatively small pre-trained networks. For those networks, they
show record sparsity levels for small networks: 98.5% for LeNet-300-100 and 99.996% for
LeNet-5 with 98.1% and 99.3% accuracy on MNIST, respectively. Training takes twice the
number of operations for forward and backward but converges equally fast on LeNet and
MNIST. VGG-style networks on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 could be sparsied by more
than 97% at similar accuracy.
Guo et al. (2016) observe that the process of sparsication can benet from re-adding
weights during training that were \erroneously" pruned. For this, they maintain the set of
all weights during the whole training process, including the pruned ones, and mask them
during the forward pass. This allows them to later re-add pruned weights if they reach a
certain magnitude. Furthermore, they specify a pruning schedule to decrease the sparsica-
tion probability over time. They demonstrate that this method signicantly improves upon
64