T. Hoefler et al.
from pruning can be reinvested during the training to increase the minibatch size. This ts
well into existing training schedules (Smith et al., 2018).
Mao et al. (2017) specically analyze the impact of structured sparsity on the accu-
racy of CNNs. They consider four levels of increasing structure in convolutional layers:
(0) unstructured weight sparsity, (1) dimension-wise (blocked) weight sparsity, (2) kernel-
level sparsity, and (3) lter-level sparsity. When considering storing the weights array as
W[C;K;H;W ] (Channel, Kernel, Height, Width), then each of the four levels would require
the following addressing per element: (0) W[C;K;H;W ], (1)W[C;K;H; :] orW[C;K; :;W],
(2)W[C;K; :;:], andW[C;:;:;:]. They show that, for a simple magnitude-based (sum per
block) pruning scheme, the top-5 accuracy degrades with increasing block size at sparsity
levels of 60{77%.
7.2 Hardware acceleration for sparse models
Numerous hardware accelerators have been designed to speed up deep neural networks,
see (Sze et al., 2017; Reuther et al., 2020) for an overview. Here, we focus on a summary
of important techniques implemented in hardware accelerators that have explicit support
for sparse computations in deep learning. Dave et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive
and generic survey including more architectures, techniques, and technical details on this
topic. Accelerator designs are based on the observation that typical workloads have 50{
90% ephemeral activation sparsity and up to 99% weight sparsity. Activation sparsity
is either induced by ReLU operations or autoencoders (Noh et al., 2015) and generative
adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) that insert zeros in the upsampling phase
of the decoder. Furthermore, as we outline in the previous sections, weights can often be
structurally sparsied to 95% (or more) without signicant loss in accuracy.
7.2.1 Inference accelerators
We start with an overview of sparse inference accelerators that typically aim at latency-
sensitive batch sizes of one where the central operation is sparse matrix-vector (SpMV,
or weight-activation) multiplication. Similarly to dense DNN accelerators, sparse accel-
erators can achieve record performance up to nearly 22 TOp/W (Zhang et al., 2019a).
Dierent layer types can be expressed in terms of a small number of primitives. For ex-
ample, fully-connected layers can be expressed as (sparse) matrix-vector multiplication.
Convolutional layers can similarly be expressed as sparse matrix-vector or matrix-matrix
multiplication (Lavin and Gray, 2016). Conversely, a 1 1 convolution can be expressed as a
fully-connected operator. Similarly, recurrent layers can be unrolled into a series of matrix-
vector multiplications. So any device that can process a convolution orfully-connected
layer can process all layers. Yet, accelerators are tuned for the specics of layer types and
network architectures. Thus, we structure our overview by dierent architectures.
Sparse CNN inference accelerators We start with an overview of sparse CNN accel-
erators (including fully-connected layers). Minerva (Reagen et al., 2016) uses a hand-tuned
threshold to prune small activation values in MLPs that save weight-fetch bandwidth and
arithmetic operations. This saves 50% of the power consumption on top of other optimiza-
tions such as quantization. Eyeriss (Chen et al., 2017) clock-gates PEs that would process
zero activation values of convolutional layers to save energy.
74