T. Hoefler et al.
Soft weight sharing Ullrich et al. (2017) propose combining soft weight sharing with
pruning to compress neural networks. The idea of soft weight sharing (Nowlan and Hinton,
1992) is to compress a neural network by assigning its weights to dierent clusters. This
is done using empirical Bayes methods, in which the prior over the parameters is learned
during the training process. Following Nowlan and Hinton (1992), Ullrich et al. (2017)
dene the prior over the weights of a neural network as a mixture of Gaussians. One of the
mixture components has a zero mean and a chosen mixture probability close to one, which
will enforce a certain sparsity level for the resulting neural network. Thus, the proposed
soft weight-sharing algorithm for compression starts from a pre-trained network and after
optimizing the corresponding variational lower-bound, the resulting weights are assigned to
the most probable cluster from the Gaussian mixture prior.
Bayesian pruning with hierarchical priors Louizos et al. (2017) use the variational
inference framework and the minimum description length (MDL) principle to compress
neural networks, by dening hierarchical sparsity inducing priors to prune neurons. The
MDL principle (Gr unwald, 2007) states that the best hypothesis is the one that uses the
smallest number of bits to communicate the sum between the model's complexity cost and
the data mist error; thus, MDL is directly related to compression. Additionally, it has been
well understood that variational inference can be reinterpreted through MDL (Hinton and
Van Camp, 1993). With this theoretical support, Louizos et al. (2017) dene a zero-mean
Gaussian prior over the weights of a neural network, where the variance is sampled from a
separate distribution, for example a log-uniform or half-Cauchy. This formulation enables
weights within the same neuron or feature map to share the corresponding scale variable in
the joint prior, which encourages structured sparsity. Furthermore, the optimal xed point
precision for encoding the weights can be determined from the posterior uncertainties, which
in turn leads to quantized networks.
Bayesian pruning for recurrent neural networks Earlier works have focused on
inducing sparsity in standard feed-forward neural networks. Yet, Bayesian pruning methods
have also been successfully applied to recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Lobacheva et al.,
2018; Kodryan et al., 2019). Lobacheva et al. (2018) use Sparse VD (Molchanov et al., 2017)
to prune individual weights of an LSTM or follow the approach from Louizos et al. (2017)
to sparsify neurons or gates and show results on text classication or language modeling
problems. Kodryan et al. (2019) use instead the Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD)
framework, in which a zero-mean element-wise factorized Gaussian prior distribution over
the parameters is used, together with a corresponding Gaussian factorized posterior, such
that a closed-form expression of the KL divergence term of the variational lower bound
is obtained. Subsequently, the Doubly Stochastic Variational Inference (DSVI) method is
used to maximize the variational lower bound and the weights for which the prior variances
are lower than a certain threshold are set to zero.
Related methods Dai et al. (2018b) prune neurons based on a simple layer-wise infor-
mation bottleneck, an information-theoretic measure of redundancy. For this, they penalize
the \inter-layer mutual information using a variational approximation" to sparsify. Their
Variational Information Bottleneck Networks modify the loss function to contain a term that
compares the mutual information from layer ito layeri+ 1 with the mutual information
between layer iand the nal result. With the optimization goal to minimize the former and
48