T. Hoefler et al.
convolutional layers. Recent work on transformers suggest the more automated way of
\train big and then prune" (Li et al., 2020c). Here, we rely on the learning process to
automatically discover good network designs. It is to be shown whether such automated
methods can compete with hand-crafted biases for modern networks such as transformers.
8.5 Optimization algorithms during model training
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the de-facto standard algorithm in training deep neural
networks. Most of the works investigating sparse training suggest that SGD is sensitive to
the parameters as well as the network structure. Several show empirically that training
larger models is more compute-ecient than training smaller models (Glorot et al., 2011;
Mhaskar and Poggio, 2016; Li et al., 2020c; Kaplan et al., 2020). Similarly to Evci et al.
(2020a), we conjecture that this may be explained by the iterative optimization process and
the ability to use additional dimensions to \route around" hills in the loss landscape. Thus,
high-dimensional dense spaces help to elude local minima in the loss landscape as illustrated
in Fig. 24: the left side shows a two dimensional function f(x1;x2) and the loss function
Las contour lines. Yellow areas are valleys and blue areas are hilltops. The red dashed
line shows the value x2= 0, emulating a sparsied model, which is shown in the right plot.
Here, we plot the (same) loss function on the x axis. We show two possible starting points
s1ands2and SGD trajectories in green on both sides. We see that the x2dimension can
be used to circumvent the leftmost hill when starting from s1in the two-dimensional model
and proceed to the lowest minimum in the middle. However, when we sparsify x2in the
right model, SGD will work in the projected subspace with fewer degrees of freedom and
converge to the suboptimal minimum.
𝑥1𝑥2
𝐿𝐿
𝑥1𝑥2=0𝑠1
𝑠2𝑠2
𝑠1
Figure 24: SGD in a 1D/2D loss landscape.
We may attribute this \weakness" of SGD to its fundamental property of linear rst-
order descent. Domingos (2020) further supports this claim by showing that models trained
with SGD are approximately kernel machines.
As we have seen, iteratively applying pruning improves the quality of pruned models
signicantly. If we now see this overall optimization process as a series of (linear) SGD
iterations mixed with (nonlinear) pruning steps, this new optimization process implements
a guided nonlinear search. At each pruning step, the function is perturbed in a guided
way (depending on the pruning methodology, see Section 3) and then again minimized with
SGD. At each pruning step, the model may evade a local minimum that SGD alone may
not be able to overcome. For well tuned schedules, this scheme seems to approximate an
ecient learning algorithm.
82