T. Hoefler et al.
Other operators such as GELU or SoftMax may also sparsify to some degree, be it
through rounding towards zero with limited precision. Since those two operators are often
used in transformers, see Section 6.2.
5.2 Dropout techniques for training
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014; Hinton et al., 2012) is a regularizing operator in DNNs
that forces the network to \prevent co-adaptation" of neurons during training. Specically,
dropout is a data-free sparsier that uses Bernoulli random sampling (with ptypically
ranging from 0 :01 to 0:5) to zero out neurons and nullify their contributions. During
training, the neuron-masking vector, which is randomly sampled at every step, is kept
stored in memory in order to mark the neurons to be ignored during backpropagation. At
inference-time, no dropout masks are applied, i.e., the entire set of neurons is considered.
The operator is applied mostly on the activations of fully connected layers, and is widely
used to increase generalization in MLPs, CNNs, and Transformers. An interesting property
of dropout is that it induces sparsity in activations (Srivastava et al., 2014), likely due to
the repeated ephemeral sparsication. The sparsity factor was observed to increase with
the dropout probability p.
There are several interpretations to dropout's generalization eect. The initial line of
research claims that neuron \co-adaptation" (a concept borrowed from genetics) harms
generalization, and dropout prevents it by \making the presence of other hidden units
unreliable" (Srivastava et al., 2014). Baldi and Sadowski (2013) characterize dropout in
neural networks as simultaneously training an ensemble of an exponentially large set of
networks, each one generated by the dierent masked versions, and that at inference-time
their sum is taken (similarly to ensembles). Another interpretation originates from Bayesian
statistics (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Molchanov et al., 2017). The claim is that dropout
is an approximating distribution to the posterior in a Bayesian neural network with a set of
random weights. It is shown that dropout's minimization objective reduces the epistemic
uncertainty of a DNN, or more specically the KL-divergence with a Gaussian process (Gal
and Ghahramani, 2016).
Over the years, several successful extensions and generalizations of dropout were pro-
posed. DropConnect (Wan et al., 2013) drops out weights instead of activations. Srivastava
et al. (2014) proposed to replace the Bernoulli distribution with a normal N(1;1) distri-
bution in order to add multiplicative noise. Other variants of dropout specialize to certain
operators: For convolutions, instead of random activation subsets, SpatialDropout (Tomp-
son et al., 2015) drops entire feature maps, and DropBlock (Ghiasi et al., 2018) drops
contiguous spatial regions. For recurrent neural network units, ZoneOut (Krueger et al.,
2017) modies information propagation through sequences by randomly selecting between
the old hidden state and the new hidden state of the RNN unit, dropping the hidden state
update. Stochastic Depth (Huang et al., 2016), Drop-Path (Larsson et al., 2017), and Layer-
Drop (Fan et al., 2020) are more coarse-grained versions of dropout, dropping layer weights
and outputs of entire subgraphs of DNNs to prevent co-adaptation of paths and increase
regularization.
The variational interpretation has been used to generalize the dropout operator in var-
ious ways. Concrete Dropout (Gal et al., 2017) uses the Concrete distribution (Maddison
56