Sparsity in Deep Learning
metaphors can be very useful to build an intuition and provide a possible direction, they
have to be considered carefully. Biological brains and computers work with fundamen-
tally dierent compute substrates. For example, the three-dimensional arrangement of the
brain encodes structural information nearly for free and learns through neuroplasticity.
Silicon devices cannot adapt their wiring structure easily, and thus the simulation of struc-
tural properties leads to overheads in terms of memory (encoding the structure) as well
as compute (controlling the execution). It is thus possible to design mechanisms that are
not common in biological systems but outperform biologically more plausible mechanisms
in silicon-based compute substrates and architectures. After all, not many animals have
wheels and airplanes do not 
ap their wings. Nevertheless, Leonardo da Vinci discovered
the principle of dynamic soaring by studying birds.
A successful method to guide innovation is to be inspired by biological phenomena and
engineer systems in a renement and optimization step given our technical understanding
of the problem. For example, the visual cortex does not utilize weight sharing like convo-
lutional networks do, however, in silicon, it seems to be the most ecient technique given
that weight sharing reduces redundancy during feature detection and enables reuse for per-
formance (Unat et al., 2017). A second example could be the optimization process. While
we currently use SGD to train networks, it remains unclear whether biological brains use
similar methods. Recent discoveries have shown a possible relationship to Hebbian learn-
ing (Millidge et al., 2020) and argue that SGD may be biologically plausible, albeit some
gaps remain (Lillicrap et al., 2020).
Various pruning approaches have been directly inspired by biological brains (Ahmad
and Scheinkman, 2019) but have not demonstrated highly-accurate results for large-scale
networks and complex tasks. They advocate sparse high-dimensional representation spaces.
Biological brains have very large sparse layers in a relatively shallow architecture with less
than ten layers. We believe that this is a very interesting direction for further exploration
and inspiration if it is augmented with theoretical reasoning and solid engineering.
8.2 Permutation Groups and Information Loss
One interesting observation is that every parameterized dense network is an element in an
exponentially large equivalence class, which will generate the same output for each input.
Specically, Changpinyo et al. (2017) prove the following lemma: \any dense convolutional
neural network with no cross-channel nonlinearities, distinct weights and biases, and with
lhidden layers of sizes n1,n2,:::,nl, has at least i= l
i=1ni! distinct equivalent networks
which produce the same output." This suggests that the information content of sparsied
networks may be exponentially larger. Ahmad and Scheinkman (2019) show a similar result
with respect to noise robustness in high-dimensional vector spaces.
8.3 Sparse subnetworks for training and lottery tickets
Some works hinted at specic subnetworks that may exist during training which could lead
to a good sparse structure (Sun et al., 2015; Cohen et al., 2017). See et al. (2016) demon-
strated that re-training a sparse RNN with the same structure results in networks that
perform well but not as well as the pruned-from-dense variants. Frankle and Carbin (2019)
analyze the relation between initialization and statically sparse training. They state the
79