Sparsity in Deep Learning
3.5.2 Magnitude pruning as a special case
To gain some intuition, let us consider the above pruning criteria when the Hessian is the
identity, possibly rescaled by a constant. Intuitively, this would mean that the Hessian ma-
trix is diagonally-dominant, and that its diagonal entries are roughly uniformly distributed.
In this case, a quick examination of the above equations will yield that following the statistic
is equivalent to pruning the weight of lowest magnitude , as the saliency measure becomes
proportional to the square of each weight. As noted, the weight magnitude is a popular
pruning criterion in practice, e.g., (Gale et al., 2019; Singh and Alistarh, 2020; Blalock
et al., 2020). We do note that this structural assumption on the Hessian is very strong, and
unlikely to hold in practice.
3.5.3 Discussion of assumptions and guarantees
The OBD/OBS method oers an interesting mathematical framework for pruning, but
comes with a few important assumptions and limitations that should be noted:
1. The original framework assumes that pruning is performed upon a well-trained model,
whose loss gradient rwLis negligible. This is unlikely to be the case in practice.
Follow-up work (Singh and Alistarh, 2020) has shown that the pruning metrics and
the pruning update can be extended to the case where the gradient is non-zero.
2. The framework inherently assumes that (a) the Hessian matrix is invertible at the
point where pruning is performed, and that (b) the pruning perturbation is small ,
and in particular that the Hessian matrix is constant along the direction of the prun-
ing perturbation (this is necessary in order to ignore the higher-order terms). This
constraint is addressed by practical schemes by either performing gradual pruning of
the weights, or by re-computing the Hessian along the pruning direction, as we will
detail in the next section.
3. Importantly, the above derivation holds if we are willing to remove a single weight at
a time, and to re-compute the Hessian upon each new removal. Clearly, this would be
infeasible for modern networks, so, to apply this method at scale and remove several
weights in a step, one assumes that the correlations between removed weights are
negligible.2Wang et al. (2019) point out that this approximation can lead to \wrong"
pruning decisions in worst-case instances, and propose to prune in an eigenbasis which
removes these correlations. Singh and Alistarh (2020) show that these correlations
can be taken into account for pruning decisions, at the cost of solving a potentially
large system of linear equations.
4. One signicant limitation of these frameworks is that they do not take into account
the post-pruning ne-tuning process. This process usually accounts for most of the
accuracy recovery, so considering it would be an interesting topic for further research.
5. Finally, we note that the early work of Le Cun et al. (1990) introduced the above
formulation under the assumption that the Hessian matrix is diagonal , and applied this
2. Technically, it could be that the removal of the lowest weight in the order of the pruning statistic would
cause the second-lowest weight to become signicantly more important towards the loss.
35