T. Hoefler et al.
output mask can be used to avoid computing zero elements. SparseNN (Zhu et al., 2018)
improves upon this scheme by learning UandVthrough back propagation. They esti-
mate the derivation of the sign function with a well-known straight-through estimator (see
Section 3.6.1).
Fixed block sparsity and systolic arrays Block sparsity (either blocks of weights or
full neurons) reduces the overhead for indices and control logic and thus can eciently be
used to optimize software for any hardware type (see Yu et al., 2017). Cambricon-S (Zhou
et al., 2018) adds explicit support for block sparsity to the Cambricon series of accelerators.
They skip both zero neurons and blocks of weights for arbitrary layer types. They observe
that large weights tend to cluster in 2D and 4D in fully-connected and convolutional layers,
respectively. Based on this observation, they dene 2D and 4D block-sparse weight formats.
The block sizes are tuned as hyperparameters and the authors observed that permissible
block sizes for ResNets are particularly small where other (\fatter") networks allow bigger
blocks. They show 1.7x better performance and 1.37x better energy eciency than the
ne-grained Cambricon-X accelerator.
Most of the sparse accelerator architectures dene logic that feeds each unit separately.
However, most dense accelerators use systolic arrays to perform the matrix operations.
Yet, sparsity would not use those xed structures of systolic arrays eciently. Kung et al.
(2019) pack sparse lters into a dense structure to use ecient systolic arrays for sparse
computations. They rst select columns of sparse lters/weights that have minimal overlap
between the non-zero elements. Then, they combine those into a single column retaining
the largest values. For example, consider the following four columns: c1= [0;2;0;3;0],
c2= [1;0;2;1;0],c3= [1;2;0;1;0], andc4= [0;0;0;0;4]. If we were to pack three columns,
we would select c1,c2, andc4with the minimal overlap and pack them into the single
dense column cp= [1;2;2;3;4]|note that only the 4th index con
icts in c1andc2and the
larger value is chosen. The group size and number of allowed con
icts are hyperparameters.
The authors show that this scheme, combined with a moderate amount of retraining is e-
cient for small networks. Squeeze
ow (Li et al., 2019) use a conceptually similar scheme to
compress sparse lters. Instead of combining dierent lters, they decompose sparse convo-
lutions into eective and ineective and map the eective ones to a dense representation for
ecient processing. Compact (Zhang et al., 2019b) regularizes sparse runlength-encoded
activations to be processed in a systolic array.
7.2.2 Training accelerators
Since the (inference) forward-pass is a part of training, one could assume that accelerators
designed for inference can also be used in the forward pass of training. While this is partially
true, it comes with additional complications. For example, during training, one needs to
store the activations. Furthermore, specialized formats such as EIE's CSC format cannot
easily be accessed (in transposition) during the backward pass. Thus, specic accelerators
are designed for sparse training. Yang et al. (2020a) show a co-design approach of a sparse
training algorithm and hardware to design Procrustes, an accelerator specic to the Drop-
back pruning algorithm (Golub et al., 2019). They observe that batch normalization layers
\shift" values away from zero and essentially eliminate sparsity in the gradients. Procrustes
thus exploits only structural weight sparsity by storing weights in a compressed block for-
76