Sparsity in Deep Learning
5.1 Sparsifying neuron activations
The output activations of any ReLU-based neural network layer are naturally sparse (Glorot
et al., 2011) since, intuitively, on random inputs, half of the output values of such a layer
would be zero. In practice, it appears that the fraction of sparse activations is signicantly
higher than 50%. This phenomenon does not currently have an analytical explanation,
but it has been leveraged by several hardware architecture proposals (see Section 7.2).
Specically, Rhu et al. (2018) were among the rst to perform an in-depth analysis of
activation sparsity on a range of large-scale convolutional models with ReLU activations,
showing high sparsities of up to 90% in some layers, well in excess of the 50% predicted by
the structure of the ReLU activation.
This phenomenon has inspired a line of work on compressing the activation maps in
a neural network for memory and computational gains, and potentially augmenting this
natural sparsity. The standard technique for reducing the memory footprint of activation
maps is quantization , see e.g., Mishra et al. (2018). Since quantization is not the main
focus of this work, we do not detail this approach here. For sparsifying activations, Alwani
et al. (2016) suggested to stochastically prune activations, although the objective is not to
gain performance, but to design a defense to adversarial attacks. To further reduce the
size of activations, Gudovskiy et al. (2018) suggested converting xed-point activations into
vectors over the smallest nite eld GF(2) followed by nonlinear dimensionality reduction
(NDR) layers embedded into the structure of the neural network. The technique results in
a factor of two decrease in memory requirements with only minor degradation in accuracy,
while adding only bitwise computations. At the same time, we note that the technique
requires modifying the network structure, and additional retraining. Both these techniques
incur low, but persistent, accuracy loss. Activation sparsity can also be used to signicantly
reduce memory consumption during the training process (Liu et al., 2019).
More recently, Georgiadis (2019) proposed and investigated the use of L1-regularization
applied to the activation maps, and showed that it can result in a signicant increase
in sparsity|up to 60% relative to naturally-occurring activation sparsity on a range of
CNNs for image classication on ImageNet. Further, he investigated a range of encoding
techniques for the activations, and evaluated them in terms of their resulting compression
factors. Kurtz et al. (2020) followed up on this idea, and showed that Hoyer regulariza-
tion (Hoyer, 2004), a popular regularizer in the context of sparse recovery, is superior to L1
regularization, in the sense that it provides higher activation sparsity with lower accuracy
loss. The paper goes on to introduce a series of thresholding methods that are complemen-
tary to regularization, in the sense that they zero out activation values that are close to, but
not exactly, zero. In addition, this paper describes a complete set of algorithms for lever-
aging activation sparsity for fast inference on CPUs, showing end-to-end inference speedup
for activation-sparsied models. Concurrent work by Dong et al. (2019) also introduced an
algorithmic framework for obtaining computational speedups on models where layers have
extremely high input sparsity. Their method is dierent from Kurtz et al. (2020), but ap-
pears to require higher input sparsity to ensure speedup. In particular, it is applied to tasks
such as LiDAR-based detection, or character recognition, in which inputs (and therefore
further activations) are naturally extremely sparse.
55