T. Hoefler et al.
1. Introduction
Deep learning shows unparalleled promise for solving very complex real-world problems
in areas such as computer vision, natural language processing, knowledge representation,
recommendation systems, drug discovery, and many more. With this development, the eld
of machine learning is moving from traditional feature engineering to neural architecture
engineering. However, still little is known about how to pick the right architecture to solve
a specic task. Several methods such as translational equivariance in convolutional layers,
recurrence, structured weight sharing, pooling, or locality are used to introduce strong
inductive biases in the model design. Yet, the exact model size and capacity required for
a task remain unknown and a common strategy is to train overparameterized models and
compress them into smaller representations.
Biological brains, especially the human brain, are hierarchical, sparse, and recurrent
structures (Friston, 2008) and one can draw some similarities with the inductive biases in
today's articial neural networks. Sparsity plays an important role in scaling biological
brains|the more neurons a brain has, the sparser it gets (Herculano-Houzel et al., 2010).
Furthermore, research has shown that a human brain starts sparse, has an early phase of
densication followed by massive pruning, and then remains at a relatively stable sparsity
level. Yet, even fully-grown brains change up to 40% of their synapses each day (Hawkins,
2017). Many of today's engineered pruning techniques have intuitive biological analogies,
which we will mention throughout the text and discuss in Section 8. Yet, the computational
substrates (biological tissue vs. CMOS) result in very dierent constraints.
Articial deep learning models are traditionally dense and over-parameterized, some-
times to the extent that they can memorize random patterns in data (Zhang et al., 2017)
or that 95% of the parameters can be predicted from the remaining 5% (Denil et al.,
2013). This may be linked to empirical evidence suggesting that over-parameterized models
are easier to train with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) than more compact representa-
tions (Glorot et al., 2011; Mhaskar and Poggio, 2016; Li et al., 2020c; Kaplan et al., 2020).
Brutzkus et al. (2018) and Du et al. (2019) show that such gradient descent techniques
provably train (shallow) over-parameterized networks optimally with good generalization.
Specically, they show that over-parameterization leads to a strong \convexity-like prop-
erty" that benets the convergence of gradient descent. Recent theoretical results (Allen-
Zhu et al., 2019; Neyshabur et al., 2019) seem to support these ndings and indicate that
training dynamics and generalization rely on overparameterization.
This over-parameterization comes at the cost of additional memory and computation ef-
fort during model training and inference. In particular, for inference on mobile and battery-
driven devices and in cost-conscious settings, sparse model representations promise huge
savings. Concretely, sparse models are easier to store, and often lead to computational
savings. Furthermore, overparameterized models tend to overt to the data and degrade
generalization to unseen examples. Following Occam's razor, sparsication can also be seen
as some form of regularization, and may improve model quality by eectively reducing
noise in the model. Specically, the framework of Minimum Description Length provides
2