Sparsity in Deep Learning
methods do not depend on examples, they can be used as a pre- or post-processing step for
data-driven methods.
A simple scheme compares sets of weights between dierent neurons. Specically, if a
fully connected layer has Noutput neurons, we create an NNmatrix and compare the
input weights between all neurons. Now we can simply merge ksimilar neurons into a single
neuron, multiply all weights by k, and add all biases. Srinivas and Babu (2015) showed
that this method works well for small networks but prunes less for large networks. Coreset
pruning (Mussay et al., 2020) enables a precise tradeo between sparsity and approxima-
tion error. The authors show improved accuracy at 90% sparsity for very small example
networks.
While data-free methods, especially magnitude pruning, are often very eective and can
provide highly-accurate results, several works have shown that more precise methods can
achieve signicantly better results, especially at high sparsity (Sanh et al., 2020). Further-
more, data-free schemes often require expensive retraining to recover an accuracy as close
to the original performance as possible. An obvious way to improve precision is to consider
the in
uence of the training data (and implicitly its distribution) in the pruning selection.
This leads us to the class of data-driven pruning schemes.
3.3 Data-driven selection based on input or output sensitivity
This class of selection methods considers the statistical sensitivity of the output of neurons
or the whole network with respect to the training data. In those methods, a set of examples
(potentially all of the training data) is used to determine directly which elements should
be removed to maintain or improve prediction accuracy while sparsifying the network. El-
ements with very small or zero change with respect to deviation of the input examples
contribute less in the entire network since their outputs are approximately constant to the
variation in their inputs. Thus, such a sensitivity measure can be employed to dene the
relevance of an element for the function of a network and low-relevance elements can be
removed.
The rst scheme follows this intuition and removes neurons that show very little variation
in their output across various input examples (Sietsma and Dow, 1988). After removing,
we add their output to the next neurons' biases. Similarly, if two neurons in a layer always
produce the same (or opposite) output for all inputs, we can remove one of those and
adjust the other one's outgoing weights without changing the overall function. Castellano
et al. (1997) generalize this scheme and formulated it in terms of solving a linear system of
equations to change the weights after removing a neuron in order to minimize the change of
output values across the dataset. They compute new weights for all units that consumed the
output of the removed unit to minimize the change in their inputs. They pose the problem
using a least-squares metric and optimize it with a conjugate gradient method. Their scheme
considers networks where layers can be skipped and it does not require hyperparameter
tuning. They also mention the possibility to remove individual weights and later develop
a similar scheme to prune input nodes (\features") (Castellano and Fanelli, 2000). In a
similar scheme, Chandrasekaran et al. (2000) model the outputs of hidden units as linear
combinations of outputs of other neurons. A neuron can be pruned if its output is well
approximated by a linear combination of other units' outputs.
29