T. Hoefler et al.
and results in a new model that is essentially dense (i.e., can eciently be executed on the
same hardware as the original model) (Sharma et al., 2017).
Ephemeral sparsication is a second class of sparsication approaches|it is applied dur-
ing the calculation of each example individually and only relevant for this example. The
most obvious structural sparsication applies to activations|in fact, the well-known ReLU
and SoftMax operators lead to a natural sparsication. Both set values to zero using a xed
threshold (rounding in case of SoftMax). One can also consider random activation spar-
sity as in dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) (see Section 5.2) or top- ksparsication as used
in (Makhzani and Frey, 2015; Ahmad and Scheinkman, 2019). A second set of ephemeral
sparsity elements are related to the gradient-based training values. The back-propagation
phase of SGD uses activations and errors to update the weights. Both can be sparsied to
only update weights partially (see Section 5.3). This can have a similar eect to ephemeral
sparsication in the forward pass and lead to signicant performance improvements, es-
pecially in distributed settings. An option here is to delay the communication/update of
small local gradient contributions until they are signicant (Renggli et al., 2019). Another
important class of ephemeral techniques is conditional computation, where the model dy-
namically decides a sparse computation path for each example. We overview ephemeral
sparsication techniques in Section 5.
2.4 When to sparsify?
While ephemeral sparsity is dynamically updated for each example and congured with a
small number of parameters during inference and training, model sparsity follows a more
complex NAS-like procedure. Model sparsity is thus often trained with a pruning schedule .
We dierentiate three dierent classes of training schedules illustrated in Fig. 7. Each of
those schedules could be used iteratively in an outer train-sparsify loop (Sun et al., 2015).
number of weights
T iterationstrain then sparsify sparsify during training
(including iterative sparsification )sparse training
(including regrowth)
Figure 7: Overview of structural sparsication schedules.
2.4.1 Sparsify after training
Thetrain-then-sparsify is the most common schedule type and uses a standard dense
training procedure that is run to convergence in Titerations (green area in Fig. 7) followed
by a sparsication of the fully trained model. Beginning from the earliest works (Janowsky,
1989), the model is typically re-trained (\ne tuned") after the sparsication to reach
signicantly higher accuracy (yellow area in Fig. 7). This schedule type aims at improving
performance and/or generalization during inference. It provides the best baseline for model
16