T. Hoefler et al.
We describe basics of storing unstructured sparse matrices in Section 2.2. Many prac-
tical schemes use run-length or delta-encoding with padding for osets (Han et al., 2016a).
Furthermore, it is common to combine quantization with index storage to achieve aligned
number formats. For example, Han et al. (2017) pack a 12-bit integer value with a 4-bit index
value into a 16-bit element that is naturally aligned to DRAM page and PCIe transaction
boundaries. This format would store the sparse vector v= [0;0;1;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;0;
0;0;0;0;3;2;0;0;0] asv0= [2j1;15j0;0j3;0j2], where, for example, the padding entry \15 j0"
decodes to 15 (rst 4 bits) zeros followed by the value 0 (last 12 bits). Sparse weights are
often stored column-wise for inference using a compressed sparse column (CSC) format to
facilitate the sparse matrix-vector multiplication. Gale et al. (2020) show various techniques
to tune such sparse computations to GPU architectures.
Park et al. (2017) tune unstructured sparsity for convolutional layers by implementing
an optimized sparse-with-dense matrix multiplication. They only consider sparsity in the
convolutional kernels and not in the activations, which, despite of up to 85% sparsity was
slower than sparse-dense in their experiments. Using a simple but eective performance
model, they guide the sparsication such that the resulting model achieves highest per-
formance. While they demonstrate their approach in conjunction with dynamic network
surgery (Guo et al., 2016), it is applicable as a regularization or direct performance metric
to many, if not most of the sparsication approaches discussed in Section 3. A general
observation is that there is a range of sparsity where workloads can eciently utilize CPUs:
too low sparsity leads to high overheads managing it but also too high sparsity leads to
a performance reduction on CPUs. This is due to the fact that higher sparsity increases
the relative storage overhead of the index structure and decreases the relative compute
load. Since CPUs have a xed ratio of memory bandwidth per compute operation, too
high sparsity will underutilize the compute units and be bound by the well-known data
locality and movement bottlenecks (Unat et al., 2017; Ivanov et al., 2021). This implies
that an accelerator needs to be carefully tuned to the expected workload, making a detailed
co-design between the data science aspects of sparsication and the engineering aspects of
representation and data
ow mandatory.
7.1.1 Structured sparsity
Various sparsity structures have been used in the deep learning context to manage the
storage overhead. They vary from completely unstructured storage where the oset for each
single element needs to be encoded to structured storage formats that only store osets of
blocks or other elements arranged with a xed structure. In Section 2.2, we analyze the
storage complexity in terms of the number of parameters needed to describe the structure of
an irregular matrix. A blocked format with block size Bwould reduce the storage overhead
by a factor of B. Fig. 23 shows an overview. Blocked formats can be dened for any set
of dimensions, the gure shows a one-dimensional format with blocks of size three and a
two dimensional format with blocks of size 4 (2 2) as used in Cambricon-S (Zhou et al.,
2018). Here, the osets are only stored once for each block of non-zeros. Another promising
format is block-balanced. This format species a xed block size and a xed number of
non-zeros per block. Here, one would only need to encode the osets of the non-zeros for
each xed-size block. Nvidia's Ampere microarchitecture (Nvidia, 2020) uses a bitmap to
72