Sparsity in Deep Learning
mat. Their design is up to 4x faster and 3.36x more energy ecient than traditional dense
training accelerators. Zhang et al. (2019) use the observation of early structure adaptation
together with an iterative pruning schedule with magnitude pruning to accelerate training
by up to 40%.
More generic accelerators such as SparTen (Gondimalla et al., 2019) and SIGMA (Qin
et al., 2020) are not specialized to particular layer types and focuses on general sparse
matrix-vector products. Both architectures can support arbitrary reuse of matrices or their
elements and both are using (blocked) bitmap storage to implement sparse vector products.
Thus, their architecture is not specic to any layer type. Yet, the sparse matrix storage
format determines ranges of sparsity where it performs most eciently (see Section 2.2).
The used bitmap format performs best for relatively dense operations. Similarly, Nvidia's
Ampere micro-architecture supports \structured sparsity" to accelerate the processing of
blocks of four values with up to 50% sparsity (Nvidia, 2020).
All those architectures are designed for the relatively modest sparsity in today's deep
neural networks. One could expect new breakthroughs to enable higher sparsity closer
to those in scientic computing ( >99.9%). Then, another class of accelerators, such as
SpArch (Zhang et al., 2020), Indirection Stream Semantic Registers (Scheer et al., 2020),
or Extensor (Hegde et al., 2019) would play a bigger role.
7.2.3 Overview of accelerators for sparse deep learning
Table 1 shows an overview of existing accelerator architectures with sparsity support. Most
accelerators are designed for inference and most can also be used for the feed-forward pass
during training|albeit not always eciently. We underline accelerators that are specically
designed for training.
Some accelerators aim at either sparse matrix vector (SpMV) or sparse matrix matrix
(SpMM) multiplications that can be used for several layer types (e.g., fully connected,
convolutional using the Winograd scheme, or RNNs). Others are optimized specically for
convolutional or recurrent layers. The second column of the table ( Ops) shows the operation
(layer) types that the accelerators were optimized for explicitly (FC = fully connected,
LSTM = Long Short Term Memory, RNN = Recurrent Layers - all SpMV and Conv =
Convolutional Layer - all SpMM via im2col). If an accelerator aims at both FC and Conv,
we mark it with SpMM as a superset. As mentioned above, most accelerators can process
all layer types at varying eciency.
The column \ w mem " lists the storage scheme for weights. A \-" means that weights
are stored densely and zeros are computed explicitly. The columns \ y mem " and \ y
comp " list whether activations are stored compressed and whether they are computed.
Some accelerators store zeros but lter them before the computation engine. When we
write CSC (Compressed Sparse Column), we include runlength encoding even though, in
some special cases, the column osets are managed outside the format. Cnvlutin uses a
blocked COO format and Procrustes uses a compressed block (CB) format. The last two
columns show specic techniques for load balancing andreuse . They are described in
the section above and listed as a summary.
77