Sparsity in Deep Learning
[l;u]. Large Fourier amplitudes at the weight's frequency !iand its harmonics indicate
that the output is sensitive to the weight. Then, perform simulation runs to compute the
contribution of each weight variation to the total output through this analysis and remove
neurons whose weights are contributing less than 5% of the total output variance. The
number of necessary simulation runs to disentangle the weights grows linearly with the
number of weights. Han and Qiao (2013) combine a similar scheme to prune neurons in
a single hidden layer. In order to nd the best number of neurons for the model, they
prune neurons based on their output variance across samples from the input distribution.
They use FFTs to determine the change in output for inputs that vary within the input
distribution. They add neurons and improve model capacity if the mean-square training
error exceeds a bound.
One benet of FAST is that it suces to have upper and lower bounds on the features to
roughly approximate the input distribution|detangling the selection process from the data.
Afghan and Naumann (2020) also only rely on the the size of the interval that the input
values live in. Together with the maximum partial derivative of that input with respect to a
specic output, they dene a measure of signicance for neurons to make pruning decisions.
3.3.1 Selection based on activity and correlation
One simple observation is that, in many networks, some neurons are often activated together,
relating to the Hebbian observation \neurons that re together wire together" (Hebb, 1949).
Several sparsication schemes are based on this observation. A simple sparsication scheme
could merge neurons that have very similar output activations and simply adapt their biases
and rewire the network accordingly. A similar idea has been used in \data free" schemes
described in Section 3.2.1.
In a method that could be seen as a generalization of APoZ (yet, it was developed
earlier), Sietsma and Dow (1988, 1991) observe that some neurons are producing very
similar outputs for all examples during inference. They identify such pairs of similar-
output neurons across the training examples and remove redundant ones. Kameyama and
Kosugi (1991) extend the idea by fusing those neurons and accumulate their weights and
biases to minimally aect the sparsied networks to reduce the re-training time. Suau et al.
(2019) perform principal component analysis of max-pooled lter and neuron outputs to
select the number of lters for a layer. They use either Principal Component Analysis or
KL divergence to compute the number for each layer and then remove the most correlated
neurons or lters.
A dierent method would strengthen connections between correlated neurons: we could
preferentially drop weights between weakly correlated neurons and maintain connections
between strongly correlated neurons. Sun et al. (2015) found that this method works par-
ticularly well to rene fully trained networks and leads to better generalization and good
sparsication for pruning a convolutional network for face recognition.
While data-driven sensitivity-based schemes consider the outputs across the examples
drawn from the input distribution, they purely aim at minimizing the impact on the input-
output behavior of the network. Thus, if the network has a low accuracy, it will not gain
from such pruning methods. We could now consider the training loss function itself in the
31