Sparsity in Deep Learning
the model retains over 90% of the original's accuracy. With this, they show that BERT
can be pruned to 40{65% sparsity on a variety of GLUE benchmark tasks. They also show
that, for low sparsity, even random structured removal achieves good performance.
McCarley et al. (2020) evaluate a larger set of pruning approaches that can remove
attention heads and slices of feedforward and embedding layers and use a gating mech-
anismj2f0;1gto select components for removal. They compare four techniques for
pruning: (1) random pruning as a baseline; (2) a rst-order \gain" metric that computes
gi=j@L=@iji=0for each example; (3) a leave-one-out score, where the loss for each el-
ement removed is computed separately, and elements that cause a small loss on removal
are retained; and (4) a sampled L0regularization. Finally, they apply distillation using the
unpruned model as a teacher for the pruned model. The main nding is that L0regulariza-
tion performs best and can prune 40{75% of the elements in BERT and RoBERTa models
while losing about 5 points F1 score on the Natural Question benchmark task (Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019).
Wang et al. (2020a) use a modied L0regularization to prune all weight matrices in a
transformer. For each weight matrix W, they rst reparameterize it as a low-rank factoriza-
tionW=PQ, and then introduce a diagonal pruning matrix G, so thatW=PGQ . The
pruning matrix allows the model to learn to keep the best rank-1 components of the weight
matrix. They use L0regularization to promote sparsity, with an additional term added to
allow for control of the desired sparsity level.
Building on the idea that layers in transformers learn disparate tasks (Rogers et al., 2021)
and that some layers may be less important than others (Tenney et al., 2019), two works
have pruned larger-scale structures. Lin et al. (2020) prune entire residual blocks (i.e., either
the entire multi-head attention layer or feedforward network) by identifying blocks whose
nonlinear part has small activations. These blocks are then pruned and replaced by a simple
identity map. To do this, they adapt -ResNets (Yu et al., 2018) and augment each residual
block with a gating function if the non-linear component is less than . Once a layer's
activations fall below , it will cease to contribute to the output, and its gradients will no
longer be updated, leading to weight collapse. In a similar vein, Fan et al. (2020) introduce
LayerDrop, a form of structured dropout that stochastically drops entire transformer layers
during training. To reduce model size for inference, they also explore dierent ways to
completely remove layers, and nd that the simple approach of dropping the layers at
depthdsuch thatd0
modj
1
pk
, wherepis the dropout probability, performs best.
6.2.2 Unstructured sparsification
Simple iterative magnitude pruning has also been applied for unstructured sparsication,
with several conclusions. Prasanna et al. (2020) compared it with structured pruning using
Michel et al. (2019)'s rst-order importance metric and found that unstructured magnitude
pruning typically results in networks that are both smaller and retain better accuracy. Gor-
don et al. (2020) showed that a pretrained BERT model can be pruned to up to 40% sparsity
without aecting the performance of downstream tasks, but beyond that performance be-
gins to degrade. Surprisingly, they also show that ne-tuning a pretrained model and then
pruning it does not result in better performance, and conclude that one need only prune
BERT once after pretraining instead of for each downstream task. Chen et al. (2020) show
69