T. Hoefler et al.
top-(k+d) gradients (Jayakumar et al., 2020) for knon-zero weights. In this way, the
additionaldgradients can be seen as a \halo zone" of the most relevant gradients to be
added.
4.3 Locality-based and greedy regrowth
Biological brains are sparse structures with hierarchical sparsity distributions that are lo-
cally dense and globally sparse (Betzel et al., 2017). It is now perceivable that local con-
nectivity could also benet deep neural networks. Str om (1997) decays the probability
for adding a new weight exponentially with the distance between neurons, leading to a
hierarchically sparse structure.
Simple greedy schemes that start from a trained network, remove all neurons and add
the most benecial neurons provide theoretical guarantees albeit with limited sparsication.
Ye et al. (2020) show a scheme that adds neurons based on maximum loss reduction and
Zhuang et al. (2018) add lters based on minimizing a gradient-based sensitivity.
5. Ephemeral Sparsication Approaches
In biological brains, model sparsity is one important component. However, activity sparsity
is at least as important: the connections among neurons are xed on a longer time-scale
ranging from hours to days while the electrical signals appear and disappear on a millisecond
time-scale. Not all 86 billion neurons of the human brain are active at any moment and are
controlled by complex activation and inhibition signals. While it is hard to estimate the
exact activity factor of this asynchronous system, several works suggest that only around
10% of the neurons are active at any moment (Kerr et al., 2005). This is necessary to
keep the human brain's energy budget around 20W ( 20% of a typical human's operating
budget, as the most expensive organ).
Deep neural networks use ephemeral sparsication to mimic that behavior: activation
functions such as ReLU inhibit certain signals by shutting down whole paths through the
network, implicitly selecting the information-rich paths specic to each input problem. We
can also extend ephemeral sparsity to the backpropagation learning process where we can
sparsify gradients and errors during training. Ephemeral sparsity has initially been used as
a regularizer but it is increasingly seen as another opportunity to save memory and energy
during processing of neural networks.
We start by describing inference sparsication where neural activations are set to zero
during inference and the forward pass of training (Section 5.1). Then we consider sparsi-
cation during training. We start with the various forms of dropout, a set of techniques
to sparsify networks during the forward pass of training to improve generalization (Sec-
tion 5.2). Gradient sparsication (Section. 5.3) has received special attention to reduce the
communication overheads in distributed data parallelism (Ben-Nun and Hoe
er, 2018). We
then discuss less common options to sparsify back-propagated errors between layers and the
optimizer state (Section 5.4).
54