Sparsity in Deep Learning
high frequency while plastic structural changes happen relatively infrequently (e.g., during
sleep, De Vivo et al., 2017; Diering et al., 2017).
Tuning the right update frequency for structural changes is crucial to the performance
of the nal model (Jin et al., 2016). There have not been many structured studies on
how to tune this new hyperparameter but it seems related to the choice of minibatch size
and ideas such as gradient noise (McCandlish et al., 2018) may be a good starting point.
Raihan and Aamodt (2020) show that a higher update frequency is better for training
based on ephemeral weight and activation sparsity. Many works also consider tempering
hyperparameters on a specic schedule during training (e.g., sparsication probability, Guo
et al., 2016), similarly to other hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate schedules).
2.5 Input Feature Selection
Some works study the \feature selection problem" to prune input neurons (\features").
Many datasets have input dimensions with very little information, for example, the four
corner pixels in the digit-recognition task for MNIST play a very small role in the actual
task output. We note that most neuron sparsication schemes can be used for feature
selection. Below, we highlight some works that particularly focus on sparsify for feature
selection tasks.
Engelbrecht et al. (1995) propose a sensitivity analysis (see Section 3.3) to identify
input neurons that are of little relevance and can be pruned. For this, they start from
a fully-trained network and compute each output's sensitivity with respect to each input
s(e)
ij=@oi
@xjfor each example e. They then use either a mean square, sum of absolute values,
or maximum to summarize the sensitivity of an input value for the whole dataset. They
then prune based on the resulting metric, re-train, and optionally repeat the procedure.
Castellano and Fanelli (2000) build on the idea to model feature selection as a special
case of network pruning and dene the contribution of an input neuron (feature) has
sh=P
o2Nh;x2X(whoxh)2, whereNhare the neurons that consume input feature h,who
their respective weights, and xhthe value of feature hin example x. They iteratively remove
the feature with the smallest shand update all remaining weights.
QuickSelection (Atashgahi et al., 2020) uses a sparse denoising autoencoder with a single
hidden layer to quickly select salient input features in an unsupervised manner. The au-
toencoder is sparsely trained with the SET method (Mocanu et al., 2018) (cf. Section 2.4.3)
and the salience of a feature is computed by the sum of the absolute weights of its outgoing
(sparse) connections.
2.6 Ensembles
One interesting use-case for sparsication is to enable ensemble models with a limited
parameter and compute budget. Instead of having a single model within the budget, one
could train an ensemble of multiple smaller models and average or otherwise combine their
outputs to make a nal selection. Collins and Kohli (2014) show that 2{3 ensemble models
can improve the performance of image recognition tasks over a single model with the same
parameter budget.
25