Sparsity in Deep Learning
2.4.3 Sparse training
Thefully-sparse training schedule starts with a sparse model and trains in the sparse
regime where it may remove and add elements during the training process. Narasimha
et al. (2008) showed early that this scheme can even outperform separate growing or pruning
approaches for neuron-sparse training of simple MLPs. Evci et al. (2020a) achieve ResNet-50
performance for a fully sparse training schedule that is comparable to a fully-dense training
but uses additional iterations. Weight-sparse training often uses complex hyperparameter
settings and schedules. However, it could enable training of very high-dimensional models
whose dense representations would simply not t into the training devices.
When training sparse networks, one should consider the impact of dierent initialization
schemes. Standard schemes, dened for dense networks normalize the output of each neuron
to zero mean and unit variance (Glorot and Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015). If such densely
initialized networks are now sparsied, then this assumption ceases to be true (Evci et al.,
2020b). This eect is mitigated by batch normalization (Ioe and Szegedy, 2015) and skip
connections (He et al., 2016). Evci et al. (2020b) and Liu et al. (2019b) propose initialization
schemes designed for sparse networks.
We dierentiate between static anddynamic sparsity during sparse training. Dy-
namic sparsity combines pruning and regrowth of elements during the training process,
while static sparsity prunes once before the training starts and does not update the model
structure during training.
Dynamic sparsity during training We start with schemes that iteratively prune and
add (regrow) elements during the training phase. A general overview of pruning techniques
is provided in Section 3 while growth techniques are described in Section 4. Dynamic
sparse training can use any combination of those schemes|we highlight some successful
approaches below.
The number of elements and the sparsity does not necessarily have to remain constant
throughout training. SET (Mocanu et al., 2018), for example, combines magnitude prun-
ing and random regrowth to maintain a balanced parameter budget throughout training.
NeST (Dai et al., 2018a), uses a training schedule that is inspired by the development of
the human brain (Hawkins, 2017). It uses three stages to arrive at the nal network archi-
tecture: (1) a random seed architecture (\birth brain"), (2) a growth phase (\baby brain")
where neurons and connections are added, and (3) a pruning phase (\adult brain") where
weights and neurons are removed. RigL (Evci et al., 2020a) xes a number of weights for
training but updates the topology using both parameter magnitudes and gradients. These
and many other schemes focus on dierent ways to regrow connections, those are outlined
in Section 4.
Fixed sparsity during training Networks can also be trained with a xed sparsity
structure determined before training starts. The most important choice is the structure
of the non-zero elements and their initial values|this structure can either be hand-tuned
such as \structured sparsity" for transformers (Child et al., 2019), sparsity determined in
a pre-training phase (You et al., 2020), or data-independent (randomly initialized) spar-
sity (Changpinyo et al., 2017; Prabhu et al., 2018; Bourely et al., 2017; Su et al., 2020).
Shallow neural network connectivity can be constrained to sparse small-world graphs
even before training without signicant loss of accuracy (on two-layer Restricted Boltzmann
19