Sparsity in Deep Learning
Han et al. (2016a) show Ecient Inference Engine (EIE), an inference architecture
optimized for sparse models with parameter sharing. Their architecture supports both
sparse matrices as well as sparse activation vectors and aims at fully-connected layers in
CNNs. To enable ne-grained parallelism, they distribute the columns of the weight matrix
to the processing elements (PEs). At the input, they scan the activations for non-zero
entries and broadcast them to all PEs, where they are accumulated into a local partial sum.
They balance the load through queues at the PEs that buer non-zero activation values to
avoid synchronization. The authors showed empirically that a queue depth of four values
is sucient to achieve good load balance. Finally, the output activations are summed and
compressed through a hierarchical non-zero detection tree. Their silicon implementation is
13x faster and 3,400x more energy ecient than an Nvidia Pascal Titan X GPU.
Zena (Kim et al., 2018) introduces a scheme that uses both weight and activation sparsity
for convolutional layers. Other sparse DNN accelerators such as Cambricon-X (Zhang et al.,
2016), SCNN (Parashar et al., 2017), Eyeriss v2 (Chen et al., 2019), and Cnvlutin (Albericio
et al., 2016) use a combination of similar ideas to achieve between 2{15x speedups and 2{
10x lower energy consumption. Niu et al. (2020) design an FPGA-based accelerator for
the spectral processing (based on FFT and Hadamard products in the frequency domain)
of sparse convolutional layers. They keep the input activations in SRAM and stream the
sparse kernels. A similar design (Niu et al., 2019) streams activations with stationary
weights. Both have limited reuse due to the limited BRAM (on-chip SRAM) on FPGAs.
Both store weights (kernels) in COO format arranged in device DRAM and Niu et al. (2020)
uses a covering algorithm to optimize locality.
Sparse RNN inference accelerators A second class of accelerators aims at sparse
recurrent (RNN, LSTM) inference accelerators. Han et al. (2017) later show Ecient Speech
Recognition Engine (ESE), an FPGA accelerator design for LSTM models using block-
balanced sparsity for load balancing. ESE stores (sparse) activations in fast memory with
the (sparse) weights being streamed, while the (dense) output is accumulated into a fast
output memory. Their overall design achieves 3x performance and 11.5x energy eciency
improvements on a Xilinx Ultrascale (XCKU60) FPGA compared to an Nvidia Pascal Titan
X GPU. Those systems are designed for the typical cases of 50{70% activation sparsity as
well as 90% weight sparsity. MASR (Gupta et al., 2019) proposes an ASIC design for sparse
RNNs as used in speech recognition. They exploit sparsity in weights and activations and
dierent from EIE, they use a bitmask scheme to store indices using a relatively moderate
sparsity of 66%.
Predicting sparsity in the results Most accelerators utilize either sparsity in the input
activations, in the weights, or both. However, one could also aim to predict sparsity in the
output activations (i.e., the result of the computation). SparseNN (Zhu et al., 2018) show
that such a prediction scheme can improve performance by up to 70% while halving power
consumption. The key technique is a light-weight prediction of the non-zero pattern in the
output. LRADNN (Zhu et al., 2016) use Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the weight
matrix:W=UV, whereW2Rmn,U2Rmr, andV2Rrn, whereUandVare the
rst left- and right-singular vectors, respectively. The prediction is then simply performed
by computing a mask m=sgn(UVx ) for the input activations x. For small enough r,
the computation can be 20x faster than evaluating the full layer and the generated sparse
75