Sparsity in Deep Learning
Renda et al. (2020) compare the standard single-shot ne-tuning after pruning to \weight
rewinding". Rewinding resets the weights after pruning to the values of a previous SGD
iterationi. Then, they retrain (ne-tune) with the same learning rate schedule (from the
original iteration i) in a process called \Iterative Magnitude Pruning". A modication to
the scheme simply uses the same learning rate schedule but without resetting the weights.
However, both Savarese et al. (2020) and Chen et al. (2020) nd rewinding to be less
ecient than ne-tuning from the most recent weights for image recognition and natural
language processing tasks. They show for a variety of medium-sized ResNets and GNMT
as well as BERT that weight rewinding outperforms ne-tuning but is itself outperformed
by just rewinding the learning rate to the rst iteration. Evci et al. (2020b) shows empirical
evidence that this is because lottery ticket networks relearn the pruning solution. Ding
et al. (2019b) found that a simple selection based on 1st order information outperforms the
simple magnitude-based scheme. Morcos et al. (2019) show that lottery tickets can transfer
across dierent datasets and optimizers. A general conclusion could be that fully sparse
training is possible (see Section 2.4.3), especially if applied iteratively (see Section 2.4.6),
but rewinding has not been proven eective.
8.4 Structured vs. unstructured sparsication
Several works found that unstructured/ne-grained (e.g., weight) pruning maintains a better
accuracy per element than structured/coarse-grained (e.g., lter, neuron) pruning (Gomez
et al., 2019; Han et al., 2016b; Ullrich et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2020). However, struc-
tured pruning approaches achieve much higher computational performance on modern de-
vices (Lym et al., 2019; Wen et al., 2016). Thus, structured sparse models could aord a
higher number of iterations to train and more 
oating point operations during inference to
achieve the same overall eciency/cost. Furthermore, unstructured sparsity has a higher
relative representational overhead of indices for each ne-grained element as discussed in
Section 2.2. It remains to be seen what level of granularity will be most ecient for the
coming computer architectures.
We also observe that random pruning at network initialization works signicantly bet-
ter for neurons and lters than for weights (Gomez et al., 2019). For neurons and lters,
most works that which produce highly-accurate models employ post-training sparsication,
indicating that this form of architecture search is ecient. This is also intuitive because the
specic location of neurons or lters no standard fully-connected and convolutional layers
is irrelevant. For weights, this very structure matters and thus random pruning at initial-
ization performs generally worse. Thus, we recommend dierent schemes for structured vs.
unstructured pruning in order to utilize training resources best.
Sparsication versus manual design An interesting observation is that sparsication
of older architectures often does not achieve the same gains as architectures developed later.
Yet, many breakthrough results in the area of ecient convolutional neural networks can
be seen as manually dened sparsiers, such as bottleneck layers or depthwise separable
convolutions (Howard et al., 2017; Iandola et al., 2016). The resulting optimized networks
are often harder to sparsify. In some sense, this manual addition of inductive biases into
the network is similar to feature engineering that deep neural networks replaced to begin
with. d'Ascoli et al. (2020) and Neyshabur (2020) study this question in the context of
81