Sparsity in Deep Learning
(a) Best accuracy and sparsity over time
 (b) Sparsity vs. accuracy
Figure 20: Reported accuracy of pruned CNNs. Marker shape indicates pruning strategy
and labels indicate sparsity.
We see that over the years, research was able to increase compression and accuracy at the
same time, and the composition of pruning strategies (see Section 3 for details) changed, but
magnitude constitutes the majority of the reviewed works. From Fig. 20b, we see that two
regions emerge: dense to moderate sparsity (0{90%), and moderate to high sparsity (marked
in darker background). In the lower compression ratios, magnitude-based pruning works
relatively well (especially when iterative pruning is applied), achieving high accuracy for all
studied networks. However, when >90% sparsity is desired, regularization, rst-order, and
second-order sparsication yield the best networks in the sparsity-accuracy tradeo. Below
we review the history and methodology behind the papers shown in the gures. First, we
focus on the convolutional operator and modications to the CNN architecture. Then we
discuss approaches for pruning CNNs and the derived training schemes.
6.1.1 CNN architecture evolution
Over-parameterization in convolutional operators was already noted by Szegedy et al.
(2015). In order to reduce the computational requirements and memory footprint of CNNs,
the authors proposed the GoogLeNet architecture, using \Inception" modules that trade
large convolution kernels with 1 1 convolutions and smaller convolutions following dimen-
sionality reduction. This was later improved to chaining separable 1D convolutions instead
of 2D in the \Inception V3" CNN (Szegedy et al., 2016), and with depth-wise separa-
ble convolution (Sifre and Mallat, 2014) in the parameter-ecient MobileNets (Howard
et al., 2017), both of which can be seen as handmade sparse formulations of convolutions.
Kuzmin et al. (2019) provides a survey about structured compression of convolutions, in-
cluding tensor decompositions, channel pruning, and probabilistic compression. A recent
popular technique to reduce the size of CNNs and increase their parameter eciency is
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Tan et al., 2019), formulating the process as a meta-
optimization problem. EcientNet (Tan and Le, 2020), a modern, highly-accurate CNN for
63