T. Hoefler et al.
each worker locally accumulates the error introduced by its compression and incorporates
the residual into the next iteration, by simply adding it to the gradient. Using this method,
Strom (2015) showed that communication bandwidth was reduced by three orders of mag-
nitude for training a DNN for acoustic modeling, with no reduction in accuracy.
Absolute cut-o magnitudes are hard to pick because dierent networks or layers within
a network may have gradients of dierent magnitudes, and the magnitude may change dur-
ing training. Dryden et al. (2016) use a form of top- kselection, whereby a xed proportion
of the positive and negative gradients are retained. They use sampling to nd an absolute
threshold for top- kselection in linear time. They also quantize those top- kgradients to
a single bit (Seide et al., 2014), compress them based on entropy, and utilize all rounding
errors through error feedback.
Subsequent works improved upon these by rening the methods for selecting gradi-
ents or incorporating other tricks. Aji and Heaeld (2017) use a single proportion for all
gradients, and select it globally for all layers, nding that layer normalization (Ba et al.,
2016b) is sucient to keep gradients on a similar scale. Sun et al. (2017) performs top- k
sparsication of gradients as part of sparsifying all computation in backpropagation (see
Section 5.4). Chen et al. (2017) study sparsication for CNNs in addition to fully-connected
networks. They formalize binning , where compression is applied separately to subsets of
a layer's gradients. This ensures that sampling windows are small enough to eectively
capture dierent gradient dynamics within a single layer. They also use a self-adjusting
threshold based on a scale factor, rather than a xed top- kthreshold. Lin et al. (2018)
introduces a number of tricks to improve the convergence of top- ksparsication, including
incorporating momentum into error feedback, gradient clipping, stopping momentum on
excluded gradients, and a warmup phase with less sparsity. This can result in orders-of-
magnitude communication-compression; however, their results appear to be quite sensitive
to hyper-parameterization. Sun et al. (2019) further approximate the gradient momentum
and incorporate local update steps.
Fig. 19 provides an overview of these methods, their key components, and the sparsity
they are able to achieve (we omit the sparsity for Strom, 2015, as they focus on very
dierent applications and the sparsity results are not comparable). Gradient sparsication
has steadily improved in the amount of sparsity it can introduce, with Lin et al. (2018)
achieving up to 99.9% sparsity. Compared to pruning for weights or activations, gradients
seem to be signicantly more amenable to sparsity. For example, Lin et al. (2018) achieves
99.6% sparsity in gradients for training ResNet-50, with no loss of accuracy. In contrast,
pruning weights in ResNet-50 (see Section 6.1) achieves up to 90% sparsity with no loss of
accuracy, or 99% sparsity with signicant accuracy loss.
5.3.2 Variance-based gradient sparsification
The convergence of SGD is signicantly impacted by the variance of the stochastic gradients
used. However, sparsication can increase the variance in the resulting sparse gradients, and
hence slow convergence. Alistarh et al. (2017) noticed that, when stochastically quantizing
gradient vectors normalized by their L2-norm to only three quantization levels: 0, 1, and
-1, in expectation all but a (pn) fraction of the ngradient values will be set to zero. This
results in non-trivial compression, but also induces high additional variance, which hurts
58