Sparsity in Deep Learning
This scheme achieves competitive results today but leads to a lower accuracy than pruning
of fully-trained ResNets. Verdenius et al. (2020) also found that random initialization is
a very strong baseline, hinting at the idea of data-free initialization methods, which we
discuss next.
Data-free initialization methods The authors of SNIP complemented their initial pruning
scheme with a data-free pruning that only considers the structure of the network (Lee et al.,
2020). They consider the \signal propagation" across layers: better signal propagation
leads to better properties during training, which leads to better networks (loss minima).
Starting from a random pruning, they propose to increase the signal propagation through
each layer by adjusting the initial weights using a gradient descent method. This method
initializes weight matrices wsuch that the combination of sparse topology and the weight
is layer-wise orthogonal (ideally leading to full rank matrices). The authors argue and show
empirically that such randomly structured but orthogonally initialized networks can be
trained to achieve the same or higher accuracy than dense networks with the same number
of parameters. Hayou et al. (2021) provide additional theoretical evidence for the ecacy
of this initialization scheme and show how ResNets can be eectively initialized. Verdenius
et al. (2020) and de Jorge et al. (2021) also use this scheme for initializing networks pruned
in a data-dependent way. With such data-free schemes, the pruning ratio still needs to be
ne-tuned per layer. Su et al. (2020) propose a xed sparsity schedule (\smart-ratio") for
ResNet and VGG that decreases for larger layers. Other networks would need to be tuned
accordingly.
Tanaka et al. (2020) propose to overcome layer collapse by ensuring a minimal 
ow
through the sparse network. They also show that iterative magnitude pruning avoids layer
collapse, providing additional support for Verdenius' and Hayou's iterative schemes. They
use theL1path norm in addition to SNIP's gradient-magnitude product to avoid layer
collapse and reach extreme sparsity. It remains unclear whether the performance-accuracy
tradeo at those sparsity levels (for which layer collapse would happen) justies the cost
of avoiding it. Another xed sparsity training method, Neural Tangent Transfer (Liu and
Zenke, 2020), uses a dense teacher to derive a sparse model without requiring labels that
follows a similar training trajectory as the dense one.
Limitations Several of those \one-shot" pruning methods have been analyzed in recent
works (Frankle et al., 2021; Su et al., 2020) that both found that the most signicant feature
of those methods is the sparsity ratio per layer. Specically, they demonstrate that a data-
independent random sparsity structure with the right density ratio at each layer achieves
competitive, sometimes even better performance than more complex methods such as SNIP
and GraSP. Frankle et al. (2021) also shows that those methods generally achieve accuracies
below the baseline of magnitude pruning after training.
2.4.4 Ephemeral sparsity during training
Most ecient training methods would take advantage of both ephemeral and model sparsity
during training (see Section 5 for an overview). In an empirical study, Raihan and Aamodt
(2020) observe that training is less robust with respect to sparsifying activations in the
forward pass and gradients in the backward pass. Based on those ndings, they design
21