3As one consequence of  the decision to focus on life in North American cities, 
military applications were deemed to be outside the scope of  this initial report. This 
is not to minimize the importance of  careful monitoring and deliberation about 
the implications of  AI advances for defense and warfare, including potentially 
destabilizing developments and deployments.
The report is designed to address four intended audiences. For the general public, 
it aims to provide an accessible, scientifically and technologically accurate portrayal 
of  the current state of  AI and its potential. For industry , the report describes relevant 
technologies and legal and ethical challenges, and may help guide resource allocation. 
The report is also directed to local, national, and international governments to help 
them better plan for AI in governance. Finally , the report can help AI researchers, 
as well as their institutions and funders, to set priorities and consider the ethical and 
legal issues raised by AI research and its applications. 
Given the unique nature of  the One Hundred Year Study on AI, we expect that 
future generations of  Standing Committees and Study Panels, as well as research 
scientists, policy experts, leaders in the private and public sectors, and the general 
public, will reflect on this assessment as they make new assessments of  AI’s future. We 
hope that this first effort in the series stretching out before us will be useful for both its 
failures and successes in accurately predicting the trajectory and influences of  AI.
The Standing Committee is grateful to the members of  the Study Panel for 
investing their expertise, perspectives, and significant time to the creation of  this 
inaugural report. We especially thank Professor Peter Stone for agreeing to serve as 
chair of  the study and for his wise, skillful, and dedicated leadership of  the panel,  
its discussions, and creation of  the report. 
Standing Committee of the One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence
Barbara J. Grosz, Chair  Russ Altman Eric Horvitz
Alan Mackworth Tom Mitchell Deirdre Mulligan Yoav Shoham
STUDY PANEL
Peter Stone , University of Texas at Austin, Chair
Rodney Brooks , Rethink Robotics
Erik Brynjolfsson , Massachussets Institute of Technology
Ryan Calo , University of Washington
Oren Etzioni , Allen Institute for AI
Greg Hager , Johns Hopkins University
Julia Hirschberg , Columbia University
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan , Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Ece Kamar , Microsoft Research
Sarit Kraus , Bar Ilan University
Kevin Leyton-Brown , University of British Columbia
David Parkes , Harvard University
William Press , University of Texas at Austin
AnnaLee (Anno) Saxenian , University of California, Berkeley 
Julie Shah , Massachussets Institute of Technology
Milind Tambe , University of Southern California
Astro Teller , X
Acknowledgments: The members of the Study Panel gratefully acknowledge the 
support of and valuable input from the Standing Committee, especially the chair, 
Barbara Grosz, who handled with supreme grace the unenviable role of mediating 
between two large, very passionate committees. We also thank Kerry Tremain for his 
tireless and insightful input on the written product during the extensive editing and 
polishing process, which unquestionably strengthened the report considerably.© 2016 by Stanford University . Artificial 
Intelligence and Life in 2030 is made 
available under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 License 
(International): https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/