52In summary , following is a list of  some of  the traditional sub-areas of  AI. As described 
in Section II, some of  them are currently “hotter” than others for various reasons. 
But that is neither to minimize the historical importance of  the others, nor to say that 
they may not re-emerge as hot areas in the future.
• Search and Planning deal with reasoning about goal-directed behavior. Search 
plays a key role, for example, in chess-playing programs such as Deep Blue, in 
deciding which move (behavior) will ultimately lead to a win (goal).
• The area of  Knowledge Representation and Reasoning involves processing 
information (typically when in large amounts) into a structured form that can 
be queried more reliably and efficiently . IBM’s Watson program, which beat 
human contenders to win the Jeopardy challenge in 2011, was largely based on 
an efficient scheme for organizing, indexing, and retrieving large amounts of  
information gathered from various sources.159
• Machine Learning is a paradigm that enables systems to automatically improve 
their performance at a task by observing relevant data. Indeed, machine 
learning has been the key contributor to the AI surge in the past few decades, 
ranging from search and product recommendation engines, to systems for 
speech recognition, fraud detection, image understanding, and countless other 
tasks that once relied on human skill and judgment. The automation of  these 
tasks has enabled the scaling up of  services such as e-commerce.
• As more and more intelligent systems get built, a natural question to consider 
is how such systems will interact with each other. The field of  Multi-Agent 
Systems considers this question, which is becoming increasingly important in 
on-line marketplaces and transportation systems.
• From its early days, AI has taken up the design and construction of  systems that 
are embodied in the real world. The area of  Robotics investigates fundamental 
aspects of  sensing and acting—and especially their integration—that enable 
a robot to behave effectively . Since robots and other computer systems share 
the living world with human beings, the specialized subject of  Human Robot 
Interaction has also become prominent in recent decades.
• Machine perception has always played a central role in AI, partly in developing 
robotics, but also as a completely independent area of  study . The most commonly 
studied perception modalities are Computer Vision and Natural Language 
Processing, each of  which is attended to by large and vibrant communities.
• Several other focus areas within AI today are consequences of  the growth of  the  
Internet. Social Network Analysis investigates the effect of  neighborhood relations 
in influencing the behavior of  individuals and communities. Crowdsourcing is 
yet another innovative problem-solving technique, which relies on harnessing 
human intelligence (typically from thousands of  humans) to solve hard 
computational problems.
Although the separation of  AI into sub-fields has enabled deep technical progress 
along several different fronts, synthesizing intelligence at any reasonable scale invariably 
requires many different ideas to be integrated. For example, the AlphaGo program160 161 
that recently defeated the current human champion at the game of  Go used multiple 
machine learning algorithms for training itself, and also used a sophisticated search 
procedure while playing the game.
159  David A. Ferrucci, “Introduction to ‘This is Watson,’” IBM Journal of  Research and Development , 
56, no. 3-4 (2012): 1.
160  David Silver et al., “Mastering the Game of  Go with Deep Neural Networks and Tree Search.”
161  Steven Borowiec and Tracey Lien, “ AlphaGo beats human Go champ in milestone for 
artificial intelligence,” Los Angeles Times , March 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.
latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-korea-alphago-20160312-story.html .