6OVERVIEW
The frightening, futurist portrayals of  Artificial Intelligence that dominate films and 
novels, and shape the popular imagination, are fictional. In reality , AI is already 
changing our daily lives, almost entirely in ways that improve human health, safety , 
and productivity . Unlike in the movies, there is no race of  superhuman robots on the 
horizon or probably even possible. And while the potential to abuse AI technologies 
must be acknowledged and addressed, their greater potential is, among other things, 
to make driving safer, help children learn, and extend and enhance people’s lives. In 
fact, beneficial AI applications in schools, homes, and hospitals are already growing 
at an accelerated pace. Major research universities devote departments to AI studies, 
and technology companies such as Apple, Facebook, Google, IBM, and Microsoft 
spend heavily to explore AI applications they regard as critical to their futures. Even 
Hollywood uses AI technologies to bring its dystopian AI fantasies to the screen.
Innovations relying on computer-based vision, speech recognition, and Natural 
Language Processing have driven these changes, as have concurrent scientific and 
technological advances in related fields. AI is also changing how people interact with 
technology . Many people have already grown accustomed to touching and talking to  
their smart phones. People’s future relationships with machines will become ever more  
nuanced, fluid, and personalized as AI systems learn to adapt to individual personalities 
and goals. These AI applications will help monitor people’s well-being, alert them to  
risks ahead, and deliver services when needed or wanted. For example, in a mere 
fifteen years in a typical North American city—the time frame and scope of  this report—
AI applications are likely to transform transportation toward self-driving vehicles with 
on-time pickup and delivery of  people and packages. This alone will reconfigure the 
urban landscape, as traffic jams and parking challenges become obsolete.
This study’s focus on a typical North American city is deliberate and meant to 
highlight specific changes affecting the everyday lives of  the millions of  people who 
inhabit them. The Study Panel further narrowed its inquiry to eight domains where 
AI is already having or is projected to have the greatest impact: transportation, 
healthcare, education, low-resource communities, public safety and security , 
employment and workplace, home/service robots, and entertainment.
Though drawing from a common source of  research, AI technologies have 
influenced and will continue to influence these domains differently . Each domain 
faces varied AI-related challenges, including the difficulty of  creating safe and reliable 
hardware for sensing and effecting (transportation and service robots), the difficulty 
of  smoothly interacting with human experts (healthcare and education), the challenge 
of  gaining public trust (low-resource communities and public safety and security), the 
challenge of  overcoming fears of  marginalizing humans (employment and workplace) 
and the risk of  diminishing interpersonal interaction (entertainment). Some domains 
are primarily business sectors, such as transportation and healthcare, while others are 
more oriented to consumers, such as entertainment and home service robots. Some 
cut across sectors, such as employment/workplace and low-resource communities.
In each domain, even as AI continues to deliver important benefits, it also raises 
important ethical and social issues, including privacy concerns. Robots and other AI 
technologies have already begun to displace jobs in some sectors. As a society , we are now 
at a crucial juncture in determining how to deploy AI-based technologies in ways that 
promote, not hinder, democratic values such as freedom, equality , and transparency . For 
individuals, the quality of  the lives we lead and how our contributions are valued are 
likely to shift gradually , but markedly . Over the next several years, AI research, systems 
development, and social and regulatory frameworks will shape how the benefits of  AI 
are weighed against its costs and risks, and how broadly these benefits are spread.Many have already grown 
accustomed to touching 
and talking to their 
smart phones. People’s 
future relationships with 
machines will become ever 
more nuanced, fluid, and 
personalized.