25for functions such as image labeling, and 3D object recognition, while common at AI 
conferences, are still only a few years into development as products.
Home robots 2030
Despite the slow growth to date of  robots in the home, there are signs that this will 
change in the next fifteen years. Corporations such as Amazon Robotics and Uber 
are developing large economies of  scale using various aggregation technologies. Also:
System in Module (SiM), with a lot of  System on Chip (SoC) subsystems, are 
now being pushed out the door by phone-chip makers (Qualcomm’s SnapDragon, 
Samsung’s Artik, etc.). These are better than supercomputers of  less than ten years 
ago with eight or more sixty-four-bit cores, and specialized silicon for cryptography , 
camera drivers, additional DSPs, and hard silicon for certain perceptual algorithms. 
This means that low cost devices will be able to support much more onboard AI than 
we have been able to consider over the last fifteen years.
Cloud (“someone else’s computer”) is going to enable more rapid release of  new 
software on home robots, and more sharing of  data sets gathered in many different 
homes, which will in turn feed cloud-based machine learning, and then power 
improvements to already deployed robots.
The great advances in speech understanding and image labeling enabled by deep 
learning will enhance robots’ interactions with people in their homes.
Low cost 3D sensors, driven by gaming platforms, have fueled work on 3D 
perception algorithms by thousands of  researchers worldwide, which will speed the 
development and adoption of  home and service robots.
In the past three years, low cost and safe robot arms have been introduced to 
hundreds of  research labs around the world, sparking a new class of  research on 
manipulation that will eventually be applicable in the home, perhaps around 2025. 
More than half  a dozen startups around the world are developing AI-based robots for 
the home, for now concentrating mainly on social interaction. New ethics and privacy 
issues may surface as a result.
HEALTHCARE
For AI technologies, healthcare has long been viewed as a promising domain.  
AI-based applications could improve health outcomes and quality of  life for  
millions of  people in the coming years—but only if  they gain the trust of  doctors, 
nurses, and patients, and if  policy , regulatory , and commercial obstacles are removed. 
Prime applications include clinical decision support, patient monitoring and 
coaching, automated devices to assist in surgery or patient care, and management  
of  healthcare systems. Recent successes, such as mining social media to infer  
possible health risks, machine learning to predict patients at risk, and robotics 
to support surgery , have expanded a sense of  possibility for AI in healthcare. 
Improvements in methods for interacting with medical professionals and patients  
will be a critical challenge.
As in other domains, data is a key enabler. There has been an immense forward 
leap in collecting useful data from personal monitoring devices and mobile apps, from 
electronic health records (EHR) in clinical settings and, to a lesser extent, from robots 
designed to assist with medical procedures and hospital operations. But using this 
data to enable more finely-grained diagnostics and treatments for both individual 
patients and patient populations has proved difficult. Research and deployment have 
been slowed by outdated regulations and incentive structures. Poor human-computer 
interaction methods and the inherent difficulties and risks of  implementing 
technologies in such a large and complex system have slowed realization of  AI’s Special purpose robots 
will deliver packages, 
clean offices, and enhance 
security, but technical 
constraints and high 
costs will continue to limit 
commercial opportunities 
for the foreseeable future.