24Interacting with people
For decades, people have imagined wildly different, futuristic-looking transportation 
vehicles. Although future cars will be smarter and drones will be available widely , it 
is unlikely that by 2030 we will have widely adopted transportation vehicles that look 
and function differently than the ones we have today . Our Study Panel doesn’t expect 
drones that can fly , swim, and drive, or flying quadcoptors to become a common 
means of  transportation in this time horizon (although prototypes exist today).
We do expect humans to become partners to self-driving cars and drones in their 
training, execution, and evaluation. This partnering will happen both when humans 
are co-located with machines and also virtually . We predict advances in algorithms to 
facilitate machine learning from human input. We also expect models and algorithms 
for modeling of  human attention, and to support communication and coordination 
between humans and machine. This is an integral part of  the development of   
future vehicles.
HOME/SERVICE ROBOTS
Robots have entered people’s homes in the past fifteen years. Disappointingly slow 
growth in the diversity of  applications has occurred simultaneously with increasingly 
sophisticated AI deployed on existing applications. AI advances are often inspired by 
mechanical innovations, which in turn prompt new AI techniques to be introduced.
Over the next fifteen years, coincident advances in mechanical and AI technologies 
promise to increase the safe and reliable use and utility of  home robots in a typical 
North American city . Special purpose robots will deliver packages, clean offices,  
and enhance security , but technical constraints and the high costs of  reliable 
mechanical devices will continue to limit commercial opportunities to narrowly 
defined applications for the foreseeable future. As with self-driving cars and other  
new transportation machines, the difficulty of  creating reliable, market-ready 
hardware is not to be underestimated.
Vacuum cleaners
In 2001, after many years of  development, the Electrolux Trilobite, a vacuum 
cleaning robot, became the first commercial home robot. It had a simple control 
system to do obstacle avoidance, and some navigation. A year later, iRobot introduced 
Roomba, which was a tenth the price of  the Trilobite and, with only 512 bytes of  
RAM, ran a behavior based controller. The most intelligent thing it did was to avoid 
falling down stairs. Since then, sixteen million Roombas have been deployed all over 
the world and several other competing brands now exist.
As the processing power and RAM capacity of  low cost embedded processors 
improved from its dismal state in the year 2000, the AI capabilities of  these robots 
also improved dramatically . Simple navigation, self-charging, and actions for dealing 
with full dust bins were added, followed by ability to deal with electrical cords and 
rug tassels, enabled by a combination of  mechanical improvements and sensor 
based perception. More recently , the addition of  full VSLAM (Visual Simultaneous 
Location and Mapping)— an AI technology that had been around for twenty years—
has enabled the robots to build a complete 3D world model of  a house as they clean, 
and become more efficient in their cleaning coverage.
Early expectations that many new applications would be found for home robots have 
not materialized. Robot vacuum cleaners are restricted to localized flat areas, while real 
homes have lots of  single steps, and often staircases; there has been very little research 
on robot mobility inside real homes. Hardware platforms remain challenging to build, 
and there are few applications that people want enough to buy . Perceptual algorithms Over the next fifteen years, 
coincident advances 
in mechanical and AI 
technologies promise to 
increase the safe and 
reliable use and utility of 
home robots in a typical 
North American city.