40ENTERTAINMENT
With the explosive growth of  the internet over the past fifteen years, few can imagine 
their daily lives without it. Powered by AI, the internet has established user-generated 
content as a viable source of  information and entertainment. Social networks such 
as Facebook are now pervasive, and they function as personalized channels of  
social interaction and entertainment—sometimes to the detriment of  interpersonal 
interaction. Apps such as WhatsApp and Snapchat enable smart-phone users to 
remain constantly “in touch” with peers and share sources of  entertainment and 
information. In on-line communities such as Second Life and role-playing games such 
as World of  Warcraft, people imagine an alternative existence in a virtual world.115 
Specialized devices, such as Amazon’s Kindle have also redefined the essentials of  
long-cherished pastimes. Books can now be browsed and procured with a few swipes 
of  the finger, stored by the thousands in a pocket-sized device, and read in much the 
same way as a handheld paperback.
Trusted platforms now exist for sharing and browsing blogs, videos, photos, and 
topical discussions, in addition to a variety of  other user-generated information. To 
operate at the scale of  the internet, these platforms must rely on techniques that are 
being actively developed in natural language processing, information retrieval, image 
processing, crowdsourcing, and machine learning. Algorithms such as collaborative 
filtering have been developed, for example, to recommend relevant movies, songs, or 
articles based on the user’s demographic details and browsing history .116
Traditional sources of  entertainment have also embraced AI to keep pace with the  
times. As exemplified in the book and movie Moneyball , professional sport is now subjected 
to intensive quantitative analysis.117 Beyond aggregate performance statistics, on-field 
signals can be monitored using sophisticated sensors and cameras. Software has been 
created for composing music118 and recognizing soundtracks.119 Techniques from computer 
vision and NLP have been used in creating stage performances.120 Even the lay user can 
exercise his or her creativity on platforms such as WordsEye, which automatically 
generates 3D scenes from natural language text.121 AI has also come to the aid of  
historical research in the arts, and is used extensively in stylometry and, more recently , 
in the analysis of  paintings.122
The enthusiasm with which humans have responded to AI-driven entertainment 
has been surprising and led to concerns that it reduces interpersonal interaction 
among human beings. Few predicted that people would spend hours on end 
interacting with a display . Children often appear to be genuinely happier playing 
at home on their devices rather than outside with their friends. AI will increasingly 
enable entertainment that is more interactive, personalized, and engaging. Research 
should be directed toward understanding how to leverage these attributes for 
individuals’ and society’s benefit.
115  Second Life, accessed August 1, 2016, http://secondlife.com; “World of  Warcraft,” Blizzard 
Entertainment, Inc, accessed August 1, 2016, http://us.battle.net/wow/en/.
116  John S. Breese, David Heckerman, and Carl Kadie, “Empirical Analysis of  Predictive 
Algorithms for Collaborative Filtering,” Proceedings of  the 14th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial 
Intelligence  (July 1998), accessed August 1, 2016, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1301.7363.pdf, 43–52.
117  Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of  Winning an Unfair Game  (New York: W . W . Norton & 
Company , Inc., 2003): http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1210166/ ).
118  MuseScore, accessed August 1, 2016, https://musescore.org/.
119  Shazam, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.shazam.com/.
120  Annie Dorsen, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.anniedorsen.com/.
121  WordsEye, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.wordseye.com/.
122  “Stylometry ,” Wikipedia , last modified August 4, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016,  https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stylometry ; http://arxiv.org/pdf/1408.3218v1.pdf.AI will increasingly enable 
entertainment that is more 
interactive, personalized, 
and engaging. Research 
should be directed toward 
understanding how to 
leverage these attributes 
for individuals’ and 
society’s benefit.