42SECTION III: PROSPECTS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AI PUBLIC POLICY
The goal of  AI applications must be to create value for society. Our policy recommendations 
flow from this goal, and, while this report is focused on a typical North American city in 
2030, the recommendations are broadly applicable to other places over time. Strategies that 
enhance our ability to interpret AI systems and participate in their use may help build trust 
and prevent drastic failures. Care must be taken to augment and enhance human capabilities 
and interaction, and to avoid discrimination against segments of  society. Research to encourage 
this direction and inform public policy debates should be emphasized. Given the current 
sector-specific regulation of  US industries, new or retooled laws and policies will be needed 
to address the widespread impacts AI is likely to bring. Rather than “more” or “stricter” 
regulation, policies should be designed to encourage helpful innovation, generate and transfer 
expertise, and foster broad corporate and civic responsibility for addressing critical societal 
issues raised by these technologies. In the long term, AI will enable new wealth creation that 
will require social debate on how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared.
AI POLICY, NOW AND IN THE FUTURE
Throughout history , humans have both shaped and adapted to new technologies. This 
report anticipates that advances in AI technologies will be developed and fielded 
gradually—not in sudden, unexpected jumps in the techniques themselves—and will  
build on what exists today , making this adaptation easier. On the other hand, small  
improvements to techniques, computing power, or availability of  data can occasionally 
lead to novel, game-changing applications. The measure of  success for AI applications 
is the value they create for human lives. Going forward, the ease with which people 
use and adapt to AI applications will likewise largely determine their success.
Conversely , since AI applications are susceptible to errors and failures, a mark of   
their success will be how users perceive and tolerate their shortcomings. As AI becomes 
increasingly embedded in daily lives and used for more critical tasks, system mistakes 
may lead to backlash from users and negatively affect their trust. Though accidents 
in a self-driving car may be less probable than those driven by humans, for example, 
they will attract more attention. Design strategies that enhance the ability of  humans 
to understand AI systems and decisions (such as explicitly explaining those decisions),  
and to participate in their use, may help build trust and prevent drastic failures. Likewise, 
developers should help manage people’s expectations, which will affect their happiness 
and satisfaction with AI applications. Frustration in carrying out functions promised 
by a system diminishes people’s trust and reduces their willingness to use the system 
in the future.
Another important consideration is how AI systems that take over certain tasks 
will affect people’s affordances and capabilities. As machines deliver super-human 
performances on some tasks, people’s ability to perform them may wither. Already , 
introducing calculators to classrooms has reduced children’s ability to do basic 
arithmetic operations. Still, humans and AI systems have complementary abilities. 
People are likely to focus on tasks that machines cannot do as well, including complex 
reasoning and creative expression.
Already , children are increasingly exposed to AI applications, such as interacting 
with personal assistants on cell phones or with virtual agents in theme parks. Having 
early exposure will improve children’s interactions with AI applications, which 
will become a natural part of  their daily lives. As a result, gaps will appear in how 
younger and older generations perceive AI’s influences on society .The measure of success 
for AI applications is 
the value they create 
for human lives. Going 
forward, the ease with 
which people use and 
adapt to AI applications 
will likewise largely 
determine their success.