14tighter coupling between hardware and software in advancing AI.
“Intelligence” remains a complex phenomenon whose varied aspects have attracted 
the attention of  several different fields of  study , including psychology , economics, 
neuroscience, biology , engineering, statistics, and linguistics. Naturally , the field of  AI has  
benefited from the progress made by all of  these allied fields. For example, the artificial 
neural network, which has been at the heart of  several AI-based solutions12 13 was 
originally inspired by thoughts about the flow of  information in biological neurons.14
AI RESEARCH TRENDS
Until the turn of  the millennium, AI’s appeal lay largely in its promise to deliver, but 
in the last fifteen years, much of  that promise has been redeemed.15 AI technologies 
already pervade our lives. As they becomes a central force in society , the field is 
shifting from simply building systems that are intelligent to building intelligent systems 
that are human-aware and trustworthy .
Several factors have fueled the AI revolution. Foremost among them is the 
maturing of  machine learning, supported in part by cloud computing resources 
and wide-spread, web-based data gathering. Machine learning has been propelled 
dramatically forward by “deep learning,” a form of  adaptive artificial neural 
networks trained using a method called backpropagation.16 This leap in the 
performance of  information processing algorithms has been accompanied by 
significant progress in hardware technology for basic operations such as sensing, 
perception, and object recognition. New platforms and markets for data-driven 
products, and the economic incentives to find new products and markets, have also 
contributed to the advent of  AI-driven technology .
All these trends drive the “hot” areas of  research described below. This compilation 
is meant simply to reflect the areas that, by one metric or another, currently receive 
greater attention than others. They are not necessarily more important or valuable 
than other ones. Indeed, some of  the currently “hot” areas were less popular in past 
years, and it is likely that other areas will similarly re-emerge in the future.
Large-scale machine learning
Many of  the basic problems in machine learning (such as supervised and 
unsupervised learning) are well-understood. A major focus of  current efforts is to 
scale existing algorithms to work with extremely large data sets. For example, whereas 
traditional methods could afford to make several passes over the data set, modern 
ones are designed to make only a single pass; in some cases, only sublinear methods 
(those that only look at a fraction of  the data) can be admitted.
Deep learning
The ability to successfully train convolutional neural networks has most benefited the 
field of  computer vision, with applications such as object recognition, video 
12  Gerald Tesauro, “Practical Issues in Temporal Difference Learning,” Machine Learning , no. 8 
(1992): 257–77.
13  David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den 
Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander 
Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, 
Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis, “Mastering the game 
of  Go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature 529 (2016): 484–489.
14  W . McCulloch and W . Pitts, W ., “ A logical calculus of  the ideas immanent in nervous activity ,” 
Bulletin of  Mathematical Biophysics , 5 (1943): 115–133.
15  Appendix I offers a short history of  AI, including a description of  some of  the traditionally 
core areas of  research, which have shifted over the past six decades.
16  Backpropagation is an abbreviation for “backward propagation of  errors,” a common method 
of  training artificial neural networks used in conjunction with an optimization method such as 
gradient descent. The method calculates the gradient of  a loss function with respect to all the 
weights in the network.Human intelligence has 
no match in the biological 
and artificial worlds for 
sheer versatility, with 
the abilities “to reason, 
achieve goals, understand 
and generate language... 
create art and music, and 
even write histories.”