30Elder care
Over the next fifteen years the number of  elderly in the United States will grow 
by over 50%.74 The National Bureau of  Labor Statistics projects that home health 
aides will grow 38% over the next ten years. Despite the broad opportunities in this 
domain—basic social support, interaction and communication devices, home health 
monitoring, a variety of  simple in-home physical aids such as walkers, and light meal  
preparation—little has happened over the past fifteen years. But the coming generational 
shift will accompany a change in technology acceptance among the elderly . Currently , 
someone who is seventy was born in 1946 and may have first experienced some form 
of  personalized IT in middle age or later, while a fifty-year-old today is far more 
technology-friendly and savvy . As a result, there will be a growing interest and market 
for already available and maturing technologies to support physical, emotional, social, 
and mental health. Here are a few likely examples by category:
Life quality and independence
• Automated transportation will support continued independence and expanded 
social horizons.
• Sharing of  information will help families remain engaged with one another at a 
distance, and predictive analytics may be used to “nudge” family groups toward 
positive behaviors, such as reminders to “call home.”
• Smart devices in the home will help with daily living activities when needed, 
such as cooking and, if  robot manipulation capabilities improve sufficiently , 
dressing and toileting.
Health and wellness
• Mobile applications that monitor movement and activities, coupled with social 
platforms, will be able to make recommendations to maintain mental and 
physical health.
• In-home health monitoring and health information access will be able to detect 
changes in mood or behavior and alert caregivers.
• Personalized health management will help mitigate the complexities associated 
with multiple co-morbid conditions and/or treatment interactions.
Treatments and devices
• Better hearing aids and visual assistive devices will mitigate the effects of  
hearing and vision loss, improving safety and social connection.
• Personalized rehabilitation and in-home therapy will reduce the need for 
hospital or care facility stays.
• Physical assistive devices (intelligent walkers, wheel chairs, and exoskeletons) will 
extend the range of  activities of  an infirm individual.
The Study Panel expects an explosion of  low-cost sensing technologies that can 
provide substantial capabilities to the elderly in their homes. In principle, social 
agents with a physical presence and simple physical capabilities (e.g. a mobile robot 
with basic communication capabilities) could provide a platform for new innovations. 
However, doing so will require integration across multiple areas of  AI—Natural 
Language Processing, reasoning, learning, perception, and robotics—to create  
a system that is useful and usable by the elderly .
These innovations will also introduce questions regarding privacy within various 
circles, including friends, family , and care-givers, and create new challenges to 
accommodate an evermore active and engaged population far past retirement.
74  Jennifer M. Ortman, Victoria A. Velkoff, and Howard Hogan, “ An Aging Nation: The 
Older Population in the United States: Population Estimates and Projections,” Current Population 
Reports , U.S Census Bureau (May 2014), accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.census.gov/
prod/2014pubs/p25-1140.pdf .Better hearing aids and 
visual assistive devices 
will mitigate the effects 
of hearing and vision 
loss, improving safety 
and social connection. 
Personalized rehabilitation 
and in-home therapy 
will reduce the need for 
hospital stays.