46policing, non-discriminatory loans, healthcare applications such as eldercare and  
drug delivery , systems designed to interact with children (for example, autonomous 
tutoring systems are required to respect laws in regard to balanced handling of  
evolution vs. intelligent design), and interactive entertainment.
Given the present structure of  American administrative law, it seems unlikely  
that AI will be treated comprehensively in the near term. Nevertheless, it is possible  
to enumerate broad categories of  legal and policy issues that AI tends to raise in 
various contexts.
Privacy
Private information about an individual can be revealed through decisions and 
predictions made by AI. While some of  the ways that AI implicates privacy mirror 
those of  technologies such as computers and the internet, other issues may be unique 
to AI. For example, the potential of  AI to predict future behavior based on previous 
patterns raises challenging questions. Companies already use machine learning to 
predict credit risk. And states run prisoner details through complex algorithms to 
predict the likelihood of  recidivism when considering parole. In these cases, it is a 
technical challenge to ensure that factors such as race and sexual orientation are not 
being used to inform AI-based decisions. Even when such features are not directly 
provided to the algorithms, they may still correlate strongly with seemingly innocuous 
features such as zip code. Nonetheless, with careful design, testing, and deployment, 
AI algorithms may be able to make less biased decisions than a typical person.
Anthropomorphic interfaces increasingly associated with AI raise novel privacy 
concerns. Social science research suggests people are hardwired to respond to 
anthropomorphic technology as though it were human. Subjects in one study 
were more likely to answer when they were born if  the computer first stated 
when it was built.132 In another, they skipped sensitive questions when posed by an 
anthropomorphic interface.133 At a basic level lies the question: Will humans continue 
to enjoy the prospect of  solitude in a world permeated by apparently social agents 
“living” in our houses, cars, offices, hospital rooms, and phones?134
Innovation policy
Early law and policy decisions concerning liability and speech helped ensure the 
commercial viability of  the Internet. By contrast, the software industry arguably 
suffers today from the decision of  firms to pivot from open and free software to the 
more aggressive pursuit of  intellectual property protections, resulting in what some 
have termed patent “thickets.” Striking the proper balance between incentivizing 
innovation in AI while promoting cooperation and protection against third party 
harm will prove a central challenge.
Liability (civil )
As AI is organized to directly affect the world, even physically , liability for harms 
caused by AI will increase in salience. The prospect that AI will behave in ways 
designers do not expect challenges the prevailing assumption within tort law that 
courts only compensate for foreseeable injuries. Courts might arbitrarily assign 
liability to a human actor even when liability is better located elsewhere for reasons 
of  fairness or efficiency . Alternatively , courts could refuse to find liability because 
the defendant before the court did not, and could not, foresee the harm that the AI 
caused. Liability would then fall by default on the blameless victim. The role 
132  Youngme Moon, “Intimate Exchanges: Using Computers to Elicit Self-Disclosure from 
Consumers,” Journal of  Consumer Research 26, no. 4 (March 2000): 323–339.
133  Lee Sproull, Mani Subramani, Sara Kiesler , Janet H. Walker, and Keith Waters, “When the 
Interface is a Face,” Human-Computer Interaction 11, no. 2 (1996): 97–124.
134  M. Ryan Calo, “People Can Be So Fake: A New Dimension to Privacy and Technology 
Scholarship,” Penn State Law Review 114, no. 3 (2010): 809–855.As AI applications engage 
in behavior that, were it 
done by a human, would 
constitute a crime, courts 
and other legal actors will 
have to puzzle through 
whom to hold accountable 
and on what theory.