33also possible, such as those designed to assess vocabulary ,86 wh (who/what/when/
where/why) questions,87 and multiple choice questions,88 using electronic resources 
such as WordNet, Wikipedia, and online ontologies. With the explosion of  online 
courses, these techniques are sure to be eagerly adopted for use in online education. 
Although the long term impact of  these systems will have on the educational system 
remains unclear, the AI community has learned a great deal in a very short time.
Learning analytics
Data sets being collected from massive scale online learning systems, ranging from 
MOOCs to Khan Academy , as well as smaller scale online programs, have fueled 
the rapid growth of  the field of  learning analytics. Online courses are not only good 
for widespread delivery , but are natural vehicles for data collection and experimental 
instrumentation that will contribute to scientific findings and improving the quality 
of  learning at scale. Organizations such as the Society for Learning Analytics 
Research (SOLAR), and the rise of  conferences including the Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge Conference89 and the Learning at Scale Conference (L@S)90 reflect this 
trend. This community applies deep learning, natural language processing, and other 
AI techniques to analysis of  student engagement, behavior, and outcomes.
Current projects seek to model common student misconceptions, predict 
which students are at risk of  failure, and provide real-time student feedback that is 
tightly integrated with learning outcomes. Recent work has also been devoted to 
understanding the cognitive processes involved in comprehension, writing, knowledge 
acquisition, and memory , and to applying that understanding to educational practice 
by developing and testing educational technologies.
Challenges and opportunities
One might have expected more and more sophisticated use of  AI technologies in 
schools, colleges, and universities by now. Much of  its absence can be explained 
by the lack of  financial resources of  these institutions as well as the lack of  data 
establishing the technologies’ effectiveness. These problems are being addressed, 
albeit slowly , by private foundations and by numerous programs to train primarily 
secondary school teachers in summer programs. As in other areas of  AI, excessive 
hype and promises about the capabilities of  MOOCs have meant that expectations 
frequently exceed the reality . The experiences of  certain institutions, such as San Jose 
State University’s experiment with Udacity ,91 have led to more sober assessment of  
the potential of  the new educational technologies.
86  Jonathan C. Brown, Gwen A. Frishkoff , and Maxine Eskenazi, “ Automatic Question 
Generation for Vocabulary Assessment,” Proceedings of  Human Language Technology Conference and 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP) , Vancouver, October 
2005, (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005), 819–826.
87  Michael Heilman, “ Automatic Factual Question Generation from Text,” PhD thesis CMU-
LTI-11-004, (Carnegie Mellon University , 2011), accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.cs.cmu.
edu/~ark/mheilman/questions/papers/heilman-question-generation-dissertation.pdf .
88  Tahani Alsubait, Bijan Parsia, and Uli Sattler, “Generating Multiple Choice Questions from 
Ontologies: How Far Can We Go?,” in eds. P . Lambrix, E. Hyvönen. E. Blomqvist, V . Presutti, G. 
Qi, U. Sattler, Y . Ding, and C. Ghidini, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management: EKAW 2014 
Satellite Events, VISUAL, EKM1, and ARCOE-Logic  Linköping, Sweden, November 24–28, 2014 Revised 
Selected Papers, (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015), 66–79.
89  The 6th International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://lak16.solaresearch.org/ .
90  Third Annual ACM Conference on Learning at Scale, http://learningatscale.acm.org/
las2016/ .
91  Ry Rivard, “Udacity Project on ‘Pause’,” Inside Higher Ed , July 18, 2013, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/07/18/citing-disappointing-student-outcomes-
san-jose-state-pauses-work-udacity .The current absence of 
sophisticated use of AI 
technologies in schools, 
colleges, and universities 
may be explained by 
the lack of financial 
resources as well as the 
lack of data establishing 
the technologies’ 
effectiveness.