37evidence of  police malpractice. These improvements could lead to even more 
widespread surveillance. Some cities have already added drones for surveillance 
purposes, and police use of  drones to maintain security of  ports, airports, coastal 
areas, waterways, industrial facilities is likely to increase, raising concerns about 
privacy , safety , and other issues.
The New York Police Department’s CompStat was the first tool pointing toward 
predictive policing,104 and many police departments now use it.105 Machine learning 
significantly enhances the ability to predict where and when crimes are more likely 
to happen and who may commit them. As dramatized in the movie Minority Report , 
predictive policing tools raise the specter of  innocent people being unjustifiably 
targeted. But well-deployed AI prediction tools have the potential to actually remove 
or reduce human bias, rather than reinforcing it, and research and resources should 
be directed toward ensuring this effect.
AI techniques can be used to develop intelligent simulations for training law-
enforcement personnel to collaborate. While international criminal organizations and 
terrorists from different countries are colluding, police forces from different countries 
still face difficulty in joining forces to fight them. Training international groups of  law 
enforcement personnel to work as teams is very challenging. The European Union, 
through the Horizon 2020 program, currently supports such attempts in projects such 
as LawTrain.106 The next step will be to move from simulation to actual investigations 
by providing tools that support such collaborations.
Tools do exist for scanning Twitter and other feeds to look for certain types 
of  events and how they may impact security . For example, AI can help in social 
network analysis to prevent those at risk from being radicalized by ISIS or other 
violent groups. Law enforcement agencies are increasingly interested in trying to 
detect plans for disruptive events from social media, and also to monitor activity at 
large gatherings of  people to analyze security . There is significant work on crowd 
simulations to determine how crowds can be controlled. At the same time, legitimate 
concerns have been raised about the potential for law enforcement agencies to 
overreach and use such tools to violate people’s privacy .
The US Transportation Security Administration (TSA), Coast Guard, and the 
many other security agencies that currently rely on AI will likely increase their 
reliance to enable significant efficiency and efficacy improvements.107 AI techniques—
vision, speech analysis, and gait analysis— can aid interviewers, interrogators, and 
security guards in detecting possible deception and criminal behavior. For example, 
the TSA currently has an ambitious project to redo airport security nationwide.108 
Called DARMS, the system is designed to improve efficiency and efficacy of  airport 
security by relying on personal information to tailor security based on a person’s risk 
categorization and the flights being taken. The future vision for this project is a tunnel 
that checks people’s security while they walk through it. Once again, developers of  
this technology should be careful to avoid building in bias (e.g. about a person’s risk 
level category) through use of  datasets that reflect prior bias.109
104  Walter L. Perry , Brian McInnis, Carter C. Price, Susan Smith, and John S. Hollywood, “The 
Role of  Crime Forecasting in Law Enforcement Operations,” Rand Corporation Report 233  (2013).
105  “CompStat,” Wikipedia , last modified July 28, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CompStat .
106  LAW-TRAIN, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.law-train.eu/ .
107  Milind Tambe, Security and Game Theory: Algorithms, Deployed Systems, Lessons Learned  (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011).
108  Peter Neffenger, “TSA ’s 2017 Budget—A Commitment to Security (Part I),” Department 
of  Homeland Security , March 1, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.tsa.gov/news/
testimony/2016/03/01/hearing-fy17-budget-request-transportation-security-administration .
109  Crawford, “ AI’s White Guy Problem.”As dramatized in the 
movie Minority Report , 
predictive policing tools 
raise the specter of 
innocent people being 
unjustifiably targeted. But 
well-deployed AI prediction 
tools have the potential to 
actually remove or reduce 
human bias.