44teams capable of  analyzing AI from multiple angles. Research questions range from 
basic research into intelligence to methods to assess and affect the safety , privacy , 
fairness, and other impacts of  AI.
Questions include: Who is responsible when a self-driven car crashes or an 
intelligent medical device fails? How can AI applications be prevented from unlawful 
discrimination? Who should reap the gains of  efficiencies enabled by AI technologies 
and what protections should be afforded to people whose skills are rendered obsolete? 
As AI becomes integrated more broadly and deeply into industrial and consumer 
products, it enters areas in which established regulatory regimes will need to be 
adapted to AI innovations or in some cases fundamentally reconfigured according to 
broadly accepted goals and principles.
The approach in the United States to date has been sector-specific, with oversight 
by a variety of  agencies. The use of  AI in devices that deliver medical diagnostics and 
treatments is subject to aggressive regulation by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), both in defining what the product is and specifying the methods by which it is 
produced, including standards of  software engineering. The use of  drones in regulated 
airspace falls under the authority of  the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).126 For 
consumer-facing AI systems, regulation by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) comes 
into play . Financial markets using AI technologies, such as in high-frequency trading, 
come under regulation by the Security Exchange Commission (SEC).
In addition to sector-specific approaches, the somewhat ambiguous and broad 
regulatory category of  “critical infrastructure” may apply to AI applications.127 The 
Obama Administration’s Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) 21 broadly defines critical 
infrastructure as composed of  “the assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or 
virtual, so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have 
a debilitating effect on security , national economic security , national public health or 
safety , or any combination thereof.” Today , an enterprise does not come under federal 
regulation solely by falling under that broad definition. Instead, the general trend of  
federal policy is to seek regulation in sixteen sectors of  the economy .128
As regards AI, critical infrastructure is notably defined by the end-user application, 
and not the technology or sector that actually produces AI software.129 Software 
126  FAA controls the ways drones fly , requires drones to be semiautonomous as opposed to 
autonomous, requires visual connection to the drone, and enforces no-fly zones close to airports.
127  “Presidential Policy Directive (PPD-21)—Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience,” The 
White House, February 12, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-infrastructure-security-and-resil .
128  PPD 21 identifies agencies responsible in each case. Chemical: Department of  Homeland 
Security; Commercial Facilities: Department of  Homeland Security; Communications: Department 
of  Homeland Security; Critical Manufacturing: Department of  Homeland Security; Dams: 
Department of  Homeland Security; Defense Industrial Base: Department of  Defense; Emergency 
Services: Department of  Homeland Security; Energy: Department of  Energy; Financial Services: 
Department of  the Treasury; Food and Agriculture: U.S. Department of  Agriculture and 
Department of  Health and Human Services; Government Facilities: Department of  Homeland 
Security and General Services Administration; Healthcare and Public Health: Department of  
Health and Human Services; Information Technology: Department of  Homeland Security; 
Nuclear Reactors, Materials, and Waste: Department of  Homeland Security; Transportation 
Systems: Department of  Homeland Security and Department of  Transportation; Water and 
Wastewater Systems: Environmental Protection Agency .
129  In “ICYMI- Business Groups Urge White House to Rethink Cyber Security Order,” Internet 
Association , March 5, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, https://internetassociation.org/030513gov-3/ : 
“Obama’s Feb. 12 order says the government can’t designate ‘commercial information technology 
products’ or consumer information technology services as critical U.S. infrastructure targeted for 
voluntary computer security standards,’ ... ‘Obama’s order isn’t meant to get down to the level 
of  products and services and dictate how those products and services behave,’ said David LeDuc, 
senior director of  public policy for the Software & Information Industry Association, a Washington 
trade group that lobbied for the exclusions.”As a society, we are 
underinvesting resources 
in research on the 
societal implications of 
AI technologies. Private 
and public dollars should 
be directed toward 
interdisciplinary teams 
capable of analyzing AI 
from multiple angles.