36Reasoning with social networks and influence maximization
Social networks can be harnessed to create earlier, less-costly interventions involving 
large populations. For example, AI might be able to assist in spreading health-
related information. In Los Angeles, there are more than 5,000 homeless youth (ages 
thirteen-twenty-four). Individual interventions are difficult and expensive, and the 
youths’ mistrust of  authority dictates that key messages are best spread through peer 
leaders. AI programs might be able to leverage homeless youth social networks to 
strategically select peer leaders to spread health-related information, such as how to 
avoid spread of  HIV . The dynamic, uncertain nature of  these networks does pose 
challenges for AI research.100 Care must also be taken to prevent AI systems from 
reproducing discriminatory behavior, such as machine learning that identifies people 
through illegal racial indicators, or through highly-correlated surrogate factors, such 
as zip codes. But if  deployed with great care, greater reliance on AI may well result 
in a reduction in discrimination overall, since AI programs are inherently more easily 
audited than humans.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY
Cities already have begun to deploy AI technologies for public safety and security . 
By 2030, the typical North American city will rely heavily upon them. These include 
cameras for surveillance that can detect anomalies pointing to a possible crime, 
drones, and predictive policing applications. As with most issues, there are benefits 
and risks. Gaining public trust is crucial. While there are legitimate concerns that 
policing that incorporates AI may become overbearing or pervasive in some contexts, 
the opposite is also possible. AI may enable policing to become more targeted and 
used only when needed. And assuming careful deployment, AI may also help remove 
some of  the bias inherent in human decision-making .
One of  the more successful uses of  AI analytics is in detecting white collar 
crime, such as credit card fraud.101 Cybersecurity (including spam) is a widely shared 
concern, and machine learning is making an impact. AI tools may also prove useful 
in helping police manage crime scenes or search and rescue events by helping 
commanders prioritize tasks and allocate resources, though these tools are not yet 
ready for automating such activities. Improvements in machine learning in general, 
and transfer learning in particular—for speeding up learning in new scenarios based 
on similarities with past scenarios—may facilitate such systems. 
The cameras deployed almost everywhere in the world today tend to be more 
useful for helping solve crimes than preventing them.102 103 This is due to the low 
quality of  event identification from videos and the lack of  manpower to look at 
massive video streams. As AI for this domain improves, it will better assist crime 
prevention and prosecution through greater accuracy of  event classification and 
efficient automatic processing of  video to detect anomalies—including, potentially , 
407–426.
100  Jordan Pearson, “ Artificial Intelligence Could Help Reduce HIV Among Homeless Youths,” 
Teamcore, University of  Southern California, February 4. 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://
teamcore.usc.edu/news/motherboard_news_ai_could_help_reduce_HIV .pdf.
101  “RSA Adaptive Authentication,” RSA, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.rsa.com/en-us/
products-services/fraud-prevention/adaptive-authentication .
102  Takeshi Arikuma and Yasunori Mochizuki, “Intelligent multimedia surveillance system for 
safer cities” APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing 5  (2016): 1–8.
103  “Big Op-Ed: Shifting Opinions On Surveillance Cameras,”, Talk of  the Nation , NPR, April 22, 
2013, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.npr.org/2013/04/22/178436355/big-op-ed-shifting-
opinions-on-surveillance-cameras .One of the more successful 
uses of AI analytics is in 
detecting white collar 
crime, such as credit 
card fraud. Cybersecurity 
(including spam) is a 
widely shared concern, 
and machine learning is 
making an impact.