35education by providing tools and relatively simple amounts of  training in their use. 
For example, large numbers of  educational apps, many of  them free, are being 
developed for the iPad. On the negative side, there is already a major trend among 
students to restrict their social contacts to electronic ones and to spend large amounts 
of  time without social contact, interacting with online programs. If  education also 
occurs more and more online, what effect will the lack of  regular, face-to-face contact 
with peers have on students’ social development? Certain technologies have even 
been shown to create neurological side effects.95 On the other hand, autistic children 
have benefited from interactions with AI systems already .96 
LOW-RESOURCE COMMUNITIES
Many opportunities exist for AI to improve conditions for people in low-resource 
communities in a typical North American city—and, indeed, in some cases it 
already has. Understanding these direct AI contributions may also inform potential 
contributions in the poorest parts of  the developing world. There has not been a 
significant focus on these populations in AI gatherings, and, traditionally , AI funders 
have underinvested in research lacking commercial application. With targeted incentives 
and funding priorities, AI technologies could help address the needs of  low-resource 
communities. Budding efforts are promising. Counteracting fears that AI may contribute 
to joblessness and other societal problems, AI may provide mitigations and solutions, 
particularly if  implemented in ways that build trust in them by the affected communities.
Machine learning, data mining approaches
 Under the banner of  “data science for social good,” AI has been used to create 
predictive models to help government agencies more effectively use their limited 
budgets to address problems such as lead poisoning,97 a major public health concern 
that has been in the news due to ongoing events in Flint, Michigan. Children may 
be tested for elevated lead levels, but that unfortunately means the problem is only 
detected after they have already been poisoned. Many efforts are underway to use 
predictive models to assist government agencies in prioritizing children at 
risk, including those who may not yet have been exposed.98 Similarly , the Illinois 
Department of  Human Services (IDHS) uses predictive models to identify pregnant 
women at risk for adverse birth outcomes in order to maximize the impact of  
prenatal care. The City of  Cincinnati uses them to proactively identify and deploy 
inspectors to properties at risk of  code violations.
Scheduling, planning
Task assignment scheduling and planning techniques have been applied by many 
different groups to distribute food before it spoils from those who may have excess, 
such as restaurants, to food banks, community centers and individuals.99
95  Scientist have studied, for example, the way reliance on GPS may lead to changes in the 
hippocampus. Kim Tingley , “The Secrets of  the Wave Pilots,” The New York Times , March 17, 2016, 
accessed August 1, 2016,  http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/20/magazine/the-secrets-of-the-wave-
pilots.html.
96  Judith Newman, “To Siri, With Love: How One Boy With Autism Became BFF With Apple’s 
Siri,” The New York Times , October 17, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.
com/2014/10/19/fashion/how-apples-siri-became-one-autistic-boys-bff.html.
97  Eric Potash, Joe Brew, Alexander Loewi, Subhabrata Majumdar, Andrew Reece, Joe Walsh, 
Eric Rozier, Emile Jorgensen, Raed Mansour, and Rayid Ghani, “Predictive Modeling for Public 
Health: Preventing Childhood Lead Poisoning,” Proceedings of  the 21th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining  (New York: Association for Computing Machinery , 
2015), 2039–2047.
98  Data Science for Social Good, University of  Chicago, accessed August 1, 2016,  
http://dssg.uchicago.edu/ .
99  Senay Solak, Christina Scherrer, and Ahmed Ghoniem, “The Stop-and-Drop Problem in 
Nonprofit Food Distribution Networks,” Annals of  Operations Research 221 , no. 1 (October 2014):  With targeted incentives 
and funding priorities, AI 
technologies could help 
address the needs of low-
resource communities. 
Budding efforts are 
promising.