4EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a science and a set of  computational technologies that 
are inspired by—but typically operate quite differently from—the ways people use 
their nervous systems and bodies to sense, learn, reason, and take action. While the 
rate of  progress in AI has been patchy and unpredictable, there have been significant 
advances since the field’s inception sixty years ago. Once a mostly academic area of   
study , twenty-first century AI enables a constellation of  mainstream technologies that  
are having a substantial impact on everyday lives. Computer vision and AI planning, 
for example, drive the video games that are now a bigger entertainment industry than  
Hollywood. Deep learning, a form of  machine learning based on layered representations 
of  variables referred to as neural networks, has made speech-understanding practical 
on our phones and in our kitchens, and its algorithms can be applied widely to an 
array of  applications that rely on pattern recognition. Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) and knowledge representation and reasoning have enabled a machine to beat 
the Jeopardy champion and are bringing new power to Web searches. 
While impressive, these technologies are highly tailored to particular tasks. Each 
application typically requires years of  specialized research and careful, unique 
construction. In similarly targeted applications, substantial increases in the future 
uses of  AI technologies, including more self-driving cars, healthcare diagnostics 
and targeted treatments, and physical assistance for elder care can be expected. AI 
and robotics will also be applied across the globe in industries struggling to attract 
younger workers, such as agriculture, food processing, fulfillment centers, and 
factories. They will facilitate delivery of  online purchases through flying drones,  
self-driving trucks, or robots that can get up the stairs to the front door.
This report is the first in a series to be issued at regular intervals as a part of  the 
One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Starting from a charge 
given by the AI100 Standing Committee to consider the likely influences of  AI in a  
typical North American city by the year 2030, the 2015 Study Panel, comprising experts  
in AI and other relevant areas focused their attention on eight domains they considered  
most salient: transportation; service robots; healthcare; education; low-resource 
communities; public safety and security; employment and workplace; and entertainment. 
In each of  these domains, the report both reflects on progress in the past fifteen years  
and anticipates developments in the coming fifteen years. Though drawing from a  
common source of  research, each domain reflects different AI influences and challenges, 
such as the difficulty of  creating safe and reliable hardware (transportation and service 
robots), the difficulty of  smoothly interacting with human experts (healthcare and  
education), the challenge of  gaining public trust (low-resource communities and public  
safety and security), the challenge of  overcoming fears of  marginalizing humans 
(employment and workplace), and the social and societal risk of  diminishing interpersonal 
interactions (entertainment). The report begins with a reflection on what constitutes 
Artificial Intelligence, and concludes with recommendations concerning AI-related 
policy . These recommendations include accruing technical expertise about AI in 
government and devoting more resources—and removing impediments—to research 
on the fairness, security , privacy , and societal impacts of  AI systems.
Contrary to the more fantastic predictions for AI in the popular press, the Study 
Panel found no cause for concern that AI is an imminent threat to humankind. 
No machines with self-sustaining long-term goals and intent have been developed, 
nor are they likely to be developed in the near future. Instead, increasingly useful 
applications of  AI, with potentially profound positive impacts on our society and  
economy are likely to emerge between now and 2030, the period this report 
considers. At the same time, many of  these developments will spur disruptions in Substantial increases 
in the future uses of AI 
applications, including 
more self-driving cars, 
healthcare diagnostics 
and targeted treatment, 
and physical assistance 
for elder care can be 
expected.