29be relatively simple once a patient is standing in a walker (though will certainly not 
be trivial for patients recovering from surgery and/or elderly patients, especially in 
corridors crowded with equipment and other people). Driving a needle to place a 
suture is relatively straightforward once the needle is correctly placed.72 This implies 
that many future systems will involve intimate interaction between people and 
machines and require technologies that facilitate collaboration between them.
The growth of  automation will enable new insights into healthcare processes. 
Historically , robotics has not been a strongly data-driven or data-oriented science. 
This is changing as (semi)automation infiltrates healthcare. As the new surgical, 
delivery , and patient care platforms come online, the beginnings of  quantification 
and predictive analytics are being built on top of  data coming from these platforms.73 
This data will be used to assess quality of  performance, identify deficiencies, errors, 
or potential optimizations, and will be used as feedback to improve performance. In 
short, these platforms will facilitate making the connection between what is done, and 
the outcome achieved, making true “closed-loop” medicine a real possibility .
Mobile health
To date, evidence-driven analytics on healthcare have relied on traditional healthcare 
data—mainly the electronic medical records discussed above. In the clinical setting, 
there are hopeful trends towards bringing new data to bear. For example, Tele-
Language enables a human clinician to conduct language therapy sessions with 
multiple patients simultaneously with the aid of  an AI agent trained by the clinician. 
And Lifegraph, which extracts behavioral patterns and creates alerts from data 
passively collected from a patient’s smartphone, has been adopted by psychiatrists in 
Israel to detect early signs of  distressful behavior in patients.
Looking ahead, driven by the mobile computing revolution, the astonishing growth 
of  “biometrics in the wild”—and the explosion of  platforms and applications that use 
them—is a hopeful and unanticipated trend. Thousands of  mobile apps now offer 
information, introduce behavior modification, or identify groups of  “people like me.” 
This, combined with the emerging trend of  more specialized motion tracking devices, 
such as Fitbit, and the emerging (inter)connectedness between the home environment 
and health-monitoring devices, has created a vibrant new sector of  innovation.
By combining social and healthcare data, some healthcare apps can perform data 
mining, learning, and prediction from captured data, though their predictions are 
relatively rudimentary . The convergence of  data and functionality across applications 
will likely spur new and even obvious products, such as an exercise app that not only 
proposes a schedule for exercise but also suggests the best time to do it, and provides 
coaching to stick to that schedule.
72  Azad Shademan, Ryan S. Decker, Justin D. Opfermann, Simon Leonard, Axel Krieger, and 
Peter CW Kim, “Supervised Autonomous Robotic Soft Tissue Surgery ,” Science Translational Medicine 
8, no. 337 (2016): 337ra64–337ra64.
73  Carolyn Chen, Lee White, Timothy Kowalewski, Rajesh Aggarwal, Chris Lintott, Bryan 
Comstock, Katie Kuksenok, Cecilia Aragon, Daniel Holst, and Thomas Lendvay , “Crowd-Sourced 
Assessment of  Technical Skills: a novel method to evaluate surgical performance.” Journal of  Surgical 
Research 187, no. 1 (2014): 65–71.Specialized motion 
tracking devices... and 
the emerging (inter)
connectedness between 
the home environment and 
health-monitoring devices 
have created a vibrant new 
sector of innovation.