8AI technologies could help address the needs of  low-resource communities, and 
budding efforts are promising. Using data mining and machine learning, for example, 
AI has been used to create predictive models to help government agencies address 
issues such as prevention of  lead poisoning in at-risk children and distribution of   
food efficiently . These budding efforts suggest more could be done, particularly if   
agencies and organizations can engage and build trust with these communities. 
Gaining public trust is also a challenge for AI use by Public Safety and Security  
professionals. North American cities and federal agencies have already begun to 
deploy AI technologies in border administration and law enforcement. By 2030,  
they will rely heavily upon them, including improved cameras and drones for 
surveillance, algorithms to detect financial fraud, and predictive policing. The latter 
raises the specter of  innocent people being unjustifiably monitored, and care must be 
taken to avoid systematizing human bias and to protect civil liberties. Well-deployed 
AI prediction tools have the potential to provide new kinds of  transparency about 
data and inferences, and may be applied to detect, remove, or reduce human bias, 
rather than reinforcing it.
Social and political decisions are likewise at play in AI’s influences on 
Employment and Workplace  trends, such as the safety nets needed to protect 
people from structural changes in the economy . AI is poised to replace people in 
certain kinds of  jobs, such as in the driving of  taxis and trucks. However, in many 
realms, AI will likely replace tasks rather than jobs in the near term, and will also 
create new kinds of  jobs. But the new jobs that will emerge are harder to imagine in  
advance than the existing jobs that will likely be lost. AI will also lower the cost of  
many goods and services, effectively making everyone better off. Longer term, AI may  
be thought of  as a radically different mechanism for wealth creation in which everyone 
should be entitled to a portion of  the world’s AI-produced treasures. It is not too soon 
for social debate on how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared.
Entertainment  has been transformed by social networks and other platforms for  
sharing and browsing blogs, videos, and photos, which rely on techniques actively 
developed in NLP , information retrieval, image processing, crowdsourcing, and machine 
learning. Some traditional sources of  entertainment have also embraced AI to compose 
music, create stage performances, and even to generate 3D scenes from natural 
language text. The enthusiasm with which people have already responded to AI-driven  
entertainment has been surprising. As with many aspects of  AI, there is ongoing debate 
about the extent to which the technology replaces or enhances sociability . AI will  
increasingly enable entertainment that is more interactive, personalized, and engaging. 
Research should be directed toward understanding how to leverage these attributes 
for individuals’ and society’s benefit. 
What’s next for AI research?
The research that fuels the AI revolution has also seen rapid changes. Foremost 
among them is the maturation of  machine learning, stimulated in part by the rise of  
the digital economy , which both provides and leverages large amounts of  data. Other 
factors include the rise of  cloud computing resources and consumer demand for 
widespread access to services such as speech recognition and navigation support.
Machine learning has been propelled dramatically forward by impressive 
empirical successes of  artificial neural networks, which can now be trained with huge 
data sets and large-scale computing. This approach has been come to be known as 
“deep learning.” The leap in the performance of  information processing algorithms 
has been accompanied by significant progress in hardware technology for basic 
operations such as sensing, perception, and object recognition. New platforms and Longer term, AI may be 
thought of as a radically 
different mechanism 
for wealth creation in 
which everyone should 
be entitled to a portion of 
the world’s AI-produced 
treasures.