28Healthcare robotics
Fifteen years ago, healthcare robotics was largely science fiction. One company 
called Robodoc,65 a spin-out from IBM, developed robotic systems for orthopedic 
surgeries, such as hip and knee replacements. The technology worked, but the 
company struggled commercially , and was ultimately shut down and acquired for 
its technology .66 More recently , though, the research and practical use of  surgical 
robotics has exploded.
In 2000 Intuitive Surgical67 introduced the da Vinci system, a novel technology 
initially marketed to support minimally invasive heart bypass surgery , and then gained 
substantial market traction for treatment of  prostate cancer and merged with its 
only major competition, Computer Motion, in 2003. The da Vinci, now in its fourth 
generation, provides 3D visualization (as opposed to 2D monocular laparoscopy) and 
wristed instruments in an ergonomic platform. It is considered the standard of  care  
in multiple laparoscopic procedures, and used in nearly three quarters of  a million 
procedures a year,68 providing not only a physical platform, but also a new data 
platform for studying the process of  surgery .
The da Vinci anticipates a day when much greater insight into how medical 
professionals carry out the process of  providing interventional medical care will 
be possible. The presence of  the da Vinci in day-to-day operation has also opened 
the doors to new types of  innovation—from new instrumentation to image fusion 
to novel biomarkers—creating its own innovation ecosystem. The success of  the 
platform has inspired potential competitors in robotic surgery , most notably the 
Alphabet spin-off Verb, in collaboration with J&J/Ethicon.69 There are likely to be 
many more, each exploring a unique niche or space and building out an ecosystem of  
sensing, data analytics, augmentation, and automation.
Intelligent automation in hospital operations has been less successful. The story 
is not unlike surgical robotics. Twenty years ago, one company , HelpMate, created 
a robot for hospital deliveries,70 such as meals and medical records, but ultimately 
went bankrupt. More recently , Aethon71 introduced TUG Robots for basic deliveries, 
but few hospitals have invested in this technology to date. However, robotics in 
other service industries such as hotels and warehouses, including Amazon Robotics 
(formerly Kiva), are demonstrating that these technologies are practical and cost 
effective in at least some large-scale settings, and may ultimately spur additional 
innovation in health care.
Looking ahead, many tasks that appear in healthcare will be amenable to 
augmentation, but will not be fully automated. For example, robots may be able to 
deliver goods to the right room in a hospital, but then require a person to pick them 
up and place them in their final location. Walking a patient down the corridor may 
65  ROBODOC, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.robodoc.com/professionals.html .
66  THINK Surgical, accessed August 1, 2016, http://thinksurgical.com/history .
67  Intuitive Surgical, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.intuitivesurgical.com .
68  Trefis Team, “Intuitive Surgical Maintains Its Growth Momentum With Strong Growth In 
Procedure Volumes,” Forbes , January 22, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.forbes.com/
sites/greatspeculations/2016/01/22/intuitive-surgical-maintains-its-growth-momentum-with-
strong-growth-in-procedure-volumes/#22ae6b0939a1 .
69  Evan Ackerman, “Google and Johnson & Johnson Conjugate to Create Verb Surgical, 
Promise Fancy Medical Robots,” IEEE Spectrum , December 17, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/medical-robots/google-verily-johnson-johnson-
verb-surgical-medical-robots .
70  John M. Evans and Bala Krishnamurthy , “HelpMate®, the trackless robotic courier: A 
perspective on the development of  a commercial autonomous mobile robot,” Lecture Notes in Control 
and Information Sciences 236 , June 18, 2005 (Springer-Verlag London Limited, 1998), 182–210, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2FBFb0030806 .
71  Aethon, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.aethon.com .The problem in medicine 
is not to recognize what is 
in the image—is this a liver 
or a kidney?—but rather 
to make a fine-grained 
judgement about it. Strict 
regulations govern these 
high-stakes judgements.