16Collaborative systems
Research on collaborative systems investigates models and algorithms to help 
develop autonomous systems that can work collaboratively with other systems and 
with humans. This research relies on developing formal models of  collaboration, 
and studies the capabilities needed for systems to become effective partners. There 
is growing interest in applications that can utilize the complementary strengths of  
humans and machines—for humans to help AI systems to overcome their limitations, 
and for agents to augment human abilities and activities.
Crowdsourcing and human computation
Since human abilities are superior to automated methods for accomplishing many 
tasks, research on crowdsourcing and human computation investigates methods to  
augment computer systems by utilizing human intelligence to solve problems that  
computers alone cannot solve well. Introduced only about fifteen years ago, this 
research now has an established presence in AI. The best-known example of  
crowdsourcing is Wikipedia, a knowledge repository that is maintained and updated 
by netizens and that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such 
as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth. Crowdsourcing focuses on 
devising innovative ways to harness human intelligence. Citizen science platforms 
energize volunteers to solve scientific problems, while paid crowdsourcing platforms 
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk provide automated access to human intelligence on 
demand. Work in this area has facilitated advances in other subfields of  AI, including 
computer vision and NLP , by enabling large amounts of  labeled training data and/or 
human interaction data to be collected in a short amount of  time. Current research 
efforts explore ideal divisions of  tasks between humans and machines based on their 
differing capabilities and costs. 
Algorithmic game theory and computational social choice
New attention is being drawn to the economic and social computing dimensions of  
AI, including incentive structures. Distributed AI and multi-agent systems have been 
studied since the early 1980s, gained prominence starting in the late 1990s, and were 
accelerated by the internet. A natural requirement is that systems handle potentially 
misaligned incentives, including self-interested human participants or firms, as well 
as automated AI-based agents representing them. Topics receiving attention include 
computational mechanism design (an economic theory of  incentive design, seeking 
incentive-compatible systems where inputs are truthfully reported), computational 
social choice (a theory for how to aggregate rank orders on alternatives), incentive 
aligned information elicitation (prediction markets, scoring rules, peer prediction) and 
algorithmic game theory (the equilibria of  markets, network games, and parlor games 
such as Poker—a game where significant advances have been made in recent years 
through abstraction techniques and no-regret learning).
Internet of Things (IoT)
A growing body of  research is devoted to the idea that a wide array of  devices can 
be interconnected to collect and share their sensory information. Such devices can 
include appliances, vehicles, buildings, cameras, and other things. While it’s a matter 
of  technology and wireless networking to connect the devices, AI can process and 
use the resulting huge amounts of  data for intelligent and useful purposes. Currently , 
these devices use a bewildering array of  incompatible communication protocols. AI 
could help tame this Tower of  Babel.
Neuromorphic Computing
Traditional computers implement the von Neumann model of  computing, which 
separates the modules for input/output, instruction-processing, and memory . With 
the success of  deep neural networks on a wide array of  tasks, manufacturers are Natural Language 
Processing is a very 
active area of machine 
perception. Research 
is now shifting towards 
developing systems that 
are able to interact with 
people through dialog, 
not just react to stylized 
requests.