2extended deep thought and cross-disciplinary scholarly investigations that could 
inspire innovation and provide intelligent advice to government agencies and industry .
This report is the first in the planned series of  studies that will continue for at least 
a hundred years. The Standing Committee defined a Study Panel charge for the 
inaugural Study Panel in the summer of  2015 and recruited Professor Peter Stone, 
at the University of  Texas at Austin, to chair the panel. The seventeen-member 
Study Panel, comprised of  experts in AI from academia, corporate laboratories 
and industry , and AI-savvy scholars in law, political science, policy , and economics, 
was launched in mid-fall 2015. The participants represent diverse specialties and 
geographic regions, genders, and career stages. 
The Standing Committee extensively discussed ways to frame the Study Panel 
charge to consider both recent advances in AI and potential societal impacts on jobs, 
the environment, transportation, public safety , healthcare, community engagement, 
and government. The committee considered various ways to focus the study , 
including surveying subfields and their status, examining a particular technology 
such as machine learning or natural language processing, and studying particular 
application areas such as healthcare or transportation. The committee ultimately 
chose a thematic focus on “ AI and Life in 2030” to recognize that AI’s various uses 
and impacts will not occur independently of  one another, or of  a multitude of  other 
societal and technological developments. Acknowledging the central role cities have 
played throughout most of  human experience, the focus was narrowed to the large 
urban areas where most people live. The Standing Committee further narrowed the 
focus to a typical North American city in recognition of  the great variability of  urban 
settings and cultures around the world, and limits on the first Study Panel’s efforts. 
The Standing Committee expects that the projections, assessments, and proactive 
guidance stemming from the study will have broader global relevance and is making 
plans for future studies to expand the scope of  the project internationally .
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4
OVERVIEW 6
SECTION I: WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE? 12
Defining AI 12
AI Research Trends 14
SECTION II: AI BY DOMAIN 18
Transportation 18
Home/Service Robots 24
Healthcare 25
Education 31
Low-resource Communities 35
Public Safety and Security 36
Employment and Workplace 38
Entertainment 40
SECTION III: PROSPECTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AI PUBLIC POLICY 42
AI Policy, Now and in the Future 42
APPENDIX I: A SHORT HISTORY OF AI 50