18SECTION II: AI BY DOMAIN
Though different instances of  AI research and practice share common technologies, such  
as machine learning, they also vary considerably in different sectors of  the economy and  
society. We call these sectors “domains,” and in this section describe the different states  
of  AI research and implementation, as well as impacts and distinct challenges, in eight of  
them: transportation; home/service robotics; healthcare; education; low-resource communities; 
public safety and security; employment and workplace; and entertainment. Based on these 
analyses, we also predict trends in a typical North American city over the next fifteen years. 
Contrary to AI’s typical depiction in popular culture, we seek to offer a balanced overview 
of  the ways in which AI is already beginning to transform everyday life, and how those 
transformations are likely to grow by the year 2030.
TRANSPORTATION
Transportation is likely to be one of  the first domains in which the general public 
will be asked to trust the reliability and safety of  an AI system for a critical task. 
Autonomous transportation will soon be commonplace and, as most people’s first 
experience with physically embodied AI systems, will strongly influence the public’s 
perception of  AI. Once the physical hardware is made sufficiently safe and robust, its 
introduction to daily life may happen so suddenly as to surprise the public, which will 
require time to adjust. As cars will become better drivers than people, city-dwellers 
will own fewer cars, live further from work, and spend time differently , leading to an 
entirely new urban organization. Further, in the typical North American city in 2030, 
changes won’t be limited to cars and trucks, but are likely to include flying vehicles 
and personal robots, and will raise social, ethical and policy issues.
A few key technologies have already catalyzed the widespread adoption of  AI 
in transportation. Compared to 2000, the scale and diversity of  data about personal 
and population-level transportation available today—enabled by the adoption of  
smartphones and decreased costs and improved accuracies for variety of  sensors—is 
astounding. Without the availability of  this data and connectivity , applications such as 
real-time sensing and prediction of  traffic, route calculations, peer-to-peer ridesharing 
and self-driving cars would not be possible.
Smarter cars
GPS was introduced to personal vehicles in 2001 with in-car navigation devices and 
has since become a fundamental part of  the transportation infrastructure.19 GPS 
assists drivers while providing large-scale information to technology companies and 
cities about transportation patterns. Widespread adoption of  smartphones with GPS 
technology further increased connectivity and the amount of  location data shared by 
individuals.
Current vehicles are also equipped with a wide range of  sensing capabilities. 
An average automobile in the US is predicted to have seventy sensors including 
gyroscopes, accelerometers, ambient light sensors, and moisture sensors.20 Sensors 
are not new to vehicles. Automobiles built before 2000 had sensors for the 
internal state of  the vehicle such as its speed, acceleration, and wheel position.21 
19  Mark Sullivan, “ A brief  history of  GPS,” PCWorld , August 9, 2012, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2000276/a-brief-history-of-gps.html .
20  William J. Fleming, “New Automotive Sensors - A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal 8, no 11 , 
(2008): 1900-1921.
21  Jean Jacques Meneu, ed., “ Automotive Sensors: Now and in the Future,” Arrow , September 24, 
2015, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.arrow.com/en/research-and-events/articles/automotive-
sensors-now-and-in-the-future .Autonomous 
transportation will soon 
be commonplace and, 
as most people’s first 
experience with physically 
embodied AI systems, 
will strongly influence the 
public’s perception of AI.