ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND LIFE IN 2030
ONE HUNDRED YEAR STUDY ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE | REPORT OF THE 2015 STUDY PANEL | SEPTEMBER 2016
PREFACE
The One Hundred Year Study on 
Artificial Intelligence, launched 
in the fall of  2014, is a long-
term investigation of  the field of  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
its influences on people, their 
communities, and society . It 
considers the science, engineering, 
and deployment of  AI-enabled 
computing systems. As its core 
activity , the Standing Committee 
that oversees the One Hundred 
Year Study forms a Study Panel 
every five years to assess the 
current state of  AI. The Study 
Panel reviews AI’s progress in the years following the immediately prior report, 
envisions the potential advances that lie ahead, and describes the technical and 
societal challenges and opportunities these advances raise, including in such arenas as 
ethics, economics, and the design of  systems compatible with human cognition. The 
overarching purpose of  the One Hundred Year Study’s periodic expert review is to 
provide a collected and connected set of  reflections about AI and its influences as the 
field advances. The studies are expected to develop syntheses and assessments that 
provide expert-informed guidance for directions in  
AI research, development, and systems design, as well as programs and policies to 
help ensure that these systems broadly benefit individuals and society .1 
The One Hundred Year Study is modeled on an earlier effort informally known as 
the “ AAAI Asilomar Study .” During 2008-2009, the then president of  the Association 
for the Advancement of  Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Eric Horvitz, assembled a 
group of  AI experts from multiple institutions and areas of  the field, along with 
scholars of  cognitive science, philosophy , and law. Working in distributed subgroups, 
the participants addressed near-term AI developments, long-term possibilities, 
and legal and ethical concerns, and then came together in a three-day meeting at 
Asilomar to share and discuss their findings. A short written report on the intensive 
meeting discussions, amplified by the participants’ subsequent discussions with other 
colleagues, generated widespread interest and debate in the field and beyond. 
The impact of  the Asilomar meeting, and important advances in AI that included 
AI algorithms and technologies starting to enter daily life around the globe, spurred 
the idea of  a long-term recurring study of  AI and its influence on people and society . 
The One Hundred Year Study was subsequently endowed at a university to enable 
1 “One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100),” Stanford University, accessed 
August 1, 2016, https://ai100.stanford.edu .
The overarching purpose 
of the One Hundred Year 
Study’s periodic expert 
review is to provide a 
collected and connected 
set of reflections about  
AI and its influences as  
the field advances.