38EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE
While AI technologies are likely to have a profound future impact on employment 
and workplace trends in a typical North American city , it is difficult to accurately 
assess current impacts, positive or negative. In the past fifteen years, employment 
has shifted due to a major recession and increasing globalization, particularly with 
China’s introduction to the world economy , as well as enormous changes in non-AI 
digital technology . Since the 1990s, the US has experienced continued growth in 
productivity and GDP , but median income has stagnated and the employment to 
population ratio has fallen.
There are clear examples of  industries in which digital technologies have had 
profound impacts, good and bad, and other sectors in which automation will likely 
make major changes in the near future. Many of  these changes have been driven 
strongly by “routine” digital technologies, including enterprise resource planning, 
networking, information processing, and search. Understanding these changes should 
provide insights into how AI will affect future labor demand, including the shift in 
skill demands. To date, digital technologies have been affecting workers more in the 
skilled middle, such as travel agents, rather than the very lowest-skilled or highest 
skilled work.110 On the other hand, the spectrum of  tasks that digital systems can 
do is evolving as AI systems improve, which is likely to gradually increase the scope 
of  what is considered routine. AI is also creeping into high end of  the spectrum, 
including professional services not historically performed by machines.
To be successful, AI innovations will need to overcome understandable human 
fears of  being marginalized. AI will likely replace tasks rather than jobs in the near 
term, and will also create new kinds of  jobs. But the new jobs that will emerge are 
harder to imagine in advance than the existing jobs that will likely be lost. Changes 
in employment usually happen gradually , often without a sharp transition, a trend 
likely to continue as AI slowly moves into the workplace. A spectrum of  effects will 
emerge, ranging from small amounts of  replacement or augmentation to complete 
replacement. For example, although most of  a lawyer’s job is not yet automated,111  
AI applied to legal information extraction and topic modeling has automated parts of  
first-year lawyers’ jobs.112 In the not too distant future, a diverse array of  job-holders, 
from radiologists to truck drivers to gardeners, may be affected.
AI may also influence the size and location of  the workforce. Many organizations 
and institutions are large because they perform functions that can be scaled only by 
adding human labor, either “horizontally” across geographical areas or “vertically” 
in management hierarchies. As AI takes over many functions, scalability no longer 
implies large organizations. Many have noted the small number of  employees of  
some high profile internet companies, but not of  others. There may be a natural scale 
of  human enterprise, perhaps where the CEO can know everyone in the company . 
Through the creation of  efficiently outsourced labor markets enabled by AI, 
enterprises may tend towards that natural size.
AI will also create jobs, especially in some sectors, by making certain tasks more 
important, and create new categories of  employment by making new modes of  
interaction possible. Sophisticated information systems can be used to create new 
110  Jeremy Ashkenas and Alicia Parlapiano, “How the Recession Reshaped the Economy , in 255 
Charts,” The New York Times , June 6, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2014/06/05/upshot/how-the-recession-reshaped-the-economy-in-255-charts.html .
111  R Dana Remus and Frank S. Levy , “Can Robots Be Lawyers? Computers, Lawyers, and the 
Practice of  Law,” Social Science Research Network , last modified February 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2701092.
112  John Markoff, “ Armies of  Expensive Lawyers, Replaced by Cheaper Software,” The New 
York Times , March 4, 2011, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/05/
science/05legal.html .AI will likely replace tasks 
rather than jobs in the 
near term, and will also 
create new kinds of jobs. 
But the new jobs that 
will emerge are harder to 
imagine in advance than 
the existing jobs that will 
likely be lost.