31EDUCATION
The past fifteen years have seen considerable AI advances in education. Applications 
are in wide use by educators and learners today , with some variation between K-12  
and university settings. Though quality education will always require active engagement 
by human teachers, AI promises to enhance education at all levels, especially by 
providing personalization at scale. Similar to healthcare, resolving how to best 
integrate human interaction and face-to-face learning with promising AI technologies 
remains a key challenge.
Robots have long been popular educational devices, starting with the early  
Lego Mindstorms kits developed with the MIT Media Lab in the 1980s. Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems (ITS) for science, math, language, and other disciplines match 
students with interactive machine tutors. Natural Language Processing, especially when 
combined with machine learning and crowdsourcing, has boosted online learning 
and enabled teachers to multiply the size of  their classrooms while simultaneously 
addressing individual students’ learning needs and styles. The data sets from large 
online learning systems have fueled rapid growth in learning analytics.
Still, schools and universities have been slow in adopting AI technologies primarily 
due to lack of  funds and lack of  solid evidence that they help students achieve 
learning objectives. Over the next fifteen years in a typical North American city , the 
use of  intelligent tutors and other AI technologies to assist teachers in the classroom 
and in the home is likely to expand significantly , as will learning based on virtual 
reality applications. But computer-based learning systems are not likely to fully 
replace human teaching in schools.
Teaching robots
Today , more sophisticated and versatile kits for use in K-12 schools are available 
from a number of  companies that create robots with new sensing technologies 
programmable in a variety of  languages. Ozobot is a robot that teaches children 
to code and reason deductively while configuring it to dance or play based on 
color-coded patterns.75 Cubelets help teach children logical thinking through 
assembling robot blocks to think, act, or sense, depending upon the function of  the 
different blocks.76 Wonder Workshop’s Dash and Dot span a range of  programming 
capabilities. Children eight years old and older can create simple actions using a 
visual programming language, Blockly , or build iOS and Android applications using 
C or Java.77 PLEO rb is a robot pet that helps children learn biology by teaching 
the robot to react to different aspects of  the environment.78 However, while fun and 
engaging for some, in order for such kits to become widespread, there will need to be 
compelling evidence that they improve students’ academic performance.
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) and online learning
ITS have been developed from research laboratory projects such as Why-2 Atlas, 
which supported human-machine dialogue to solve physics problems early in the 
era.79 The rapid migration of  ITS from laboratory experimental stages to real use is 
75  Ozobot, accessed August 1, 2016, http://ozobot.com/ .
76  “Cubelets,” Modular Robotics, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.modrobotics.com/
cubelets .
77  “Meet Dash,” Wonder Workshop, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.makewonder.com/
dash.
78  “Pleo rb,” Innvo Labs, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.pleoworld.com/pleo_rb/eng/
lifeform.php .
79  Kurt VanLehn, Pamela W . Jordan, Carolyn P . Rosé, Dumisizwe Bhembe, Michael Böttner, 
Andy Gaydos, Maxim Makatchev, Umarani Pappuswamy , Michael Ringenberg, Antonio Roque, 
Stephanie Siler, and Ramesh Srivastava, “The Architecture of  Why2-Atlas: A Coach for Qualitative Though quality education 
will always require active 
engagement by human 
teachers, AI promises to 
enhance education at 
all levels, especially by 
providing personalization 
at scale.