10AI policy, now and in the future
The measure of  success for AI applications is the value they create for human lives. 
In that light, they should be designed to enable people to understand AI systems 
successfully , participate in their use, and build their trust. Public policies should help 
ease society’s adaptation to AI applications, extend their benefits, and mitigate their 
inevitable errors and failures. Debate about how AI is deployed, including concerns 
about how privacy is protected and AI’s benefits fairly shared, should be encouraged. 
Given the speed with which AI technologies are being realized, and concomitant 
concerns about their implications, the Study Panel recommends that all layers of  
government acquire technical expertise in AI. Further, research on the fairness, 
security , privacy , and societal implications of  AI systems should be encouraged by 
removing impediments and increasing private and public spending to support it.
Currently in the United States, at least sixteen separate agencies govern sectors 
of  the economy related to AI technologies. Rapid advances in AI research and, 
especially , its applications require experts in these sectors to develop new concepts 
and metaphors for law and policy . Who is responsible when a self-driven car crashes 
or an intelligent medical device fails? How can AI applications be prevented from 
promulgating racial discrimination or financial cheating? Who should reap the gains 
of  efficiencies enabled by AI technologies and what protections should be afforded 
to people whose skills are rendered obsolete? As people integrate AI more broadly 
and deeply into industrial processes and consumer products, best practices need to be 
spread, and regulatory regimes adapted.
While the Study Panel does not consider it likely that near-term AI systems will 
autonomously choose  to inflict harm on people, it will be possible for people to use  
AI-based systems for harmful as well as helpful purposes. And though AI algorithms 
may be capable of  making less biased decisions than a typical person, it remains 
a deep technical challenge to ensure that the data that inform AI-based decisions 
can be kept free from biases that could lead to discrimination based on race, sexual 
orientation, or other factors.
Faced with the profound changes that AI technologies can produce, pressure for 
“more” and “tougher” regulation is probably inevitable. Misunderstandings about 
what AI is and is not could fuel opposition to technologies with the potential to 
benefit everyone. Inappropriate regulatory activity would be a tragic mistake. Poorly 
informed regulation that stifles innovation, or relocates it to other jurisdictions, would 
be counterproductive.2
Fortunately , principles that guide successful regulation of  current digital technologies 
provide a starting point. In privacy regulation, broad legal mandates coupled with 
tough transparency requirements and meaningful enforcement—rather than strict 
controls—encourage companies to develop processes and professional staff to 
enforce privacy controls, engage with outside stakeholders, and adapt their practices 
to technological advances. This in turn supports the development of  professional 
trade associations and standards committees that spread best practices. In AI, too, 
regulators can strengthen a virtuous cycle of  activity involving internal and external 
accountability , transparency , and professionalization, rather than narrow compliance.
A vigorous and informed debate about how to best steer AI in ways that enrich 
our lives and our society , while encouraging creativity in the field, is an urgent and 
vital need. AI technologies could widen existing inequalities of  opportunity if  access 
to them—along with the high-powered computation and large-scale data that fuel 
many of  them—is unfairly distributed across society . These technologies will improve 
2  Kate Crawford, “ Artificial Intelligence’s White Guy Problem,” The New York Times , June 25, 
2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-
intelligences-white-guy-problem.html .Misunderstandings 
about what AI is and is 
not could fuel opposition 
to technologies with 
the potential to benefit 
everyone. Poorly informed 
regulation that stifles 
innovation would be a 
tragic mistake.