9markets for data-driven products, and the economic incentives to find new products 
and markets, have also stimulated research advances. Now, as it becomes a central 
force in society , the field of  AI is shifting toward building intelligent systems that 
can collaborate effectively with people, and that are more generally human-aware , 
including creative ways to develop interactive and scalable ways for people to 
teach robots. These trends drive the currently “hot” areas of  AI research into both 
fundamental methods and application areas:
Large-scale machine learning  concerns the design of  learning algorithms, as 
well as scaling existing algorithms, to work with extremely large data sets.
Deep learning , a class of  learning procedures, has facilitated object recognition 
in images, video labeling, and activity recognition, and is making significant inroads into 
other areas of  perception, such as audio, speech, and natural language processing.
Reinforcement learning  is a framework that shifts the focus of  machine 
learning from pattern recognition to experience-driven sequential decision-making. 
It promises to carry AI applications forward toward taking actions in the real world. 
While largely confined to academia over the past several decades, it is now seeing 
some practical, real-world successes.
Robotics  is currently concerned with how to train a robot to interact with the 
world around it in generalizable and predictable ways, how to facilitate manipulation 
of  objects in interactive environments, and how to interact with people.  Advances in 
robotics will rely on commensurate advances to improve the reliability and generality 
of  computer vision and other forms of  machine perception.
Computer vision  is currently the most prominent form of  machine perception. 
It has been the sub-area of  AI most transformed by the rise of  deep learning. For the 
first time, computers are able to perform some vision tasks better than people. Much 
current research is focused on automatic image and video captioning.
Natural Language Processing , often coupled with automatic speech recognition, 
is quickly becoming a commodity for widely spoken languages with large data sets. 
Research is now shifting to develop refined and capable systems that are able to 
interact with people through dialog, not just react to stylized requests. Great strides 
have also been made in machine translation among different languages, with more 
real-time person-to-person exchanges on the near horizon.
Collaborative systems  research investigates models and algorithms to help develop 
autonomous systems that can work collaboratively with other systems and with humans.
Crowdsourcing and human computation  research investigates methods to 
augment computer systems by making automated calls to human expertise to solve 
problems that computers alone cannot solve well. 
Algorithmic game theory and computational social choice  draw attention 
to the economic and social computing dimensions of  AI, such as how systems can 
handle potentially misaligned incentives, including self-interested human participants 
or firms and the automated AI-based agents representing them.
Internet of  Things (IoT)  research is devoted to the idea that a wide array of  
devices, including appliances, vehicles, buildings, and cameras, can be interconnected to 
collect and share their abundant sensory information to use for intelligent purposes.
Neuromorphic computing  is a set of  technologies that seek to mimic 
biological neural networks to improve the hardware efficiency and robustness of  
computing systems, often replacing an older emphasis on separate modules for input/
output, instruction-processing, and memory .The field of AI is shifting 
toward building intelligent 
systems that can 
collaborate effectively with 
people, including creative 
ways to develop interactive 
and scalable ways for 
people to teach robots.