45companies such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon have actively lobbied to avoid 
being designated as critical to the economy , arguing that this would open the door to  
regulation that would inevitably compromise their rapid product development cycles  
and ability to innovate.130 Nonetheless, as the companies creating, operating, and 
maintaining critical infrastructure use AI, interest will grow in regulating that software. 
Some existing regulatory regimes for software safety (for example, the FDA ’s 
regulation of  high consequence medical software) require specific software 
engineering practices at the developer level. However, modern software systems 
are often assembled from library components which may be supplied by multiple 
vendors, and are relatively application-independent. It doesn’t seem feasible or 
desirable to subject all such developers to the standards required for the most critical, 
rare applications. Nor does it seem advisable to allow unregulated use of  such 
components in safety critical applications. Tradeoffs between promoting innovation 
and regulating for safety are difficult ones, both conceptually and in practice. At a 
minimum, regulatory entities will require greater expertise going forward in order to 
understand the implications of  standards and measures put in place by researchers, 
government, and industry .131
Policy and legal considerations
While a comprehensive examination of  the ways artificial intelligence (AI) interacts 
with the law is beyond the scope of  this inaugural report, this much seems clear:  
as a transformative technology , AI has the potential to challenge any number of  
legal assumptions in the short, medium, and long term. Precisely how law and policy 
will adapt to advances in AI—and how AI will adapt to values reflected in law and 
policy—depends on a variety of  social, cultural, economic, and other factors, and  
is likely to vary by jurisdiction.
American law represents a mixture of  common law, federal, state, and local 
statutes and ordinances, and—perhaps of  greatest relevance to AI—regulations. 
Depending on its instantiation, AI could implicate each of  these sources of  law. For  
example, Nevada passed a law broadly permitting autonomous vehicles and instructed 
the Nevada Department of  Motor Vehicles to craft requirements. Meanwhile, the 
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration has determined that a self-
driving car system, rather than the vehicle occupants, can be considered the “driver” 
of  a vehicle. Some car designs sidestep this issue by staying in autonomous mode 
only when hands are on the wheel (at least every so often), so that the human driver 
has ultimate control and responsibility . Still, Tesla’s adoption of  this strategy did not 
prevent the first traffic fatality involving an autonomous car, which occurred in June 
of  2016. Such incidents are sure to influence public attitudes towards autonomous 
driving. And as most people’s first experience with embodied agents, autonomous 
transportation will strongly influence the public’s perception of  AI.
Driverless cars are, of  course, but one example of  the many instantiations of   
AI in services, products, and other contexts. The legal effect of  introducing AI into 
the provision of  tax advice, automated trading on the stock market, or generating  
medical diagnoses will also vary in accordance to the regulators that govern 
these contexts and the rules that apply within them. Many other examples of  AI 
applications fall within current non-technology-specific policy , including predictive 
130  Eric Engleman, “Google Exception in Obama’s Cyber Order Questioned as Unwise Gap,” 
Bloomberg Technology , March 4, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2013-03-05/google-exception-in-obama-s-cyber-order-questioned-as-unwise-gap .
131  Ryan Calo, “The Case for a Federal Robotics Commission,” Brookings Report , September 15, 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports2/2014/09/case-for-
federal-robotics-commission .Absent sufficient technical 
expertise to assess 
safety or other metrics, 
national or local officials 
may refuse to permit a 
potentially promising 
application—or green light 
a sensitive application that 
has not been adequately 
vetted.