49privacy as their responsibility . Broad legal mandates encouraged companies to 
develop a professional staff and processes to enforce privacy controls, engage with 
outside stakeholders, and to adapt their practices to technology advances. Requiring 
greater transparency enabled civil society groups and media to become credible 
enforcers both in court and in the court of  public opinion, making privacy more 
salient to corporate boards and leading them to further invest in privacy protection.
In AI, too, regulators can strengthen a virtuous cycle of  activity involving internal 
and external accountability , transparency , and professionalization, rather than narrow 
compliance. As AI is integrated into cities, it will continue to challenge existing 
protections for values such as privacy and accountability . Like other technologies, AI 
has the potential to be used for good or nefarious purposes. This report has tried to 
highlight the potential for both. A vigorous and informed debate about how to best 
steer AI in ways that enrich our lives and our society , while encouraging creativity 
in the field, is an urgent and vital need. Policies should be evaluated as to whether 
they democratically foster the development and equitable sharing of  AI’s benefits, 
or concentrate power and benefits in the hands of  a fortunate few. And since future 
AI technologies and their effects cannot be foreseen with perfect clarity , policies will 
need to be continually re-evaluated in the context of  observed societal challenges and 
evidence from fielded systems.
As this report documents, significant AI-related advances have already had 
an impact on North American cities over the past fifteen years, and even more 
substantial developments will occur over the next fifteen. Recent advances are largely 
due to the growth and analysis of  large data sets enabled by the Internet, advances 
in sensory technologies and, more recently , applications of  “deep learning.” In the 
coming years, as the public encounters new AI applications in domains such as 
transportation and healthcare, they must be introduced in ways that build trust and 
understanding, and respect human and civil rights. While encouraging innovation, 
policies and processes should address ethical, privacy , and security implications, and 
should work to ensure that the benefits of  AI technologies will be spread broadly and 
fairly . Doing so will be critical if  Artificial Intelligence research and its applications 
are to exert a positive influence on North American urban life in 2030 and beyond.