7An accurate and sophisticated picture of  AI—one that competes with its popular 
portrayal—is hampered at the start by the difficulty of  pinning down a precise 
definition of  artificial intelligence . In the approaches the Study Panel considered, 
none suggest there is currently a “general purpose” AI. While drawing on common 
research and technologies, AI systems are specialized to accomplish particular 
tasks, and each application requires years of  focused research and a careful, unique 
construction. As a result, progress is uneven within and among the eight domains.
A prime example is Transportation , where a few key technologies have catalyzed 
the widespread adoption of  AI with astonishing speed. Autonomous transportation 
will soon be commonplace and, as most people’s first experience with physically 
embodied AI systems, will strongly influence the public’s perception of  AI. As cars 
become better drivers than people, city-dwellers will own fewer cars, live further from 
work, and spend time differently , leading to an entirely new urban organization. In 
the typical North American city in 2030, physically embodied AI applications will 
not be limited to cars, but are likely to include trucks, flying vehicles, and personal 
robots. Improvements in safe and reliable hardware will spur innovation over the next 
fifteen years, as they will with Home/Service Robots , which have already entered 
people’s houses, primarily in the form of  vacuum cleaners. Better chips, low-cost 3D 
sensors, cloud-based machine learning, and advances in speech understanding will 
enhance future robots’ services and their interactions with people. Special purpose 
robots will deliver packages, clean offices, and enhance security . But technical 
constraints and the high costs of  reliable mechanical devices will continue to limit 
commercial opportunities to narrowly defined applications for the foreseeable future.
In Healthcare , there has been an immense forward leap in collecting useful data  
from personal monitoring devices and mobile apps, from electronic health records (EHR)  
in clinical settings and, to a lesser extent, from surgical robots designed to assist with 
medical procedures and service robots supporting hospital operations. AI-based 
applications could improve health outcomes and the quality of  life for millions of  
people in the coming years. Though clinical applications have been slow to move from  
the computer science lab to the real-world, there are hopeful signs that the pace of   
innovation will improve. Advances in healthcare can be promoted via the development 
of  incentives and mechanisms for sharing data and for removing overbearing policy , 
regulatory , and commercial obstacles. For many applications, AI systems will have to work  
closely with care providers and patients to gain their trust. Advances in how intelligent 
machines interact naturally with caregivers, patients, and patients’ families are crucial.
Enabling more fluid interactions between people and promising AI technologies 
also remains a critical challenge in Education , which has seen considerable progress 
in the same period. Though quality education will always require active engagement 
by human teachers, AI promises to enhance education at all levels, especially by 
providing personalization at scale. Interactive machine tutors are now being matched 
to students for teaching science, math, language, and other disciplines. Natural 
Language Processing, machine learning, and crowdsourcing have boosted online 
learning and enabled teachers in higher education to multiply the size of  their 
classrooms while addressing individual students’ learning needs and styles. Over the 
next fifteen years in a typical North American city , the use of  these technologies in 
the classroom and in the home is likely to expand significantly , provided they can be 
meaningfully integrated with face-to-face learning.
Beyond education, many opportunities exist for AI methods to assist  
Low-resource Communities by providing mitigations and solutions to a  
variety of  social problems. Traditionally , funders have underinvested in AI research 
lacking commercial application. With targeted incentives and funding priorities,  Society is now at a crucial 
juncture in determining 
how to deploy AI-based 
technologies in ways that 
promote rather than hinder 
democratic values such 
as freedom, equality, and 
transparency.