43Likewise, AI could widen existing inequalities of  opportunity if  access to AI 
technologies—along with the high-powered computation and large-scale data that 
fuel many of  them—is unfairly distributed across society . These technologies will 
improve the abilities and efficiency of  people who have access to them. A person with 
access to accurate Machine Translation technology will be better able to use learning 
resources available in different languages. Similarly , if  speech translation technology is 
only available in English, people who do not speak English will be at a disadvantage.
Further, AI applications and the data they rely upon may reflect the biases of  their 
designers and users, who specify the data sources. This threatens to deepen existing 
social biases, and concentrate AI’s benefits unequally among different subgroups 
of  society . For example, some speech recognition technologies do not work well for 
women and people with accents. As AI is increasingly used in critical applications, 
these biases may surface issues of  fairness to diverse groups in society . On the other 
hand, compared to the well-documented biases in human decision-making, AI-based 
decision-making tools have the potential to significantly reduce the bias in critical 
decisions such as who is lent money or sent to jail.
Privacy concerns about AI-enabled surveillance are also widespread, particularly 
in cities with pervasive instrumentation. Sousveillance, the recording of  an activity 
by a participant, usually with portable personal devices, has increased as well. Since 
views about bias and privacy are based on personal and societal ethical and value 
judgments, the debates over how to address these concerns will likely grow and resist 
quick resolution. Similarly , since AI is generating significant wealth, debates will grow 
regarding how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared—especially as 
AI expertise and the underlying data sets that fuel applications are concentrated in a 
small number of  large corporations.
To help address these concerns about the individual and societal implications  
of  rapidly evolving AI technologies, the Study Panel offers three general policy 
recommendations: 
1. Define a path toward accruing technical expertise in AI at all 
levels of  government. Effective governance requires more experts 
who understand and can analyze the interactions between AI 
technologies, programmatic objectives, and overall societal values.
Absent sufficient technical expertise to assess safety or other metrics, national or  
local officials may refuse to permit a potentially promising application. Or insufficiently 
trained officials may simply take the word of  industry technologists and green light a 
sensitive application that has not been adequately vetted. Without an understanding 
of  how AI systems interact with human behavior and societal values, officials will be 
poorly positioned to evaluate the impact of  AI on programmatic objectives. 
2. Remove the perceived and actual impediments to research on the 
fairness, security , privacy , and social impacts of  AI systems.
Some interpretations of  federal laws such as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act  
and the anti-circumvention provision of  the Digital Millennium Copyright Act are  
ambiguous regarding whether and how proprietary AI systems may be reverse engineered 
and evaluated by academics, journalists, and other researchers. Such research is critical  
if  AI systems with physical and other material consequences are to be properly vetted 
and held accountable. 
3. Increase public and private funding for interdisciplinary studies of  
the societal impacts of  AI.
As a society , we are underinvesting resources in research on the societal implications  
of  AI technologies. Private and public dollars should be directed toward interdisciplinary AI could widen 
existing inequalities of 
opportunity if access to 
AI technologies—along 
with the high-powered 
computation and large-
scale data that fuel 
many of them—is unfairly 
distributed across society.