32surprising and welcome. Downloadable software and online systems such as Carnegie 
Speech or Duolingo provide foreign language training using Automatic Speech 
Recognition (ASR) and NLP techniques to recognize language errors and help users 
correct them.80 Tutoring systems such as the Carnegie Cognitive Tutor81 have been 
used in US high schools to help students learn mathematics. Other ITS have been 
developed for training in geography , circuits, medical diagnosis, computer literacy 
and programming, genetics, and chemistry . Cognitive tutors use software to mimic 
the role of  a good human tutor by , for example, providing hints when a student gets 
stuck on a math problem. Based on the hint requested and the answer provided, the 
tutor offers context specific feedback. 
Applications are growing in higher education. An ITS called SHERLOCK82 is 
beginning to be used to teach Air Force technicians to diagnose electrical systems 
problems in aircraft. And the University of  Southern California’s Information 
Sciences Institute has developed more advanced avatar-based training modules to 
train military personnel being sent to international posts in appropriate behavior 
when dealing with people from different cultural backgrounds. New algorithms for 
personalized tutoring, such as Bayesian Knowledge Tracing, enable individualized 
mastery learning and problem sequencing.83
Most surprising has been the explosion of  the Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) and other models of  online education at all levels—including the use 
of  tools like Wikipedia and Khan Academy as well as sophisticated learning 
management systems that build in synchronous as well as asynchronous education 
and adaptive learning tools. Since the late 1990s, companies such as the Educational 
Testing Service and Pearson have been developing automatic NLP assessment tools to 
co-grade essays in standardized testing.84 Many of  the MOOCs which have become 
so popular, including those created by EdX, Coursera, and Udacity , are making use 
of  NLP , machine learning, and crowdsourcing techniques for grading short-answer 
and essay questions as well as programming assignments.85 Online education systems 
that support graduate-level professional education and lifelong learning are also 
expanding rapidly . These systems have great promise because the need for face-to-face
interaction is less important for working professionals and career changers. While not 
the leaders in AI-supported systems and applications, they will become early adopters 
as the technologies are tested and validated.
It can be argued that AI is the secret sauce that has enabled instructors, particularly 
in higher education, to multiply the size of  their classrooms by a few orders of  
magnitude—class sizes of  a few tens of  thousands are not uncommon. In order to 
continually test large classes of  students, automated generation of  the questions is 
Physics Essay Writing,” Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Proceedings of  the 6th International Conference , (Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2002), 158–167.
80  VanLehn et al, “The Architecture of  Why2-Atlas.”
81  “Resources and Support,” Carnegie Learning, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.
carnegielearning.com/resources-support/ .
82  Alan Lesgold, Suzanne Lajoie, Marilyn Bunzo, and Gary Eggan, “SHERLOCK: A Coached 
Practice Environment for an Electronics Troubleshooting Job,” in J. H. Larkin and R. W . Chabay , 
eds., Computer-Assisted Instruction and Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Shared Goals and Complementary Approaches  
(Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988).
83  Michael V . Yudelson, Kenneth R. Koedinger, and Geoffrey J. Gordon, (2013). “ Individualized 
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing Models,” Artificial Intelligence in Education , (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013), 171–180.
84  Jill Burstein, Karen Kukich, Susanne Wolff, Chi Lu, Martin Chodorow, Lisa Braden-Harder, 
and Mary Dee Harris, “ Automated Scoring Using a Hybrid Feature Identification Technique ” in 
Proceedings of  the Annual Meeting of  the Association of  Computational Linguistics , Montreal, Canada, August 
1998, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/erater_acl98.pdf .
85  EdX, https://www.edx.org/, Coursera, https://www.coursera.org/, Udacity , https://www.
udacity .com/ , all accessed August 1, 2016.It can be argued that AI 
is the secret sauce that 
has enabled instructors, 
particularly in higher 
education, to multiply the 
size of their classrooms 
by a few orders of 
magnitude—class sizes of 
a few tens of thousands 
are not uncommon.