39markets, which often have the effect of  lowering barriers to entry and increasing 
participation—from app stores to AirBnB to taskrabbit. A vibrant research 
community within AI studies further ways of  creating new markets and making 
existing ones operate more efficiently . 
While work has intrinsic value, most people work to be able to purchase goods and 
services they value. Because AI systems perform work that previously required human 
labor, they have the effect of  lowering the cost of  many goods and services, effectively 
making everyone richer. But as exemplified in current political debates, job loss is 
more salient to people—especially those directly affected—than diffuse economic 
gains, and AI unfortunately is often framed as a threat to jobs rather than a boon to 
living standards. 
There is even fear in some quarters that advances in AI will be so rapid as 
to replace all human jobs—including those that are largely cognitive or involve 
judgment—within a single generation. This sudden scenario is highly unlikely , but 
AI will gradually invade almost all employment sectors, requiring a shift away from 
human labor that computers are able to take over.
The economic effects of  AI on cognitive human jobs will be analogous to  
the effects of  automation and robotics on humans in manufacturing jobs. Many 
middle-aged workers have lost well-paying factory jobs and the socio-economic status 
in family and society that traditionally went with such jobs. An even larger fraction  
of  the total workforce may , in the long run, lose well-paying “cognitive” jobs. As labor 
becomes a less important factor in production as compared to owning intellectual 
capital, a majority of  citizens may find the value of  their labor insufficient to pay for 
a socially acceptable standard of  living. These changes will require a political, rather 
than a purely economic, response concerning what kind of  social safety nets should 
be in place to protect people from large, structural shifts in the economy . Absent 
mitigating policies, the beneficiaries of  these shifts may be a small group at the  
upper stratum of  the society .113
In the short run, education, re-training, and inventing new goods and services may 
mitigate these effects. Longer term, the current social safety net may need to evolve into 
better social services for everyone, such as healthcare and education, or a guaranteed 
basic income. Indeed, countries such as Switzerland and Finland have actively considered 
such measures. AI may be thought of  as a radically different mechanism of  wealth 
creation in which everyone should be entitled to a portion of  the world’s AI-produced 
treasure.114 It is not too soon for social debate on how the economic fruits of   
AI-technologies should be shared. As children in traditional societies support their  
aging parents, perhaps our artificially intelligent “children” should support us, the 
“parents” of  their intelligence.
113  For example, Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age , have two chapters of  devoted to 
this (Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of  Brilliant Technologies , (New York: W . W . Norton & Company , Inc., 2014)) and Brynjolfsson, 
McAfee, and Spence describe policy responses for the combination of  globalization and digital 
technology (Erik Brynjolfsson, Andrew McAfee, and Michael Spence, Foreign Affairs , July/August 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/  
2014-06-04/new-world-order ).
114  GDP does not do a good job of  measuring the value of  many digital goods. When society 
can’t manage what isn’t measured, bad policy decisions result. One alternative is to look at 
consumer surplus, not just dollar flows. As AI is embodied in more goods, this issue becomes more 
salient. It may look like GDP goes down but people have better well-being through access to these 
digital goods. See Erik Brynjolfsson and Adam Saunders, “What the GDP Gets Wrong (Why 
Managers Should Care),” Sloan Management Review , vol. 51, no. 1 (October 1, 2009): 95–96.As labor becomes a 
less important factor in 
production as compared 
to owning intellectual 
capital, a majority of 
citizens may find the value 
of their labor insufficient 
to pay for a socially 
acceptable standard of 
living.