41Imagining the Future
The success of  any form of  entertainment is ultimately determined by the individuals 
and social groups that are its subjects. The modes of  entertainment that people find  
appealing are diverse and change over time. It is therefore hard to predict the forms 
entertainment will take in the next fifteen years precisely . Nevertheless, current trends  
suggest at least a few features that the future entertainment landscape is likely to contain.
To date, the information revolution has mostly unfolded in software. However, 
with the growing availability of  cheaper sensors and devices, greater innovation in the 
hardware used in entertainment systems is expected. Virtual reality and haptics could 
enter our living rooms—personalized companion robots are already being developed.123 
With the accompanying improvements in Automatic Speech Recognition, the Study 
Panel expects that interaction with robots and other entertainment systems will become 
dialogue-based, perhaps constrained at the start, but progressively more human-like. 
Equally , the interacting systems are predicted to develop new characteristics such as 
emotion, empathy , and adaptation to environmental rhythms such as time of  day .124
Today , an amateur with a video camera and readily-available software tools can 
make a relatively good movie. In the future, more sophisticated tools and apps will 
become available to make it even easier to produce high-quality content, for example, 
to compose music or to choreograph dance using an avatar. The creation and 
dissemination of  entertainment will benefit from the progress of  technologies such as 
ASR, dubbing, and Machine Translation, which will enable content to be customized 
to different audiences inexpensively . This democratization and proliferation of  AI-
created media makes it difficult to predict how humans’ taste for entertainment, which 
are already fluid, will evolve.
With content increasingly delivered digitally , and large amounts of  data being 
logged about consumers’ preferences and usage characteristics, media powerhouses 
will be able to micro-analyze and micro-serve content to increasingly specialized 
segments of  the population—down to the individual.125 Conceivably the stage is set 
for the emergence of  media conglomerates acting as “Big Brothers” who are able to 
control the ideas and online experiences to which specific individuals are exposed. 
It remains to be seen whether broader society will develop measures to prevent their 
emergence. This topic, along with others pertaining to AI-related policy , is treated in 
more detail in the next section.
123  Emoters, accessed August 1, 2016, http://emoterbots.com/.
124  “Siri,” Apple, Inc., accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.apple.com/in/ios/siri/.
125  Ryan Calo, “Digital Market Manipulation,” George Washington Law Review  82, no. 4 (2014): 
995–1051.More sophisticated tools 
and apps will become 
available to make it 
even easier to produce 
high-quality content, for 
example, to compose 
music or to choreograph 
dance using an avatar.