15labeling, activity recognition, and several variants thereof. Deep learning is also making 
significant inroads into other areas of  perception, such as audio, speech, and natural 
language processing.
Reinforcement learning
Whereas traditional machine learning has mostly focused on pattern mining, 
reinforcement learning shifts the focus to decision making, and is a technology that 
will help AI to advance more deeply into the realm of  learning about and executing 
actions in the real world. It has existed for several decades as a framework for 
experience-driven sequential decision-making, but the methods have not found great 
success in practice, mainly owing to issues of  representation and scaling. However, 
the advent of  deep learning has provided reinforcement learning with a “shot in the 
arm.” The recent success of  AlphaGo, a computer program developed by Google 
Deepmind that beat the human Go champion in a five-game match, was due in large 
part to reinforcement learning. AlphaGo was trained by initializing an automated 
agent with a human expert database, but was subsequently refined by playing a large 
number of  games against itself  and applying reinforcement learning.
Robotics
Robotic navigation, at least in static environments, is largely solved. Current efforts 
consider how to train a robot to interact with the world around it in generalizable 
and predictable ways. A natural requirement that arises in interactive environments 
is manipulation , another topic of  current interest. The deep learning revolution is 
only beginning to influence robotics, in large part because it is far more difficult to 
acquire the large labeled data sets that have driven other learning-based areas of  AI.  
Reinforcement learning (see above), which obviates the requirement of  labeled data, 
may help bridge this gap but requires systems to be able to safely explore a policy 
space without committing errors that harm the system itself  or others. Advances in 
reliable machine perception, including computer vision, force, and tactile perception, 
much of  which will be driven by machine learning, will continue to be key enablers to 
advancing the capabilities of  robotics.
Computer vision
Computer vision is currently the most prominent form of  machine perception. It has 
been the sub-area of  AI most transformed by the rise of  deep learning. Until just a 
few years ago, support vector machines were the method of  choice for most visual 
classification tasks. But the confluence of  large-scale computing, especially on GPUs, 
the availability of  large datasets, especially via the internet, and refinements of  neural 
network algorithms has led to dramatic improvements in performance on benchmark 
tasks (e.g., classification on ImageNet17). For the first time, computers are able to 
perform some (narrowly defined) visual classification tasks better than people. Much 
current research is focused on automatic image and video captioning.
Natural Language Processing
Often coupled with automatic speech recognition, Natural Language Processing is 
another very active area of  machine perception. It is quickly becoming a commodity 
for mainstream languages with large data sets. Google announced that 20% of  
current mobile queries are done by voice,18 and recent demonstrations have proven 
the possibility of  real-time translation. Research is now shifting towards developing 
refined and capable systems that are able to interact with people through dialog, not 
just react to stylized requests.
17  ImageNet, Stanford Vision Lab, Stanford University , Princeton University , 2016, accessed 
August 1, 2016, www.image-net.org/.
18  Greg Sterling, “Google says 20% of  mobile queries are voice searches,” Search Engine Land , 
May 18, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://searchengineland.com/google-reveals-20-percent-
queries-voice-queries-249917 .AI technologies already 
pervade our lives. As 
they become a central 
force in society, the 
field is shifting from 
simply building systems 
that are intelligent to 
building intelligent 
systems that are 
human-aware and 
trustworthy.