21commuter in US spends twenty-five minutes driving each way .37 With self-driving car 
technology , people will have more time to work or entertain themselves during their 
commutes. And the increased comfort and decreased cognitive load with self-driving 
cars and shared transportation may affect where people choose to live. The reduced 
need for parking may affect the way cities and public spaces are designed. Self-driving 
cars may also serve to increase the freedom and mobility of  different subgroups of  
the population, including youth, elderly and disabled.
Self-driving cars and peer-to-peer transportation services may eliminate the need  
to own a vehicle. The effect on total car use is hard to predict. Trips of  empty vehicles 
and people’s increased willingness to travel may lead to more total miles driven. 
Alternatively , shared autonomous vehicles—people using cars as a service rather than  
owning their own—may reduce total miles, especially if  combined with well-constructed 
incentives, such as tolls or discounts, to spread out travel demand, share trips, and 
reduce congestion. The availability of  shared transportation may displace the need 
for public transportation—or public transportation may change form towards 
personal rapid transit, already available in four cities,38 which uses small capacity 
vehicles to transport people on demand and point-to-point between many stations.39
As autonomous vehicles become more widespread, questions will arise over their 
security , including how to ensure that technologies are safe and properly tested 
under different road conditions prior to their release. Autonomous vehicles and the 
connected transportation infrastructure will create a new venue for hackers to exploit 
vulnerabilities to attack. Ethical questions are also involved in programming cars to 
act in situations in which human injury or death is inevitable, especially when there 
are split-second choices to be made about whom to put at risk. The legal systems in 
most states in the US do not have rules covering self-driving cars. As of  2016, four 
states in the US (Nevada, Florida, California, and Michigan), Ontario in Canada, 
the United Kingdom, France, and Switzerland have passed rules for the testing 
of  self-driving cars on public roads. Even these laws do not address issues about 
responsibility and assignment of  blame for an accident for self-driving and semi-self-
driving cars.40
Transportation planning
By 2005, cities had started investing in the transportation infrastructure to develop 
sensing capabilities for vehicle and pedestrian traffic.41 The sensors currently used 
include inductive loops, video cameras, remote traffic microwave sensors, radars, and 
GPS.42 For example, in 2013 New York started using a combination of  microwave 
sensors, a network of  cameras, and pass readers to detect vehicle traffic in the city .43
37  Brian McKenzie and Melanie Rapino, “Commuting in the United States: 2009,” American 
Community Survey Reports , United States Census Bureau, September 2011, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acs-15.pdf .
38  Morgantown, West Virginia; Masdar City , UAE; London, England; and Suncheon, South 
Korea.
39  “Personal rapid transit,” Wikipedia , Last modified July 18, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_rapid_transit .
40  Patrick Lin, “The Ethics of  Autonomous Cars,” The Atlantic , October 8, 2013, accessed 
August 1, 2016, http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/10/the-ethics-of-
autonomous-cars/280360/ .
41  Steve Lohr, “Bringing Efficiency to the Infrastructure,” The New York Times , April 29, 
2009, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/30/business/energy-
environment/30smart.html .
42  “Intelligent transportation system,” Wikipedia , last modified July 28, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016,  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_transportation_system .
43  Access Science Editors, “ Active traffic management: adaptive traffic signal control,” Access Science , 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.accessscience.com/content/active-traffic-management-
adaptive-traffic-signal-control/BR0106141 .Shared transportation 
may displace the need for 
public transportation—
or public transportation 
may change form towards 
personal rapid transit  
that uses small capacity 
vehicles to transport 
people on demand.