17actively pursuing alternative models of  computing—especially those that are inspired 
by what is known about biological neural networks—with the aim of  improving the 
hardware efficiency and robustness of  computing systems. At the moment, such 
“neuromorphic” computers have not yet clearly demonstrated big wins, and are just 
beginning to become commercially viable. But it is possible that they will become 
commonplace (even if  only as additions to their von Neumann cousins) in the 
near future. Deep neural networks have already created a splash in the application 
landscape. A larger wave may hit when these networks can be trained and executed 
on dedicated neuromorphic hardware, as opposed to simulated on standard von 
Neumann architectures, as they are today .
Overall trends and the future of AI research
The resounding success of  the data-driven paradigm has displaced the traditional 
paradigms of  AI. Procedures such as theorem proving and logic-based knowledge 
representation and reasoning are receiving reduced attention, in part because of  the 
ongoing challenge of  connecting with real-world groundings. Planning, which was a 
mainstay of  AI research in the seventies and eighties, has also received less attention 
of  late due in part to its strong reliance on modeling assumptions that are hard 
to satisfy in realistic applications. Model-based approaches—such as physics-based 
approaches to vision and traditional control and mapping in robotics—have by and 
large given way to data-driven approaches that close the loop with sensing the results 
of  actions in the task at hand. Bayesian reasoning and graphical models, which were 
very popular even quite recently , also appear to be going out of  favor, having been 
drowned by the deluge of  data and the remarkable success of  deep learning.
Over the next fifteen years, the Study Panel expects an increasing focus on 
developing systems that are human-aware, meaning that they specifically model, 
and are specifically designed for, the characteristics of  the people with whom they 
are meant to interact. There is a lot of  interest in trying to find new, creative ways 
to develop interactive and scalable ways to teach robots. Also, IoT-type systems— 
devices and the cloud—are becoming increasingly popular, as is thinking about 
social and economic dimensions of  AI. In the coming years, new perception/object 
recognition capabilities and robotic platforms that are human-safe will grow, as will 
data-driven products and their markets.
The Study Panel also expects a reemergence of  some of  the traditional forms of  
AI as practitioners come to realize the inevitable limitations of  purely end-to-end deep 
learning approaches. We encourage young researchers not to reinvent the wheel,  
but rather to maintain an awareness of  the significant progress in many areas of   
AI during the first fifty years of  the field, and in related fields such as control theory , 
cognitive science, and psychology .A growing body of research 
is devoted to the idea that 
a wide array of devices 
can be interconnected 
to collect and share their 
sensory information. 
Such devices can include 
appliances, vehicles, 
buildings, cameras, and 
other things.