12SECTION I: WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE?
This section describes how researchers and practitioners define “ Artificial Intelligence,” and 
the areas of  AI research and application that are currently thriving. It proffers definitions of  
what AI is and is not, and describes some of  the currently “hot” areas of  AI Research. This 
section lays the groundwork for Section II, which elaborates on AI’s impacts and future in 
eight domains and Section III, which describes issues related to AI design and public policy 
and makes recommendations for encouraging AI innovation while protecting democratic values.
DEFINING AI
Curiously , the lack of  a precise, universally accepted definition of  AI probably 
has helped the field to grow, blossom, and advance at an ever-accelerating pace. 
Practitioners, researchers, and developers of  AI are instead guided by a rough 
sense of  direction and an imperative to “get on with it.” Still, a definition remains 
important and Nils J. Nilsson has provided a useful one:
“ Artificial intelligence is that activity devoted to making machines intelligent, and 
intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to function appropriately and with 
foresight in its environment.”3
From this perspective, characterizing AI depends on the credit one is willing to 
give synthesized software and hardware for functioning “appropriately” and with 
“foresight.” A simple electronic calculator performs calculations much faster than 
the human brain, and almost never makes a mistake.4 Is a calculator intelligent? 
Like Nilsson, the Study Panel takes a broad view that intelligence lies on a multi-
dimensional spectrum. According to this view, the difference between an arithmetic 
calculator and a human brain is not one of  kind, but of  scale, speed, degree of  
autonomy , and generality . The same factors can be used to evaluate every other 
instance of  intelligence—speech recognition software, animal brains, cruise-control 
systems in cars, Go-playing programs, thermostats—and to place them at some 
appropriate location in the spectrum.
Although our broad interpretation places the calculator within the intelligence 
spectrum, such simple devices bear little resemblance to today’s AI. The frontier of   
AI has moved far ahead and functions of  the calculator are only one among the  
millions that today’s smartphones can perform. AI developers now work on improving, 
generalizing, and scaling up the intelligence currently found on smartphones.
In fact, the field of  AI is a continual endeavor to push forward the frontier of  
machine intelligence. Ironically , AI suffers the perennial fate of  losing claim to its 
acquisitions, which eventually and inevitably get pulled inside the frontier, a repeating 
pattern known as the “ AI effect” or the “odd paradox”—AI brings a new technology 
into the common fold, people become accustomed to this technology , it stops being 
considered AI, and newer technology emerges.5 The same pattern will continue in the 
future. AI does not “deliver” a life-changing product as a bolt from the blue. Rather, 
AI technologies continue to get better in a continual, incremental way .
3  Nils J. Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of  Ideas and Achievements  (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
4  Wikimedia Images, accessed August 1, 2016, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/b/b6/SHARP_ELSIMATE_EL-W221.jpg .
5  Pamela McCorduck, Machines Who Think: A Personal Inquiry into the History and Prospects of  
Artificial Intelligence , 2nd ed. (Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, Ltd., 2004; San Francisco: W . H. Freeman, 
1979), Citations are to the Peters edition.An accurate and 
sophisticated picture of 
AI—one that competes with 
its popular portrayal—is 
hampered by the difficulty 
of pinning down a precise 
definition of artificial 
intelligence.