23AI is likely to have an increasing impact on city infrastructure. Accurate predictive 
models of  individuals’ movements, their preferences, and their goals are likely to 
emerge with the greater availability of  data. The ethical issues regarding such an 
emergence are discussed in Section III of  this report.
The United States Department of  Transportation released a call for proposals in  
2016 asking medium-size cities to imagine smart city infrastructure for transportation.55 
This initiative plans to award forty million dollars to a city to demonstrate how 
technology and data can be used to reimagine the movement of  people as well as goods.
One vision is a network of  connected vehicles that can reach a high level of  safety 
in driving with car-to-car communication.56 If  this vision becomes reality , we expect 
advances in multi-agent coordination, collaboration, and planning will have a 
significant impact on future cars and play a role in making the transportation system 
more reliable and efficient. Robots are also likely to take part in transportation by 
carrying individuals and packages (c.f., Segway robot). For transportation of  goods, 
interest in drones has increased, and Amazon is currently testing a delivery system using 
them,57 although questions remain about the appropriate safety rules and regulations. 
The increased sensing capabilities, adoption of  drones, and the connected 
transportation infrastructure will also raise concerns about the privacy of  individuals 
and the safety of  private data. In coming years, these and related transportation issues 
will need to be addressed either by preemptive action on the part of  industry or within 
the legal framework. As noted in the Section III policy discussion, how well this is done 
will affect the pace and scope of  AI-related advances in the transportation sector.
On-demand transportation
On-demand transportation services such as Uber and Lyft have emerged as another 
pivotal application of  sensing, connectivity , and AI,58 with algorithms for matching 
drivers to passengers by location and suitability (reputation modeling).59 60
Through dynamic pricing, these services ration access by willingness-to-pay , with 
dynamic pricing also encouraging an increase in the supply of  drivers, and have 
become a popular method for transportation in cities. With their rapid advance have 
come multiple policy and legal issues, such as competition with existing taxi services 
and concerns about lack of  regulation and safety . On-demand transportation services 
seem likely to be a major force towards self-driving cars.
Carpooling and ridesharing have long been seen as a promising approach to 
decrease traffic congestion and better utilize personal transportation resources. 
Services such as Zimride and Nuride bring together people sharing similar routes for a 
joint trip. But this approach to carpooling has failed to gain traction on a large scale.
55  “U.S. Department of  Transportation Launches Smart City Challenge to Create a City of  
the Future,” Transportation.gov, U.S. Department of  Transportation, December 7, 2015, accessed 
August 1, 2016, https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/us-department-transportation-
launches-smart-city-challenge-create-city-future .
56  Will Knight, “Car-to-Car Communication: A simple wireless technology promises to 
make driving much safer.,” MIT Technology Review , accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.
technologyreview.com/s/534981/car-to-car-communication/ .
57  “ Amazon Prime Air,” Amazon, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.amazon.com/
b?node=8037720011 .
58  Jared Meyer, “Uber and Lyft are changing the way Americans move about their country ,” 
National Review , June 7, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nationalreview.com/
article/436263/uber-lyft-ride-sharing-services-sharing-economy-are-future .
59  Alexander Howard, “How Digital Platforms Like LinkedIn, Uber And TaskRabbit Are 
Changing The On-Demand Economy ,” The Huffington Post , July 14, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/online-talent-platforms_us_55a03545e4b0b8145f72ccf6 .
60  “ Announcing UberPool,” Uber Newsroom, August 5, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, https://
newsroom.uber.com/announcing-uberpool/ .Our Study Panel doesn’t 
expect drones that can 
fly, swim, and drive, or 
flying quadcoptors to 
become a common means 
of transportation by 2030 
(although prototypes exist 
today).