26promise in healthcare.61 The reduction or removal of  these obstacles, combined with 
innovations still on the horizon, have the potential to significantly improve health 
outcomes and quality of  life for millions of  people in the coming years.
The clinical setting
For decades, the vision of  an AI-powered clinician’s assistant has been a near cliché. 
Although there have been successful pilots of  AI-related technology in healthcare,62 
the current healthcare delivery system unfortunately remains structurally ill-suited to 
absorb and deploy rapid advances. Incentives provided by the Affordable Care Act 
have accelerated the penetration of  electronic health records (EHRs) into clinical 
practice, but implementation has been poor, eroding clinicians’ confidence in their 
usefulness. A small group of  companies control the EHR market, and user interfaces 
are widely considered substandard, including annoying pop-ups that physicians 
routinely dismiss. The promise of  new analytics using data from EHRs, including AI, 
remains largely unrealized due to these and other regulatory and structural barriers.
Looking ahead to the next fifteen years, AI advances, if  coupled with sufficient data  
and well-targeted systems, promise to change the cognitive tasks assigned to human 
clinicians. Physicians now routinely solicit verbal descriptions of  symptoms from 
presenting patients and, in their heads, correlate patterns against the clinical 
presentation of  known diseases. With automated assistance, the physician could 
instead supervise this process, applying her or his experience and intuition to guide the 
input process and to evaluate the output of  the machine intelligence. The literal 
“hands-on” experience of  the physician will remain critical. A significant challenge is to 
optimally integrate the human dimensions of  care with automated reasoning processes.
To achieve future advances, clinicians must be involved and engaged at the outset to 
ensure that systems are well-engineered and trusted. Already , a new generation of  more 
tech savvy physicians routinely utilize specialized apps on mobile devices. At the same 
time, workloads on primary care clinicians have increased to the point that they are  
grateful for help from any quarter. Thus, the opportunity to exploit new learning methods,  
to create structured patterns of  inference by mining the scientific literature automatically ,  
and to create true cognitive assistants by supporting free-form dialogue, has never 
been greater. Provided these advances are not stymied by regulatory , legal, and social 
barriers, immense improvements to the value of  healthcare are within our grasp.
Healthcare analytics
At the population level, AI’s ability to mine outcomes from millions of  patient clinical 
records promises to enable finer-grained, more personalized diagnosis and treatment. 
Automated discovery of  genotype-phenotype connections will also become possible 
as full, once-in-a-lifetime genome sequencing becomes routine for each patient.
A related (and perhaps earlier) capability will be to find “patients like mine” as a way  
to inform treatment decisions based on analysis of  a similar cohort. Traditional and  
non-traditional healthcare data, augmented by social platforms, may lead to the emergence 
of  self-defined subpopulations, each managed by a surrounding ecosystem of  healthcare 
providers augmented with automated recommendation and monitoring systems.
These developments have the potential to radically transform healthcare 
61  LeighAnne Olsen, Dara Aisner, and J. Michael McGinnis, eds., “Institute of  Medicine 
(US) Roundtable on Evidence-Based Medicine,” The Learning Healthcare System: Workshop Summary.  
(Washington (DC): National Academies Press  (US); 2007), accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53500/ .
62  Katherine E. Henry , David N. Hager, Peter J. Pronovost, and Suchi Saria, “ A Targeted Real-
time Early Warning Score (TREWScore) for Septic Shock,” Science Translational Medicine 7 , (299), 
299ra122.AI-based applications 
could improve health 
outcomes and quality of 
life for millions of people 
in the coming years—but 
only if they gain the trust 
of doctors, nurses, and 
patients.