34In the next fifteen years, it is likely that human teachers will be assisted by AI 
technologies with better human interaction, both in the classroom and in the home. 
The Study Panel expects that more general and more sophisticated virtual reality 
scenarios in which students can immerse themselves in subjects from all disciplines 
will be developed. Some steps in this direction are being taken now by increasing 
collaborations between AI researchers and researchers in the humanities and social 
sciences, exemplified by Stanford’s Galileo Correspondence Project92 and Columbia’s 
Making and Knowing Project.93 These interdisciplinary efforts create interactive 
experiences with historical documents and the use of  Virtual Reality (VR) to explore 
interactive archeological sites.94 VR techniques are already being used in the natural 
sciences such as biology , anatomy , geology and astronomy to allow students to interact 
with environments and objects that are difficult to engage with in the real world. The 
recreation of  past worlds and fictional worlds will become just as popular for studies 
of  arts and other sciences.
AI techniques will increasingly blur the line between formal, classroom education 
and self-paced, individual learning. Adaptive learning systems, for example, are going 
to become a core part of  the teaching process in higher education because of  the 
pressures to contain cost while serving a larger number of  students and moving students 
through school more quickly . While formal education will not disappear, the Study 
Panel believes that MOOCs and other forms of  online education will become part of  
learning at all levels, from K-12 through university , in a blended classroom experience. 
This development will facilitate more customizable approaches to learning, in which 
students can learn at their own pace using educational techniques that work best for 
them. Online education systems will learn as the students learn, supporting rapid 
advances in our understanding of  the learning process. Learning analytics, in turn, will 
accelerate the development of  tools for personalized education.
The current transition from hard copy books to digital and audio media and texts 
is likely to become prevalent in education as well. Digital reading devices will also 
become much ‘smarter’, providing students with easy access to additional information 
about subject matter as they study . Machine Translation (MT) technology will 
also make it easier to translate educational material into different languages with a 
fair degree of  accuracy , just as it currently translates technical manuals. Textbook 
translation services that currently depend only upon human translators will 
increasingly incorporate automatic methods to improve the speed and affordability of  
their services for school systems.
Online learning systems will also expand the opportunity for adults and working 
professionals to enhance their knowledge and skills (or to retool and learn a new field)
 in a world where these fields are evolving rapidly . This will include the expansion 
of  fully online professional degrees as well as professional certifications based on 
online coursework.
Broader societal consequences
In countries where education is difficult for the broad population to obtain, online 
resources may have a positive effect if  the population has the tools to access them.  
The development of  online educational resources should make it easier for 
foundations that support international educational programs to provide quality 
92  Stanford University: Galileo Correspondence Project, accessed August 1, 2016, http://galileo.
stanford.edu .
93  The Making and Knowing Project: Reconstructing the 16th Century Workshop of  BNF MS. 
FR. 640 at Columbia University , accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.makingandknowing.org .
94  Paul James, “3D Mapped HTC Vive Demo Brings Archaeology to Life,” Road to VR , August 
31, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.roadtovr.com/3d-mapped-htc-vive-demo-brings-
archaeology-to-life/.While formal education 
will not disappear, the 
Study Panel believes that 
MOOCs and other forms 
of online education will 
become part of learning 
at all levels, from K-12 
through university, in 
a blended classroom 
experience.