13The human measure
Notably , the characterization of  intelligence as a spectrum grants no special status 
to the human brain. But to date human intelligence has no match in the biological 
and artificial worlds for sheer versatility , with the abilities “to reason, achieve 
goals, understand and generate language, perceive and respond to sensory inputs, 
prove mathematical theorems, play challenging games, synthesize and summarize 
information, create art and music, and even write histories.”6
This makes human intelligence a natural choice for benchmarking the progress 
of  AI. It may even be proposed, as a rule of  thumb, that any activity computers 
are able to perform and people once performed should be counted as an instance 
of  intelligence. But matching any human ability is only a sufficient condition, not a 
necessary one. There are already many systems that exceed human intelligence, at 
least in speed, such as scheduling the daily arrivals and departures of  thousands of  
flights in an airport.
AI’s long quest—and eventual success—to beat human players at the game of  
chess offered a high-profile instance for comparing human to machine intelligence. 
Chess has fascinated people for centuries. When the possibility of  building computers 
became imminent, Alan Turing, who many consider the father of  computer science, 
“mentioned the idea of  computers showing intelligence with chess as a paradigm.”7 
Without access to powerful computers, “Turing played a game in which he simulated 
the computer, taking about half  an hour per move.”
But it was only after a long line of  improvements in the sixties and seventies—
contributed by groups at Carnegie Mellon, Stanford, MIT , The Institute for 
Theoretical and Experimental Physics at Moscow, and Northwestern University—
that chess-playing programs started gaining proficiency . The final push came 
through a long-running project at IBM, which culminated with the Deep Blue 
program beating Garry Kasparov, then the world chess champion, by a score of  
3.5-2.5 in 1997. Curiously , no sooner had AI caught up with its elusive target than 
Deep Blue was portrayed as a collection of  “brute force methods” that wasn’t “real 
intelligence.”8 In fact, IBM’s subsequent publication about Deep Blue, which gives 
extensive details about its search and evaluation procedures, doesn’t mention the 
word “intelligent” even once!9 Was Deep Blue intelligent or not? Once again, the 
frontier had moved.
An operational definition
AI can also be defined by what AI researchers do. This report views AI 
primarily as a branch of  computer science that studies the properties of 
intelligence by synthesizing intelligence.10 Though the advent of  AI has depended 
on the rapid progress of  hardware computing resources, the focus here on 
software reflects a trend in the AI community . More recently , though, progress in 
building hardware tailored for neural-network-based computing11 has created a 
6  Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence .
7  Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence , 89.
8  McCorduck, Machines Who Think , 433.
9  Murray Campbell, A. Joseph Hoane Jr., and Feng-hsiung Hsu, “Deep Blue,” Artificial 
Intelligence 134, nos. 1 and 2 (2002): 57–83.
10  Herbert A. Simon, “ Artificial Intelligence: An Empirical Science,” Artificial Intelligence 77, no. 2 
(1995):95–127.
11  Paul Merolla John V . Arthur, Rodrigo Alvarez-Icaza, Andrew S. Cassidy , Jun Sawada, Filipp 
Akopyan, Bryan L. Jackson, Nabil Imam, Chen Guo, Yutaka Nakamura, Bernard Brezzo, Ivan Vo, 
Steven K. Esser, Rathinakumar Appuswamy , Brian Taba, Arnon Amir, Myron D. Flickner, William 
P . Risk, Rajit Manohar, and Dharmendra S. Modha, “ A Million Spiking-Neuron Integrated 
Circuit with a Scalable Communication Network and Interface,” accessed August 1, 2016, http://
paulmerolla.com/merolla_main_som.pdf .Intelligence lies on a 
multi-dimensional 
spectrum. According to 
this view, the difference 
between an arithmetic 
calculator and a human 
brain is not one of kind, 
but of scale, speed, 
degree of autonomy, and 
generality.