27delivery as medical procedures and lifetime clinical records for hundreds of  millions 
of  individuals become available. Similarly , the automated capture of  personal 
environmental data from wearable devices will expand personalized medicine. These 
activities are becoming more commercially viable as vendors discover ways to engage 
large populations (e.g. ShareCare)63 and then to create population-scale data that can 
be mined to produce individualized analytics and recommendations.
Unfortunately , the FDA has been slow to approve innovative diagnostic software, 
and there are many remaining barriers to rapid innovation. HIPAA (Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act) requirements for protecting patient privacy create  
legal barriers to the flow of  patient data to applications that could utilize AI technologies. 
Unanticipated negative effects of  approved drugs could show up routinely , sooner, and 
more rigorously than they do today , but mobile apps that analyze drug interactions 
may be blocked from pulling the necessary information from patient records. More 
generally , AI research and innovation in healthcare are hampered by the lack of  
widely accepted methods and standards for privacy protection. The FDA has been 
slow to approve innovative software, in part due to an unclear understanding of  the 
cost/benefit tradeoffs of  these systems. If  regulators (principally the FDA) recognize 
that effective post-marketing reporting is a dependable hedge against some safety risks, 
faster initial approval of  new treatments and interventions may become possible.
Automated image interpretation has also been a promising subject of  study for 
decades. Progress on interpreting large archives of  weakly-labeled images, such as 
large photo archives scraped from the web, has been explosive. At first blush, it is 
surprising that there has not been a similar revolution in interpretation of  medical 
images. Most medical imaging modalities (CT , MR, ultrasound) are inherently digital, 
the images are all archived, and there are large, established companies with internal 
R&D (e.g. Siemens, Philips, GE) devoted to imaging.
But several barriers have limited progress to date. Most hospital image archives 
have only gone digital over the past decade. More importantly , the problem in 
medicine is not to recognize what is in the image (is this a liver or a kidney?), but 
rather to make a fine-grained judgement about it (does the slightly darker smudge 
in the liver suggest a potentially cancerous tumor?). Strict regulations govern these 
high-stakes judgements. Even with state-of-the-art technologies, a radiologist will still 
likely have to look at the images, so the value proposition is not yet compelling. Also, 
healthcare regulations preclude easy federation of  data across institutions. Thus, only 
very large organizations of  integrated care, such as Kaiser Permanente, are able to 
attack these problems.
Still, automated/augmented image interpretation has started to gain momentum. 
The next fifteen years will probably not bring fully automated radiology , but initial forays 
into image “triage” or second level checking will likely improve the speed and cost-
effectiveness of  medical imaging. When coupled with electronic patient record systems, 
large-scale machine learning techniques could be applied to medical image data. For 
example, multiple major healthcare systems have archives of  millions of  patient scans, 
each of  which has an associated radiological report, and most have an associated 
patient record. Already , papers are appearing in the literature showing that deep neural 
networks can be trained to produce basic radiological findings, with high reliability ,  
by training from this data.64
63  Sharecare, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.sharecare.com .
64  Hoo-Chang Shin, Holger R. Roth, Mingchen Gao, Le Lu, Ziyue Xu, Isabella Nogues, 
Jianhua Yao, Daniel Mollura, and Ronald M. Summers, “Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for 
Computer-aided Detection: CNN Architectures, Dataset Characteristics and Transfer Learning,” 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35, no. 5 (2016): 1285–1298.A small group of companies 
control the EHR market, 
and user interfaces 
are widely considered 
substandard, including 
annoying pop-ups that 
physicians routinely 
dismiss.