48“habits” than people, resulting in still fewer revenue sources. The many municipalities 
relying on income from speeding or parking tickets will have to find alternatives 
if  autonomous cars can drop people off and find distance parking, or if  they are 
programmed not to violate the law. As a result, government bodies trying to balance 
their budgets in light of  advances in AI may pass legislation to slow down or alter the 
course of  the technology .
Politics
AI technologies are already being used by political actors in gerrymandering and 
targeted “robocalls” designed to suppress votes, and on social media platforms in the 
form of  “bots.”138 They can enable coordinated protest as well as the ability to predict 
protests, and promote greater transparency in politics by more accurately pinpointing 
who said what, when. Thus, administrative and regulatory laws regarding AI can be 
designed to promote greater democratic participation or, if  ill-conceived, to reduce it.
This list is not exhaustive and focuses largely on domestic policy in the United 
States, leaving out many areas of  law that AI is likely to touch. One lesson that 
might be drawn concerns the growing disconnect between the context-specific way 
in which AI is governed today and a wider consideration of  themes shared by AI 
technologies across industries or sectors of  society . It could be tempting to create new 
institutional configurations capable of  amassing expertise and setting AI standards 
across multiple contexts. The Study Panel’s consensus is that attempts to regulate “ AI” 
in general would be misguided, since there is no clear definition of  AI (it isn’t any 
one thing), and the risks and considerations are very different in different domains. 
Instead, policymakers should recognize that to varying degrees and over time, various 
industries will need distinct, appropriate, regulations that touch on software built 
using AI or incorporating AI in some way . The government will need the expertise to 
scrutinize standards and technology developed by the private and public sector, and 
to craft regulations where necessary .
Guidelines for the future
Faced with the profound changes that AI technologies can produce, pressure for 
“more” and “tougher” regulation is inevitable. Misunderstanding about what AI is 
and is not, especially against a background of  scare-mongering, could fuel opposition 
to technologies that could benefit everyone. This would be a tragic mistake. 
Regulation that stifles innovation, or relocates it to other jurisdictions, would be 
similarly counterproductive.
Fortunately , principles that guide successful regulation of  current digital 
technologies can be instructive. A recent multi-year study comparing privacy 
regulation in four European countries and the United States, for example, yielded 
counter-intuitive results.139 Those countries, such as Spain and France, with strict 
and detailed regulations bred a “compliance mentality” within corporations, which 
had the effect of  discouraging both innovation and robust privacy protections. 
Rather than taking responsibility for privacy protection internally and developing a 
professional staff to foster it in business and manufacturing processes, or engaging with 
privacy advocates or academics outside their walls, these companies viewed privacy as 
a compliance activity . Their focus was on avoiding fines or punishments, rather than 
proactively designing technology and adapting practices to protect privacy .
By contrast, the regulatory environment in the United States and Germany , 
which combined more ambiguous goals with tough transparency requirements and 
meaningful enforcement, were more successful in catalyzing companies to view 
138  Political Bots, accessed August 1, 2016, http://politicalbots.org/ .
139  Kenneth A. Bamberger and Deirdre K. Mulligan, Privacy on the Ground: Driving Corporate Behavior 
in the United States and Europe  (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2015).Like other technologies, 
AI has the potential to be 
used for good or nefarious 
purposes. A vigorous and 
informed debate about 
how to best steer AI in 
ways that enrich our lives 
and our society is an 
urgent and vital need.