47of  product liability—and the responsibility that falls to companies manufacturing 
these products— will likely grow when human actors become less responsible for the 
actions of  a machine.
Liability (criminal )
If  tort law expects harms to be foreseeable, criminal law goes further to expect that 
harms be intended . US law in particular attaches great importance to the concept of  
mens rea —the intending mind. As AI applications engage in behavior that, were it 
done by a human, would constitute a crime, courts and other legal actors will have to 
puzzle through whom to hold accountable and on what theory .
Agency
The above issues raise the question of  whether and under what circumstances an 
AI system could operate as the agent of  a person or corporation. Already regulatory 
bodies in the United States, Canada, and elsewhere are setting the conditions under 
which software can enter into a binding contract.135 The more AI conducts legally 
salient activities, the greater the challenge to principles of  agency under the law.
Certification
The very notion of  “artificial intelligence” suggests a substitution for human skill 
and ingenuity . And in many contexts, ranging from driving to performing surgery or 
practicing law, a human must attain some certification or license before performing 
a given task. Accordingly , law and policy will have to—and already does—grapple 
with how to determine competency in an AI system. For example, imagine a 
robotics company creates a surgical platform capable of  autonomously removing an 
appendix. Or imagine a law firm writes an application capable of  rendering legal 
advice. Today , it is unclear from a legal perspective who in this picture would have to 
pass the medical boards or legal bar, let alone where  they would be required to do so.136
Labor
As AI substitutes for human roles, some jobs will be eliminated and new jobs will 
be created. The net effect on jobs is ambiguous, but labor markets are unlikely to 
benefit everyone evenly . The demand for some types of  skills or abilities will likely 
drop significantly , negatively affecting the employment levels and wages of  people 
with those skills.137 While the ultimate effects on income levels and distribution are not 
inevitable, they depend substantially on government policies, on the way companies 
choose to organize work, and on decisions by individuals to invest in learning new 
skills and seeking new types of  work and income opportunities. People who find their 
employment altered or terminated as a consequence of  advances of  AI may seek 
recourse in the legislature and courts. This may be why Littler Mendelson LLP—
perhaps the largest employment law firm in the world—has an entire practice group 
to address robotics and artificial intelligence.
Taxation
Federal, state, and local revenue sources may be affected. Accomplishing a task using AI 
instead of  a person can be faster and more accurate—and avoid employment taxes.  
As a result, AI applications could increasingly shift investment from payroll and 
income to capital expenditure. Depending on a state budget’s reliance on payroll 
and income tax, such a shift could be destabilizing. AI may also display different 
135  Ian R. Kerr, “Ensuring the Success of  Contract Formation in Agent-Mediated Electronic 
Commerce,” Electronic Commerce Research 1 (2001): 183–202.
136  Ryan Calo, “Digital Agenda’s public discussion on ‘The effects of  robotics on economics, 
labour and society ,’” Ausschuss Digitale Agenda , (Deutsche Bundestag: Ausschussdrucksache A-Drs.  
18(24)102), June 22, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.bundestag.de/blob/428266/195a
1cde8d5347849accbbe60ed91865/a-drs-18-24-102-data.pdf .
137  Brynjolfsson and McAfee, “Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution is 
Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity , and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the 
Economy (2011)”; Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age .AI applications could 
increasingly shift 
investment from payroll 
and income to capital 
expenditure. Depending on 
a state budget’s reliance 
on payroll and income 
tax, such a shift could be 
destabilizing.