3.1. Pairwise Self­attention
We explore two types of self-attention. The ﬁrst, which
we refer to as pairwise , has the following form:
yi=/summationdisplay
j∈R(i)α(xi,xj)⊙β(xj), (2)
where⊙is the Hadamard product, iis the spatial index of
feature vector xi(i.e., its location in the feature map), and
R(i)is the local footprint of the aggregation. The footprint
R(i)is a set of indices that speciﬁes which feature vectors
are aggregated to construct the new feature yi.
The function βproduces the feature vectors β(xj)that
are aggregated by the adaptive weight vectors α(xi,xj).
Possible instantiations of this function, along with feature
transformation elements that surround self-attention opera-
tions in our architecture, are discussed later in this section.
The function αcomputes the weights α(xi,xj)that are
used to combine the transformed features β(xj). To simplify
exposition of different forms of self-attention, we decompose
αas follows:
α(xi,xj) =γ(δ(xi,xj)). (3)
The relation function δoutputs a single vector that represents
the features xiandxj. The function γthen maps this vector
into a vector that can be combined with β(xj)as shown in
Eq.2.
The function γenables us to explore relations δthat pro-
duce vectors of varying dimensionality that need not match
the dimensionality of β(xj). It also allows us to introduce
additional trainable transformations into the construction of
the weights α(xi,xj), making this construction more ex-
pressive. This function performs a linear mapping, followed
by a nonlinearity, followed by another linear mapping; i.e.,
γ={Linear→ReLU→Linear}. The output dimensional-
ity ofγdoes not need to match that of βas attention weights
can be shared across a group of channels.
We explore multiple forms for the relation function δ:
Summation: δ(xi,xj) =ϕ(xi)+ψ(xj)
Subtraction: δ(xi,xj) =ϕ(xi)−ψ(xj)
Concatenation: δ(xi,xj) = [ϕ(xi),ψ(xj)]
Hadamard product: δ(xi,xj) =ϕ(xi)⊙ψ(xj)
Dot product: δ(xi,xj) =ϕ(xi)⊤ψ(xj)
Hereϕandψare trainable transformations such as linear
mappings, and have matching output dimensionality. With
summation, subtraction, and Hadamard product, the dimen-
sionality of δ(xi,xj)is the same as the dimensionality of
the transformation functions. With concatenation, the dimen-
sionality ofδ(xi,xj)will be doubled. With the dot product,
the dimensionality of δ(xi,xj)is 1.Position encoding. A distinguishing characteristic of pair-
wise attention is that feature vectors xjare processed in-
dependently and the weight computation α(xi,xj)cannot
incorporate information from any location other than iandj.
To provide some spatial context to the model, we augment
the feature maps with position information. The position
is encoded as follows. The horizontal and vertical coor-
dinates along the feature map are ﬁrst normalized to the
range[−1,1]in each dimension. These normalized two-
dimensional coordinates are then passed through a trainable
linear layer, which can map them to an appropriate range
for each layer in the network. This linear mapping outputs
a two-dimensional position feature pifor each location iin
the feature map. For each pair (i,j)such thatj∈ R(i), we
encode the relative position information by calculating the
difference pi−pj. The output of δ(xi,xj)is augmented by
concatenating [pi−pj]prior to the mapping γ.
3.2. Patchwise Self­attention
The other type of self-attention we explore is referred to
aspatchwise and has the following form:
yi=/summationdisplay
j∈R(i)α(xR(i))j⊙β(xj), (4)
wherexR(i)is the patch of feature vectors in the footprint
R(i).α(xR(i))is a tensor of the same spatial dimensionality
as the patch xR(i).α(xR(i))jis the vector at location jin
this tensor, corresponding spatially to the vector xjinxR(i).
In patchwise self-attention, we allow the construction
of the weight vector that is applied to β(xj)to refer to
and incorporate information from all feature vectors in the
footprint R(i). Note that, unlike pairwise self-attention,
patchwise self-attention is no longer a set operation with
respect to the features xj. It is not permutation-invariant or
cardinality-invariant: the weight computation α(xR(i))can
index the feature vectors xjindividually, by location, and
can intermix information from feature vectors from different
locations within the footprint. Patchwise self-attention is
thus strictly more powerful than convolution.
We decompose α(xR(i))as follows:
α(xR(i)) =γ(δ(xR(i))). (5)
The function γmaps a vector produced by δ(xR(i))to a
tensor of appropriate dimensionality. This tensor comprises
weight vectors for all locations j. The function δcombines
the feature vectors xjfrom the patch xR(i). We explore the
following forms for this combination:
Star-product: δ(xR(i)) = [ϕ(xi)⊤ψ(xj)]∀j∈R(i)
Clique-product: δ(xR(i)) = [ϕ(xj)⊤ψ(xk)]∀j,k∈R(i)
Concatenation: δ(xR(i)) = [ϕ(xi),[ψ(xj)]∀j∈R(i)]
10078