Transition. Transition layers reduce spatial resolution, thus
reducing the computational burden and expanding receptive
ﬁeld. The transition comprises a batch normalization layer,
a ReLU [ 25],2×2max pooling with stride 2, and a linear
mapping that expands channel dimensionality.
Footprint of self-attention. The local footprint R(i)con-
trols the amount of context gathered by a self-attention oper-
ator from the preceding feature layer. We set the footprint
size to7×7for the last four stages of SAN. The footprint is
set to3×3in the ﬁrst stage due to the high resolution of that
stage and the consequent memory consumption. Note that
increasing the footprint size has no impact on the number
of parameters in pairwise self-attention. We will study the
effect of footprint size on accuracy, capacity, and FLOPs in
Section 5.3.
Instantiations. The number of self-attention blocks in each
stage can be adjusted to obtain networks with different ca-
pacities. In the networks presented in Table 1, the number of
self-attention blocks used in the last four stages is the same
as the number of residual blocks in ResNet26, ResNet38,
and ResNet50, respectively.
4. Comparison
In this section, we relate the family of self-attention oper-
ators presented in Section 3to other constructions, including
convolution [ 19] and scalar attention [ 33,35,27,13]. Ta-
ble2summarizes some differences between the construc-
tions. These are discussed in more detail below.
Operation Content adaptive Channel adaptive
Convolution [ 19] ✗ ✓
Scalar attention [ 33,35,27,13]✓ ✗
Vector attention (ours) ✓ ✓
Table 2. The convolution does not adapt to the content of the image.
Scalar attention produces scalar weights that do not vary along the
channel dimension. Our operators efﬁciently compute attention
weights that adapt across both spatial dimensions and channels.
Convolution. The regular convolution operator has ﬁxed
kernel weights that are independent of the content of the
image. It does not adapt to the input content. The kernel
weights can vary across channels.
Scalar attention. Scalar attention, as used in the trans-
former [ 33] and related constructions in computer vi-
sion [ 35,27,13], typically has the following form:
yi=/summationdisplay
j∈R(i)/parenleftbig
ϕ(xi)⊤ψ(xj)/parenrightbig
β(xj) (6)
(A softmax and other forms of normalization can be added.)
Unlike the convolution, the aggregation weights can vary
across different locations, depending on the content of the
image. On the other hand, the weight ϕ(xi)⊤ψ(xj)is ascalar that is shared across all channels. (Hu et al. [ 13] ex-
plored alternatives to the dot product, but these alternatives
operated on scalar weights that were likewise shared across
channels.) This construction does not adapt the attention
weights at different channels. Although this can be mitigated
to some extent by introducing multiple heads [ 33], the num-
ber of heads is a small constant and scalar weights are shared
by all channels within a head.
Vector attention (ours). The operators presented in Sec-
tion3subsume scalar attention and generalize it in important
ways. First, within the pairwise attention family, the relation
functionδcan produce vector output. This is the case for
the summation, subtraction, Hadamard, and concatenation
forms. This vector can then be further processed and mapped
to the right dimensionality by γ, which can also take posi-
tion encoding channels as input. The mapping γproduces a
vector that has compatible dimensionality to the transformed
featuresβ. This gives the construction signiﬁcant ﬂexibility
in accommodating different relation functions and auxiliary
inputs, expressive power due to multiple linear mappings
and nonlinearities along the computation graph, ability to
produce attention weights that vary along both spatial and
channel dimensions, and computational efﬁciency due to the
ability to reduce dimensionality by the mappings γandβ.
The patchwise family of operators generalizes convolu-
tion while retaining parameter and FLOP efﬁciency. This
family of operators produces weight vectors for all positions
along a feature map that also vary along the channel dimen-
sion. The weight vectors are informed by the entirety of the
footprint of the operator.
5. Experiments
We conduct experiments on ImageNet classiﬁcation [ 29].
The dataset contains 1.28 million training images and 50K
validation images from 1000 different classes. For compar-
isons of self-attention networks with convolutional networks
such as ResNet, we train on the original training set and re-
port accuracy (single center crop) on the original validation
set (referred to as ‘val-original’). For controlled experiments
and ablation studies on self-attention networks, we split a
separate validation set out of the original training set by ran-
domly sampling 50 images from the training set for each
category: this is referred to as ‘val-split’. This ensures that
architectural and hyperparameter choices are not made on
the same set that is used for comparisons with external base-
lines.
5.1. Implementation
We train all models from scratch for 100 epochs. We
use the cosine learning rate schedule with base learning rate
0.1 [ 23]. We apply standard data augmentation on Ima-
geNet, including random cropping to 224×224patches [ 31],
random horizontal ﬂipping, and normalization. We use syn-
chronous SGD with minibatch size 256 on 8 GPUs. We
10080