Exploring Self-attention for Image Recognition
Hengshuang Zhao
CUHKJiaya Jia
CUHKVladlen Koltun
Intel Labs
Abstract
Recent work has shown that self-attention can serve as
a basic building block for image recognition models. We
explore variations of self-attention and assess their effec-
tiveness for image recognition. We consider two forms of
self-attention. One is pairwise self-attention, which gener-
alizes standard dot-product attention and is fundamentally
a set operator. The other is patchwise self-attention, which
is strictly more powerful than convolution. Our pairwise
self-attention networks match or outperform their convolu-
tional counterparts, and the patchwise models substantially
outperform the convolutional baselines. We also conduct
experiments that probe the robustness of learned represen-
tations and conclude that self-attention networks may have
signiﬁcant beneﬁts in terms of robustness and generalization.
1. Introduction
Convolutional networks have revolutionized computer
vision. Thirty years ago, they were applied successfully to
recognizing handwritten digits [ 19]. Building directly on
this work, convolutional networks were scaled up in 2012 to
achieve breakthrough accuracy on the ImageNet dataset, out-
performing all prior methods by a large margin and launch-
ing the deep learning era in computer vision [ 18,29]. Subse-
quent architectural improvements yielded successively larger
and more accurate convolutional networks for image recog-
nition, including GoogLeNet [ 31], VGG [ 30], ResNet [ 12],
DenseNet [ 16], and squeeze-and-excitation [ 15]. These ar-
chitectures in turn serve as templates for applications in
computer vision and beyond.
All these networks, from LeNet [ 19] onwards, are based
fundamentally on the discrete convolution. The discrete
convolution operator ∗can be deﬁned as follows:
(F∗k)(p) =/summationdisplay
s+t=pF(s)k(t). (1)
HereFis a discrete function and kis a discrete ﬁlter. A
key characteristic of the convolution is its translation invari-
ance: the same ﬁlter kis applied across the image F. Whilethe convolution has undoubtedly been effective as the ba-
sic operator in modern image recognition, it is not without
drawbacks. For example, the convolution lacks rotation in-
variance. The number of parameters that must be learned
grows with the footprint of the kernel k. And the stationarity
of the ﬁlter can be seen as a drawback: the aggregation of
information from a neighborhood cannot adapt to its content.
Is it possible that networks based on the discrete convolution
are a local optimum in the design space of image recognition
models? Could other parts of the design space yield models
with interesting new capabilities?
Recent work has shown that self-attention may consti-
tute a viable alternative for building image recognition mod-
els [13,27]. The self-attention operator has been adopted
from natural language processing, where it serves as the basis
for powerful architectures that have displaced recurrent and
convolutional models across a variety of tasks [ 33,7,6,40].
The development of effective self-attention architectures in
computer vision holds the exciting prospect of discovering
models with different and perhaps complementary properties
to convolutional networks.
In this work, we explore variations of the self-attention
operator and assess their effectiveness as the basic building
block for image recognition models. We explore two types
of self-attention. The ﬁrst is pairwise self-attention, which
generalizes the standard dot-product attention used in natural
language processing [ 33]. Pairwise attention is compelling
because, unlike the convolution, it is fundamentally a set
operator, rather than a sequence operator. Unlike the con-
volution, it does not attach stationary weights to speciﬁc
locations ( sin equation ( 1)) and is invariant to permutation
and cardinality. One consequence is that the footprint of a
self-attention operator can be increased (e.g., from a 3×3to
a7×7patch) or even made irregular without any impact on
the number of parameters. We present a number of variants
of pairwise attention that have greater expressive power than
dot-product attention while retaining these invariance proper-
ties. In particular, our weight computation does not collapse
the channel dimension and allows the feature aggregation to
adapt to each channel.
Next, we explore a different class of operators, which
we term patchwise self-attention. These operators, like the
convolution, have the ability to uniquely identify speciﬁc
locations within their footprint. They do not have the permu-
1
10076