tation or cardinality invariance of pairwise attention, but are
strictly more powerful than convolution.
Our experiments indicate that both forms of self-attention
are effective for building image recognition models. We
construct self-attention networks that can be directly com-
pared to convolutional ResNet models [ 12], and conduct
experiments on the ImageNet dataset [ 29]. Our pairwise self-
attention networks match or outperform their convolutional
counterparts, with similar or lower parameter and FLOP bud-
gets. Controlled experiments also indicate that our vectorial
operators outperform standard scalar attention. Furthermore,
our patchwise models substantially outperform the convolu-
tional baselines. For example, our mid-sized SAN15 with
patchwise attention outperforms the much larger ResNet50,
with a 78% top-1 accuracy for SAN15 versus 76.9% for
ResNet50, with a 37% lower parameter and FLOP count.
Finally, we conduct experiments that probe the robustness of
learned representations and conclude that self-attention net-
works may have signiﬁcant beneﬁts in terms of robustness
and generalization.
2. Related Work
Convolutional networks. Convolutional networks have
come to dominate computer vision. More than two decades
after their pioneering application to recognizing handwrit-
ten digits [ 19], ConvNets became mainstream after their
successful application to image recognition on the Ima-
geNet dataset [ 18,29]. A succession of increasingly pow-
erful convolutional architectures for image recognition fol-
lowed [ 31,30,12,16,15]. These serve as the basis for
models developed for other computer vision tasks, such
as semantic segmentation [ 22,3,42,44] and object detec-
tion [ 10,9,28,21].
Self-attention. Self-attention models have revolutionized
machine translation and natural language processing more
broadly [ 33,37,7,6,40]. This has inspired applications of
self-attention and related ideas to image recognition [ 5,34,
15,14,45,46,13,1,27], image synthesis [ 43,26,2], image
captioning [ 39,41,4], and video prediction [ 17,35].
Until very recently, applications of self-attention in com-
puter vision were complementary to convolution: forms of
self-attention were primarily used to create layers that were
used in addition to, to modulate the output of, or otherwise
in combination with convolutions. In channelwise attention
models [ 34,15,14], attention weights reweight activations in
different channels. Other approaches [ 4,36,8] adopted both
spatial and channel attention. A number of methods learned
to reweight convolutional activations or offset the taps of con-
volutional kernels [ 5,15,34,36,46], thus retaining the basic
principle of convolutional feature construction. Others ap-
plied self-attention in speciﬁc modules that were appended
to convolutional structures [ 35,45]. Bello et al. [ 1] com-
bined convolutional and self-attention processing streams,
but found that the global self-attention they used was notsufﬁciently powerful to replace convolutions entirely. Jia
et al. [ 17] explored dynamic ﬁlter networks, which general-
ized convolutions, but the construction incurred signiﬁcant
memory and computational costs and was not scaled up to
high-resolution images and larger datasets.
Most closely related to our work are the recent results of
Hu et al. [ 13] and Ramachandran et al. [ 27]. One of their
key innovations is restricting the scope of self-attention to
a local patch (for example, 7×7pixels), in contrast to ear-
lier constructions that applied self-attention globally over a
whole feature map [ 35,1]. Such local attention is key to lim-
iting the memory and computation consumed by the model,
facilitating successful application of self-attention through-
out the network, including early high-resolution layers. Our
work builds on these results and explores a broader variety
of self-attention formulations. In particular, our primary self-
attention mechanisms compute a vector attention that adapts
to different channels, rather than a shared scalar weight. We
also explore a family of patchwise attention operators that
are structurally different from the forms used in [ 13,27] and
constitute strict generalizations of convolution. We show that
all the presented forms of self-attention can be implemented
at scale, with favorable parameter and FLOP budgets.
3. Self-attention Networks
In convolutional networks for image recognition, the lay-
ers of the network perform two functions. The ﬁrst is feature
aggregation, which the convolution operation performs by
combining features from all locations tapped by the ker-
nel. The second function is feature transformation, which
is performed by successive linear mappings and nonlinear
scalar functions: these successive mappings and nonlinear
operations shatter the feature space and give rise to complex
piecewise mappings.
One observation that underlies our construction is that
these two functions – feature aggregation and feature trans-
formation – can be decoupled. If we have a mechanism that
performs feature aggregation, then feature transformation
can be performed by perceptron layers that process each
feature vector (for each pixel) separately. A perceptron layer
consists of a linear mapping and a nonlinear scalar function:
this pointwise operation performs feature transformation.
Our construction therefore focuses on feature aggregation.
The convolution operator performs feature aggregation
by a ﬁxed kernel that applies pretrained weights to linearly
combine feature values from a set of nearby locations. The
weights are ﬁxed and do not adapt to the content of the fea-
tures. And since each location must be processed with a
dedicated weight vector, the number of parameters scales
linearly with the number of aggregated features. We present
a number of alternative aggregation schemes and construct
high-performing image recognition architectures that inter-
leave feature aggregation (via self-attention) and feature
transformation (via elementwise perceptrons).
10077