dependency tree from the matrix M. The Per-
turbed Masking can exert on any layer of BERT or
RoBERTa.
3.2 ALSC Models Based on Trees
In this subsection, we introduce three representa-
tive tree-based ALSC models. Each of the model
is from the methods mentioned in the Introduction
part (Section 1). For a fair comparison, all the se-
lected models are of the most recently advanced
tree-based ALSC models. We brieﬂy introduce
these three models as follows.
3.2.1 Aspect-speciﬁc Graph Convolutional
Networks (ASGCN)
The Aspect-speciﬁc Graph Convolutional Net-
works (ASGCN) is proposed by Sun et al. (2019b).
They utilize the dependency tree as a graph, where
each word is viewed as a node and the dependen-
cies between words are deemed as edges. After con-
verting the dependency tree into the graph, ASGCN
uses the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to
operate on this graph to model dependencies be-
tween each word.
3.2.2 Proximity-Weighted Convolution
Network (PWCN)
The Proximity-Weighted Convolution Network
(PWCN) model is proposed by Zhang et al. (2019b).
They try to help the aspect to ﬁnd their contextual
words. For an input sentence, the PWCN ﬁrst gets
its dependency tree, and based on this tree it would
assign a proximity value to each word in the sen-
tence. The proximity value for each word is calcu-
lated by the shortest path in the dependency tree
between this word and the aspects.
3.3 Relational Graph Attention Network
(RGAT)
The Relational Graph Attention Network (RGAT)
is proposed by Wang et al. (2020). In the RGAT
model, they transform the dependency tree into
an aspect-oriented dependency tree. The aspect-
oriented dependency tree uses the aspect as the
root node, and all other words depend on the aspect
directly. The relation between the aspect and other
words is either based on the syntactic tag or the tree-
based distance in the dependency tree. Speciﬁcally,
the RGAT reserves syntactic tags for words with
1 tree-based distance to aspect, and assigns virtual
tags to longer distance words, such as “2:con” for
“A 2 tree-based distance connection”. Therefore,Dataset Split Positive Negative Neutral
Rest14Train 2164 807 637
Test 728 196 196
Laptop14Train 994 870 464
Test 341 128 169
TwitterTrain 1561 1560 3127
Test 173 173 346
Table 1: Data statistics.
the RGAT model not only exploits the topological
structure of the dependency tree but also the tree-
based distance between two words.
4 Experimental Setup
In this section, we present details about the datasets,
the tree structures used in experiments, as well as
the experiments implementations. We conduct ex-
periments on all six datasets across four languages.
But due to the limited space, we present our experi-
ments on the non-English datasets in the Appendix.
4.1 Datasets
We run experiments on six benchmark datasets.
Three of them, namely, Rest14, Laptop14, and
Twitter, are English datasets. Rest14 and Laptop14
are from SemEval 2014 task 4 (Pontiki et al., 2014),
containing sentiment reviews from restaurant and
laptop domains. Twitter is from Dong et al. (2014),
which is processed from tweets. The statistics of
these datasets are presented in Table 6. Details of
the other three non-English datasets can be found
in the Appendix. Following previous works, we
remove samples with conﬂicting polarities or with
“NULL” aspects in all datasets.
4.2 Tree Structures
For each dataset, we obtain ﬁve kinds of trees from
three sources. (1)The ﬁrst one is derived from
the off-the-shelf dependency tree parser, such as
spaCy2and allenNLP3, written as “Dep.”. For the
three English datasets, we use the biafﬁne parser
from the allenNLP package to get the dependency
tree, which is reported in Wang et al. (2020) that the
biafﬁne parser could achieve better performance.
(2)We induce trees from the pre-trained BERT and
RoBERTa by the Perturbed Masking method (Wu
et al., 2020), written them as “BERT Induced Tree”
and “RoBERTa Induced Tree”, respectively. (3)We
2http://spacy.io/
3http://www.allennlp.org/