Therefore, two following questions arise natu-
rally.
Q1: Will the tree induced from PTMs
achieve better performance than the tree given
by a dependency parser when combined with
different tree-based ALSC models? To answer
this question, we choose one model from each of
the three typical dependency tree based methods in
ALSC, and compare their performance when com-
bined with the parser-provided dependency tree
and the off-the-shelf PTMs induced trees.
Q2: Will PTMs adapt the implicitly entailed
tree structure to the ALSC task during the ﬁne-
tuning? Therefore, in this paper, we not only use
the trees induced from the off-the-shelf PTMs to en-
hance ALSC models, but also use the trees induced
from the ﬁne-tuned PTMs (In short FT-PTMs)
which are ﬁne-tuned on the ALSC datasets. Ex-
periments show that trees induced from FT-PTMs
can help tree-based ALSC models achieve better
performance than their counterparts before ﬁne-
tuning. Besides, models with trees induced from
the ALSC ﬁne-tuned RoBERTa can even outper-
form trees from the dependency parser.
Last but not least, we ﬁnd that the base RoBERTa
with an MLP layer is enough to achieve State-of-
the-art (SOTA) or near SOTA performance on all
six ALSC datasets across four languages, while
incorporating tree structures into RoBERTa-based
ALSC models does not achieve concrete improve-
ment.
Therefore, our contributions can be summarized
as:
(1) We extensively study the induced trees from
PTMs and FT-PTMs. Experiments show that mod-
els using induced trees from FT-PTMs achieve bet-
ter performance. Moreover, models using induced
trees from ﬁne-tuned RoBERTa outperform other
trees.
(2) The analysis of the induced tree from FT-
PTMs shows that it tends to be more sentiment-
word-oriented, making the aspect term directly con-
nect to its sentiment adjectives.
(3) We achieve SOTA or near SOTA perfor-
mances on six ALSC datasets across four languages
based on RoBERTa. We ﬁnd that the RoBERTa
could better adapt to ALSC and help the aspects to
ﬁnd the sentiment words.2 Related Work
ALSC without Dependencies V o and Zhang
(2015) propose the early neural network model
which does not rely on the dependency tree. Along
this line, diverse neural network models have been
proposed. Tang et al. (2016a) use the long short
term memory (LSTM) network to enhance the in-
teractions between aspects and context words. In
order to model relations of aspects and their con-
textual words, Wang et al. (2016); Liu and Zhang
(2017); Ma et al. (2017); Tay et al. (2018) incorpo-
rate the attention mechanism into the LSTM-based
neural network models. Other model structures
such as convolutional neural network (CNN) (Li
et al., 2018; Xue and Li, 2018), gated neural net-
work (Zhang et al., 2016; Xue and Li, 2018), mem-
ory neural network (Tang et al., 2016b; Chen et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018), attention neural network
(Tang et al., 2019) have also been applied in ALSC.
ALSC with Dependencies Early works of ALSC
mainly employ traditional text classiﬁcation meth-
ods focusing on machine learning algorithms and
manually designed features, which took syntactic
structures into consideration from the very begin-
ning. Kiritchenko et al. (2014) combine a set of
features including sentiment lexicons and parsing
dependencies, from which experiments show the
effectiveness of context parsing features.
A myriad of works attempt to fuse dependency
tree into neural network models in ALSC. Dong
et al. (2014) propose to convert the dependency
tree into a binary tree ﬁrst, then apply the adaptive
recursive neural network to propagate information
from the context words to aspects. Despite the
improvement of aspect-oriented feature modeling,
converting the dependency tree into a binary tree
might cause syntax related words separated away
from each other. In general, owing to the syntax
parsing errors, early dependency tree based ALSC
models do not show clear preponderance over mod-
els without the dependency tree.
However, the introduction of the neural network
into the dependency parsing task enhances the pars-
ing quality substantially (Chen and Manning, 2014;
Dozat and Manning, 2017). Recent advances, lever-
aging graph neural network (GNN) to model the
dependency tree (Zhang et al., 2019a; Huang and
Carley, 2019; Sun et al., 2019b; Tang et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2020), have achieved signiﬁcant per-
formance. Among them, Zheng et al. (2020); Wang
et al. (2020) attempt to convert the dependency tree