17
“disagreement” among these learners is crucial. When the
data has two sufﬁcient redundancy and conditional in-
dependence views, Deep Co-training [217] improves the
disagreement by designing a View Difference Constraint.
Tri-Net [220] obtains three labeled datasets by bootstrap
sampling and trains three different learners. These methods
in this category are less affected by model assumptions,
non-convexity of the loss function and the scalability of the
learning algorithms.
6.2 Self-training models
Self-training algorithm leverages the model’s own conﬁdent
predictions to produce the pseudo labels for unlabeled data.
In other words, it can add more training data by using
existing labeled data to predict the labels of unlabeled data.
EntMin. Entropy Minimization (EntMin) [223] is a
method of entropy regularization, which can be used to
realize SSL by encouraging the model to make low-entropy
predictions for unlabeled data and then using the unlabeled
data in a standard supervised learning setting. In theory,
entropy minimization can prevent the decision boundary
from passing through a high-density data points region,
otherwise it would be forced to produce low-conﬁdence
predictions for unlabeled data.
Pseudo-label. Pseudo-label [224] proposes a simple and
efﬁcient formulation of training neural networks in a semi-
supervised fashion, in which the network is trained in a
supervised way with labeled and unlabeled data simulta-
neously. As illustrated in Fig. 6(3), the model is trained on
labeled data in a usual supervised manner with a cross-
entropy loss. For unlabeled data, the same model is used
to get predictions for a batch of unlabeled samples. The
maximum conﬁdence prediction is called a pseudo-label,
which has the maximum predicted probability.
That is, the pseudo-label model trains a neural network
with the loss function L, where:
L=1
nnX
m=1KX
i=1R(ym
i;fm
i) +(t)1
n0n0X
m=1KX
i=1R(y0m
i;f0m
i);
(50)
wherenis the number of mini-batch in labeled data for
SGD,n0for unlabeled data, fm
iis the output units of m’s
sample in labeled data, ym
iis the label of that, y0m
ifor
unlabeled data, y0m
iis the pseudo-label of that for unlabeled
data,(t)is a coefﬁcient balancing the supervised and
unsupervised loss terms.
Noisy Student. Noisy Student [225] proposes a semi-
supervised method inspired by knowledge distillation [226]
with equal-or-larger student models. The framework is
shown in Fig. 6(4). The teacher EfﬁcientNet [227] model is
ﬁrst trained on labeled images to generate pseudo labels
for unlabeled examples. Then a larger EfﬁcientNet model
as a student is trained on the combination of labeled and
pseudo-labeled examples. These combined instances are
augmented using data augmentation techniques such as
RandAugment [228], and model noise such as Dropout and
stochastic depth are also incorporated in the student model
during training. After a few iterations of this algorithm,
the student model becomes the new teacher to relabel the
unlabeled data and this process is repeated.S4L.Self-supervised Semi-supervised Learning ( S4L)
[229] tackles the problem of SSL by employing self-
supervised learning [230] techniques to learn useful rep-
resentations from the image databases. The architecture of
S4Lis shown in Fig. 6(5). The conspicuous self-supervised
techniques are predicting image rotation [231] and exemplar
[232], [233]. Predicting image rotation is a pretext task
that anticipates an angle of the rotation transformation
applied to an input example. In S4L, there are four rotation
degreesf0;90;180;270gto rotate input images. The
S4L-Rotation loss is the cross-entropy loss on outputs pre-
dicted by those rotated images. S4L-Exemplar introduces
an exemplar loss which encourages the model to learn a
representation that is invariant to heavy image augmenta-
tions. Speciﬁcally, eight different instances of each image are
produced by inception cropping [234], random horizontal
mirroring, and HSV-space color randomization as in [232].
Following [230], the loss term on unsupervised images uses
the batch hard triplet loss [235] with a soft margin.
MPL. In the SSL, the target distributions are often gener-
ated on unlabeled data by a shaped teacher model trained
on labeled data. The constructions for target distributions
are heuristics that are designed prior to training, and cannot
adapt to the learning state of the network training. Meta
Pseudo Labels (MPL) [236] designs a teacher model that
assigns distributions to input examples to train the student
model. Throughout the course of the student’s training,
the teacher observes the student’s performance on a held-
out validation set, and learns to generate target distribu-
tions so that if the student learns from such distributions,
the student will achieve good validation performance. The
training procedure of MPL involves two alternating pro-
cesses. As shown in Fig. 6(6), the teacher g()produces
the conditional class distribution g(x)to train the student.
The pair (x;g(x))is then fed into the student network f()
to update its parameters from the cross-entropy loss. After
the student network updates its parameters, the model eval-
uates the new parameters 0based on the samples from the
held-out validation dataset. Since the new parameters of the
student depend on the teacher, the dependency allows us
to compute the gradient of the loss to update the teacher’s
parameters.
EnAET. Different from the previous semi-supervised
methods and S4L[229], EnAET [237] trains an Ensemble
of Auto-Encoding Transformations to enhance the learning
ability of the model. The core part of this framework is
that EnAET integrates an ensemble of spatial and non-
spatial transformations to self-train a good feature repre-
sentation [238]. EnAET incorporates four spatial transfor-
mations and a combined non-spatial transformation. The
spatial transformations are Projective transformation, Afﬁne
transformation, Similarity transformation and Euclidean
transformation. The non-spatial transformation is composed
of different colors, contrast, brightness and sharpness with
four strength parameters. As shown in Fig. 6(7), EnAET
learns an encoder E:x!E(x);t(x)!E(t(x))on
an original instance and its transformations. Meanwhile, a
decoderD: [E(x);E(t(x))]!^tis learned to estimate ^t
of input transformation. Then, we can get an AutoEncoding