3
terms in many cases. Unless particularly speciﬁed, the nota-
tions used in this paper are illustrated in TABLE 1.
Regarding whether test data are wholly available in the
training process, semi-supervised learning can be classiﬁed
into two settings: the transductive setting and the inductive
learning setting. Transductive learning assumes that the
unlabeled samples in the training process are exactly the
data to be predicted, and the purpose of the transductive
learning is to generalize over these unlabeled samples,
while inductive learning supposes that the learned semi-
supervised classiﬁer will be still applicable to new unseen
data. In fact, most graph-based methods are transductive
while most other kinds of SSL methods are inductive.
2.1 Assumptions for semi-supervised learning
SSL aims to predict more accurately with the aid of unla-
beled data than supervised learning that uses only labeled
data. However, an essential prerequisite is that the data
distribution should be under some assumptions. Otherwise,
SSL may not improve supervised learning and may even
degrade the prediction accuracy by misleading inferences.
Following [12] and [28], the related assumptions in SSL
include:
Self-training assumption. The predictions of the self-
training model, especially those with high conﬁdence, tend
to be correct. We can assume that when the hypothesis is
satisﬁed, those high-conﬁdence predictions are considered
to be ground-truth. This can happen when classes form well-
separated clusters.
Co-training assumption. Different reasonable assump-
tions lead to different combinations of labeled and unla-
beled data, and accordingly, different algorithms are de-
signed to take advantage of these combinations. For exam-
ple, Blum et al. [27] proposed a co-training model, which
works under the assumptions: instance xhas two condi-
tionally independent views, and each view is sufﬁcient for
a classiﬁcation task.
Generative model assumption. Generally, it is assumed
that data are generated from a mixture of distributions.
When the number of mixed components, a prior p(y)and
a conditional distribution p(xjy)are correct, data can be
assumed to come from the mixed model. This assumption
suggests that if the generative model is correct enough, we
can establish a valid link between the distribution of unla-
beled data and the category labels by p(x;y) =p(y)p(xjy).
Cluster assumption. If two points x1andx2are in the
same cluster, they should belong to the same category [28].
This assumption refers to the fact that data in a single class
tend to form a cluster, and when the data points can be
connected by short curves that do not pass through any low-
density regions, they belong to the same class cluster [28].
According to this assumption, the decision boundary should
not cross high-density areas but instead lie in low-density
regions [35]. Therefore, the learning algorithm can use a
large amount of unlabeled data to adjust the classiﬁcation
boundary.
Low-density separation. The decision boundary should
be in a low-density region, not through a high-density
area [28]. The low-density separation assumption is closely
related to the cluster assumption. We can consider the clus-
tering assumption from another perspective by assumingTABLE 1
Notations
Symbol Explanation
X Input space, for example X=Rn
Y Output space.
Classiﬁcation:Y=fy1;y2;:::;yKg.
Regression:Y=R
XL Labeled dataset. xi2X;yi2Y
XU Unlabeled dataset. xi2X
X Input dataset X.N=L+U;LU
L Loss Function
G Generator
D Discriminator
C Classiﬁer
H Entropy
E Expectation
R Consistency constraint
Tx Consistency target
G A graph
V The set of vertices in a graph
E The set of edges in a graph
v A nodev2V
eij An edge linked between node iandj,eij2E
A The adjacency matrix of a graph
D The degree matrix of a graph
Dii The degree of node i
W The weight matrix
Wij The weight associated with edge eij
N(v) The neighbors of a node v
Z Embedding matrix
zv An embedding for node v
S Similarity matrix of a graph
S[u;v] Similarity measurement between node uandv
h(k)
v Hidden embedding for node vinkth layer
mN(v) Message aggregated from node v’s neighborhoods
that the class is separated by areas of low density [28]. Since
the decision boundary in a high-density region would cut
a cluster into two different classes and within such a part
would violate the cluster assumption.
Manifold assumption. If two points x1andx2are lo-
cated in a local neighborhood in the low-dimensional man-
ifold, they have similar class labels [28]. This assumption
reﬂects the local smoothness of the decision boundary. It is
well known that one of the problems of machine learning
algorithms is the curse of dimensionality. It is hard to
estimate the actual data distribution when volume grows
exponentially with the dimensions in high dimensional
spaces. If the data lie on a low-dimensional manifold, the
learning algorithms can avoid the curse of dimensionality
and operate in the corresponding low-dimension space.
2.2 Classical Semi-supervised learning Methods
In the following, we brieﬂy introduce some representative
SSL methods motivated from the above described assump-
tions.
In the 1970s, the concept of SSL ﬁrst came to the fore [14],
[15], [16]. Perhaps the earliest method has been established
as self-learning — an iterative mechanism that uses initial
labeled data to train a model to predict some unlabeled
samples. Then the most conﬁdent prediction is marked as
the best prediction of the current supervised model, thus
providing more training data for the supervised algorithm,
until all the unlabelled examples have been predicted.
Co-training [27] provides a similar solution by training
two different models on two different views. Conﬁdent