2
 
Fig. 1. The taxonomy of major deep semi-supervised learning methods based on loss function and model design.
vide a comprehensive overview of traditional SSL methods.
Nowadays, deep neural networks have played a dominat-
ing role in many research areas. It is important to adopt
the classic SSL framework and develop novel SSL meth-
ods for deep learning settings, which leads to deep semi-
supervised learning (DSSL). DSSL studies how to effectively
utilize both labeled and unlabeled data by deep neural
networks. A considerable amount of DSSL methods have
been proposed. According to the most distinctive features
in semi-supervised loss functions and model designs, we
classify DSSL into ﬁve categories, i.e., generative methods,
consistency regularization methods, graph-based methods,
pseudo-labeling methods, and hybrid methods. The overall
taxonomy used in this literature is shown in Fig. 1.
Some representative works of SSL were described in
the early survey [12], [28], however, emerging technologies
based on deep learning, such as adversarial training which
generates new training data for SSL, have not been included.
Besides, [13] focuses on unifying the evaluation indices of
SSL, and [29] only reviews generative models and teacher-
student models in SSL without making a comprehensive
overview of SSL. Although [30] tries to present a whole
picture of SSL, the taxonomy is quite different from ours.
A recent review by Ouali et al. [31] gives a similar notion
of DSSL as we do. However, it does not compare the
presented methods based on their taxonomy and provide
perspectives on future trends and existing issues. Summa-
rizing both previous and the latest research on SSL, we
survey the fundamental theories and compare the deep
semi-supervised methods. In summary, our contributions
are listed as follows.
We provide a detailed review of DSSL methods and
introduce a taxonomy of major DSSL methods, back-
ground knowledge, and various models. One can
quickly grasp the frontier ideas of DSSL.
We categorize DSSL methods into several cate-
gories, i.e., generative methods, consistency regu-
larization methods, graph-based methods, pseudo-
labeling methods, and hybrid methods, with partic-
ular genres inside each one. We review the variants
on each category and give standardized descriptions
and uniﬁed sketch maps.
We identify several open problems in this ﬁeld and
discuss the future direction for DSSL.This survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
introduce SSL background knowledge, including assump-
tions in SSL, classical SSL methods, related concepts, and
datasets used in various applications. Section 4 to Section 7
introduce the primary deep semi-supervised techniques, i.e.,
generative methods in Section 3, consistency regularization
methods in Section 4, graph-based methods in Section 5,
pseudo-labeling methods in Section 6 and hybrid methods
in Section 7. In Section 8, we discuss the challenges in semi-
supervised learning and provide some heuristic solutions
and future directions for these open problems.
2 B ACKGROUND
Before presenting an overview of the techniques of SSL, we
ﬁrst introduce the notations. To illustrate the DSSL frame-
work, we limit our focus on the single-label classiﬁcation
tasks which are simple to describe and implement. We refer
interested readers to [32], [33], [34] for multi-label classiﬁ-
cation tasks. Let X=fXL;XUgdenote the entire data set,
including a small labeled subset XL=fxigL
i=1with labels
YL= (y1;y2;:::;yL)and a large scale unlabeled subset
XU=f(xi)gU
i=1, and generally we assume LU. We
assume that the dataset contains Kclasses and the ﬁrst Lex-
amples within Xare labeled byfyigL
i=12(y1;y2;:::;yK).
Formally, SSL aims to solve the following optimization
problem,
min
X
x2XL;y2YLLs(x;y; )
|{z}
supervised loss+X
x2XULu(x;)
|{z}
unsupervised loss+X
x2XR(x;)
|{z}
regularization;
(1)
whereLsdenotes the per-example supervised loss, e.g.,
cross-entropy for classiﬁcation, Ludenotes the per-example
unsupervised loss, and Rdenotes the per-example regu-
larization, e.g., consistency loss or a designed regularization
term. Note that unsupervised loss terms are often not strictly
distinguished from regularization terms, as regularization
terms are normally not guided by label information. Lastly,
denotes the model parameters and ;2R>0denotes
the trade-off. Different choices of the unsupervised loss
functions and regularization terms lead to different semi-
supervised models. Note that we do not make a clear
distinction between unsupervised loss and regularization