INTERNATIONALJOURNALOFCOMPUTERSANDAPPLICATIONS
https://doi.org/10.1080/1206212X.2018.1521895
Swarm intelligence in anomaly detection systems: an overview
Sanju Mishraa, Rafid Sagbanb, Ali Yakoobcand Niketa Gandhid
aDepartmentofComputerApplications,NationalInstituteofKurukshetra,Haryana,India;bDepartmentofNetworkInformation,Facultyof
InformationTechnology,UniversityofBabylon,Babylon,Iraq;cComputerScienceDepartment,UniversityofBabylon,Babylon,Iraq;dMachine
IntelligenceResearchLabs(MIRLabs),Auburn,WA,USA
ABSTRACT
In an era of the industrial internet of things (IoT), data transferred or saved is always vulnerable to attacks.
The IoT networks are needed for implementing security in IoT devices. The IoT networks are considered assecured with authentication and encryption, but these networks are not protected against cyber-attacks.Although there exist hundreds of data protection systems, but there are some shortcomings as well. Thus,anomaly detection takes the responsibility upon itself to make various kinds of attacks less vulnerable.This is achieved by making use of the power of data mining algorithms and tools to analyze and cap-ture any anomalous network traffic. Swarm intelligence has been integrated with data mining to generatelightweight but robust methods to detect and identify the flow of data effectively. This review paper pur-
sues a twofold goal. First is to review various swarm-based anomaly detection methods and to provide new
insights in that direction. Secondly, to replenish the literature with fresh reviews on swarm-based data min-ing studies based on anomaly detection. Further it discusses various methods and architectures of anomalydetection based on statistical, machine learning and data mining techniques.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received15July2018
Accepted5September2018
KEYWORDS
Anomalydetection;machinelearning;statisticalanomalydetection;swarmintelligence
Introduction
Thein ternetofthings(I oT)isacollectionofobjectsordevices
(things)suchassensors,transceiversandactuatorsthathavethe
ability to collect and analyze data about themselves and their
environment to act intelligently to other objects through theinternet[1 ].I oTcanbeappliedinallaspectsofourlifeforbet-
terenjoymentandmanagement.IoTisaheterogeneousnetworkthatismorecomplexthanothernetworks.Asitbecomesperva-siveeveryday,attacksagainstitarealsoincreasing.Monitoring
such kindofnetworksisquietchallengingandhardbecauseof
the large number of connected devices and the heterogeneityoftheexchangeddata.Generally,anIoTdevicegatherssensing
data and sends it to a central system for further processing via
gateways.AnomaliesindataforwardedbyIoTdevicesmightbe
identifiedatanapplicationlayerinthecentralsystems[ 2].Min-
imumattentionhasbeenpaidtominingdatageneratedbyIoT
devices themselves. Anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Sys-
tems are cyber-attack detection techniques designed to detect
intrusionsandmisusebycapturingsystem/networkactivityandclassifyingitaseithernormaloranomalousbehavior.IDSmust
have low false alarm rate (FAR) with high attack detection rate
(DR) at the same time. This paper discusses several method-
ologies and techniques used to reduce the anomalousbehavior
of networks in IoT systems. There is a need to represent bio-
inspired methodologies and techniques to reduce the FAR andincreasetheDR.
Swarm Intelligence (SI) is a collection of bio-inspired
methodologies,techniquesandalgorithmsforcomplexproblem
CONTACT SanjuMishra sanju.tiwari.2007@gmail.coms o l v i n g .I ts i m u l a t e st h ec o l l a b o r a t i v eb e h a v i o r( f o re x a m p l e ,antsforaging,beeforagingandbirdsflocking)ofsomeinsects,
birdsandfishestosolvecomplextaskslikesearchingfood,nest
organization, movement synchronization or travelling as a sin-gleentitywithhighspeed[ 3].ThemainfocusofSIistodesign
robust systems that can operate intelligently without central-ized control [ 4]. Examples of SI methodologies are ant colony
optimization (ACO), particle swarm optimization (PSO) and
artificialbeecolony(ABC)[ 5].Thus,SI-basedIDSaremorefit
totheIoTenvironmentastheyaregenerallylightweightsystems
tobeimplemented.Thispaperhasthreemaincontributionsfor
theresearchersofthisdomain.
(1) From the existing literature, 45 papers were studied in
d e t a i la n ds u m m a r i z e di nat a b u l a rf o r m a tf o ri d e n t i f y i n g
severaldatasetsandADS.
( 2 ) I ti so b se rv edth a tth el i t e r a t u r eh i ghl i gh t sm o r ea bo u tth e
FAR and DR from different research carried out in thisdomain.
(3) This paper attempts to classify and categorize the litera-
ture about this subject. Furthermore, the usage of review-ing SI models discussed and examined in the detection
of abnormal data or behavior. This paper is structured
as follows. Section 2 discusses the anomaly detectiontechniques and their categories. Section 3 presents SI-
basedIDS.Section4providedadetaileddiscussionbefore
the paper is concluded. Finally, conclusion is drawn inSection5.
©2018InformaUKLimited,tradingasTaylor&FrancisGroup