4 S. MISHRA ET AL.
their trip searching for food [ 28]. Laid pheromone will attract
f o r a g e ra n t st of o l l o wt h es a m et r i pp a t h s .T h eo t h e ra n t sfi n d
andmovetothelocationwiththechemicalsubstance,antswill
tendtomovealongthepathinsteadofmovinginarandompat-
tern. After some time, in some paths, the chemical substanceor pheromone will evaporate which results in the reduction of
attractingtheantsandthentheyfindandmovetotheposition
with pheromone which is more likely to strengthen the attrac-tion.Attheendofthepath,theantswithpoorperformancewill
disappear. ACO meta-heuristic transformed this natural opti-
mizationintoacomputationaloptimizationprocessforproblemsolving.
Feature selection is one of the optimization problems that
IDS suffer from. ACO is one of the nominated techniques tosolvesuchkindofproblemsbecauseofitssimplicityandquick
convergence.AghdamandKabiri[ 29]designedanewheuristic
function based on the length of the selected feature vector. Inspite of using ACO to speed up the convergence, the proposed
model used the Ant System variant model which is not one ofthebestACOmodelssuchastheMax-MinAntSystem.
TheACO-basedclusteringmethodisusedtodetecttheout-
liers [7], it performs a data preprocessing that leads to detect
theoutliers.Eachantcomparesthepropertyvaluewiththeini-
t i a lp o i n ts e ta n dc h e c k sd a t ap o i n t si m p o r t a n c ea n du p d a t e s
the values of the pheromones of other ants. Finally, the datapointsareselectedandthefinalclusteringmatrixisobtained.All
the remaining data points (unselected) are considered as out-
lier. ACO-based clustering have an acceptable correctness ratewithoutinitializingthecentersandthenumberofclusters.
Hamamoto et al. [ 30] proposed a hybrid signature-based
theme of anomaly detection. Hybridization was between thegenetic algorithm (GA) and ACO models. To predict the net-
work behavior of a given day, data of previous days are col-
lectedandDenialofService(DoS)andDistributedDoS(DDoS)
attacksareusedinsimulation.Thiswayofflowanalysisrecurred
in [6] between ACO and PCA, the statistical procedure. There
is great potential of using other machine learning procedures
with ACO such as the decision trees and random forests [31 ].
Unfortunately, most of the yet reviewed ACO-based IDs omit-
ted the global framework of the searching algorithm except
ACSMiner [ 32] which took into account the impact of using
effectiveupdatingpheromoneinIDSperformance.
Particleswarmoptimization
The model of PSO, developed by Eberhart and Kennedy in
1995 [33], is based on the social behavior of fish flocking and
bird schooling in their coordinated movement dynamics [ 33].
The synchronization of such group behavior was made by the
birds to maintain optimal distance between themselves and
their neighbors. There are three basic rules to control this nat-uraloptimizationprocess.Theseare CollisionPrevention ,Speed
Adjustment andHerdCentering .Thefirstruleistoavoidneigh-
borsbyreadjustingtheirphysicalposition.Thesecondruleistosynchronize their speed with their neighbors. The third rule is
tostayclosetotheirherdmates.SeveralPSOapplicationsinthe
fieldofanomalydetectioncanberecognized.Lima et al. [ 7] presented the signature-based approach to
profile the normal network traffic behavior in real traffic envi-ronment. Because of the powerful characteristics of PSO, for
example its low computational complexity, ability to escape
from local optima and small number of input parameters, itwasintegratedtoachievehighconvergencerate.Poornianetal.
[6] represented a new optimized scheduling hybrid algorithm
namedasGPSO.ItisacombinationofGelalgorithmsandPSO.
Artificialbeecolony
ABC simulates behavior of real bees and contains three groups
of bees for solving multimodal optimization and multidimen-
sional problems [ 34]. The three groups are onlookers, scouts
and employed bees. The behavior of honey bees can be cat-
egorized in terms of their responsibility and the work that
they carry. The bee is called as an onlooker if they are wait-
ing on the dance area for making decision to choose a food
source;ifthebeerevisitedtheperviousfoodsourceitisnamedas an employed bee; and a scout bee where individual bees
search randomly without prior information for the location of
food.
In the ABC algorithm, the roles of employed bees, onlook-
ers and scout are interchangeable among the individuals; anemployed bee’s job is to mine and gather the required infor-mation, while scouts exploit for new food sources, whereas
onlookersareinchargeofsharinginformationwithscoutsand
employedbeesbycommunicatinginthedancearea.
Fireflyalgorithm
Thefireflyalgorithm(FA)isproblemsolvingmethoddeveloped
by Yang and He [ 35] for the mathematical optimization and
engineeringproblemsinspiredbytheflashingbehaviorofsome
insectscalledfireflies.Flashingbehaviorisproducingrhythmic
flashes
throughaprocesscalledbioluminescencewhichisaway
ofdirectcommunicationtoattractthepreyandfordefensefrom
predators.Thisintensityoflightwillguidetheswarmoffireflies
toward their colleagues. Intensity of light is inversely propor-tional to the distance from the light source. In FA [ 36], there
arethreeidealizedruleswhicharetheattractivenessregardlessof the gender, the attractiveness of high bright insects to thelowerbrightonesandtheobjectivefunctionthatsimulatesthat
brightness.TheFAarepowerfulandwithdistincttechniquesin
the optimization of an objective function, especially for a widesearchspace.Thetwomodelsusedtheflowdatainitsanomaly
detection task. Good results have been gained with real world
dataiwhichisthebackboneofauniversity.
Cuckoosearchoptimization
Cuckoo search is a heuristic search algorithm [ 37]. This
algorithmoperatesbasedonthereproductionstrategyofabird
called the cuckoo. This cuckoo bird does not create a nest for
itself; therefore, it uses the nests of other birds to lay their own
eggs.Thiscuckoobirdhasanabilitytolayeggsjustliketheeggof the host bird. It is one of the reinforcement in the cuckoo
bird.Ifthehostbirddiscoverstheeggsthatarenothers,itdis-
posesthenestanditcreatesanewnestinsomeotherplaces.The