2 S. MISHRA ET AL.
Anomaly detection techniques
The threat of cyber-attacks, crimes and terror is increasing
expo nen tially .Afteryearso fr esear chinthear eao fcybersecu-
rity, it is well known that the current cyber infrastructure isnot efficient enough and thus need many more improvements.
This has motivated the development of IDS systems as adap-
tivedefensemechanisms.IDSsystemsarecategorizedintothreeclasses, namely signature, anomaly and hybrid detection sys-
tems.Thefirst class identifiespatternsoftrafficsupposedto be
malicious. The second class compares such patterns to normalbaselineandthethirdclasscombinestechniquesfromboththe
techniques[ 6–8].Thispaperfocusesonthesecondclasswhich
is anomaly detection systems. Several techniques for anomaly
detections are available for detecting insider attacks such as
identifying credit card thefts, application fraud and account
takeover.Ananomalydetectionsystemgeneratesanalertwhen-
ever the user performs any action that is beyond the user’s
normal profile. It detects unknown attacks that are not identi-fiedpreviouslythroughtwophases.Thesearethetrainingphase
in which the profile of normal traffic is described and the test-
ing phase in which the profile of learning applied to new data.Several architectures can be found in the literature. These are
the statistical, data-mining and machine learning-based tech-
niques[8].
An intrusion detection system has been designed using the
FuzzyQ-learning(FQL)algorithm[ 9]toprotectwirelessnodes
within the network and target nodes from DDoS attacks todetect the attack patterns and take appropriate countermea-
sures.AdistributedintrusiondetectionsystemnamedCooper-
ative IDS [ 10] had been represented to protect wireless nodes
within the network and target nodes from DDoS attacks by
using a Cooperative Fuzzy Q-learning (Co-FQL) optimization
algorithmic technique to identify the attack patterns. A fuzzytheory named FR TRUST has been introduced in a trust over-
lay network that models the storage of reputation information
andnetworkstructure.Thisfuzzytheoryisusedbythesystem
toestimateapeertrustlevel,whichmaybeeitherLow,Medium
or High [ 11]. Several security issues and network attacks are
discussed by Javadi et al. [ 12] addressing service problems of
unsolved quality which can produce a serious security issuein WBANs with substantial potential. Various methods andarchitectures of anomaly detection systems are reviewed and
classified in this paper. These include machine learning-based
techniques,data-mining-basedtechniquesandstatistical-basedtechniques. Figure 1depicts the main hierarchy for existing
anomalydetection-basedIDS.Eachofthemisdiscussedinthefollowingsection.
Machinelearningtechniques
T h et y p eo fs y s t e m st h a te n h a n c et h e i rp e r f o r m a n c eb a s e do n
theirpreviousstatearereferredasMachineLearningtechniques
[8]. Feizollah et al. [ 13] evaluated several machine learning
classifiersandtheyarediscussedinthefollowingsubsections.
Bayesian networks
AB a y e s i a nn e t w o r ki sad i r e c t e da c y c l i cg r a p hi nw h i c ht h e
nodesareassociatedwithprobabilityfunctions.Itisusedinthe
Figure 1. Classiﬁcationofanomalydetection-basedIDs.
suppression of false alarms and classification tasks within the
anomaly detection domain. Speed of the Bayesian network is
not high, it will be significant to use when the data set is verylarge[8].
Neural network
It is a collection of interrelated nodes created to emulate the
human brain functions. Each node has a weighted connectiontovariousothernodesinneighboringlayers[ 14].Intheneural
networkapproach,itlearnstointerpretthenatureofthediffer-entdaemonsandusersintotheintrusiondetectionsystem.The
prime benefit of neural networks is their strength to uncertain
information and unreliable data and their ability to determinetheresultsfromdatawithouthavingpreviousknowledgeofthe
dataregularities.
Support vector machine
Support vector machine (SVM) are a group of related super-
vised learning tasks used for regression and classification [ 15].
It is mostly used in the pattern recognition field and also usedin anomaly detection systems. The one class SVM is based ononeexamplesetbelongingtoaspecificclassandpositiveexam-
ple,ratherthanusingbothnegativeandpositiveexample.When
compared to neural networks in the KDD cup data set, it was