continuous encoding unitary that maps a classical input data xi
into quantum state xi/C12/C12/C11
¼UencðxiÞ0ji/C10nand refer to the
corresponding density matrix as ρ(xi). The expressive power of
these embeddings have been investigated from a functional
analysis point of view28,29; however, the setting where data are
provided requires special attention. The encoding unitary is
followed by a unitary UQNN(θ). We then measure an observable O
after the quantum neural network. This produces the label/value
for input xigiven as yi¼fðxiÞ¼ xi/C10/C12/C12Uy
QNNOUQNN xi/C12/C12/C11
. The
quantum model considered here is also referred to as a quantum
neural network (QNN) in the literature14,30. The goal is to
understand when it is easy to predict the function f(x) by training
classical/quantum machine learning models.
With notation in place, we turn to a simple motivating example
to understand how the availability of data in machine learning
tasks can change computational hardness. Consider data points
fxigN
i¼1that are p-dimensional classical vectors with ∣∣xi∣∣2=1, and
use amplitude encoding31–33to encode the data into an n-qubit
state xi/C12/C12/C11
¼∑p
k¼1xk
ikji, where xk
iis the individual coordinate of
the vector xi.I fUQNN is a time-evolution under a many-body
Hamiltonian, then the function fðxÞ¼ xhjUy
QNNOUQNNxjiis in
general hard to compute classically34, even for a single input state.
In particular, we have the following proposition showing that if a
classical algorithm can compute f(x)e fﬁciently, then quantum
computers will be no more powerful than classical computers; see
Supplementary Section 1 for a proof.
Proposition 1 . If a classical algorithm without training
data can compute f(x)e fﬁciently for any UQNN and O,t h e n
BPP=BQP.
Nevertheless, it is incorrect to conclude that training a classical
model from data to learn this evolution is hard. To see this, wewrite out the expectation value as
fðxiÞ¼∑p
k¼1xk/C3
ikhj/C18/C19
Uy
QNNOUQNN∑p
l¼1xl
ilji/C18/C19
¼∑p
k¼1∑p
l¼1Bklxk/C3
ixli;ð1Þ
which is a quadratic function with p2coefﬁcients
Bkl¼khjUy
QNNOUQNN lji. Using the theory developed later in
this work, we can show that, for any UQNN and O, training a
speciﬁc classical ML model on a collection of Ntraining examples
{(xi,yi=f(xi))} would give rise to a prediction model h(xi) with
Ex/C24DjhðxÞ/C0fðxÞj≤cﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
p2
Nr
; ð2Þ
for a constant c> 0. We refer to Supplementary Section 1 for the
proof of this result. Hence, with N∝p2/ϵ2training data, one can
train a classical ML model to predict the function f(x)u pt oa n
additive prediction error ϵ. This elevation of classical models
through some training samples is illustrative of the power of data.
In Supplementary Section 2, we give a rigorous complexity-
theoretic argument on the computational power provided by
data. A cartoon depiction of the complexity separation induced
by data is provided in Fig. 1(a).
While this simple example makes the basic point that suf ﬁcient
data can change complexity considerations, it perhaps opens
more questions than it answers. For example, it uses a rather
weak encoding into amplitudes and assumes one has access to an
amount of data that is on par with the dimension of the model.
The more interesting cases occur if we strengthen the data
encoding, include modern classical ML models, and consider the
number of data Nmuch less than the dimension of the model.
These more interesting cases are the ones we quantitatively
answer.
Fig. 1 Illustration of the relation between complexity classes and a ﬂowchart for understanding and prescreening potential quantum advantage. a We
cartoon the separation between problem complexities that are created by the addition of data to a problem. Classical algorithms that can learn from da ta
deﬁne a complexity class that can solve problems beyond classical computation (BPP), but it is still expected that quantum computation can ef ﬁciently
solve problems that classical ML algorithms with data cannot. A rigorous de ﬁnition and proof for the separation between classical algorithms that can learn
from data and BPP/BQP is given in Supplementary Section 2. bTheﬂowchart we develop for understanding the potential for quantum prediction
advantage. Nsamples of data from a potentially in ﬁnite depth QNN made with encoding and function circuits UencandUQNNare provided as input along
with quantum and classical methods with associated kernels. Tests are given as functions of Nto emphasize the role of data in the possibility of a
prediction advantage. One can ﬁrst evaluate a geometric quantity gCQthat measures the possibility of an advantageous quantum/classical prediction
separation without yet considering the actual function to learn. We show how one can ef ﬁciently construct an adversarial function that saturates this limit if
the test is passed, otherwise the classical approach is guaranteed to match performance for any function of the data. To subsequently consider the act ual
function provided, a label/function-speci ﬁc test may be run using the model complexities sCandsQ. If one speci ﬁcally uses the quantum kernel (QK)
method, the red dashed arrows can evaluate if all possible choices of UQNN lead to an easy classical function for the chosen encoding of the data.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3