obtaining KQfrom a quantum device, the dimension dcan be
computed ef ﬁciently on a classical machine by performing a
singular value decomposition on the N×Nmatrix KQ. Estimation
of Tr( O2) can be performed by sampling random states ψ/C12/C12/C11
from a
quantum 2-design, measuring Oonψ/C12/C12/C11
, and performing statistical
analysis on the measurement data25. This prediction error bound
shows that a quantum kernel method can learn any UQNNwhen the
dimension of the training set space dor the squared Frobenius
norm of observable Tr( O2) is much smaller than the amount of data
N. In Supplementary Section 8, we show that quantum kernel
methods are optimal for learning quantum models with bounded
Tr(O2) as they saturate the fundamental lower bound. However, in
practice, most observables, such as Pauli operators, will have
exponentially large Tr( O2), so the central quantity is the dimension
d. Using the prediction error bound for the quantum kernel
method, if both gCQand min ðd;TrðO2ÞÞare small, then a classical
ML would also be able to learn any UQNN.I ns u c hac a s e ,o n em u s t
conclude that the given encoding of the data is classically easy, and
this cannot be affected by an arbitrarily deep UQNN. This constitutes
the bottom left part of our ﬂowchart in Fig. 1.
Ultimately, to see a prediction advantage in a particular
dataset with speci ﬁc function values/labels, we need a large
separation between sCand sQ. This happens when the inputs xi,
xjconsidered close in a quantum ML model are actually close in
the target function f(x), but are far in classical ML. This is
represented as the ﬁnal test in Fig. 1and the methodology here
outlines how this result can be achieved in terms of its more
essential components.
Projected quantum kernels . In addition to analyzing existing
quantum models, the analysis approach introduced also provides
suggestions for new quantum models with improved properties,
which we now address here. For example, if we start with the
original quantum kernel, when the effective dimension dis large,
kernel Tr( ρ(xi)ρ(xj)), which is based on a ﬁdelity-type metric, will
regard all data to be far from each other and the kernel matrix KQ
will be close to identity. This results in a small geometric differ-
ence gCQleading to classical ML models being competitive or
outperforming the quantum kernel method. In Supplementary
Section 9, we present a simple quantum model that requires an
exponential amount of samples to learn using the quantum kernel
Tr(ρ(xi)ρ(xj)), but only needs a linear number of samples to learn
using a classical ML model.
To circumvent this setback, we propose a family of projected
quantum kernels as a solution. These kernels work by projecting
the quantum states to an approximate classical representation,
e.g., using reduced physical observables or classicalshadows
25,27,42–44. Even if the training set space has a large
dimension d~N, the projection allows us to reduce to a low-
dimensional classical space that can generalize better. Further-
more, by going through the exponentially large quantum Hilbert
space, the projected quantum kernel can be challenging to
evaluate without a quantum computer. In numerical experiments,
weﬁnd that the classical projection increases rather than
decreases the geometric difference with classical ML models.
These constructions will be the foundation of our best performing
quantum method later.
One of the simplest forms of projected quantum kernel is to
measure the one-particle reduced density matrix (1-RDM) on all
qubits for the encoded state, ρk(xi)=Trj≠k[ρ(xi)], then de ﬁne the
kernel as
kPQðxi;xjÞ¼exp /C0γ∑
kjjρkðxiÞ/C0ρkðxjÞjj2
F/C18/C19
: ð9Þ
This kernel de ﬁnes a feature map function in the 1-RDM spacethat is capable of expressing arbitrary functions of powers of the
1-RDMs of the quantum state. From nonintuitive results in
density functional theory, we know even one body densities can
be suf ﬁcient for determining exact ground state45and time-
dependent46properties of many-body systems under modest
assumptions. In Supplementary Section 10, we provide examples
of other projected quantum kernels. This includes an ef ﬁcient
method for computing a kernel function that contains all orders
of RDMs using local randomized measurements and the
formalism of classical shadows25. The classical shadow formalism
allows ef ﬁcient construction of RDMs from very few measure-
ments. In Supplementary Section 11, we show that projected
versions of quantum kernels lead to a simple and rigorous
quantum speed-up in a recently proposed learning problem based
on discrete logarithms24.
Numerical studies . We now provide numerical evidence up to 30
qubits that supports our theory on the relation between the
dimension d, the geometric difference g, and the prediction per-
formance. Using the projected quantum kernel, the geometric
difference gis much larger and we see the strongest empirical
advantage of a scalable quantum model on quantum datasets to
date. These are the largest combined simulation and analysis in
digital quantum machine learning that we are aware of, and make
use of the TensorFlow and TensorFlow-Quantum package47,
reaching a peak throughput of up to 1.1 quadrillion ﬂoating point
operations per second (peta ﬂop/s). Trends of ~300 tera ﬂop/s for
quantum simulation and 800 tera ﬂop/s for classical analysis were
observed up to the maximum experiment size with the overall
ﬂoating point operations across all experiments totalling ~2
quintillion (exa ﬂop).
In order to mimic a data distribution that pertains to real-world
data, we conduct our experiments around the fashion-MNIST
dataset48, which is an image classi ﬁcation for distinguishing
clothing items, and is more challenging than the original digit-
based MNIST source49. We preprocess the data using principal
component analysis50to transform each image into an
n-dimensional vector. The same data are provided to the quantum
and classical models, where in the classical case the data is the
n-dimensional input vector, and the quantum case uses a given
circuit to embed the n-dimensional vector into the space of
nqubits. For quantum embeddings, we explore three options, E1
is a separable rotation circuit32,51,52, E2 is an IQP-type embedding
circuit15, and E3 is a Hamiltonian evolution circuit, with explicit
constructions in Supplementary Section 12.
For the classical ML task (C), the goal is to correctly identify
the images as shirts or dresses from the original dataset. For the
quantum ML tasks, we use the same fashion-MINST source data
and embeddings as above, but take as function values the
expectation value of a local observable that has been evolved
under a quantum neural network resembling the Trotter
evolution of 1D-Heisenberg model with random couplings. In
these cases, the embedding is taken as part of the ground truth, so
the resulting function will be different depending on the quantum
embedding. For these ML tasks, we compare against the best
performing model from a list of standard classical ML algorithms
with properly tuned hyperparameters (see Supplementary Sec-
tion 12 for details).
In Fig. 3, we give a comparison between the prediction
performance of classical and quantum ML models. One can see
that not only do classical ML models perform best on the original
classical dataset, the prediction performance for the classical
methods on the quantum datasets is also very competitive and
can even outperform existing quantum ML models despite the
quantum ML models having access to the training embeddingARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9
6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications