Our primary interest will be ML algorithms that are much
stronger than ﬁtting a quadratic function and the input data are
provided in more interesting ways than an amplitude encoding.
In this work, we focus on both classical and quantum ML modelsbased on kernel functions k(x
i,xj). At a high level, a kernel
function can be seen as a measure of similarity, if k(xi,xj) is large
when xiandxjare close. When considered for ﬁnite input data, a
kernel function may be represented as a matrix Kij=k(xi,xj) and
the conditions required for kernel methods are satis ﬁed when the
matrix representation is Hermitian and positive semi-de ﬁnite.
A given kernel function corresponds to a nonlinear feature
mapping ϕ(x) that maps xto a possibly in ﬁnite-dimensional
feature space, such that kðxi;xjÞ¼ϕðxiÞyϕðxjÞ. This is the basis of
the so-called “kernel trick ”where intricate and powerful maps ϕ
(xi) can be implemented through the evaluation of relatively
simple kernel functions k. As a simple case, in the example above,
using a kernel of k(xi,xj)=∣〈xi∣xj〉∣2corresponds to a feature map
ϕðxiÞ¼∑klxk/C3
ixlikji/C10ljiwhich is capable of learning quadratic
functions in the amplitudes. In kernel based ML algorithms, the
trained model can always be written as h(x)=w†ϕ(x) where wis
a vector in the feature space de ﬁned by the kernel. For example,
training a convolutional neural network with large hidden
layers19,35is equivalent to using a corresponding neural tangent
kernel kCNN. The feature map ϕCNN for the kernel kCNN is a
nonlinear mapping that extracts all local properties of x35.I n
quantum mechanics, similarly a kernel function can be de ﬁned
using the native geometry of the quantum state space xji. For
example, we can de ﬁne the kernel function as 〈xi∣xj〉or∣〈xi∣xj〉∣2.
Using the output from this kernel in a method like a classical
support vector machine16deﬁnes the quantum kernel method.
A wide class of functions can be learned with a suf ﬁciently
large amount of data by using the right kernel function k. For
example, in contrast to the perhaps more natural kernel, 〈xi∣xj〉,
the quantum kernel kQ(xi,xj)=∣〈xi∣xj〉∣2=Tr(ρ(xi)ρ(xj)) can
learn arbitrarily deep quantum neural network UQNN that
measures any observable O(shown in Supplementary Section 3),
and the Gaussian kernel, kγðxi;xjÞ¼expð/C0γjjxi/C0xjjj2Þwith
hyperparameter γ, can learn any continuous function in a
compact space36, which includes learning any QNN. Never-
theless, the required amount of data Nto achieve a small
prediction error could be very large in the worst case. Although
we will work with other kernels de ﬁned through a quantum
space, due both to this expressive property and terminology of
past work, we will refer to kQðxi;xjÞ¼Tr/C2
ρðxiÞρðxjÞ/C3
as the
quantum kernel method throughout this work, which is also the
deﬁnition given in15.
Testing quantum advantage . We now construct our more general
framework for assessing the pot ential for quantum prediction
advantage in a machine learning task. Beginning from a general
result, we build both intuition and practical tests based on the geo-
metry of the learning spaces. This framework is summarized in Fig. 1.
Our foundation is a general prediction error bound for training
classical/quantum ML models to predict some quantum model
deﬁned by f(x)=Tr(OUρ(x)) derived from concentration inequal-
ities, where OU¼Uy
QNNOUQNN. Suppose we have obtained N
training examples {( xi,yi=f(xi))}. After training on this data,
there exists an ML algorithm that outputs h(x)=w†ϕ(x) using
kernel kðxi;xjÞ¼Kij¼ϕðxiÞyϕðxjÞ, which has a simpli ﬁed
prediction error bounded by
Ex/C24DjhðxÞ/C0fðxÞj≤cﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
sKðNÞ
Nr
ð3Þ
for a constant c> 0 and Nindependent samples from the datadistribution D. We note here that this and all subsequent bounds
have a key dependence on the quantity of data N,r eﬂecting
the role of data to improve prediction performance. Due to a
scaling freedom between αϕ(x) and w/α, we have assumed
∑N
i¼1ϕðxiÞyϕðxiÞ¼TrðKÞ¼N. A derivation of this result is
given in Supplementary Section 4.
Given this core prediction error bound, we now seek to
understand its implications. The main quantity that determines
the prediction error is
sKðNÞ¼∑N
i¼1∑N
j¼1ðK/C01ÞijTrðOUρðxiÞÞTrðOUρðxjÞÞ: ð4Þ
The quantity sK(N) is equal to the model complexity of the
trained function h(x)=w†ϕ(x), where sK(N)=∣∣w∣∣2=w†wafter
training. A smaller value of sK(N) implies better generalization to
new data xsampled from the distribution D. Intuitively, sK(N)
measures whether the closeness between xi,xjdeﬁned by the
kernel function k(xi,xj) matches well with the closeness of the
observable expectation for the quantum states ρ(xi),ρ(xj),
recalling that a larger kernel value indicates two points are
closer. The computation of sK(N) can be performed ef ﬁciently on
a classical computer by inverting an N×Nmatrix Kafter
obtaining the Nvalues Tr( OUρ(xi)) by performing order N
experiments on a physical quantum device. The time complexity
scales at most as order N3. Due to the connection between w†w
and the model complexity, a regularization term w†wis often
added to the optimization problem during the training of h(x)=
w†ϕ(x), see e.g., refs.16,37,38. Regularization prevents sK(N) from
becoming too large at the expense of not completely ﬁtting the
training data. A detailed discussion and proof under regulariza-tion is given in Supplementary Section 4 and 6.
The prediction error upper bound can often be shown to be
asymptotically tight by proving a matching lower bound. As an
example, when k(x
i,xj) is the quantum kernel Tr( ρ(xi)ρ(xj)), we
can deduce that sK(N)≤Tr(O2) hence one would need a number
of data Nscaling as Tr( O2). In Supplementary Section 8, we give a
matching lower bound showing that a scaling of Tr( O2)i s
unavoidable if we assume a large Hilbert space dimension. This
lower bound holds for any learning algorithm and not only for
quantum kernel methods. The lower bound proof uses mutual
information analysis and could easily extend to other kernels.
This proof strategy is also employed extensively in a follow-up
work39to devise upper and lower bounds for classical and
quantum ML in learning quantum models. Furthermore, not only
are the bounds asymptotically tight, in numerical experiments
given in Supplementary Section 13 we ﬁnd that the prediction
error bound also captures the performance of other classical ML
models not based on kernels where the constant factors are
observed to be quite modest.
Given some set of data, if sK(N) is found to be small relative to
Nafter training for a classical ML model, this quantum model f(x)
can be predicted accurately even if f(x) is hard to compute
classically for any given x. In order to formally evaluate the
potential for quantum prediction advantage generally, one must
take sK(N) to be the minimal over ef ﬁcient classical models.
However, we will be more focused on minimally attainable values
over a reasonable set of classical methods with tuned hyperpara-
meters. This prescribes an effective method for evaluating
potential quantum advantage in practice, and already rules out
a considerable number of examples from the literature.
From the bound, we can see that the potential advantage for
one ML algorithm de ﬁned by K1to predict better than another
ML algorithm de ﬁned by K2depends on the largest possible
separation between sK1and sK2for a dataset. The separation can
be characterized by de ﬁning an asymmetric geometric differenceARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications