while the classical methods do not. The performance of the
classical ML model is especially strong on Dataset (Q, E1) and
Dataset (Q, E2). This elevation of the classical performance is
evidence of the power of data. Moreover, this intriguing behavior
and the lack of quantum advantage may be explained by
considering the effective dimension dand the geometric
difference gfollowing our theoretical constructions. From Fig. 3a,
we can see that the dimension dof the original quantum state
space grows rather quickly, and the geometric difference g
becomes small as the dimension becomes too large ( d∝N) for the
standard quantum kernel. The saturation of the dimension
coincides with the decreasing and statistical ﬂuctuations in
performance seen in Fig. 4. Moreover, given poor ML
performance a natural instinct is to throw more resources at
the problem, e.g., more qubits, but as demonstrated here, doingthis for naïve quantum kernel methods is likely to lead to tiny
inner products and even worse performance. In contrast, the
projected quantum space has a low dimension even when d
grows, and yields a higher geometric difference gfor all
embeddings and system sizes. Our methodology predicts that,
when gis small, classical ML model will be competitive or
outperform the quantum ML model. This is veri ﬁed in Fig. 3b for
both the original and projected quantum kernel, where a small
geometric difference gleads to a very good performance of
classical ML models and no large quantum advantage can be seen.
Only when the geometric difference gis large (projected kernel
method with embedding E3) can we see some mild advantage
over the best classical method. This result holds disregarding any
detail of the quantum evolution we are trying to learn, even for
ones that are hard to simulate classically.
Fig. 3 Relation between dimension d, geometric difference g, and prediction performance. The shaded regions are the standard deviation over 10
independent runs and nis the number of qubits in the quantum encoding and dimension of the input for the classical encoding. aThe approximate
dimension dand the geometric difference gwith classical ML models for quantum kernel (Q) and projected quantum kernel (PQ) under different
embeddings and system sizes n.bPrediction error (lower is better) of the quantum kernel method (Q), projected quantum kernel method (PQ), and
classical ML models on classical (C) and quantum (Q) datasets with number of data N=600. As dgrows too large, the geometric difference gfor
quantum kernel becomes small. We see that small geometric difference galways results in classical ML being competitive or outperforming the quantum
ML model. When gis large, there is a potential for improvement over classical ML. For example, projected quantum kernel improves upon the best classical
ML in Dataset (Q, E3).
Fig. 4 Prediction accuracy (higher the better) on engineered datasets. A label function is engineered to match the geometric difference g(C∣∣PQ)
between projected quantum kernel and classical approaches, demonstrating a signi ﬁcant gap between quantum and the best classical models up to 30
qubits when gis large. We consider the best performing classical ML models among Gaussian SVM, linear SVM, Adaboost, random forest, neural
networks, and gradient boosting. We only report the accuracy of the quantum kernel method up to system size n=28 due to the high simulation cost and
the inferior performance.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7