that depends on the dataset, but is independent of the function
values or labels. Hence evaluating this quantity is a good ﬁrst step
in understanding if there is a potential for quantum advantage, as
shown in Fig. 1. This quantity is de ﬁned by
g12¼gðK1jjK2Þ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jjﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2p
ðK1Þ/C01ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2p
jj1q
;ð5Þ
where ∣∣.∣∣∞is the spectral norm of the resulting matrix and we
assume Tr( K1)=Tr(K2)=N. One can show that sK1≤g2
12sK2,
which implies the prediction error bound
cﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
sK1=Np
≤cg12ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
sK2=Np
. A detailed derivation is given in
Supplementary Section C and an illustration of g12can be found
in Fig. 2. The geometric difference g(K1∣∣K2) can be computed on
a classical computer by performing a singular value decomposi-
tion of the N×Nmatrices K1and K2. Standard numerical
analysis packages40provide highly ef ﬁcient computation of a
singular value decomposition in time at most order N3.
Intuitively, if K1(xi,xj) is small/large when K2(xi,xj) is small/
large, then the geometric difference g12is a small value ~1, where
g12grows as the kernels deviate.
To see more explicitly how the geometric difference allows one
to make statements about the possibility for one ML model tomake different predictions from another, consider the geometric
difference g
CQ=g(KC∣∣KQ) between a classical ML model with
kernel kC(xi,xj) and a quantum ML model, e.g., with kQ(xi,xj)=
Tr(ρ(xi)ρ(xj)). If gCQis small, because
sC≤g2
CQsQ; ð6Þ
the classical ML model will always have a similar or better model
complexity sK(N) compared to the quantum ML model. This
implies that the prediction performance for the classical ML will
likely be competitive or better than the quantum ML model, and
one is likely to prefer using the classical model. This is captured in
theﬁrst step of our ﬂowchart in Fig. 1.
In contrast, if gCQis large we show that there exists a dataset
with sC¼g2
CQsQwith the quantum model exhibiting superiorprediction performance. An ef ﬁcient method to explicitly
construct such a maximally divergent dataset is given in
Supplementary Section 7 and a numerical demonstration of the
stability of this separation is provided in the next section. While a
formal statement about classical methods generally requires
deﬁning it overall ef ﬁcient classical methods, in practice, we
consider gCQto be the minimum geometric difference among a
suite of optimized classical ML models. Our engineered approach
minimizes this value as a hyperparameter search to ﬁnd the best
classical adversary, and shows remarkable robustness across
classical methods including those without an associated kernel,
such as random forests41.
In the speci ﬁc case of the quantum kernel method with
KQ
ij¼kQðxi;xjÞ¼TrðρðxiÞρðxjÞÞ, we can gain additional insights
into the model complexity sK, and sometimes make conclusions
about classically learnability for all possible UQNN for the given
encoding of the data. Let us de ﬁne vec( X) for a Hermitian matrix
Xto be a vector containing the real and imaginary part of each
entry in X. In this case, we ﬁndsQ¼vecðOUÞTPQvecðOUÞ, where
PQis the projector onto the subspace formed by {vec( ρ(x1)),…,
vec(ρ(xN))}. We highlight
d¼dimðPQÞ¼rankðKQÞ≤N; ð7Þ
which de ﬁnes the effective dimension of the quantum state space
spanned by the training data. An illustration of the dimension dcan
be found in Fig. 1. Because PQis a projector and has eigenvalues 0
or 1, sQ≤minðd;vecðOUÞTvecðOUÞÞ ¼ minðd;TrðO2ÞÞassuming
∣∣O∣∣∞≤1. Hence in the case of the quantum kernel method, the
prediction error bound may be written as
Ex2DjhðxÞ/C0fðxÞj≤cﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
minðd;TrðO2ÞÞ
Nr
: ð8Þ
A detailed derivation is given in Supplementary Section A. We can
also consider the approximate dimension d, where small eigenva-
lues in KQare truncated, by incurring a small training error. After
Fig. 2 Cartoon of the geometry (kernel function) de ﬁned by classical and quantum ML models. The letters A, B, ... represent data points { xi} in different
spaces with arrows representing the similarity measure (kernel function) between data. The geometric difference gis a difference between similarity
measures (arrows) in different ML models and dis an effective dimension of the dataset in the quantum Hilbert space.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5