As quantum technologies continue to rapidly advance, it
becomes increasingly important to understand which
applications can bene ﬁt from the power of these devices.
At the same time, machine learning on classical computers hasmade great strides, revolutionizing applications in image recog-
nition, text translation, and even physics applications, with more
computational power leading to ever increasing performance
1.A s
such, if quantum computers could accelerate machine learning,
the potential for impact is enormous.
At least two paths towards quantum enhancement of machine
learning have been considered. First, motivated by quantum
applications in optimization2–4, the power of quantum comput-
ing could, in principle, be used to help improve the training
process of existing classical models5,6, or enhance inference in
graphical models7. This could include ﬁnding better optima in a
training landscape or ﬁnding optima with fewer queries. How-
ever, without more structure known in the problem, the advan-
tage along these lines may be limited to quadratic or small
polynomial speedups8,9.
The second vein of interest is the possibility of using quantum
models to generate correlations between variables that are inef-
ﬁcient to represent through classical computation. The recent
success both theoretically and experimentally for demonstrating
quantum computations beyond classical tractability can be taken
as evidence that quantum computers can sample from probability
distributions that are exponentially dif ﬁcult to sample from
classically10,11. If these distributions were to coincide with real-
world distributions, this would suggest the potential for sig-
niﬁcant advantage. This is typically the type of advantage that has
been sought in recent work on both quantum neural
networks12–14, which seek to parameterize a distribution through
some set of adjustable parameters, and quantum kernel
methods15that use quantum computers to de ﬁne a feature map
that maps classical data into the quantum Hilbert space. The
justiﬁcation for the capability of these methods to exceed classical
models often follows similar lines as refs.10,11or quantum
simulation results. That is, if the model leverages a quantumcircuit that is hard to sample results from classically, then there is
potential for a quantum advantage.
In this work, we show quantitatively how this picture is
incomplete in machine learning (ML) problems where some
training data are provided. The provided data can elevate classical
models to rival quantum models, even when the quantum circuits
generating the data are hard to compute classically. We begin
with a motivating example and complexity-theoretic argument
showing how classical algorithms with data can match quantum
output. Following this, we provide rigorous prediction error
bounds for training classical and quantum ML methods based on
kernel functions
15–24to learn quantum mechanical models. We
focus on kernel methods, as they not only provide provable
guarantees, but are also very ﬂexible in the functions they can
learn. For example, recent advancements in theoretical machine
learning show that training neural networks with large hidden
layers is equivalent to training an ML model with a particular
kernel, known as the neural tangent kernel19–21. Throughout,
when we refer to classical ML models related to our theoretical
developments, we will be referring to ML models that can be
easily associated with a kernel, either explicitly as in kernel
methods, or implicitly as in the neural tangent kernels. However,
in the numerical section, we will also include performance
comparisons to methods where direct association of a kernel is
challenging, such as random forest methods. In the quantum
case, we will also show how quantum ML based on kernels can be
made equivalent to training an in ﬁnite depth quantum neural
network.We use our prediction error bounds to devise a ﬂowchart for
testing potential quantum prediction advantage, the separation
between prediction errors of quantum and classical ML models
for a ﬁxed amount of training data. The most important test is a
geometric difference between kernel functions de ﬁned by classical
and quantum ML. Formally, the geometric difference is de ﬁned
by the closest ef ﬁcient classical ML model. In practice, one should
consider the geometric difference with respect to a suite of
optimized classical ML models. If the geometric difference is
small, then a classical ML method is guaranteed to provide
similar or better performance in prediction on the dataset,
independent of the function values or labels. Hence this repre-
sents a powerful, function independent prescreening that allows
one to evaluate if there is any possibility of better performance.
On the other hand, if the geometry differs greatly, we show both
the existence of a dataset that exhibits large prediction advantage
using the quantum ML model and how one can construct it
efﬁciently. While the tools we develop could be used to compare
and construct hard classical models like hash functions, we
enforce restrictions that allow us to say something about a
quantum separation. In particular, the feature map will be white
box, in that a quantum circuit speci ﬁcation is available for the
ideal feature map, and that feature map can be made computa-
tionally hard to evaluate classically. A constructive example of
this is a discrete log feature map, where a provable separation for
our kernel is given in Supplementary Section 11. Additionally, the
minimum over classical models means that classical hash func-
tions are reproduced formally by de ﬁnition.
Moreover, application of these tools to existing models in the
literature rules many of them out immediately, providing a
powerful sieve for focusing development of new data encodings.
Following these constructions, in numerical experiments, we ﬁnd
that a variety of common quantum models in the literature
perform similarly or worse than classical ML on both classical
and quantum datasets due to a small geometric difference. The
small geometric difference is a consequence of the exponentially
large Hilbert space employed by existing quantum models, whereall inputs are too far apart. To circumvent the setback, we propose
an improvement, which enlarges the geometric difference by
projecting quantum states embedded from classical data back to
approximate classical representation
25–27. With the large geo-
metric difference endowed by the projected quantum model, we
are able to construct engineered datasets to demonstrate large
prediction advantage over common classical ML models in
numerical experiments up to 30 qubits. Despite our constructions
being based on methods with associated kernels, we ﬁnd
empirically that the prediction advantage remains robust across
tested classical methods, including those without an easily
determined kernel. This opens the possibility to use a small
quantum computer to generate ef ﬁciently veri ﬁable machine
learning problems that could be challenging for classical ML
models.
Results
Setup and motivating example . We begin by setting up the
problems and methods of interest for classical and quantum
models, and then provide a simple motivating example for
studying how data can increase the power of classical models on
quantum data. The focus will be a supervised learning task with a
collection of Ntraining examples {( xi,yi)}, where xiis the input
data and yiis an associated label or value. We assume that xiare
sampled independently from a data distribution D.
In our theoretical analysis, we will consider yi2Rto be
generated by some quantum model. In particular, we consider aARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2631 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications