Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 2 of 14
1. Introduction
Even though considerable advances have been made in understanding cancers and
implementing the diagnostic and therapeutic methods, breast cancer is the most com-
mon malignant cancer diagnosed globally and is the secondary leading cause of cancer-
associated death in women [ 1–3]. Metastatic Breast Cancers (MBCs), the main cause of
death from incurable breast cancer, spreads from local invasion of peripheral tissue to
lymphatic and blood vessels and ends in distant organs [ 4–6]. It is estimated that 10 to
50% of patients experience metastases eventually, despite being diagnosed with regular
breast cancer at the beginning [ 7]. Moreover, because of the primary tumor subtype, the
metastasis rate and site are heterogeneities [ 8]. Thus, prognosis, accurate diagnosis, and
treatment for MBCs remain challenging. For MBC diagnosis, one of the most important
tasks is the staging of BC that counts the recognition of Axillary Lymph Node (ALN)
metastases, which is detectable among most node-positive sufferers using Sentinel Lymph
Node (SLN) biopsies [ 9,10]. Assessing microscopy images from SLNs are conventional
techniques for evaluating ALNs. However, they require on-site pathologists to investigate
samples, which is time-consuming, laborious, and less reliable due to a certain degree of
subjectivity, particularly in cases that contain small lesions or in which the lymph nodes
are negative for cancer [11].
Consequently, developing digital pathology methods to assist in microscopic diagnosis
has evolved signiﬁcantly during the last decade [ 12,13]. Advanced scanning technology,
cost reduction, quality of spatial images, and magniﬁcation have made full digitalization
feasible for evaluating histopathologic tissues [ 14]. Multiple advantages appear with digital
pathology technology development, which include online consultation and case analysis,
thus advancing the availability of samples and waiving on-site experts. However, manual
inspection is also necessary, and the potential inconsistent diagnosis decisions may affect
the accuracy of diagnosis. In addition, hospitals are often short of advanced equipment
and pathologists to support digital pathology. It is reported that presumptive treatment
phenomena may exist widely among developing countries due to the lack of well-trained
pathologists and advanced equipment [ 15]. Moreover, the majority of the population often
has difﬁculty getting access to pathology and laboratory medicine services. Regarding
cancer, cardiovascular disease, and bone generation as examples, few communities can get
the pathology and laboratory medicine treatment [16–21].
To better facilitate digital pathology and alleviate the above mentioned problems, var-
ious analytic approaches have been proposed (e.g., deep learning, machine learning, and
some speciﬁc software) to strengthen the accuracy and sensitivity of metastatic cancer de-
tection [ 22–26]. With excellent robust ability to extract features in images, a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) becomes the most successful deep learning-based method in the
Computer Vision (CV) ﬁeld. It has been widely used in diseases diagnosed with microscopy
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) [ 27–30]. CNN automatically learns image features from multiple
dimensions in a large image dataset, which is applied to identify or classify structures and
is therefore applicable in multiple automated image-recognition biomedical areas [ 31,32].
CNN-based cancer detection has proved to be a convenient method to classify tumors from
other cells or tissues and has demonstrated satisfactory results [ 33–36]. EfﬁcientNet is one
of the most potent CNN architectures. It utilizes a compound scaling method to enlarge
the network depth, width, and resolution, obtaining state-of-the-art capacity in various
benchmark datasets while requiring fewer computation resources than other models [ 37].
Hence, the EfﬁcientNet is a suitable model, which may provide signiﬁcant medical image
classiﬁcation potentials, although there is a substantial difference between medical images
and traditional images. However, less attention has been paid to the abilities of EfﬁcientNet
in medical images, making motivation for us to conduct this work.
One core problem defecting the performance of these CNN-based models in medical
imaging is the image resolution disparity. State-of-the-art CNN models normally are
designed for large resolution images (e.g., 500 500 or larger), but the image resolution of
the lymph node metastasis datasets in breast cancer is usually quite smaller (e.g., 96 96