Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 9 of 14
4.3. Boosted EfﬁcientNet
The architecture of boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 is shown in Figure 5. The main building
block is MBConv [ 64,65]. The components in red dashed rectangles are different from
the original EfﬁcientNet-B3. Images are ﬁrst sent to some blocks containing multiple
convolutional layers to extract image features. Then, these features are weighted by the
attention mechanism to improve the response of features contributing to classiﬁcation.
Next, the FF mechanism is utilized, enabling features to retain some low-level information.
Consequently, images are classiﬁed according to those fused features.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  9 of 14 
 
 4.3. Boosted EfficientNet  
The architecture of boosted EfficientNet-B3 is shown in Figure 5. The main building 
block is MBConv [64,65]. The components in red dashed rectangles are different from the 
original EfficientNet-B3. Images are first sent to some blocks containing multiple convo-lutional layers to extract image features. Then , these features are weighted by the attention 
mechanism to improve the response of features  contributing to classification. Next, the FF 
mechanism is utilized, enabling features to retain some low-level information. Conse-
quently, images are classified according to those fused features. 
 
Figure 5. The architecture of boosted-EfficientN et-B3. EfficientNet first extracts im age features through its convolutional 
layers. The attention mechanism is then utilized to reweight fe atures, increasing the activation of significant parts. Next, 
we perform FF on the outputs of several convolutional layers . Subsequently, images are clas sified based on those fused 
features. Details of these methods are described in the following sections. 
4.4. Reduce the Downsampling Scale 
To mitigate the problem mentioned in the discussion, we adjusted the downsampling 
multiple in EfficientNet. Our idea is implemented by modifying the stride of the convo-
lution kernel of EfficientNet . To select the best-performed downsampling scale, multiple 
and elaborate experiments were conducted on the downsampling scale {2, 4, 6, 8, 16}, and Strategy 16 outperforms other settings. The si ze of the feature map in the best-performing 
downsampling scale (16) was 6 × 6, which is one times larger than the original downsam-
pling multiple (32). The change of the downsampling scale from 32 to 16 was implemented 
by modifying the stride of the first convolutio n layer from two to one, as shown in the red 
dashed squares on the left half of Figure 5. 
4.5. Attention Mechanism 
As an example for the attention mechanism, it can be seen from Figure 6 that the 
response to the background is large, since most parts of the image consist of the back-
ground. However, this information usually is useless for classification, so their response 
should be suppressed. On the other hand, cancerous tissue is more informative and de-
serves higher activation, so its response is enhanced after being processed by the attention 
mechanism. 
We adopted the attention mechanism impl emented by a Squeeze-and-Excitation 
block proposed by Hu et al. [61]. Briefly, the essential components are the Squeeze and 
Excitation. Suppose feature maps 𝑈 have 𝐶 channels and the size of the feature in each 
channel is 𝐻∗𝑊 . For the Squeeze operation, global average pooling is applied to 𝑈, ena-
bling features to gain a global receptive field.  After the Squeeze operation, the size of fea-
ture maps 𝑈 change from 𝐻∗𝑊∗𝐶  to 1∗1∗𝐶 .  Results are denoted as 𝑍. More pre-
cisely, this change is given by 
𝑍
௖=𝐹 ௦௤(𝑈௖)=1
𝐻×𝑊෍෍𝑈 ௖(𝑖,𝑗)ு
௝ୀଵௐ
௜ୀଵ (1)
where 𝑐 denotes 𝑐௧௛ channel of 𝑈, and 𝐹௦௤ is the Squeeze function. 
Figure 5. The architecture of boosted-EfﬁcientNet-B3. EfﬁcientNet ﬁrst extracts image features through its convolutional
layers. The attention mechanism is then utilized to reweight features, increasing the activation of signiﬁcant parts. Next, we
perform FF on the outputs of several convolutional layers. Subsequently, images are classiﬁed based on those fused features.
Details of these methods are described in the following sections.
4.4. Reduce the Downsampling Scale
To mitigate the problem mentioned in the discussion, we adjusted the downsampling
multiple in EfﬁcientNet. Our idea is implemented by modifying the stride of the convo-
lution kernel of EfﬁcientNet. To select the best-performed downsampling scale, multiple
and elaborate experiments were conducted on the downsampling scale {2, 4, 6, 8, 16}, and
Strategy 16 outperforms other settings. The size of the feature map in the best-performing
downsampling scale (16) was 6 6, which is one times larger than the original downsam-
pling multiple (32). The change of the downsampling scale from 32 to 16 was implemented
by modifying the stride of the ﬁrst convolution layer from two to one, as shown in the red
dashed squares on the left half of Figure 5.
4.5. Attention Mechanism
As an example for the attention mechanism, it can be seen from Figure 6 that the
response to the background is large, since most parts of the image consist of the background.
However, this information usually is useless for classiﬁcation, so their response should be
suppressed. On the other hand, cancerous tissue is more informative and deserves higher
activation, so its response is enhanced after being processed by the attention mechanism.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  10 of 14 
 
 Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (sca-
lar) of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Specif-
ically, two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activa-
tion function sigmoid, and Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity in-creasing. Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certifies the weight falls 
in the range of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation 
(2). 
𝑆=𝐹
௘௫(𝑍, 𝑊 )=𝜎 ൫ 𝑔 (𝑍, 𝑊 )൯=𝜎 ( 𝑊 ଶ𝛿(𝑊ଵ𝑍)) (2)
where 𝑆 is the result of the Excitation operation, 𝐹௘௫ is the Excitation function, and 𝑔 re-
fers to the gating function. 𝜎 and 𝛿 denote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. 
𝑊ଵ and 𝑊ଶ are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The final output 
is calculated by multiplying the scalar 𝑆 with the original feature maps 𝑈. 
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown 
in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism. 
4.6. Feature Fusion 
Four steps are involved during the FF techni que, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During the 
forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the 4th, 7th, 
17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features, the attention 
mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined  using the outputs of Step 2 after applying 
the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features  are then sent to the following layers to 
conduct classification. 
 
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfficientNet-B3. 
  
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism.