Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 7 of 14
adversely affect the performance of EfﬁcientNet. Hence, along with the RCC, we proposed
to reduce the downsampling scale to mitigate this problem, and the experimental results
prove our theory.
When viewing a picture, the human visual system tends to selectively focus on a
speciﬁc part of the picture while ignoring other visible information due to limited visual
information processing resources. For example, although the sky information primarily
covers Figure 2, people are readily able to capture the airplane in the image [ 55]. To simulate
this process in artiﬁcial neural networks, the attention mechanism is proposed and has
many successful applications including image caption [ 56,57], image classiﬁcation [ 58], and
object detection [ 59,60]. As previously stated, for RPCam datasets, the most informative
features are concentrated in the center area of images, making attention to this area more
critical. Hence, this project also adopts the attention mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-
and-Excitation block proposed by Hu et al. [61].
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  7 of 14 
 
 a balance between performance and time comp lexity. The depth of the network is also 
designed for adapting the input size. This setti ng performs well in most well-known base-
line image datasets (e.g., ImageNet [54], PA SCAL VOC [55]) as their resolutions usually 
are more than 1000 × 1000. However, the resolu tion of RPCam datasets is 96 ×96, which is 
much less than the designed model inputs of 300 × 300. After the feature extraction, the 
size of the final feature will be 32 times smaller than the input (from 96 × 96 to 3 × 3). This 
feature map is likely to be too abstractive and thus lose low-level features, which may 
adversely affect the performance of EfficientN et. Hence, along with the RCC, we proposed 
to reduce the downsampling scale to mitigate this problem, and the experimental results 
prove our theory. 
When viewing a picture, the human visual sy stem tends to selectively focus on a spe-
cific part of the picture while ignoring other visible information due to limited visual infor-
mation processing resources. For example, al though the sky information primarily covers 
Figure 2, people are readily able to capture the airplane in the image [55]. To simulate this 
process in artificial neural networks, the a ttention mechanism is proposed and has many 
successful applications including image caption [56,57], image classification [58], and object 
detection [59,60]. As previously stated, for RP Cam datasets, the most informative features 
are concentrated in the center area of images, making attention to this area more critical. 
Hence, this project also adopts the attent ion mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-and-
Excitation block proposed by Hu et al. [61]. 
Moreover, high-level features generated by deeper convolutional layers contain rich 
semantic information, but they usually lose de tails such as positions and colors that are 
helpful in the classification. In contrast, low-level features include more detailed infor-
mation but introduce non-specific noise. FF is a technique that combines low-level and 
high-level features and has been adopted in many image recognition tasks for perfor-
mance improvement [62]. Detail ed information is more consequential in our work since 
complex texture contours exist in the RPCam images despite their small resolution. Ac-
cordingly, we adopt the FF techniqu e to boost classification accuracy. 
The experimental results reveal that boos ted EfficientNet-B3 alleviates the problem 
of overfitting training images and outperfo rms the ResNet50, DenseNet121, and the basic 
EfficientNet-B3 for all indicators in testing da tasets. Furthermore, the results of the abla-
tion experiment indicate that these four strategies adopted are all helpful to enhance the 
performance of the classifier model, including generalization ability, accuracy, and com-
putational cost. 
There are some limitations in this work. Our main purpose was to propose a method 
to classify the lymph node metastases in BC , and we only tested the RPCam dataset. If 
multiple sources are applied for training, there are potentials to improve the model clas-
sification and generalization  performance. Additionally, we believe our model can be 
used for other biomedical diagnostic applications after a few modifications. 
Besides, we select features from the 4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks to perform feature 
fusion, but other combinations may obtain better performance. Due to the limited compu-
tation resources, we have not tried other a ttention mechanisms and feature fusion strate-
gies yet. 
 
Figure 2. Attention in the human visual  system. Although the image primarily involves the back-
ground, people are easily able to capt ure the airplane in the red rectangle. 
Figure 2. Attention in the human visual system. Although the image primarily involves the background, people are easily
able to capture the airplane in the red rectangle.
Moreover, high-level features generated by deeper convolutional layers contain rich
semantic information, but they usually lose details such as positions and colors that
are helpful in the classiﬁcation. In contrast, low-level features include more detailed
information but introduce non-speciﬁc noise. FF is a technique that combines low-level and
high-level features and has been adopted in many image recognition tasks for performance
improvement [ 62]. Detailed information is more consequential in our work since complex
texture contours exist in the RPCam images despite their small resolution. Accordingly, we
adopt the FF technique to boost classiﬁcation accuracy.
The experimental results reveal that boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 alleviates the problem
of overﬁtting training images and outperforms the ResNet50, DenseNet121, and the ba-
sic EfﬁcientNet-B3 for all indicators in testing datasets. Furthermore, the results of the
ablation experiment indicate that these four strategies adopted are all helpful to enhance
the performance of the classiﬁer model, including generalization ability, accuracy, and
computational cost.
There are some limitations in this work. Our main purpose was to propose a method
to classify the lymph node metastases in BC, and we only tested the RPCam dataset.
If multiple sources are applied for training, there are potentials to improve the model
classiﬁcation and generalization performance. Additionally, we believe our model can be
used for other biomedical diagnostic applications after a few modiﬁcations.
Besides, we select features from the 4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks to perform fea-
ture fusion, but other combinations may obtain better performance. Due to the limited
computation resources, we have not tried other attention mechanisms and feature fusion
strategies yet.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon Datasets
A Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam) dataset created by deleting duplicate images in
the PCam dataset [ 63] was sponsored by the Kaggle Competition. The dataset consisted of