Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 10 of 14
We adopted the attention mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-and-Excitation block
proposed by Hu et al. [ 61]. Brieﬂy, the essential components are the Squeeze and Excitation.
Suppose feature maps Uhave Cchannels and the size of the feature in each channel is
HW. For the Squeeze operation, global average pooling is applied to U, enabling features
to gain a global receptive ﬁeld. After the Squeeze operation, the size of feature maps U
change from HWCto11C.Results are denoted as Z.More precisely, this change is
given by
Zc=Fsq(Uc)=1
HWW
å
i=1H
å
j=1Uc(i,j) (1)
where cdenotes cthchannel of U, and Fsqis the Squeeze function.
Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (scalar)
of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Speciﬁcally,
two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activation
function sigmoid, and Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity increasing.
Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certiﬁes the weight falls in the range
of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation (2).
S=Fex(Z,W)=s(g(Z,W))=s(W2d(W1Z)) (2)
where Sis the result of the Excitation operation, Fexis the Excitation function, and grefers
to the gating function. sand ddenote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. W1
and W2are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The ﬁnal output is
calculated by multiplying the scalar Swith the original feature maps U.
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown
in Figure 5.
4.6. Feature Fusion
Four steps are involved during the FF technique, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During
the forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the
4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features,
the attention mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential
information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined using the outputs of Step
2 after applying the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features are then sent to the
following layers to conduct classiﬁcation.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  10 of 14 
 
 Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (sca-
lar) of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Specif-
ically, two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activa-
tion function sigmoid, and Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity in-creasing. Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certifies the weight falls 
in the range of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation 
(2). 
𝑆=𝐹
௘௫(𝑍, 𝑊 )=𝜎 ൫ 𝑔 (𝑍, 𝑊 )൯=𝜎 ( 𝑊 ଶ𝛿(𝑊ଵ𝑍)) (2)
where 𝑆 is the result of the Excitation operation, 𝐹௘௫ is the Excitation function, and 𝑔 re-
fers to the gating function. 𝜎 and 𝛿 denote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. 
𝑊ଵ and 𝑊ଶ are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The final output 
is calculated by multiplying the scalar 𝑆 with the original feature maps 𝑈. 
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown 
in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism. 
4.6. Feature Fusion 
Four steps are involved during the FF techni que, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During the 
forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the 4th, 7th, 
17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features, the attention 
mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined  using the outputs of Step 2 after applying 
the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features  are then sent to the following layers to 
conduct classification. 
 
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfficientNet-B3. 
  
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfﬁcientNet-B3.
4.7. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluated our method on the RPCam dataset. Since the testing set was not pro-
vided, we split the original training set into a training set and a validation set and utilized