ful explainability approaches in the NLP domain
(Section 6).
Related Surveys : Earlier surveys on XAI in-
clude Adadi and Berrada (2018) and Guidotti et al.
(2018). While Adadi and Berrada provide a com-
prehensive review of basic terminology and fun-
damental concepts relevant to XAI in general, our
goal is to survey more recent works in NLP in an
effort to understand how these achieve XAI and
how well they achieve it. Guidotti et al. adopt a
four dimensional classiﬁcation scheme to rate var-
ious approaches. Crucially, they differentiate be-
tween the “explanator” and the black-box model it
explains. This makes most sense when a surrogate
model is used to explain a black-box model. As we
shall subsequently see, such a distinction applies
less well to the majority of NLP works published in
the past few years where the same neural network
(NN) can be used not only to make predictions but
also to derive explanations. In a series of tutorials,
Lecue et al. (2020) discuss fairness and trust in ma-
chine learning (ML) that are clearly related to XAI
but not the focus of this survey. Finally, we adapt
some nomenclature from Arya et al. (2019) which
presents a software toolkit that can help users lend
explainability to their models and ML pipelines.
Our goal for this survey is to: (1) provide the
reader with a better understanding of the state of
XAI in NLP, (2) point developers interested in
building explainable NLP models to currently avail-
able techniques, and (3) bring to the attention of
the research community the gaps that exist; mainly
a lack of formal deﬁnitions and evaluation for ex-
plainability. We have also built an interactive web-
site providing interested readers with all relevant
aspects for every paper covered in this survey.1
2 Methodology
We identiﬁed relevant papers (see Appendix A) and
classiﬁed them based on the aspects deﬁned in Sec-
tions 3 and 4. To ensure a consistent classiﬁcation,
each paper was individually analyzed by at least
two reviewers, consulting additional reviewers in
the case of disagreement. For simplicity of presen-
tation, we label each paper with its main applicable
category for each aspect, though some papers may
span multiple categories (usually with varying de-
grees of emphasis.) All relevant aspects for every
1https://xainlp2020.github.io/xainlp/
(we plan to maintain this website as a contribution to the
community.)paper covered in this survey can be found at the
aforementioned website; to enable readers of this
survey to discover interesting explainability tech-
niques and ideas, even if they have not been fully
developed in the respective publications.
3 Categorization of Explanations
Explanations are often categorized along two main
aspects (Guidotti et al., 2018; Adadi and Berrada,
2018). The ﬁrst distinguishes whether the expla-
nation is for an individual prediction ( local ) or the
model’s prediction process as a whole ( global ).
The second differentiates between the explanation
emerging directly from the prediction process ( self-
explaining ) versus requiring post-processing ( post-
hoc). We next describe both of these aspects in de-
tail, and provide a summary of the four categories
they induce in Table 1.
3.1 Local vs Global
Alocal explanation provides information or justiﬁ-
cation for the model’s prediction on a speciﬁc in-
put; 46 of the 50 papers fall into this category.
Aglobal explanation provides similar justiﬁca-
tion by revealing how the model’s predictive pro-
cess works, independently of any particular input.
This category holds the remaining 4 papers cov-
ered by this survey. This low number is not surpris-
ing given the focus of this survey being on explana-
tions that justify predictions, as opposed to expla-
nations that help understand a model’s behavior in
general (which lie outside the scope of this survey).
3.2 Self-Explaining vs Post-Hoc
Regardless of whether the explanation is local or
global, explanations differ on whether they arise
as part of the prediction process, or whether their
generation requires post-processing following the
model making a prediction. A self-explaining ap-
proach, which may also be referred to as directly
interpretable (Arya et al., 2019), generates the ex-
planation at the same time as the prediction, us-
ing information emitted by the model as a result
of the process of making that prediction. Decision
trees and rule-based models are examples of global
self-explaining models, while feature saliency ap-
proaches such as attention are examples of local
self-explaining models.
In contrast, a post-hoc approach requires that
an additional operation is performed after the pre-
dictions are made. LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) is