A Survey of the State of Explainable AI for Natural Language Processing
Marina Danilevsky, Kun Qian, Ranit Aharonov, Yannis Katsis, Ban Kawas, Prithviraj Sen
IBM Research – Almadem
mdanile@us.ibm.com ,fqian.kun,Ranit.Aharonov2 g@ibm.com
yannis.katsis@ibm.com ,fbkawas,senp g@us.ibm.com
Abstract
Recent years have seen important advances in
the quality of state-of-the-art models, but this
has come at the expense of models becom-
ing less interpretable. This survey presents an
overview of the current state of Explainable
AI (XAI), considered within the domain of
Natural Language Processing (NLP). We dis-
cuss the main categorization of explanations,
as well as the various ways explanations can be
arrived at and visualized. We detail the oper-
ations and explainability techniques currently
available for generating explanations for NLP
model predictions, to serve as a resource for
model developers in the community. Finally,
we point out the current gaps and encourage
directions for future work in this important re-
search area.
1 Introduction
Traditionally, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
systems have been mostly based on techniques that
are inherently explainable. Examples of such ap-
proaches, often referred to as white box techniques,
include rules, decision trees, hidden Markov mod-
els, logistic regressions, and others. Recent years,
though, have brought the advent and popularity of
black box techniques, such as deep learning mod-
els and the use of language embeddings as features.
While these methods in many cases substantially
advance model quality, they come at the expense
of models becoming less interpretable. This ob-
fuscation of the process by which a model arrives
at its results can be problematic, as it may erode
trust in the many AI systems humans interact with
daily (e.g., chatbots, recommendation systems, in-
formation retrieval algorithms, and many others).
In the broader AI community, this growing under-
standing of the importance of explainability has cre-
ated an emerging ﬁeld called Explainable AI (XAI).
However, just as tasks in different ﬁelds are more
amenable to particular approaches, explainabilitymust also be considered within the context of each
discipline. We therefore focus this survey on XAI
works in the domain of NLP, as represented in the
main NLP conferences in the last seven years. This
is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst XAI sur-
vey focusing on the NLP domain.
As will become clear in this survey, explainabil-
ity is in itself a term that requires an explanation.
While explainability may generally serve many
purposes (see, e.g., Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni,
2019), our focus is on explainability from the per-
spective of an end user whose goal is to understand
how a model arrives at its result, also referred to as
theoutcome explanation problem (Guidotti et al.,
2018). In this regard, explanations can help users
of NLP-based AI systems build trust in these sys-
tems’ predictions. Additionally, understanding the
model’s operation may also allow users to provide
useful feedback, which in turn can help developers
improve model quality (Adadi and Berrada, 2018).
Explanations of model predictions have previ-
ously been categorized in a fairly simple way that
differentiates between (1) whether the explanation
is for each prediction individually or the model’s
prediction process as a whole, and (2) determin-
ing whether generating the explanation requires
post-processing or not (see Section 3). However,
although rarely studied, there are many additional
characterizations of explanations, the most impor-
tant being the techniques used to either generate
or visualize explanations. In this survey, we ana-
lyze the NLP literature with respect to both these
dimensions and identify the most commonly used
explainability and visualization techniques , in ad-
dition to operations used to generate explanations
(Sections 4.1-Section 4.3). We brieﬂy describe
each technique and point to representative papers
adopting it. Finally, we discuss the common evalu-
ation techniques used to measure the quality of ex-
planations (Section 5), and conclude with a discus-
sion of gaps and challenges in developing success-arXiv:2010.00711v1  [cs.CL]  1 Oct 2020