venient for NN-based models because these can
be computed for any layer using a single call to
auto-differentiation, which most deep learning en-
gines provide out-of-the-box. Recent work has also
proposed improvements to ﬁrst-derivative saliency
(Sundararajan et al., 2017). As suggested by its
name and deﬁnition, ﬁrst-derivative saliency can be
used to enable feature importance explainability, es-
pecially on word/token-level features (Aubakirova
and Bansal, 2016; Karlekar et al., 2018).
Layer-wise relevance propagation. This is an-
other way to attribute relevance to features com-
puted in any intermediate layer of an NN. Deﬁni-
tions are available for most common NN layers in-
cluding fully connected layers, convolution layers
and recurrent layers. Layer-wise relevance propa-
gation has been used to, for example, enable feature
importance explainability (Poerner et al., 2018) and
example-driven explainability (Croce et al., 2018).
Input perturbations. Pioneered by LIME
(Ribeiro et al., 2016), input perturbations can ex-
plain the output for input xby generating ran-
dom perturbations of xand training an explainable
model (usually a linear model). They are mainly
used to enable surrogate models (e.g., Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2017).
Attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al.,
2017). Less an operation and more of a strategy to
enable the NN to explain predictions, attention lay-
ers can be added to most NN architectures and, be-
cause they appeal to human intuition, can help indi-
cate where the NN model is “focusing”. While pre-
vious work has widely used attention layers (Luo
et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2017; Mullenbach et al.,
2018) to enable feature importance explainability,
the jury is still out as to how much explainability at-
tention provides (Jain and Wallace, 2019; Serrano
and Smith, 2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019).
LSTM gating signals. Given the sequential na-
ture of language, recurrent layers, in particular
LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), are
commonplace. While it is common to mine the out-
puts of LSTM cells to explain outputs, there may
also be information present in the outputs of the
gates produced within the cells. It is possible to uti-
lize (and even combine) other operations presented
here to interpret gating signals to aid feature impor-
tance explainability (Ghaeini et al., 2018).
Explainability-aware architecture design. One
way to exploit the ﬂexibility of deep learning is to
devise an NN architecture that mimics the processhumans employ to arrive at a solution. This makes
the learned model (partially) interpretable since the
architecture contains human-recognizable compo-
nents. Implementing such a model architecture can
be used to enable the induction of human-readable
programs for solving math problems (Amini et al.,
2019; Ling et al., 2017) or sentence simpliﬁcation
problems (Dong et al., 2019). This design may also
be applied to surrogate models that generate expla-
nations for predictions (Rajani et al., 2019a; Liu
et al., 2019).
Previous works have also attempted to compare
these operations in terms of efﬁcacy with respect
to speciﬁc NLP tasks (Poerner et al., 2018). Oper-
ations outside of this list exist and are popular for
particular categories of explanations. Table 2 men-
tions some of these. For instance, Pr ¨ollochs et al.
(2019) use reinforcement learning to learn simple
negation rules, Liu et al. (2018) learns a taxonomy
post-hoc to better interpret network embeddings,
and Pryzant et al. (2018b) uses gradient reversal
(Ganin et al., 2016) to deconfound lexicons.
4.3 Visualization Techniques
An explanation may be presented in different ways
to the end user, and making the appropriate choice
is crucial for the overall success of an XAI ap-
proach. For example, the widely used attention
mechanism, which learns the importance scores
of a set of features, can be visualized as raw at-
tention scores or as a saliency heatmap (see Fig-
ure 1a). Although the former is acceptable, the lat-
ter is more user-friendly and has become the stan-
dard way to visualize attention-based approaches.
We now present the major visualization techniques
identiﬁed in our literature review.
Saliency. This has been primarily used to visu-
alize the importance scores of different types of
elements in XAI learning systems, such as show-
ing input-output word alignment (Bahdanau et al.,
2015) (Figure 1a), highlighting words in input text
(Mullenbach et al., 2018) (Figure 1b) or displaying
extracted relations (Xie et al., 2017). We observe a
strong correspondence between feature importance-
based explainability and saliency-based visualiza-
tions; namely, all papers using feature importance
to generate explanations also chose saliency-based
visualization techniques. Saliency-based visualiza-
tions are popular because they present visually per-
ceptive explanations and can be easily understood
by different types of end users. They are there-