only part of this process, leaving it up to the end
user to ﬁll in the gaps.
As an example, consider the MathQA task of
solving math word problems. As readers may be fa-
miliar from past education experience, in math ex-
ams, one is often asked to provide a step-by-step ex-
planation of how the answer was derived. Usually,
full credit is not given if any of the critical steps
used in the derivation are missing. Recent works
have studied the explainability of MathQA models,
which seek to reproduce this process (Amini et al.,
2019; Ling et al., 2017), and have employed dif-
ferent approaches in the type of explanations pro-
duced. While (Amini et al., 2019) explains the pre-
dicted answer by showing the sequence of mathe-
matical operations leading to it, this provides only
partial coverage, as it does not explain how these
operations were derived from the input text. On
the other hand, the explanations produced by (Ling
et al., 2017) augment the mathematical formulas
with text describing the thought process behind the
derived solution, thus covering a bigger part of the
prediction process.
The level of coverage may be an artifact of ex-
plainability techniques used: provenance-based ap-
proaches tend to provide more coverage, while
example-driven approaches, may provide little to
no coverage. Moreover, while our math teacher
would argue that providing higher coverage is al-
ways beneﬁcial to the student, in reality this may
depend on the end use of the explanation. For
instance, the coverage of explanations of (Amini
et al., 2019) may be potentially sufﬁcient for ad-
vanced technical users. Thus, higher coverage,
while in general a positive aspect, should always
be considered in combination with the target use
and audience of the produced explanations.
6 Insights and Future Directions
This survey showcases recent advances of XAI
research in NLP, as evidenced by publications in
major NLP conferences in the last 7 years. We have
discussed the main categorization of explanations
(Local vs Global, Self-Explaining vs Post-Hoc)
as well as the various ways explanations can be
arrived at and visualized, together with the common
techniques used. We have also detailed operations
and explainability techniques currently available
for generating explanations of model predictions,
in the hopes of serving as a resource for developers
interested in building explainable NLP models.We hope this survey encourages the research
community to work in bridging the current gaps in
the ﬁeld of XAI in NLP. The ﬁrst research direction
is a need for clearer terminology and understand-
ing of what constitutes explainability and how it
connects to the target audience. For example, is a
model that displays an induced program that, when
executed, yields a prediction, and yet conceals the
process of inducing the program, explainable in
general? Or is it explainable for some target users
but not for others? The second is an expansion of
the evaluation processes and metrics, especially for
human evaluation. The ﬁeld of XAI is aimed at
adding explainability as a desired feature of models,
in addition to the model’s predictive quality, and
other features such as runtime performance, com-
plexity or memory usage. In general, trade-offs ex-
ist between desired characteristics of models, such
as more complex models achieving better predic-
tive power at the expense of slower runtime. In
XAI, some works have claimed that explainability
may come at the price of losing predictive quality
(Bertsimas et al., 2019), while other have claimed
the opposite (Garneau et al., 2018; Liang et al.,
2016). Studying such possible trade-offs is an im-
portant research area for XAI, but one that cannot
advance until standardized metrics are developed
for evaluating the quality of explanations. The third
research direction is a call to more critically ad-
dress the issue of ﬁdelity (or causality), and to ask
hard questions about whether a claimed explana-
tion is faithfully explaining the model’s prediction.
Finally, it is interesting to note that we found
only four papers that fall into the global explana-
tions category. This might seem surprising given
that white box models, which have been fundamen-
tal in NLP, are explainable in the global sense. We
believe this stems from the fact that because white
box models are clearly explainable, the focus of
the explicit XAI ﬁeld is in explaining black box
models, which comprise mostly local explanations.
White box models, like rule based models and de-
cision trees, while still in use, are less frequently
framed as explainable or interpretable, and are
hence not the main thrust of where the ﬁeld is going.
We think that this may be an oversight of the ﬁeld
since white box models can be a great test bed for
studying techniques for evaluating explanations.