next present the major categories of evaluation tech-
niques we encountered (summarized in Table 3).
None or Informal Comparison to Human
Examination only Ground Truth Evaluation
32 12 9
Table 3: Common evaluation techniques and number
of papers adopting them, out of the 50 papers surveyed
(note that some papers adopt more than one technique)
Informal examination of explanations. This typ-
ically takes the form of high-level discussions of
how examples of generated explanations align with
human intuition. This includes cases where the
output of a single explainability approach is exam-
ined in isolation (Xie et al., 2017) as well as when
explanations are compared to those of other refer-
ence approaches (Ross et al., 2017) (such as LIME,
which is a frequently used baseline).
Comparison to ground truth. Several works com-
pare generated explanations to ground truth data in
order to quantify the performance of explainabil-
ity techniques. Employed metrics vary based on
task and explainability technique, but commonly
encountered metrics include P/R/F1 (Carton et al.,
2018), perplexity, and BLEU (Ling et al., 2017;
Rajani et al., 2019b). While having a quantitative
way to measure explainability is a promising di-
rection, care should be taken during ground truth
acquisition to ensure its quality and account for
cases where there may be alternative valid explana-
tions. Approaches employed to address this issue
involve having multiple annotators and reporting
inter-annotator agreement or mean human perfor-
mance, as well as evaluating the explanations at
different granularities (e.g., token-wise vs phrase-
wise) to account for disagreements on the precise
value of the ground truth (Carton et al., 2018).
Human evaluation. A more direct way to assess
the explanation quality is to ask humans to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of the generated explanations.
This has the advantage of avoiding the assumption
that there is only one good explanation that could
serve as ground truth, as well as sidestepping the
need to measure similarity of explanations. Here as
well, it is important to have multiple annotators, re-
port inter-annotator agreement, and correctly deal
with subjectivity and variance in the responses. The
approaches found in this survey vary in several
dimensions, including the number of humans in-
volved (ranging from 1 (Mullenbach et al., 2018) to25 (Sydorova et al., 2019) humans), as well as the
high-level task that they were asked to perform (in-
cluding rating the explanations of a single approach
(Dong et al., 2019) and comparing explanations of
multiple techniques (Sydorova et al., 2019)).
Other operation-speciﬁc techniques. Given the
prevalence of attention layers (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Vaswani et al., 2017) in NLP, recent work
(Jain and Wallace, 2019; Serrano and Smith, 2019;
Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019) has developed speciﬁc
techniques to evaluate such explanations based on
counterfactuals or erasure-based tests (Feng et al.,
2018). Serrano and Smith repeatedly set to zero the
maximal entry produced by the attention layer. If at-
tention weights indeed “explain” the output predic-
tion, then turning off the dominant weights should
result in an altered prediction. Similar experiments
have been devised by others (Jain and Wallace,
2019). In particular, Wiegreffe and Pinter caution
against assuming that there exists only one true ex-
planation to suggest accounting for the natural vari-
ance of attention layers. On a broader note, causal-
ity has thoroughly explored such counterfactual-
based notions of explanation (Halpern, 2016).
While the above overview summarizes how ex-
plainability approaches are commonly evaluated,
another important aspect is what is being evaluated.
Explanations are multi-faceted objects that can be
evaluated on multiple aspects, such as ﬁdelity (how
much they reﬂect the actual workings of the under-
lying model), comprehensibility (how easy they are
to understand by humans), and others. Therefore,
understanding the target of the evaluation is impor-
tant for interpreting the evaluation results. We refer
interested readers to (Carvalho et al., 2019) for a
comprehensive presentation of aspects of evaluat-
ing approaches.
Many works do not explicitly state what is be-
ing evaluated. As a notable exception, (Lertvit-
tayakumjorn and Toni, 2019) outlines three goals of
explanations (reveal model behavior, justify model
predictions, and assist humans in investigating un-
certain predictions) and proposes human evaluation
experiments targeting each of them.
5.2 Predictive Process Coverage
An important and often overlooked aspect of expla-
nation quality is the part of the prediction process
(starting with the input and ending with the model
output) covered by an explanation. We have ob-
served that many explainability approaches explain