an example of producing a local explanation us-
ing a surrogate model applied following the predic-
tor’s operation. A paper might also be considered
to span both categories – for example, (Sydorova
et al., 2019) actually presents both self-explaining
and post-hoc explanation techniques.
Local
Post-HocExplain a single prediction by per-
forming additional operations ( after the
model has emitted a prediction)
Local Self-
ExplainingExplain a single prediction using the
model itself (calculated from informa-
tion made available from the model as
part of making the prediction)
Global
Post-HocPerform additional operations to explain
the entire model’s predictive reasoning
Global Self-
ExplainingUse the predictive model itself to explain
the entire model’s predictive reasoning
(a.k.a. directly interpretable model)
Table 1: Overview of the high-level categories of expla-
nations (Section 3).
4 Aspects of Explanations
While the previous categorization serves as a con-
venient high-level classiﬁcation of explanations, it
does not cover other important characteristics. We
now introduce two additional aspects of explana-
tions: (1) techniques for deriving the explanation
and (2) presentation to the end user. We discuss
the most commonly used explainability techniques,
along with basic operations that enable explainabil-
ity, as well as the visualization techniques com-
monly used to present the output of associated ex-
plainability techniques. We identify the most com-
mon combinations of explainability techniques, op-
erations, and visualization techniques for each of
the four high-level categories of explanations pre-
sented above, and summarize them, together with
representative papers, in Table 2.
Although explainability techniques and visual-
izations are often intermixed, there are fundamental
differences between them that motivated us to treat
them separately. Concretely, explanation derivation
- typically done by AI scientists and engineers - fo-
cuses on mathematically motivated justiﬁcations
of models’ output, leveraging various explainabil-
ity techniques to produce “raw explanations” (such
as attention scores). On the other hand, explana-
tion presentation - ideally done by UX engineers -
focuses on how these “raw explanations” are best
presented to the end users using suitable visualiza-
tion techniques (such as saliency heatmaps).4.1 Explainability Techniques
In the papers surveyed, we identiﬁed ﬁve major
explainability techniques that differ in the mecha-
nisms they adopt to generate the raw mathematical
justiﬁcations that lead to the ﬁnal explanation pre-
sented to the end users.
Feature importance. The main idea is to derive
explanation by investigating the importance scores
of different features used to output the ﬁnal pre-
diction. Such approaches can be built on differ-
ent types of features, such as manual features ob-
tained from feature engineering (e.g., V oskarides
et al., 2015), lexical features including word/tokens
and n-gram (e.g., Godin et al., 2018; Mullenbach
et al., 2018), or latent features learned by NNs (e.g.,
Xie et al., 2017). Attention mechanism (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) and ﬁrst-derivative saliency (Li et al.,
2015) are two widely used operations to enable
feature importance-based explanations. Text-based
features are inherently more interpretable by hu-
mans than general features, which may explain the
widespread use of attention-based approaches in
the NLP domain.
Surrogate model. Model predictions are ex-
plained by learning a second, usually more explain-
able model, as a proxy. One well-known example
is LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), which learns sur-
rogate models using an operation called input per-
turbation. Surrogate model-based approaches are
model-agnostic and can be used to achieve either
local (e.g., Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2017) or
global (e.g., Liu et al., 2018) explanations. How-
ever, the learned surrogate models and the original
models may have completely different mechanisms
to make predictions, leading to concerns about the
ﬁdelity of surrogate model-based approaches.
Example-driven. Such approaches explain the
prediction of an input instance by identifying and
presenting other instances, usually from available
labeled data, that are semantically similar to the
input instance. They are similar in spirit to nearest
neighbor-based approaches (Dudani, 1976), and
have been applied to different NLP tasks such as
text classiﬁcation (Croce et al., 2019) and question
answering (Abujabal et al., 2017).
Provenance-based. Explanations are provided
by illustrating some or all of the prediction deriva-
tion process, which is an intuitive and effective ex-
plainability technique when the ﬁnal prediction is
the result of a series of reasoning steps. We observe
several question answering papers adopt such ap-