(a) Saliency heatmap (Bahdanau et al.,
2015)
(b) Saliency highlighting (Mullenbach
et al., 2018)
(c) Raw declarative rules
(Pezeshkpour et al., 2019b)
(d) Raw declarative program (Amini et al., 2019)
 (e) Raw examples (Croce et al., 2019)
Figure 1: Examples of different visualization techniques
fore frequently seen across different AI domains
(e.g., computer vision (Simonyan et al., 2013) and
speech (Aldeneh and Provost, 2017)). As shown in
Table 2, saliency is the most dominant visualization
technique among the papers covered by this survey.
Raw declarative representations . As suggested
by its name, this visualization technique directly
presents the learned declarative representations,
such as logic rules, trees, and programs (Figure 1c
and 1d). Such techniques assume that end users can
understand speciﬁc representations, such as ﬁrst-
order logic rules (Pezeshkpour et al., 2019a) and
reasoning trees (Liang et al., 2016), and therefore
may implicitly target more advanced users.
Natural language explanation . The explanation
is verbalized in human-comprehensible natural lan-
guage (Figure 2). The natural language can be
generated using sophisticated deep learning mod-
els, e.g., by training a language model with human
natural language explanations and coupling with
a deep generative model (Rajani et al., 2019a). It
can also be generated by using simple template-
based approaches (Abujabal et al., 2017). In fact,
many declarative induction-based techniques can
use template-based natural language generation
(Reiter and Dale, 1997) to turn rules and programs
into human-comprehensible language, and this mi-
nor extension can potentially make the explanation
more accessible to lay users.
Table 2 references some additional visualiza-
Figure 2: Template-based natural language explanation
for a QA system (Abujabal et al., 2017).
tion techniques, such as using raw examples to
present example-driven approaches (Jiang et al.,
2019; Croce et al., 2019) (e.g., Figure 1e), and de-
pendency parse trees to represent input questions
(Abujabal et al., 2017).
5 Explanation Quality
Following the goals of XAI, a model’s quality
should be evaluated not only by its accuracy and
performance, but also by how well it provides ex-
planations for its predictions. In this section we dis-
cuss the state of the ﬁeld in terms of deﬁning and
measuring explanation quality.
5.1 Evaluation
Given the young age of the ﬁeld, unsurprisingly
there is little agreement on how explanations
should be evaluated. The majority of the works
reviewed (32 out of 50) either lack a standardized
evaluation or include only an informal evaluation,
while a smaller number of papers looked at more
formal evaluation approaches, including leverag-
ing ground truth data and human evaluation. We