ReferenceDomain Pixel Feature Feature#CClassiﬁer TaskDataset Task Resultgenerator alignment domains alignment loss alignment domains weight backbone
[Russo et al. , 2019 ]CoGANtarget and each source GAN loss target and each source M uniform DeepLabV2 S2R-CS seg 42.8shared
[Zhao et al. , 2019a ]CycleGANtarget and aggregated source GAN loss target and each source 1 — FCN8sS2R-CSseg41.4
shared S2R-BDDS 36.3
[Linet al. , 2020 ]V AE+CycleGANtarget and combined source — — 1 — ResNet-18 SI cls 68.1unshared
Table 3: Comparison of different intermediate domain generation methods for MDA, where ‘#C’, ‘seg’, and ‘cls’ are short for the number
of classiﬁers during reference ( Mis the number of source domains), segmentation, and classiﬁcation, respectively. ‘Result’ is the average
performance of all target domains measured by accuracy for classiﬁcation and mean intersection-over-union (mIoU) for segmentation.
and source domains in the latent space, the classiﬁers trained
based on the labeled source samples can be used to predict
the labels of a target sample. Since there are multiple sources,
it is possible that they will yield different target predictions.
One way to reconcile these different predictions is to uni-
formly average the predictions from different source classi-
ﬁers [Zhuet al. , 2019 ]. However, different sources may have
different relationships with the target, e.g.one source might
better align with the target, so a non-uniform, weighted av-
eraging of the predictions leads to better results. Weighting
strategies, known as a source selection process , include uni-
form weight [Zhu et al. , 2019 ], perplexity score based on
adversarial loss [Xuet al. , 2018 ], point-to-set (PoS) metric
using Mahalanobis distance [Guo et al. , 2018 ], relative er-
ror based on source-only accuracy [Peng et al. , 2019 ], and
Wasserstein distance based weights [Zhao et al. , 2020 ].
Besides the source importance, Zhao et al. [2020 ]also con-
sidered the sample importance, i.e.different samples from
the same source may still have different similarities from the
target samples. The source samples that are closer to the tar-
get are distilled (based on a manually selected Wasserstein
distance threshold) to ﬁne-tune the source classiﬁers. Auto-
matically and adaptively selecting the most relevant training
samples for each source remains an open research problem.
4.2 Intermediate Domain Generation
Feature-level alignment only aligns high-level information,
which is insufﬁcient for ﬁne-grained predictions, such as
pixel-wise semantic segmentation [Zhao et al. , 2019a ]. Gen-
erating an intermediate adapted domain with pixel-level
alignment, typically via GANs [Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ], can
help address this problem.
Domain generator. Since the original GAN is highly
under-constrained, some improved versions are employed,
such as Coupled GAN (CoGAN) in [Russo et al. , 2019 ]and
CycleGAN in MADAN [Zhao et al. , 2019a ]. Instead of di-
rectly taking the original source data as input to the genera-
tor[Russo et al. , 2019; Zhao et al. , 2019a ], Lin et al. [2020 ]
used a variational autoencoder to map all source and target
domains to a latent space and then generated an adapted do-
main from the latent space. Russo et al. [2019 ]then tried
to align the target and each adapted domain, while Lin et
al.[2020 ]aligned the target and combined adapted domain
from the latent space. Zhao et al. [2019a ]proposed to ag-
gregate different adapted domains using a sub-domain aggre-
gation discriminator and cross-domain cycle discriminator,
where the pixel-level alignment is then conducted between
the aggregated and target domains. Zhao et al. [2019a ]andLinet al. [2020 ]showed that the semantics might change in
the intermediate representation, and that enforcing a semantic
consistency before and after generation can help preserve the
labels.
Feature alignment and target prediction. Feature-level
alignment is often jointly considered with pixel-level align-
ment. Both alignments are usually achieved by minimizing
the GAN loss with a discriminator. One classiﬁer is trained
on each adapted domain [Russo et al. , 2019 ]and the multiple
predictions for a given target sample are averaged. Only one
classiﬁer is trained on the aggregated domain [Zhao et al. ,
2020 ]or on the combined adapted domain [Linet al. , 2020 ]
which is obtained by a unique generator from the latent space
for all source domains. The comparison of these methods are
summarized in Table 3.
5 Conclusion and Future Directions
In this paper, we provided a survey of recent MDA develop-
ments in the deep learning era. We motivated MDA, deﬁned
different MDA strategies, and summarized the datasets that
are commonly used for performing MDA evaluation. Our
survey focused on a typical MDA setting, i.e.unsupervised,
homogeneous, closed set, and one target MDA. We classi-
ﬁed these methods into different categories, and compared
the representative ones technically and experimentally. We
conclude with several open research directions:
Speciﬁc MDA strategy implementation. As introduced
in Section 2, there are many types of MDA strategies, and im-
plementing an MDA strategy according to the speciﬁc prob-
lem requirement would likely yield better results than a one-
size-ﬁts-all MDA approach. Further investigation is needed
to determine which MDA strategies work the best for which
types of problems. Also, real-world applications may have a
small amount of labeled target data; determining how to in-
clude this data and what fraction of this data is needed for a
certain performance remains an open question.
Multi-modal MDA. The labeled source data may be of
different modalities, such as LiDAR, radar, and image. Fur-
ther research is needed to ﬁnd techniques for fusing different
data modalities in MDA. A further extension of this idea is to
have varied modalities in defferent sources as well as partially
labeled, multi-modal sources.
Incremental and online MDA. Designing incremental
and online MDA algorithms remains largely unexplored and
may provide great beneﬁt for real-world scenarios, such as
updating deployed MDA models when new source or target
data becomes available.