(a) Digit recognition
(b) Semantic SegmentationSource 1: GTA Target: Cityscapges
 Source 2: SYNTHIA
Single-source DA
from Source 1Single-source DA 
from Source 2Source-combined 
DAmIoU
on target
Single-source
DA from Source 138.7
Single-source
DA from Source 229.2
Source-combined 
DA37.3
Source 1: MNIST
 Source 2: SVHN
Source 3: Synthetic digits
 Source 4: USPS
Target: MNIST-MAccuracy 
on target
Single-best 
DA71.3
Source-combined 
DA70.8Figure 2: An example of domain shift in the multi-source scenario.
Combining multiple sources into one source and directly performing
single-source domain adaptation on the entire dataset does not guar-
antee better performance compared to just using the best individual
source domain.
the joint probability distributions of observed data and labels
are different in the two domains. Domain shift exists in many
forms, such as from dataset to dataset, from simulation to
real-world, from RGB images to depth, and from CAD mod-
els to real images.
The phenomenon of domain shift motivates the research on
domain adaptation (DA), which aims to learn a model from a
labeled source domain that can generalize well to a different,
but related, target domain. Existing DA methods mainly fo-
cus on the single-source scenario. In the deep learning era, re-
cent single-source DA (SDA) methods usually employ a con-
joined architecture with two approaches to respectively rep-
resent the models for the source and target domains. One ap-
proach aims to learn a task model based on the labeled source
data using corresponding task losses, such as cross-entropy
loss for classiﬁcation. The other approach aims to deal with
the domain shift by aligning the target and source domains.
Based on the alignment strategies, deep SDA methods can be
classiﬁed into four categories:
1.Discrepancy-based methods try to align the features by
explicitly measuring the discrepancy on corresponding
activation layers, such as maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [Long et al. , 2015b ], correlation alignment [Sun
et al. , 2017 ], and contrastive domain discrepancy [Kang
et al. , 2019 ].
2.Adversarial generative methods generate fake data to
align the source and target domains at pixel-level based
on Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [Goodfellow
et al. , 2014 ]and its variants, such as CycleGAN [Zhuet
al., 2017; Zhao et al. , 2019b ].
3.Adversarial discriminative methods employ an adversar-
ial objective with a domain discriminator to align the
features [Tzeng et al. , 2017; Tsai et al. , 2018 ].
4.Reconstruction based methods aim to reconstruct the tar-
get input from the extracted features using the source
task model [Ghifary et al. , 2016 ].In practice, the labeled data may be collected from mul-
tiple sources with different distributions [Sunet al. , 2015;
Bhatt et al. , 2016 ]. In such cases, the aforementioned SDA
methods could be trivially applied by combining the sources
into a single source: an approach we refer to as source-
combined DA . However, source-combined DA oftentimes re-
sults in a poorer performance than simply using one of the
sources and discarding the others. As illustrated in Figure 2,
the accuracy on the best single source digit recognition adap-
tation using DANN [Ganin et al. , 2016 ]is 71.3%, while the
source-combined accuracy drops to 70.8%. For segmenta-
tion adaptation using CyCADA [Hoffman et al. , 2018b ], the
mIoU of source-combined DA (37.3%) is also lower than that
of SDA from GTA (38.7%). Because the domain shift not
only exists between each source and target, but also exists
among different sources, the source-combined data from dif-
ferent sources may interfere with each other during the learn-
ing process [Riemer et al. , 2019 ]. Therefore, multi-source
domain adaptation (MDA) is needed in order to leverage all
of the available data.
The early MDA methods mainly focus on shallow mod-
els[Sunet al. , 2015 ], either learning a latent feature space
for different domains [Sunet al. , 2011; Duan et al. , 2012 ]or
combining pre-learned source classiﬁers [Schweikert et al. ,
2009 ]. Recently, the emphasis on MDA has shifted to deep
learning architectures. In this paper, we systematically sur-
vey recent progress on deep learning based MDA, summarize
and compare similarities and differences in the approaches,
and discuss potential future research directions.
2 Problem Deﬁnition
In the typical MDA setting, there are multiple source domains
S1; S2;; SM(Mis the number of sources) and one target
domain T. Suppose the observed data and corresponding la-
bels2in the ithsource Siare drawn from distribution pi(x;y)
areXi=fxj
igNi
j=1andYi=fyj
igNi
j=1, respectively, where Ni
is the number of source samples. Let XT=fxj
TgNT
j=1and
YT=fyj
TgNT
j=1denote the target data and corresponding la-
bels drawn from the target distribution PT(x;y), where NT
is the number of target samples.
Suppose the number of labeled target samples is NTL, the
MDA problem can be classiﬁed into different categories:
unsupervised MDA , when NTL= 0;
fully supervised MDA , when NTL=NT;
semi-supervised MDA , otherwise.
Suppose xj
i2Rdiandxj
T2RdTare an observation in
source Siand target T, we can classify MDA into:
homogeneous MDA , when d1==dM=dT;
heterogeneous MDA , otherwise.
SupposeCiandCTare the label set for source Siand target
T, we can deﬁne different MDA strategies:
closed set MDA , whenC1==CM=CT;
2The label could be any type, such as object classes, bounding
boxes, semantic segmentation, etc.