Multi-source Domain Adaptation in the Deep Learning Era:
A Systematic Survey
Sicheng Zhao1,Bo Li1,Colorado Reed1,Pengfei Xu2,Kurt Keutzer1
1University of California, Berkeley, USA2Didi Chuxing, China
schzhao@gmail.com, drluodian@gmail.com, cjrd@cs.berkeley.edu,
xupengfeipf@didiglobal.com, keutzer@berkeley.edu
Abstract
In many practical applications, it is often difﬁcult
and expensive to obtain enough large-scale labeled
data to train deep neural networks to their full ca-
pability. Therefore, transferring the learned knowl-
edge from a separate, labeled source domain to
an unlabeled or sparsely labeled target domain be-
comes an appealing alternative. However, direct
transfer often results in signiﬁcant performance de-
cay due to domain shift . Domain adaptation (DA)
addresses this problem by minimizing the impact
of domain shift between the source and target do-
mains. Multi-source domain adaptation (MDA)
is a powerful extension in which the labeled data
may be collected from multiple sources with differ-
ent distributions. Due to the success of DA meth-
ods and the prevalence of multi-source data, MDA
has attracted increasing attention in both academia
and industry. In this survey, we deﬁne various
MDA strategies and summarize available datasets
for evaluation. We also compare modern MDA
methods in the deep learning era, including latent
space transformation and intermediate domain gen-
eration. Finally, we discuss future research direc-
tions for MDA.
1 Background and Motivation
The availability of large-scale labeled training data, such
as ImageNet, has enabled deep neural networks (DNNs) to
achieve remarkable success in many learning tasks, ranging
from computer vision to natural language processing. For ex-
ample, the classiﬁcation error of the “Classiﬁcation + local-
ization with provided training data” task in the Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge has reduced from 0.28 in 2010
to 0.0225 in 20171, outperforming even human classiﬁcation.
However, in many practical applications, obtaining labeled
training data is often expensive, time-consuming, or even im-
possible. For example, in ﬁne-grained recognition, only the
experts can provide reliable labels [Gebru et al. , 2017 ]; in
semantic segmentation, it takes about 90 minutes to label
each Cityscapes image [Cordts et al. , 2016 ]; in autonomous
1http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2017
Source: GTA Target: Cityscapges(a) Digit recognition
(b) Semantic SegmentationTrain on source Train on target Ground truth
mIoU
on target
Train on source 21.7
Train on target 62.6
Source: MNIST
 Target: MNIST-MAccuracy 
on target
Train on source 52.3
Train on target 96.0Figure 1: An example of domain shift in the single-source scenario.
The models trained on the labeled source domain do not perform
well when directly transferring to the target domain.
driving, it is difﬁcult to label point-wise 3D LiDAR point
clouds [Wuet al. , 2019 ].
One potential solution is to transfer a model trained on
a separate, labeled source domain to the desired unlabeled
or sparsely labeled target domain. But as Figure 1 demon-
strates, the direct transfer of models across domains leads
to poor performance . Figure 1(a) shows that even for
the simple task of digit recognition, training on the MNIST
source domain [LeCun et al. , 1998 ]for digit classiﬁcation in
the MNIST-M target domain [Ganin and Lempitsky, 2015 ]
leads to a digit classiﬁcation accuracy decrease from 96.0% to
52.3% when training a LeNet-5 model [LeCun et al. , 1998 ].
Figure 1(b) shows a more realistic example of training a
semantic segmentation model on a synthetic source dataset
GTA [Richter et al. , 2016 ]and conducting pixel-wise seg-
mentation on a real target dataset Cityscapes [Cordts et al. ,
2016 ]using the FCN model [Long et al. , 2015a ]. If we train
on the real data, we obtain a mean intersection-over-union
(mIoU) of 62.6%; but if we train on synthetic data, the mIoU
drops signiﬁcantly to 21.7%.
The poor performance from directly transferring models
across domains stems from a phenomenon known as domain
shift [Torralba and Efros, 2011; Zhao et al. , 2018b ]: wherebyarXiv:2002.12169v1  [cs.LG]  26 Feb 2020