Classifier
Task labelClassifier
Task label
Feature-level
alignment
Domain label
Target predictionFeature extractor
Feature extractorFeature extractorTraining Inference
Classifier 
alignmentTarget 
Adapted 𝒊ᇱ
Adapted 𝒋ᇱ
Source ௜
Source ௝Domain generator
Pixel-level 
alignment
Domain label
Domain generatorInputFigure 3: Illustration of widely employed framework for MDA. The solid arrows and dashed dot arrows indicate the training of latent space
transformation and intermediate domain generation, respectively. The dashed arrows represent the reference process. Most existing MDA
methods can be obtained by employing different component details, enforcing some constraints, or slightly changing the architecture. Best
viewed in color.
contains 10,000 real-world dash cam video frames with a
compatible label space with Cityscapes. GTA [Richter et
al., 2016 ]is a vehicle-egocentric image dataset collected
in the high-ﬁdelity rendered computer game GTA-V . It
contains 24,966 images (video frames) with 19 classes as
Cityscapes. SYNTHIA [Roset al. , 2016 ]is a large synthetic
dataset. To pair with Cityscapes, a subset, named SYNTHIA-
RANDCITYSCAPES, is designed with 9,400 images which
are automatically annotated with 16 compatible Cityscapes
classes, one void class, and some unnamed classes. The com-
mon 16 classes are used for MDA.
Sentiment classiﬁcation of natural languages. Amazon
Reviews [Chen et al. , 2012 ]is a dataset of reviews on four
kinds of products: Books ( B), DVDs ( D), Electronics ( E),
and Kitchen appliances ( K). Reviews are encoded as 5,000
dimensional feature vectors of unigrams and bigrams and are
labeled with binary sentiment. Each source has 2,000 labeled
examples, and the target test set has 3,000 to 6,000 examples.
Media Reviews [Liuet al. , 2017 ]contains 16 domains of
product reviews and movie reviews for binary sentiment clas-
siﬁcation. 5 domains with 6,897 labeled samples are usually
employed for MDA, including Apparel, Baby, Books, Cam-
era taken from Amazon and MR from Rotten Tomato.
Part-of-speech tagging. The SANCL dataset [Petrov and
McDonald, 2012 ]contains part-of-speech tagging annota-
tions in 5 web domains: Emails ( E), Weblogs ( W), Answers
(A), Newsgroups ( N), and Reviews ( R). 750 sentences from
each source are used for training.
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, each domain is selected as the
target and the rest domains are considered as the sources.
For WebCamT, 2 domains are randomly selected as the tar-
get. For Sim2RealSeg, MDA is often performed using the
simulation-to-real setting [Zhao et al. , 2019a ],i.e. from
synthetic GTA, SYNTHIA to real Cityscapes, BDDS. For
SANCL, N,R, and Aare used as target domains, while E
andWare used as target domains [Guo et al. , 2018 ].4 Deep Multi-source Domain Adaptation
Existing methods on deep MDA primarily focus on the unsu-
pervised, homogeneous, closed set, strongly supervised, one
target, and target data available settings. That is, there is one
target domain, the target data is unlabeled but available dur-
ing the training process, the source data is fully labeled, the
source and target data are observed in the same data space,
and the label sets of all sources and the target are the same. In
this paper, we focus on MDA methods under these settings.
There are some theoretical analysis to support existing
MDA algorithms. Most theories are based on the semi-
nal theoretical model [Blitzer et al. , 2008; Ben-David et al. ,
2010 ]. Mansour et al. [2009 ]assumed that the target distri-
bution can be approximated by a mixture of the Msource
distributions. Therefore, weighted combination of source
classiﬁers has been widely employed for MDA. Moreover,
tighter cross domain generalization bound and more accu-
rate measurements on domain discrepancy can provide in-
tuitions to derive effective MDA algorithms. Hoffman et
al.[2018a ]derived a novel bound using DC-programming
and calculated more accurate combination weights. Zhao
et al. [2018a ]extended the generalization bound of seminal
theoretical model to multiple sources under both classiﬁca-
tion and regression settings. Besides the domain discrepancy
between the target and each source [Hoffman et al. , 2018a;
Zhao et al. , 2018a ], Liet al. [2018 ]also considered the re-
lationship between pairwise sources and derived a tighter
bound on weighted multi-source discrepancy. Based on this
bound, more relevant source domains can be picked out.
Typically, some task models ( e.g. classiﬁers) are learned
based on the labeled source data with corresponding task loss,
such as cross-entropy loss for classiﬁcation. Meanwhile, spe-
ciﬁc alignments among the source and target domains are
conducted to bridge the domain shift so that the learned task
models can be better transferred to the target domain. Based
on the different alignment strategies, we can classify MDA