Duo-SegNet 3
Fig. 1: Proposed Adversarial Dual View Network. fFi()g2
i=1and () denote
Segmentation networks and Critic network. Here, Critic criticizes between pre-
diction masks and the ground truth masks to perform the min-max game.
set, where each pair ( Xi;Yi) consists of an image Xi2RCHWand its associ-
ated ground-truth mask Yi2f0;1gHW. Furthermore, let U=fUign
i=1;Ui2
RCHWbe a set of nunlabelled images with nm. The primary objective
is to learn a segmentation model from D=X [ U .
The Duo-SegNet includes two basic modules, a dual view segmentation net-
works and a critic, shown by F1,F2, and respectively in Fig. 1. Each leg in
the dual-view network ( i.e.,F1andF2) benets from an encoder-decoder de-
sign, and is structured as a UNet [16]. In this work, by incorporating a critic,
we implicitly enforce segmentation networks to create predictions that are more
similar to the desired masks holistically. The parameters of the model are the
parameters of the dual-view network 1,2and the critic network C. We col-
lectively show the parameters of the dual-view network ( i.e.,1,2) byto
avoid cluttering the equations. To train the model, we propose optimizing the
following min-max problem:
min
max
CL(;D): (1)
The familiar min-max problem in (1) encourages the dual-view segmentation
networks to yield segmentation masks that look like realistic ones by deceiving
the critic. Similar to standard multi-view training, our approach adapted dual
view training to train two segmentation models collaboratively. We propose to
train dual view segmentation networks by minimizing a multitask loss function
consists of three loss terms:
L(;D):=sLs(;X) +uLu(;U) +cLc(;C;D); (2)
whereLs,Lu, andLcdenote the supervised, the unsupervised and the critic loss
respectively. Furthermore, s;u;c>0 are hyper-parameters of the algorithm,
controlling the contribution of each loss term. We note that the supervised and
unsupervised loss are only dependent on the dual-view networks while the critic
loss is dened based on the parameters of the whole model. In practice, we
nd that tuning the hyper-parameters of the network is not dicult at all and