Duo-SegNet: Adversarial Dual-Views for
Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Himashi Peiris1, Zhaolin Chen1;2, Gary Egan2, Mehrtash Harandi1
1Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia.
2Monash Biomedical Imaging (MBI), Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
fEdirisinghe.Peiris, Zhaolin.Chen, Gary.Egan,
Mehrtash.Harandi g@monash.edu
Abstract. Segmentation of images is a long-standing challenge in med-
ical AI. This is mainly due to the fact that training a neural network to
perform image segmentation requires a signicant number of pixel-level
annotated data, which is often unavailable. To address this issue, we pro-
pose a semi-supervised image segmentation technique based on the con-
cept of multi-view learning. In contrast to the previous art, we introduce
an adversarial form of dual-view training and employ a critic to formu-
late the learning problem in multi-view training as a min-max problem.
Thorough quantitative and qualitative evaluations on several datasets,
indicate that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art medical
image segmentation algorithms consistently and comfortably. The code
is publicly available at https://github.com/himashi92/Duo-SegNet .
Keywords: Deep Learning ·Semi-Supervised Learning ·Medical Image
Segmentation ·Multi-View Learning ·Adversarial Learning.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised technique based on the concept of
multi-view learning [18] to segment medical images. Accurate segmentation of
medical images is a key-step in developing Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD)
and automating various clinical tasks such as image-guided interventions.
The prevailing idea in medical image segmentation is to employ an encoder-
decoder structure ( e.g., UNet [16] and its variants [20,12]) and formulate the
problem as a dense classication/regression problem, depending on the type
of input and the desired output. Most of the existing algorithms are breeze
through supervised setting when sizable, annotated datasets are available. How-
ever, annotating large-scale datasets for image segmentation is challenging and
expensive. On one hand, most medical image modalities are hefty in size ( e.g.,
3D volumes as in MRI and CT) and hence annotation is extremely laborious.
On the other hand, annotating medical images requires expert knowledge and
cannot be crowd-sourced. Add to this the fact that medical images often contain
low contrast slices and ambiguous regions, which in turn makes annotation veryarXiv:2108.11154v1  [cs.CV]  25 Aug 2021