6 H. Peiris et al.
labelling [9], mean teacher model [17], Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) [11],
recently published deep co-training [13]. Our goal here is to discuss the resem-
blance and dierences between our proposed approach and some of the methods
that have been adopted for semi-supervised image segmentation.
In Pseudo Labelling, as the name implies, the model uses the predicted la-
bels of the unlabeled data and treat it as ground-truth labels for training. The
drawback here is, sometimes incorrect pseudo labels may diminish the generaliza-
tion performance and weaken the training of deep neural networks. In contrast,
Duo-SegNet by incorporating a critic, increases the tolerance of these incorrect
pseudo labels which stabilizes the generalization performance. Similar to Duo-
SegNet, the mean teacher approach benets from two neural networks, namely
the teacher and the student networks. While the student model is trained in a
stochastic manner, the parameters of the teacher model are updated slowly by
a form of moving averaging of the student's parameters. This, in turn, results in
better robustness to prediction error as one could hope that averaging attenuates
the eect of noisy gradient (as a result of incorrect pseudo labels). Unlike mean
teacher model, Duo-SegNet simultaneously train both networks and models can
learn from one another during training. VAT can be understood as an eective
regularization method which optimizes generalization power of a model for un-
labeled examples. This is achieved by generating adversarial perturbations to
the input of the model, followed by making the model robust to the adversarial
perturbations. In contrast to VAT, Duo-SegNet makes use of a critic to judge
if predictions are from the same or dierent distribution compared to labeled
examples. With this, segmentation networks are encouraged to generate simi-
lar predictive distribution for both labeled and unlabeled data. Similar to our
work, in co-training two models are alternately trained on distinct views, while
learning from each other is encouraged. Recently, Peng et al. introduced a deep
co-training method for semi-supervised image segmentation task [13] based on
the approach presented by Qiao et al. for image recognition task in [14]. In this
approach diversity among views are achieved via adversarial examples follow-
ing VAT [11]. We note that adversarial examples, from a theoretical point of
view, cannot guarantee diversity, especially when unlabeled data is considered.
That is, a wrong prediction can intensify even more once adversarial examples
are constructed from it. In contrast, inspired by Generative Adversarial Net-
works(GANs) [6] and GAN based medical imaging applications including med-
ical image segmentation [10], reconstruction [15] and domain adaptation [19],
our proposed method graciously encloses the min-max formulation in dual-view
learning for segmenting medical images where high-condence predictions for
unlabeled data are leveraged, which is simple and eective.
4 Experiments
Implementation Details: The proposed model is developed in PyTorch [3].
Training was done from scratch without using any pre-trained model weights.
For training of segmentation network and critic, we use SGD optimizer(LR=1e-