2 H. Peiris et al.
dicult. While attaining large annotated datasets is challenging, unlabeled data
comes (almost) for free and is abundant.
Multi-view learning makes use of multiple distinct views of data and bene-
ts from the resulting relationships to achieve accurate models. The principle
of consensus [18] states that by minimizing the disagreement on multiple dis-
tinct hypotheses, the error of each hypothesis will be minimized. To be specic,
supposeh1andh2are two distinct hypothesis dened on a distribution. Under
some mild assumptions and as shown in [5]
P(h16=h2)max
Perr(h1);Perr(h2)	
:
That is, reducing the disagreement of the two hypotheses minimizes the error of
each hypothesis. The consensus principle provides an ecient way with strong
theoretical properties to benet from unlabeled data as shown for example in the
celebrated work of Blum and Mitchell [4]. Except a handful of studies [14,13],
multi-view learning has been mostly studied under the classication regime [8,7].
This raises a natural question, is multi-view learning benecial when it comes to
segmentation? and if yes, how it must be formulated? Our work takes a step in
this direction and provides a way to cultivate unlabeled data for image segmen-
tation. In particular, we propose a dual-view UNet model and equip it with a
critic network. Each UNet provides a view of the data distribution and will be
trained by minimizing a supervised loss on the labeled data and a disagreement
loss over the unlabeled data. The critic is used to facilitate two objectives, 1.
to ensure that the output of UNets resembles the ground-truth segmentation
masks (in the ideal case, the critic is not able to distinguish whether its input
is a ground-truth mask or a prediction mask from the UNets), and 2.to iden-
tify condent parts of a prediction mask to enforce agreement across the views.
We should stress that unlike classication where (dis)agreement can be formu-
lated readily between predictions, in segmentation, we face a dense prediction
problem, meaning a prediction mask includes tens of thousands, if not more,
predictions at pixel-level. A naive treatment of (dis)agreement loss could lead to
inferior results as simply the networks can overt to agree on the background,
which is the dominant part of the prediction mask in many cases. Therefore, to
train the Duo-SegNet, we formulate the learning as a min-max problem by allow-
ing a critic to stand in as a quantitative subjective referee. Thorough empirical
evaluations demonstrate that our method performs well both qualitatively and
quantitatively, utilizing small fraction of labeled data.
In short, we have made the following contributions in this work, 1.We pro-
pose a dual-view learning scheme for semi-supervised medical image segmenta-
tion.2.We make use of a critic to regularize the training and identify condent
parts of a prediction mask towards learning from unlabelled data.
2 Methodology
We start this section by providing an overview of the Duo-SegNet (see Fig. 1
for a conceptual illustration). Let X=f(X1;Y1);;(Xm;Ym)gbe a labeled