Duo-SegNet 7
02) and RMSProp optimizer(LR=5e-05), respectively. We divide the original
dataset into training (80%) and test set (20%). Experiments were conducted for
5%, 20% and 50% of labeled training sets.
Datasets: We use three medical image datasets for model evaluation covering
three medical image modalities : 670 Fluorescence Microscopy (FM) images from
Nuclei [1], 20 MRI volumes from Heart [2] and 41 CT volumes from Spleen [2].
For our experiments, 2D images are obtained by slicing the high-resolution MRI
and CT volumes for Heart (2271 slices) and Spleen (3650 slices) datasets. Each
slice is then resized to a resolution of 256 256.
Competing Methods and Evaluation Metrics: We compare our proposed
method with Mean Teacher [17], Pseudo Labelling [9], VAT [11], Deep Co-
training [13] and fully supervised U-Net [16]. For all baselines, we follow the
same congurations as for our method. All approaches are evaluated using : 1)
Dice Srensen coecient (DSC) and 2) Mean Absolute Error (MAE).
Performance Comparison: The qualitative results for the proposed and com-
peting methods are shown in Fig. 3. The quantitative results comparison of the
proposed method to the four state-of-the-art methods are shown in Table 1. The
results reveal that the proposed method comfortably outperform other studied
methods for smaller fractions of annotated data ( e.g. Spleen 5%). The gap be-
tween the Duo-SegNet and other competitors decreases on the Nuclei dataset,
when the amount of labeled data increases. That said, we can still observe a sig-
nicant improvement on the Heart and Spleen dataset. The proposed network
can produce both accurate prediction masks and condence maps representing
which regions of the prediction distribution are close to the ground truth label
distribution. This is useful when training unlabeled data. Fig. 2 shows the visual
analysis of condence maps.
Input GT PredictionCondence
Map
Fig. 2: Visual Analysis of Condence Map generated by the Critic during training
Ablation Study: We also perform ablation studies to show the eectiveness of
adding a critic in dual-view learning in semi-supervised setting and the impor-
tance of dual view network structure. In our algorithm, we benet from unlabeled
data via (1) criss-cross exchange of condent regions, (2) improving the critic