Figure 2: Influences of removing regular terms in BERT
(Last-Int) and Conv-KNRM on MS MARCO. Each point cor-
responds to one query-passage pair with a random regular
term removed from the passage. X-axes mark the original
ranking scores and Y-axes are the scores after term removal.
4.3 Learned Term Matches
This experiment studies the learned matching patterns in BERT
(Last-Int) and compares it to Conv-KNRM . The same MS MARCO
Dev sample from last experiment is used.
We first study the influence of a term by comparing the ranking
score of a document with and without the term. For each query-
passage pair, we randomly remove a non-stop word, calculate the
ranking score using BERT (Last-Int) orConv-KNRM , and plot it
w.r.t the original ranking score in Figure 2.
Figure 2 illustrates two interesting behaviors of BERT. First, it as-
signs more extreme ranking scores: most pairs receive either close
to 1 or 0 ranking scores in BERT, while the ranking scores in Conv-
KNRM are more uniformly distributed. Second, there are a few
terms in each document that determine the majority of BERT ’s
ranking scores; removing them significantly changes the rank-
ing score—drop from 1 to near 0, while removing the majority
of terms does not matter much in BERT —most points are grouped
in the corners. It indicates that BERT is well-trained from the large
scale pre-training. In comparison, terms contribute more evenly in
Conv-KNRM ; removing single term often varies the ranking scores
ofConv-KNRM by some degree, shown by the wider band near the
diagonal in Figure 2, but not as dramatically as in BERT .
We manually examined those most influential terms in BERT
(Last-Int) andConv-KNRM . Some examples of those terms are
listed in Table 2. The exact match terms play an important role in
BERT (Last-Int) ; we found many of the influential terms in BERT
are those appear in the question or close paraphrases. Conv-KNRM ,
on the other hand, prefers terms that are more loosely related to
the query in search [ 1]. For example, on MS MARCO, it focuses
more on the terms that are the role of milk in macchiato (“visible
mark”), the show and the role Sinbad played (“Cosby” and “Coach
Walter”), and the task related to Personal Meeting ID (“schedule”).
These observations suggest that, BERT’s pre-training on sur-
rounding contexts favors text sequence pairs that are closer in their
semantic meanings. It is consistent with previous observations in
Neu-IR research, that such surrounding context trained models
are not as effective in TREC-style ad hoc document ranking for
keyword queries [1, 7, 8].Table 2: Example of most influential terms in MS MARCO
passages in BERT and Conv-KNRM.
Query: “What is a macchiato coffee drink”
BERT (Last-Int) macchiato, coffee
Conv-KNRM visible mark
Query: “What shows was Sinbad on”
BERT (Last-Int) Sinbad
Conv-KNRM Cosby, Coach Walter
Query: “What is a PMI id”
BERT (Last-Int) PMI
Conv-KNRM schedule a meeting
5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTION
This paper studies the performances and behaviors of BERT in MS
MARCO passage ranking and TREC Web Track ad hoc ranking
tasks. Experiments show that BERT is an interaction-based seq2seq
model that effectively matches text sequences. BERT based rankers
perform well on MS MARCO passage ranking task which is focused
on question-answering, but not as well on TREC ad hoc document
ranking. These results demonstrate that MS MARCO, with its QA
focus, is closer to the seq2seq matching tasks where BERT’s sur-
rounding context based pre-training fits well, while on TREC ad
hoc document ranking tasks, user clicks are better pre-training
signals than BERT’s surrounding contexts.
Our analyses show that BERT is a strong matching model with
globally distributed attentions over the entire contexts. It also as-
signs extreme matching scores to query-document pairs; most pairs
get either one or zero ranking scores, showing it is well tuned by
pre-training on large corpora. At the same time, pre-trained on
surrounding contexts, BERT prefers text pairs that are semantically
close. This observation helps explain BERT’s lack of effectiveness
on TREC-style ad hoc ranking which is considered to prefer pre-
training from user clicks than surrounding contexts.
Our results suggest the need of training deeper networks on user
clicks signals. In the future, it will be interesting to study how a
much deeper model—as big as BERT—behaves compared to both
shallower neural rankers when trained on relevance-based labels.
REFERENCES
[1]Zhuyun Dai, Chenyan Xiong, Jamie Callan, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2018. Convolutional
Neural Networks for Soft-Matching N-Grams in Ad-hoc Search. In Proceedings of
WSDM 2018 . ACM, 126–134.
[2]Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint (2018).
[3]Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, and W Bruce Croft. 2016. A deep relevance
matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of CIKM 2016 . ACM, 55–64.
[4]Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Passage Re-ranking with BERT.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 (2019).
[5]Liang Pang, Yanyan Lan, Jiafeng Guo, Jun Xu, Jingfang Xu, and Xueqi Cheng.
2017. Deeprank: A new deep architecture for relevance ranking in information
retrieval. In Proceedings of CIKM 2017 . ACM, 257–266.
[6]Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Proceedings of NeuIPS 2017 . 5998–6008.
[7]Chenyan Xiong, Zhuyun Dai, Jamie Callan, Zhiyuan Liu, and Russell Power. 2017.
End-to-end neural ad-hoc ranking with kernel pooling. In Proceedings of SIGIR
2017. ACM, 55–64.
[8]Hamed Zamani and W Bruce Croft. 2017. Relevance-based word embedding. In
Proceedings of SIGIR 2017 . ACM, 505–514.
4