“[CLS]” token at the start of the sequence, whose embeddings are
treated as the representation of the text sequence(s), and suggests
to add task-specific layers on the “[CLS]” embedding in fine-tuning.
2.2 Ranking with BERT
We experiment with four BERT based ranking models: BERT (Rep) ,
BERT (Last-Int) ,BERT (Mult-Int) , and BERT (Term-Trans) .
All four methods use the pre-trained BERT to obtain the representa-
tion of the query q, the document d, or the concatenation of the two
qd. In the concatenation sequence qd, the query and document are
concatenated to one sequence with boundary marked by a marker
token (“[SEP]”).
The rest of this section uses subscript i,j, orclsto denote the
tokens in q,d, orqd, and superscript kto denote the layer of BERT’s
Transformer network: k=1is the first layer upon word embedding
and k=24or “last” is the last layer. For example, ®qdk
clsis the
embedding of the “[CLS]” token, in the k-th layer of BERT on the
concatenation sequence qd.
BERT (Rep) uses BERT to represent qandd:
BERT (Rep)(q,d)=cos(®qlast
cls,®dlast
cls). (1)
It first uses the last layers’ “[CLS]” embeddings as the query and
document representations , and then calculates the ranking score via
their cosine similarity (cos). Thus it is a representation-based ranker.
BERT (Last-Int) applies BERT on the concatenated qdsequence:
BERT (Last-Int)(q,d)=wT®qdlast
cls. (2)
It uses the last layer’s “[CLS]” as the matching features and com-
bines them linearly with weight w. It is the recommended way to
use BERT [ 2] and is first applied to MARCO passage ranking by
Nogueira and Cho [ 4]. The ranking score from BERT (Last-Int)
includes all term pair interactions between the query and docu-
ment via its Transformer’s cross-match attentions [ 6]. Thus it is an
interaction-based ranker.
BERT (Mult-Int) is defined as:
BERT (Mult-Int)(q,d)=Õ
1≤k≤24(wk
Mult)T®qdk
cls. (3)
It extends BERT (Last-Int) by adding the matching features ®qdk
cls
from all BERT’s layers, to study whether different layers of BERT
provide different information.
BERT (Term-Trans) adds a neural ranking network upon BERT,
to study the performance of their combinations:
sk(q,d)=Mean i,j(cos(relu(Pk®qk
i),relu(Pk®dk
j))) (4)
BERT (Term-Trans) (q,d)=Õ
kwk
trans sk(q,d). (5)
It first constructs the translation matrix between query and docu-
ment, using the cosine similarities between the projections of their
contextual embeddings. Then it combines the translation matrices
from all layers using mean-pooling and linear combination.
All four BERT based rankers are fine-tuned from the pre-trained
BERT-Large model released by Google. The fine-tuning uses clas-
sification loss, i.e., to classify whether a query-document pair is
relevant or not, following the prior research [ 4]. We experimented
with pairwise ranking loss but did not observe any difference.3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGIES
Datasets. Our experiments are conducted on MS MARCO passage
reranking task and TREC Web Track ad hoc tasks with ClueWeb
documents.
MS MARCO includes question-alike queries sampled from Bing
search log and the task is to rank candidate passages based on
whether the passage contains the answer for the question1. It in-
cludes 1,010,916 training queries and a million expert annotated
answer passage relevance labels. We follow the official train/develop
split, and use the given “Train Triples Small” to fine-tune BERT.
ClueWeb includes documents from ClueWeb09-B and queries
from TREC Web Track ad hoc retrieval task 2009-2012. In total,
200 queries with relevance judgements are provided by TREC. Our
experiments follow the same set up in prior research and use the
processed data shared by their authors [ 1]: the same 10-fold cross
validation, same data pre-processing, and same top 100 candidate
documents from Galago SDM to re-rank.
We found that the TREC labels alone are not sufficient to fine-
tune BERT nor train other neural rankers to outperform SDM. Thus
we decided to first pre-train all neural methods on MS MARCO and
then fine-tune them on ClueWeb.
Evaluation Metrics. MS MARCO uses MRR@10 as the official
evaluation. Results on the Develop set re-rank top 100 from BM25
in our implementation. Results on Eval uations set are obtained
from the organizers and re-rank top 1000 from their BM25 im-
plementation. ClueWeb results are evaluated by NDCG@20 and
ERR@20, the official evaluation metrics of TREC Web Track.
Statistical significance is tested by permutation tests with p<
0.05, except on MS MARCO Eval where per query scores are not
returned by the leader board.
Compared Methods. The BERT based rankers are compared
with the following baselines:
•Base is the base retrieval model that provides candidate
documents to re-rank. It is BM25 on MS MARCO and Galago-
SDM on ClueWeb.
•LeToR is the feature-based learning to rank. It is RankSVM
on MS MARCO and Coordinate Ascent on ClueWeb.
•K-NRM is the kernel-based interaction-based neural ranker [ 7].
•Conv-KNRM is the n-gram version of K-NRM .
K-NRM and Conv-KNRM results on ClueWeb are obtained by our
implementations and pre-trained on MS MARCO. We also include
Conv-KNRM (Bing) which is the same Conv-KNRM model but
pre-trained on Bing clicks by prior research [ 1]. The rest baselines
reuse the existing results from prior research. Keeping experimental
setups consistent makes all results directly comparable.
Implementation Details. All BERT rankers are trained using
Adam optimizer and learning rate 3e-6, except Term-Trans which
trains the projection layer with learning rate 0.002. On one typical
GPU, the batch size is 1 at most; fine-tuning takes on average
one day to converge. Convergence is determined by the loss on a
small sample of validation data (MS MARCO) or the validation fold
(ClueWeb). In comparison, K-NRM and Conv-KNRM take about 12
hours to converge on MS MARCO and one hour on ClueWeb. On
MS MARCO all rankers take about 5% training triples to converge.
1http://msmarco.org
2