Understanding the Behaviors of BERT in Ranking
Yifan Qiao
Tsinghua University
qiaoyf15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cnChenyan Xiong
Microsoft Research
Chenyan.Xiong@microsoft.com
Zhenghao Liu
Tsinghua University
liu-zh16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cnZhiyuan Liu
Tsinghua University
liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the performances and behaviors of BERT in
ranking tasks. We explore several different ways to leverage the
pre-trained BERT and fine-tune it on two ranking tasks: MS MARCO
passage reranking and TREC Web Track ad hoc document ranking.
Experimental results on MS MARCO demonstrate the strong effec-
tiveness of BERT in question-answering focused passage ranking
tasks, as well as the fact that BERT is a strong interaction-based
seq2seq matching model. Experimental results on TREC show the
gaps between the BERT pre-trained on surrounding contexts and
the needs of ad hoc document ranking. Analyses illustrate how
BERT allocates its attentions between query-document tokens in
its Transformer layers, how it prefers semantic matches between
paraphrase tokens, and how that differs with the soft match patterns
learned by a click-trained neural ranker.
1 INTRODUCTION
In the past several years, neural information retrieval (Neu-IR)
research has developed several effective ways to improve rank-
ing accuracy. Interaction-based neural rankers soft match query-
documents using their term interactions [ 3];Representation-based
embeddings capture relevance signals using distributed represen-
tations [ 7,8]; large capacity networks learn relevance patterns
using large scale ranking labels [ 1,5,7]. These techniques lead to
promising performances on various ranking benchmarks [ 1,3,5,7].
Recently, BERT, the pre-trained deep bidirectional Transformer,
has shown strong performances on many language processing
tasks [ 2]. BERT is a very deep language model that is pre-trained
on the surrounding context signals in large corpora. Fine-tuning
its pre-trained deep network works well on many downstream se-
quence to sequence (seq2seq) learning tasks. Different from seq2seq
learning, previous Neu-IR research considers such surrounding-
context-trained neural models not as effective in search as relevance
modeling [ 7,8]. However, on the MS MARCO passage ranking task,
fine-tuning BERT and treating ranking as a classification problem
outperforms existing Neu-IR models by large margins [4].
This paper studies the performances and properties of BERT in ad
hoc ranking tasks. We explore several ways to use BERT in ranking,
as representation-based and interaction-based neural rankers, as
in combination with standard neural ranking layers. We study the
behavior of these BERT-based rankers on two benchmarks: the MS
MARCO passage ranking task, which ranks answer passages for
questions, and TREC Web Track ad hoc task, which ranks ClueWeb
documents for keyword queries.Our experiments observed rather different performances of BERT-
based rankers on the two benchmarks. On MS MARCO, fine-tuning
BERT significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art Neu-IR
models, and the effectiveness mostly comes from its strong cross
question-passage interactions. However, on TREC ad hoc ranking,
BERT-based rankers, even further pre-trained on MS MARCO rank-
ing labels, perform worse than feature-based learning to rank and
a Neu-IR model pre-trained on user clicks in Bing log.
We further study the behavior of BERT through its learned at-
tentions and term matches. We illustrate that BERT uses its deep
Transformer architecture to propagate information more globally
on the text sequences through its attention mechanism, compared
to interaction-based neural rankers which operate more individu-
ally on term pairs. Further studies reveal that BERT focuses more
on document terms that directly match the query. It is similar to
the semantic matching behaviors of previous surrounding context-
based seq2seq models, but different from the relevance matches
neural rankers learned from user clicks.
2 BERT BASED RANKERS
This section describes the notable properties of BERT and how it is
used in ranking.
2.1 Notable Properties of BERT
We refer readers to the BERT and Transformer papers for their
details [ 2,6]. Here we mainly discuss its notable properties that
influence its usage in ranking.
Large Capacity. BERT uses standard Transformer architecture—
multi-head attentions between all term pairs in the text sequence—
but makes it very deep. Its main version, BERT-Large , includes
24 Transformer layers, each with 1024 hidden dimensions and 16
attention heads. It in total has 340 million learned parameters, much
bigger than typical Neu-IR models.
Pretraining. BERT learns from the surrounding context signals
in Google News and Wikipedia corpora. It is learned using two tasks:
the first predicts random missing words (15%) using the rest of the
sentence (Mask-LM); the second predicts whether two sentences
appear next to each other. In the second task, the two sentences are
concatenated to one sequence; a special token “[SEP]” marks the
sequence boundaries. Its deep network is very resource consuming
in training: BERT-Large takes four days to train on 64 TPUs and
easily takes months on typical GPUs clusters.
Fine Tuning. End-to-end training BERT is unfeasible in most
academic groups due to resource constraints. It is suggested to use
the pre-trained BERT as a fine-tuning method [ 2]. BERT provides aarXiv:1904.07531v4  [cs.IR]  26 Apr 2019