Drones 2023 ,7, 190 11 of 29
equipment embedded with YOLO algorithms for object identiﬁcation. The YOLO algorithm
has been very widely used in various ﬁelds for object identiﬁcation detection, while the
method of carrying embedded processors in UAVs for object identiﬁcation detection in the
air has only just started to become popular. With the development of UAV technology and
advances in algorithm performance, YBUT applications are expected to spread widely in
life and in production in the coming years. Examples of YBUT applications in engineering,
transportation, agriculture, automation, and other ﬁelds are outlined below, and these
application methods or application approaches are discussed.
4.1. Related Applications in the Field of Engineering
Engineering is the main activity of everyday production and an important way of
generating economic value. Amongst engineering operations, manual operations are both
an important way of increasing productivity and a hindrance to it. Highly efﬁcient large-
scale manual operations in engineering are bound to produce higher production values,
but there are also problems with overall production being affected by manual errors. With
the advent of the industrial age, large-scale machine production has gradually replaced
manual production, resulting in an exponential increase in output and a gradual reduction
in costs. However, certain special jobs still need to adhere to manual work, such as checking
power components of transmission lines and monitoring industrial instrumentation data.
Although these jobs are not very difﬁcult, the work is tedious, and it is very easy for staff to
become fatigued and negligent, resulting in serious consequences. With the progress of
UAV technology and the YOLO algorithm, some problems in engineering can be addressed
by using a machine instead of manual labor or manual operation of the machine, which
can alleviate the labor pressure on the staff to a considerable extent.
In engineering applications, YBUT has been successfully used and can, to a certain
extent, replace people in some operations. The more mature research ﬁelds in which YBUT
has been applied are transmission line detection [ 44], building surface detection [ 45], mov-
ing target tracking [ 46], gauge display reading [ 47], photovoltaic module detection [ 48], and
building identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation [ 49]. According to the current survey, YBUT appli-
cation research in the engineering ﬁeld, researchers prefer the direction of transmission line
detection. Objects, such as power line poles [ 50], insulators [ 51], electrical components [ 52],
distribution line poles [ 53], transmission towers [ 54], bird nests [ 55], and breakers [ 56], can
be accurately identiﬁed, classiﬁed, and located in complex environments. For example,
Bao et al. [ 57] proposed an end-to-end parallel mixed attention detection YOLO network
(PMA-YOLO) by collecting transmission line vibration damper data through UAVs and
then creating a dataset to train and test the model; the results showed that the model can
detect abnormal vibration dampers with an accuracy of 93.8% (see Figure 14). The success-
ful detection and classiﬁcation of various equipment and facilities in these transmission
lines lay the technical basis for the construction of future intelligent power systems.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 31 
 
(see Figure 14).  The successful detection and classification of various equipment and fa-
cilities i n these transmission lines lay the technical basis for the construction of future in-
telligent power systems.  
 
Figure 14. Experimental results of the PMA -YOLO network for the detection of anomalous vibration 
dampers [57].  The ground truth boxes and predict ion boxes for “rusty”, “defective ”, and “normal” 
dampers are shown in yellow, red, blue, and green, respectively.  
Recently, Alsanad et al. [58] proposed an improved YOLOv3 algorithm for small UAV 
detection in low -altitude airspace; experiments showed that the disclosed improved model of 
the algorithm can effectively detect low -altitude UAVs in complex environments (see Figure 
15) and can be successfully applied to the anti -drone research field to manage low -altitude 
airspace UAVs. The proposed method yielde d a further enhancement in the low -altitude 
small -UAV detection performance of YBUT based on previous studies [59 –62]. Other infor-
mation regarding YBUT applications in the engineering field is shown in Table 2.  
 
Figure 15. Results of the improved YOLOv3 algorithm for UAV detection [58].  
Figure 14. Experimental results of the PMA-YOLO network for the detection of anomalous vibration
dampers [ 57]. The ground truth boxes and prediction boxes for “rusty”, “defective”, and “normal”
dampers are shown in yellow, red, blue, and green, respectively.