Drones 2023 ,7, 190 18 of 29
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 31 
 
In this section, we provide an overview of the applications of YBUT in agriculture, 
and these exploratory applications point the way for expanding YOLO -based UAV appli-
cations in agriculture. Although the technology is still at the beginning stage in agriculture 
and many issues have not yet been resolved, such as dataset collection and sharing and 
stable YOLO algorithms that are more suitabl e for applications, we believe that YBUT can 
aid in the development of smart agriculture and has a broad scope of development in the 
agricultural field.  
4.4. Related Applications in the Field of Automation  
The production method of the future is automated production with machines com-
pletely replacing manual labor. In everyday production, most operations require human 
control of the machines, while some of the more technologically advanced production op-
erations have already been automated with mach ines replacing humans. In operations 
where staff are involved in production, their main task is to control the machine, i.e., to 
adjust the machine’s working status according to the real -time operational situation. The 
combination of computer technology, w hich can now make decisions instead of humans, 
and object detection technology based on the YOLO algorithm, which can detect the status 
of the operation in real time and can provide feedback, can replace staff control of the 
machine to a certain extent. If  both technologies are applied to drone platforms, it may be 
possible to reduce the labor pressure for workers and can increase the productivity of 
some industries.  
To automate the use of YBUT in various applications, numerous researchers have 
developed di fferent supporting technologies. After many studies, the technology for the 
detection, tracking, and avoidance of specific targets has matured and is now largely au-
tomated [115 –118]. Notably, YBUT has been effectively used for the detection and locali-
zatio n of pedestrians [119 –123]. Moreover, with an increase in unmanned mobility con-
cepts, certain applications have been rapidly automated. Kraft et al. [124] proposed a 
YOLOv4 -based method for locating litter in parks by using drones. The experimental re-
sults  showed that the drones can detect litter and can collect litter location data in a fixed 
area while marking the litter location on a map for sweepers to see for easy cleaning (see 
Figure 23). In the future, the system can also work together with other equ ipment to locate 
and automatically sweep up litter, completely reducing the workload of sweepers. Liao et 
al. [125] proposed a UAV -based marine litter detection system that uses a UAV with an 
improved YOLO algorithm for marine litter detection; their syste m transmits the results 
to a ground -based monitoring platform via the internet to assist government agencies in 
implementing management plans (see Figure 24). Other information regarding YBUT ap-
plications in the automation sector is shown in Table 5.  
 
Figure 23. Results of UAV dataset detection using YOLOv4 [124].  
Figure 23. Results of UAV dataset detection using YOLOv4 [124].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 31 
 
 
Figure 24. Results of UAV litter detection at Badouzi fishing port [125].  
Table 5. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in automation . 
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv3  Liu et al. (2020) [126]  Small objects  mAP 
72.54%  Journal  Cameras  Small object detection  
Wang et al. (2020) [127]  UAVs  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Airport obstacle -free zone 
monitoring UAV system  
YOLOv4  Kong et al. (2022) [128]  Pedestrian  mAP 
39.32%  Journal  Cameras  Pedestrian Detection and 
Counting  
YOLOv5  Maharjan et al. (2022) 
[129]  River Plastic  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Plastic waste management  
The successful application of YBUT in the field of automation demonstrates a viable 
method for achieving an unmanned and automated future. The research information ob-
tained from existing exploratory practical applications provides a credible reference for 
reducing the pressure on human labor and increasing existing productivity lev els in the 
future. In the coming period, the research focus of YBUT in the engineering field should 
be on expanding the types of operations to which the technology can be applied, devel-
oping specialist drones, developing high -performance YOLO algorithms su itable for em-
bedded environments, and developing visual and convenient control systems.  
4.5. Related Applications in Other Fields  
In addition to the main areas of YBUT application discussed above, some researchers 
have explored completely new areas, experi mented with new methods, and used these 
methods to promote and enhance the applicability and usefulness of YBUT. Wyder et al. 
[130] integrated YBUT with vision service algorithms to successfully achieve the autono-
mous detection and tracking of moving targe ts in a GPS -limited environment. Quan, 
Herrmann et al. [131] proposed Project Vulture, an intelligent human –subject location sys-
tem for UAVs based on the YOLO algorithm, and the system possessed higher sensitivity 
than other peer systems in mountain rescue  operations. Similar content has been studied 
by Kashihara et al. [132] and Sambolek and Ivasic -Kos [133]. Arnold et al. [134] investi-
gated object classification functions and reactive group behavior in a dispersed autono-
mous heterogeneous swarm of UAVs de ployed with YOLO; their approach supported the 
identification of specific targets with a UAV, and other UAVs were able to learn the be-
havior accordingly. The experimental results showed that the system still performs well 
at 25 m from the building. Jing et  al. [135] proposed a neural network based on YOLOv5s -
ViT-BiFPN, which can assess the damage of rural houses after natural disasters using 
drone images (see Figure 25). Information regarding YBUT applications in other areas is 
shown in Table 6.  
Figure 24. Results of UAV litter detection at Badouzi ﬁshing port [125].
The successful application of YBUT in the ﬁeld of automation demonstrates a viable
method for achieving an unmanned and automated future. The research information
obtained from existing exploratory practical applications provides a credible reference for
reducing the pressure on human labor and increasing existing productivity levels in the
future. In the coming period, the research focus of YBUT in the engineering ﬁeld should be
on expanding the types of operations to which the technology can be applied, developing
specialist drones, developing high-performance YOLO algorithms suitable for embedded
environments, and developing visual and convenient control systems.
Table 5. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in automation.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv3Liu et al. (2020) [126] Small objects mAP 72.54% Journal CamerasSmall object
detection
Wang et al. (2020) [127] UAVs N/A Journal CamerasAirport obstacle-free
zone monitoring
UAV system
YOLOv4 Kong et al. (2022) [128] Pedestrian mAP 39.32% Journal CamerasPedestrian Detection
and Counting
YOLOv5 Maharjan et al. (2022) [129] River Plastic N/A Journal CamerasPlastic waste
management
4.5. Related Applications in Other Fields
In addition to the main areas of YBUT application discussed above, some researchers have
explored completely new areas, experimented with new methods, and used these methods to
promote and enhance the applicability and usefulness of YBUT. Wyder et al. [ 130] integrated
YBUT with vision service algorithms to successfully achieve the autonomous detection and
tracking of moving targets in a GPS-limited environment. Quan, Herrmann et al. [131] pro-
posed Project Vulture, an intelligent human–subject location system for UAVs based on
the YOLO algorithm, and the system possessed higher sensitivity than other peer systems
in mountain rescue operations. Similar content has been studied by Kashihara et al. [ 132]