Drones 2023 ,7, 190 22 of 29
presented to people in the way of practical applications to address the needs of life so that
people beneﬁt.
In this literature review, we demonstrate that the combination of deep learning YOLO
algorithms and UAV technology can be of great use in the future, and an attempt is made
to introduce and to promote the technology to attract the attention of more researchers. In
this paper, we ﬁrst describe the development of YBUT, including the early developments
and leaps and bounds in the application of YOLO algorithms in conjunction with UAV
technology. Second, to promote YBUT, the main areas where researchers have applied the
technology and the recent state of research, as well as the exploration and experimentation
of the technology in certain new areas, are presented. It is clear from the article that YOLO-
based object detection algorithms could be a key enabler for future drone applications,
allowing drones to provide better productivity and greater convenience.
Currently, UAV technology and YOLO-based object detection are relatively well
established in their respective pre-existing ﬁelds, and the cross-fertilization of the two into
new technologies is becoming an increasingly important area. The results show that there
is a high degree of advantageous complementarity between UAV-derived aerial platforms
and YOLO algorithms for object detection. However, the application methodology and
performance of YBUT need to be further enhanced. The development of YBUT has, thus
far, seen more applications in engineering, transportation, agriculture, and automation
and less practice in other ﬁelds; the diffusion of the technology remains a challenge. The
future development of technology needs to take these four issues into account. The actual
detection performance of ground-acquired datasets applied directly to the training of
UAV-based object detection algorithms is not very satisfactory, and further dedicated high-
quality datasets need to be acquired. Deploying existing YOLO algorithms directly to
mobile processors through optimization can complete the current exploratory research
goals, but this step is still a long way from industrializing YBUT and requires dedicated
algorithms to be developed for the UAV hardware environment. For future applications of
the technology in more areas, a single specialist drone should be developed for speciﬁc use
environments. The timely development of talent for the development and application of
YBUT is also an effective way to rapidly promote the technology. To some extent, the rapid
diffusion of YBUT and the continuous identiﬁcation of new problems and needs during the
diffusion process, addressing new problems and meeting new needs, can also contribute to
technological progress.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.C. and Z.Z.; methodology, C.C.; software, S.F.; valida-
tion, C.C., Z.Z. and S.G.; formal analysis, T.X.; investigation, C.C.; resources, C.C.; data curation, Z.Z.;
writing—original draft preparation, C.C. and Z.Z.; writing—review and editing, W.Y.; visualization,
C.C. and Z.Z.; supervision, Y.L.; project administration, T.X. and W.Y.; funding acquisition, T.X., W.Y.
and Y.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the General Program of Liaoning Provincial Educational
Department (LJKMZ20221059), the Key Tackling Program of Liaoning Provincial Educational Depart-
ment (LSNZD202005), and the 111 Project (D18019).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We sincerely thank Dongxu Su, Yihan Liu, Hongyang Zhou, and Ziqi Yu from
Shenyang Agricultural University for supporting this work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.