Drones 2023 ,7, 190 21 of 29
5.3. Developing Professional, Stable, and Reliable UAVs in Combination with the YOLO
Inspection Environment
Given the many areas of development of YBUT and the issues with UAVs themselves,
further development and promotion of UAVs with high professionalism, high environ-
mental adaptability, stability, and reliability should be carried out [ 167–172]. The overall
design of UAVs should be combined with the ﬁeld of UAV operations, while considering
the environment, to improve the professionalism of UAV operations and to ensure the
adaptability and stability of UAV operations. In terms of the UAV power system, we
should develop the core components of power motors or engines, improve the service life
of the core components, and reduce the total amount of the whole aircraft to improve the
practicality of UAVs. In terms of UAV onboard equipment, multisensor fusion technology
should continue to be developed and applied autonomously. In terms of UAV safety, the de-
velopment of UAV safety ﬂight algorithms is necessary. We also improve the UAV runaway
self-protection system, realize effective obstacle avoidance, runaway self-protection, fault
self-testing, and runaway warning functions. Moreover, we need to monitor all parameters
of the UAV itself to protect the users’ property.
5.4. Enhancing the Security of YBUT for Multiple Application Scenarios
The development of YBUT and its widespread use in various ﬁelds have led to the tech-
nology being gradually recognized by researchers, but in the pursuit of rapid technological
development, safety issues are often easily overlooked. In the daily application of YBUT,
UAVs mainly transmit data with ground control terminals by wireless communication,
which is easily interfered with and invaded by others, thus causing problems, such as loss
of control of UAVs and data information leakage [ 173]. In many application scenarios,
if a UAV is hacked by others and loses control of its ﬂight, it will not only pose a threat
to the UAV itself but also to the surrounding environment and may even endanger the
personal safety of the operator. To prevent relevant security issues from occurring, it is
vital to enhance the data security of the YBUT. Both the storage and transmission of data
information and the transmission of UAV movement control commands should be the
main targets for security enhancements in the YBUT.
5.5. Popularising YBUT Knowledge, Training Technical Application Talents, and Improving
Relevant Laws, Regulations, and Codes of Practice
Popularizing the knowledge of UAVs and YOLO algorithms and training composite
talents in UAV control and YOLO algorithm application should be the role of higher educa-
tion institutions, research units, relevant enterprises, and group organizations. Improving
relevant laws, regulations, and codes of practice is an inescapable responsibility of the
relevant legislative bodies in the face of the rise of new technological developments and
applications. Although YBUT is developing rapidly, it takes time to achieve autonomous
unmanned operation of drones, so talent for drone control should be cultivated to improve
the overall level of the industry and the scope of production and use in life. At the same
time, to adapt to the rapid iteration of YOLO algorithm versions, knowledge of YOLO
algorithm applications should be popularized, and the ability of relevant personnel to apply
YOLO algorithms should be improved to bring into play the diversity of YOLO-based
UAV operations. To further protect the legal rights of users and others, the YBUT must
be applied in strict accordance with relevant laws and regulations, and operators must be
trained to ensure the correct use of the YBUT.
6. Conclusions
In any period, social progress needs advanced productivity as a basis, and every
advancement needs time to develop. When an emerging ﬁeld becomes popular, the ﬁeld
then gathers most of the current resources to develop it so that it rapidly progresses
and spreads to other ﬁelds. Then, having been fully integrated with other ﬁelds, it is