Drones 2023 ,7, 190 8 of 29
In addition, Ruan et al. [ 34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision-based drogue
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refueling of UAVs in complex environments. They
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse ﬁt to
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the ﬁducial location, and,
ﬁnally, a monocular vision camera for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The
simulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5–45 m, indicating
that the YOLO method has good results for target object detection and localization in
various complex environments. Yang et al. [ 35] investigated a method to achieve real-time
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they
attempted to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fusion
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application,
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on and exploring
the ﬁeld of YOLO-based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the
ﬁeld, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high-performance
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 31 
 
applications in this field. Since then, Ruan et al.  [34] and Yang et al. [35] have further ex-
plored the application of YBUT in other fields.  
 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].  
In addition, Ruan et al. [34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision -based drogue 
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of 
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refue ling of UAVs in complex environments. They 
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse fit to 
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the fiducial location, and, fi-
nally, a monocular vision camer a for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The sim-
ulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones 
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5 –45 m, indicat-
ing that the YOLO met hod has good results for target object detection and localization in 
various complex environments. Yang et al. [35] investigated a method to achieve real -time 
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they 
attempted  to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while 
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for 
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed 
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to 
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking 
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fus ion 
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application, 
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent 
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on an d exploring 
the field of YOLO -based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the 
field, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high -performance 
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.  
 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].  
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds  
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is 
equipped with a high -performance processor rich in computing resources, within which 
YOLO -based o bject detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to detect, 
to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data. Zhang et 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is
equipped with a high-performance processor rich in computing resources, within which
YOLO-based object detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to de-
tect, to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data.
Zhang et al. [36], to explore the feasibility of a new generation of technology, embedded
the YOLOv3 algorithm into the resource-limited NVIDIA Jason TX1 platform environment
(see Figure 10) and had the UAV carry the embedded platform for real-time pedestrian
detection experiments. The experimental results demonstrated the feasibility of imple-
menting YOLO-based real-time target detection on a resource-limited mobile platform and
provided a reference for the development of next-generation YBUT. Alam et al. [ 37], to
alleviate the computational pressure on the onboard embedded processor of the UAVs and
to enhance the practicality of YBUT, proposed a cost-effective aerial surveillance system that
reserves the limited Tiny-YOLO computational requirements on the onboard embedded
processor Movidius VPU, shifts the large Tiny-YOLO computational tasks to the cloud, and
maintains minimal communication between the UAV and the cloud. Experimental results
showed that the system is six-times faster in target detection processing at frames per
second compared to the speed of other state-of-the-art approaches, while the application of
airborne-embedded processor technology reduces end-to-end latency and network resource
consumption (see Figure 11). Similar research was conducted by Dimithe et al. [ 38]. The