Drones 2023 ,7, 190 2 of 29
assessment [ 14], multitarget tracking [ 15], and robot vision [ 16]. However, UAVs face
complex scenarios or work with the need to maintain good data communication with
ground control terminals, so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be
limited by certain application environments. However, UAVs face complex scenarios or
work with the need to maintain good data communication with ground control terminals, so
the innovation and development of UAV technology may be limited by certain application
environments. Moreover, object detection technology based on the YOLO algorithm needs
to be deployed into high-performance processors and be used in conjunction with image or
video data, which places certain requirements on the scenarios where it is used. These two
technologies can be combined to create a new technology—YOLO-based UAV technology
(YBUT). UAVs provide more application scenarios for the YOLO algorithm, and the YOLO
algorithm can assist UAVs in completing more novel tasks. In this way, drone technology
and the YOLO algorithm can further facilitate people’s daily lives while contributing to the
productivity of their respective industries.
A UAV is often deﬁned as an unmanned ﬂying device that can either ﬂy autonomously
according to a course or program established within the system or can be manually con-
trolled by the controller. UAVs can be classiﬁed into various types depending on various
parameters. In recent years, as a hot spot in the new round of global scientiﬁc and techno-
logical revolution and industrial revolution, UAVs have been able to replace most of the
tasks that used to be completed by manned aircraft. At the same time, as UAV technology
continues to mature, the number of UAVs in countries around the world is increasing every
year, and according to Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [ 17], as
illustrated in Figure 1, there will be approximately 2,679,000 UAVs in the world by 2025,
with a market size worth approximately USD 5.3 billion. With such a large number of
UAVs worldwide, it may be possible to make UAVs more valuable if they can be used as
aerial platforms to deploy YOLO algorithms.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 31 
 
ment [7], aerial photography [8], and sowing fertilizer or seeds [9]. Object detectio n tech-
nology based on the YOLO algorithm has been able to achieve human behavior analysis 
[10], face mask recognition [11], medical diagnosis analysis [12], autonomous driving [13], 
traffic assessment [14], multitarget tracking [15], and robot vision [16].  However, UAVs 
face complex scenarios or work with the need to maintain good data communication with 
ground control terminals, so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be 
limited by certain application environments. However, UAVs face comple x scenarios or 
work with the need to maintain good data communication with ground control terminals, 
so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be limited by certain appli-
cation environments. Moreover, object detection technology based on the YOLO algo-
rithm needs to be deployed into high -performance processors and be used in conjunction 
with image or video data, which places certain requirements on the scenarios where it is 
used. These two technologies can be combined to create a new technology —YOLO -based 
UAV technology (YBUT). UAVs provide more application scenarios for the YOLO algo-
rithm, and the YOLO algorithm can assist UAVs in completing more novel tasks. In this 
way, drone technology and the YOLO algorithm can further facilitate people’s d aily lives 
while contributing to the productivity of their respective industries.  
A UAV is often defined as an unmanned flying device that can either fly autono-
mously according to a course or program established within the system or can be manu-
ally control led by the controller. UAVs can be classified into various types depending on 
various parameters. In recent years, as a hot spot in the new round of global scientific and 
technological revolution and industrial revolution, UAVs have been able to replace mo st 
of the tasks that used to be completed by manned aircraft. At the same time, as UAV tech-
nology continues to mature, the number of UAVs in countries around the world is in-
creasing every year, and according to Global commercial drone annual sales and sale s 
statistics [17], as illustrated in Figure 1, there will be approximately 2,679,000 UAVs in the 
world by 2025, with a market size worth approximately USD 5.3 billion. With such a large 
number of UAVs worldwide, it may be possible to make UAVs more valuabl e if they can 
be used as aerial platforms to deploy YOLO algorithms.  
 
Figure 1. Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [17].  
YOLO is a widely used deep learning algorithm, because it is a classification -/regres-
sion-based object detectio n method, giving the algorithm its core strengths: a very simple 
structure, small model size, and fast computational speed. After seven years of develop-
ment since the introduction of YOLO (as of February 2023), researchers released seven 
Figure 1. Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [17].
YOLO is a widely used deep learning algorithm, because it is a classification-/regression-
based object detection method, giving the algorithm its core strengths: a very simple structure,
small model size, and fast computational speed. After seven years of development since
the introduction of YOLO (as of February 2023), researchers released seven versions of the
YOLO algorithm [ 18–22]. After the YOLO algorithm was popularized, researchers and users
improved it for various applications due to its openness and ease of secondary develop-
ment, and various revisions were introduced, such as YOLODrone [ 23], YOLOv4_Drone [ 24],
VIT-YOLO [ 25], YOLO-RTUAV [ 26], YOLO-Neck [ 27],and YOLOv7-DeepSORT [ 28]. The
mechanism of the YOLO-based object detection algorithm is that the input image is resized
to the same size, and then the image is divided into a total of SSnetwork cells of equal