Drones 2023 ,7, 190 4 of 29
paper, therefore, presents the history of YBUT and provides an overview of case studies
of the application of YBUT in several industry sectors, intending to provide researchers,
beginners, and consumers with a better understanding of the ﬁeld, as well as a reference
for the research and application of the technology in new areas. Here, we also discuss the
direction of the technology and provide an outlook on its application.
2. Survey Methodology
In this section, we explain the methodology and the idea behind the selection of the
papers studied and the main areas of application of YBUT. To screen the literature efﬁciently
and quickly for papers within the scope of this overview, a clear and simple screening
process was identiﬁed for the published literature, and its methodology is explained,
together with an analysis of the main research directions of interest in international and
Chinese journals.
2.1. Screening Methods for Research Papers Related to YBUT
To search for high-impact research/papers on aerial robots or UAVs that use deep
learning YOLO models/algorithms, many of the keywords come from top journals and
conferences, including the Web of Science Core Collection, KCI (Korean Journal Database),
MEDLINE®, SciELO Citation Index, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure indexed
journals, among others. The collected keywords were grouped into A1, A2, A3, and A4
groups and searched in various search engines; then, the results were then ﬁltered for the
next step. The keyword groupings used and the detailed search method for the articles are
shown in Figure 3.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 31 
 
realized on real -time footage from the UAV camera, turning the two steps of UAV acqui-
sition and computer detection into simultaneous UAV acquisition and detection, which 
greatly saves operational time and improves operational efficiency. The improv ement in 
the level of autonomous target recognition by drones can strongly promote the automa-
tion or unmanned operation of drones in most industries.  
Over the past few years, YBUT has become a popular research area of interest, but 
the application scenario s and impact of the technology have yet to be enhanced; a sum-
mary overview of the recent state of the application in this technology area is lacking. This 
paper, therefore, presents the history of YBUT and provides an overview of case studies 
of the applic ation of YBUT in several industry sectors, intending to provide researchers, 
beginners, and consumers with a better understanding of the field, as well as a reference 
for the research and application of the technology in new areas. Here, we also discuss th e 
direction of the technology and provide an outlook on its application.  
2. Survey Methodology  
In this section, we explain the methodology and the idea behind the selection of the 
papers studied and the main areas of application of YBUT. To screen the lite rature effi-
ciently and quickly for papers within the scope of this overview, a clear and simple screen-
ing process was identified for the published literature, and its methodology is explained, 
together with an analysis of the main research directions of in terest in international and 
Chinese journals.  
2.1. Screening Methods for Research Papers Related to YBUT  
To search for high -impact research/papers on aerial robots or UAVs that use deep 
learning YOLO models/algorithms, many of the keywords come from top jo urnals and 
conferences, including the Web of Science Core Collection, KCI (Korean Journal Data-
base), MEDLINE®, SciELO Citation Index, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure 
indexed journals, among others. The collected keywords were grouped into A1, A 2, A3, 
and A4 groups and searched in various search engines; then, the results were then filtered 
for the next step. The keyword groupings used and the detailed search method for the 
articles are shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Literature search methods.  
With the Web of Science search engine as an example, after searching for the above 
keywords, 243 articles in 41 research fields were collected as of February 2023, containing 
the types of papers, conferences, revisions, letters, etc., with the specific subje ct directions 
shown in Table 1.  
  
Figure 3. Literature search methods.
With the Web of Science search engine as an example, after searching for the above
keywords, 243 articles in 41 research ﬁelds were collected as of February 2023, containing
the types of papers, conferences, revisions, letters, etc., with the speciﬁc subject directions
shown in Table 1.
Based on the applicability of the ﬁltered articles, we did not consider multiple topics,
such as revisions and letters. The articles were also rigorously reviewed for content to
remove articles that did not contribute to the topic of this research review, with a focus
on checking the image data within the article and the dataset used. At the same time,
the articles were veriﬁed and analyzed for algorithmic improvements and innovations,
and some articles were selected that were progressive or identiﬁed as implementable for
the development of the relevant industry. Finally, the introduction, discussion, summary,
and outlook of the articles, after the screening process was completed, were checked and
categorized. Each step of the methodology used in the screening process of the required
articles is shown in Figure 4.