Drones 2023 ,7, 190 7 of 29
inspection, etc. The YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016 [ 2], and after several improve-
ments, it has reached the forefront of the object recognition ﬁeld in terms of detection speed,
detection accuracy, and recognition classiﬁcation.
The application of YBUT in real production operations started in 2017. In the early
stages of the YBUT application, the main working mechanism was image or video data
acquisition by UAVs, followed by object detection, identiﬁcation, and classiﬁcation by
computers running YOLO-based object detection algorithms. To explore methods to detect
vehicles from UAV-captured images for application in trafﬁc monitoring and management,
and as deep learning algorithms have shown signiﬁcant advantages in target detection,
researchers have tried to apply YOLO-based object detection algorithms to vehicle detec-
tion in UAV images. Jiang et al. [ 32] constructed a multisource data acquisition system by
integrating a thermal infrared imaging sensor and a visible-light imaging sensor on a UAV ,
corrected and aligned the images through feature point extraction and single response
matrix methods, and then performed image fusion on the multisource data. Finally, they uti-
lized a deep learning YOLO algorithm for data training and vehicle detection (see Figure 7 ).
The experimental results found that the inclusion of a thermal infrared image dataset could
improve the accuracy of vehicle detection and veriﬁed that the YOLO framework is an ad-
vanced and effective framework for real-time target detection. The ﬁrst attempt to combine
and apply the YOLO algorithm with UAV technology by Jiang et al. [ 32] demonstrated
the usability of YOLO-based UAV technology. Although the detection performance of
the early YOLOv1 algorithm was not very good, the experimental results were relatively
satisfactory as the ﬁrst exploration of the technology and the innovative incorporation of
thermal infrared image data.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 31 
 
computer systems to now being run by onboard embedded systems for real -time detec-
tion and recognitio n. Each of these technological advances has taken the application of 
technology to a new level in some areas.  
3.1. Early Development of YBUT  
At the beginning of the research on YBUT, the technology was proposed because of 
a technological fusion between UAV  technology and YOLO algorithms in the context of a 
trend towards cross -disciplinary development. Among other things, UAV technology re-
search began in the 1920s and has been developed, to date, with successful applications 
in agriculture, surveillance, mon itoring, traffic construction, system transportation, sys-
tem inspection, etc. The YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016  [2], and after several im-
provements, it has reached the forefront of the object recognition field in terms of detec-
tion speed, detection a ccuracy, and recognition classification.  
The application of YBUT in real production operations started in 2017. In the early 
stages of the YBUT application, the main working mechanism was image or video data 
acquisition by UAVs, followed by object detectio n, identification, and classification by 
computers running YOLO -based object detection algorithms. To explore methods to de-
tect vehicles from UAV -captured images for application in traffic monitoring and man-
agement, and as deep learning algorithms have sho wn significant advantages in target 
detection, researchers have tried to apply YOLO -based object detection algorithms to ve-
hicle detection in UAV images. Jiang et al. [32] constructed a multisource data acquisition 
system by integrating a thermal infrared imaging sensor and a visible -light imaging sen-
sor on a UAV, corrected and aligned the images through feature point extraction and sin-
gle response matrix methods, and then performed image fusion on the multisource data. 
Finally, they utilized a deep learnin g YOLO algorithm for data training and vehicle detec-
tion (see Figure 7). The experimental results found that the inclusion of a thermal infrared 
image dataset could improve the accuracy of vehicle detection and verified that the YOLO 
framework is an advanc ed and effective framework for real -time target detection.  The first 
attempt to combine and apply the YOLO algorithm with UAV technology by Jiang et al. 
[32] demonstrated the usability of YOLO -based UAV technology. Although the detection 
performance of the  early YOLOv1 algorithm was not very good, the experimental results 
were relatively satisfactory as the first exploration of the technology and the innovative 
incorporation of thermal infrared image data.  
 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the proposed method by Jia ng et al. [32].  
Based on this study, Xu et al. [33] proposed an improved algorithm for small vehicle 
detection based on YOLOv2, whose detection structure model is shown in Figure 8. Com-
pared with the YOLOv2 model structure, the algorithm adds an additional  feature layer 
that can reach 1/32 of the input image in size, making the algorithm more adept at detect-
ing small targets and having higher localization accuracy than YOLOv2. This research has 
greatly contributed to researchers’ understanding of YBUT and h as also inspired research-
ers to make targeted improvements to the YOLO algorithm structure when carrying out 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the proposed method by Jiang et al. [32].
Based on this study, Xu et al. [ 33] proposed an improved algorithm for small vehi-
cle detection based on YOLOv2, whose detection structure model is shown in Figure 8.
Compared with the YOLOv2 model structure, the algorithm adds an additional feature
layer that can reach 1/32 of the input image in size, making the algorithm more adept
at detecting small targets and having higher localization accuracy than YOLOv2. This
research has greatly contributed to researchers’ understanding of YBUT and has also in-
spired researchers to make targeted improvements to the YOLO algorithm structure when
carrying out applications in this ﬁeld. Since then, Ruan et al. [ 34] and Yang et al. [ 35] have
further explored the application of YBUT in other ﬁelds.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 31 
 
applications in this field. Since then, Ruan et al.  [34] and Yang et al. [35] have further ex-
plored the application of YBUT in other fields.  
 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].  
In addition, Ruan et al. [34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision -based drogue 
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of 
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refue ling of UAVs in complex environments. They 
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse fit to 
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the fiducial location, and, fi-
nally, a monocular vision camer a for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The sim-
ulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones 
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5 –45 m, indicat-
ing that the YOLO met hod has good results for target object detection and localization in 
various complex environments. Yang et al. [35] investigated a method to achieve real -time 
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they 
attempted  to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while 
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for 
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed 
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to 
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking 
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fus ion 
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application, 
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent 
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on an d exploring 
the field of YOLO -based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the 
field, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high -performance 
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.  
 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].  
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds  
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is 
equipped with a high -performance processor rich in computing resources, within which 
YOLO -based o bject detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to detect, 
to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data. Zhang et 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].