Drones 2023 ,7, 190 3 of 29
size, and each individual network cell can detect objects within it. If the center of a detected
target falls into a network cell, that network cell will make a prediction about the target.
Each network cell may have N detection boxes, each of which not only calculates its own
position but also makes a prediction score. The score represents the likelihood that a
detection target is present in the predicted network cell. As there may be multiple boxes
in a network cell, YOLO will automatically select the highest-scoring target category for
prediction (see Figure 2).
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 31 
 
versions of the YO LO algorithm [18 –22]. After the YOLO algorithm was popularized, re-
searchers and users improved it for various applications due to its openness and ease of 
secondary development, and various revisions were introduced, such as YOLODrone 
[23], YOLOv4_Drone [2 4], VIT -YOLO [25], YOLO -RTUAV [26], YOLO -Neck [27], and 
YOLOv7 -DeepSORT [28]. The mechanism of the YOLO -based object detection algorithm 
is that the input image is resized to the same size, and then the image is divided into a 
total of S × S network cells of equal size, and each individual network cell can detect objects 
within it. If the center of a detected target falls into a network cell, that network cell will 
make a prediction about the target. Each network cell may have N detection boxes, each 
of whi ch not only calculates its own position but also makes a prediction score. The score 
represents the likelihood that a detection target is present in the predicted network cell. 
As there may be multiple boxes in a network cell, YOLO will automatically selec t the 
highest -scoring target category for prediction (see Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. YOLOv7 -based UAV technology architecture diagram (BN: batch normalization layer; AF: 
activation function layer).  
When UAVs are used for operations in various industries and when an operation 
involves target identification and positioning, manual operation is often required to con-
firm the goal location and operation location through real -time images transmitted by 
UAV  cameras, such as transport UAVs for precise parcel delivery. The process is tedious 
and cumbersome and requires a high level of UAV handling skills, which can easily lead 
to accidents and financial losses. Although YOLO -based target detection technology 
emerged late, it has been continuously improved and developed by researchers and al-
ready has a high accuracy rate in the fields of object detection and image recognition; the 
detection speed and accuracy have reached the forefront of the industry while play ing an 
important role in the application of target recognition in UAV aerial images [29]. Khang 
et al. [30] conducted experiments on the VisDrone2019 dataset containing 96 videos and 
39,988 annotated frames and evaluated deep learning detectors with FPS an d mAP as 
evaluation metrics, including Faster R -CNN, RFCN, SNIPER, YOLO, RetinaNet, and Cen-
terNet. Ammar et al. [31] evaluated the performance of convolutional neural network 
models, such as Faster R -CNN, YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and EfficientDet, using IoU, precis ion, 
recall, F1, AP, and mAP as evaluation metrics. The experimental results showed that 
YOLO is ideal for real -time target detection applications. If the UAV is equipped with an 
embedded processor deploying the YOLO algorithm, object detection recognition  can be 
Figure 2. YOLOv7-based UAV technology architecture diagram (BN: batch normalization layer;
AF: activation function layer).
When UAVs are used for operations in various industries and when an operation
involves target identiﬁcation and positioning, manual operation is often required to conﬁrm
the goal location and operation location through real-time images transmitted by UAV
cameras, such as transport UAVs for precise parcel delivery. The process is tedious and
cumbersome and requires a high level of UAV handling skills, which can easily lead to
accidents and ﬁnancial losses. Although YOLO-based target detection technology emerged
late, it has been continuously improved and developed by researchers and already has a
high accuracy rate in the ﬁelds of object detection and image recognition; the detection
speed and accuracy have reached the forefront of the industry while playing an important
role in the application of target recognition in UAV aerial images [ 29]. Khang et al. [ 30]
conducted experiments on the VisDrone2019 dataset containing 96 videos and 39,988
annotated frames and evaluated deep learning detectors with FPS and mAP as evaluation
metrics, including Faster R-CNN, RFCN, SNIPER, YOLO, RetinaNet, and CenterNet.
Ammar et al. [ 31] evaluated the performance of convolutional neural network models, such
as Faster R-CNN, YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and EfﬁcientDet, using IoU, precision, recall, F1, AP ,
and mAP as evaluation metrics. The experimental results showed that YOLO is ideal for
real-time target detection applications. If the UAV is equipped with an embedded processor
deploying the YOLO algorithm, object detection recognition can be realized on real-time
footage from the UAV camera, turning the two steps of UAV acquisition and computer
detection into simultaneous UAV acquisition and detection, which greatly saves operational
time and improves operational efﬁciency. The improvement in the level of autonomous
target recognition by drones can strongly promote the automation or unmanned operation
of drones in most industries.
Over the past few years, YBUT has become a popular research area of interest, but the
application scenarios and impact of the technology have yet to be enhanced; a summary
overview of the recent state of the application in this technology area is lacking. This