Drones 2023 ,7, 190 20 of 29
5. Development Prospects
With the rapid development of YOLO-based object detection technology and special
UAV research, the YOLO-based UAV industry has set off a technological boom with
multiﬁeld applications and multidirectional development. With the assistance of a variety
of cutting-edge technologies, it is possible to improve productivity and quality of life and to
create economic beneﬁts while creating good ecological, environmental, and social beneﬁts.
YBUT shows increasingly obvious value and potential as it develops.
5.1. Improving the Quality of UAV Datasets and Training YOLO Algorithms Suitable for
Aerial Imagery
In the practical application of YBUT, it is often the case that accuracy and speed are high
for ground-based operational tests but low for aerial UAV operations, possibly due to the
unsuitability of the dataset used by recent target detection algorithms [ 155–158]. Therefore,
when collecting and selecting datasets to create models that perform as well as possible for
the UAV operational environment, the following should be noted: (1) When performing
image acquisition of the target, care should be taken that the acquisition equipment is as
consistent as possible and that the same equipment is used for acquisition from start to
ﬁnish so that the same-resolution image can be obtained. This helps ensure that the image
content is not distorted due to inconsistencies in image size during algorithm training.
(2) The dataset should be collected from as many different angles as possible, e.g., different
camera angles, weather differences, various light intensities, several poses of the target,
numerous target positions, and different target backgrounds. (3) When annotating the
target border category and coordinate information within the dataset, we need to reduce
the area of the background content within the border as much as possible and must ensure
that all the target content is placed within the border. When annotating multiple categories
of borders, we need to minimize the area of overlapping borders to avoid the algorithm
combining the two into the same content.
At the same time, to accelerate the progress of research on YOLO-based UAV object
recognition technology, it is recommended that most developers create good-performing
models, describe the content and application performance of the datasets used, and upload
them to the community for sharing.
5.2. Research into Object Detection Algorithms Suitable for UAV-Embedded Processors
In YBUT research, UAVs can carry limited hardware resources for mobile processors
and cannot be better transplanted to existing YOLO algorithms for application. Therefore,
lightweight target detection algorithms should be investigated for mobile processors with
limited resources, or performance optimization or network pruning model improvements
should be made to existing YOLO algorithms [ 159–164]. Liu et al. [ 165] proposed a Slice-
Concat structure based on YOLOv3 and YOLOv3-SPP , which can improve the target
detection speed by simply changing the width and height of the uniform input dataset.
Zhang et al. [ 166] proposed an intelligent approach for UAVs that combines machine
learning, traditional algorithms, and intelligent AI algorithms. The YOLOv3 algorithm
is then used to sense the location of objects in the environment and to classify them, and
ﬁnally, AI is used to evaluate the working state. Experiments showed that the method
has high computational speed and recognition accuracy, good generality, portability, and
scalability, and they proposed a new development direction for future UAV technology.
To quickly promote the YBUT and facilitate learning and application by other inter-
ested researchers or industry beginners, it is recommended that all peer researchers who
have successfully implemented the application for lightweight UAV models disclose their
optimization methods and model source code and provide detailed explanations of the
optimized parts and the optimized network structure.