Drones 2023 ,7, 190 13 of 29
YBUT is of great value to the engineering ﬁeld and the productivity of society. Al-
though there are still more engineering problems waiting to be resolved and more tradi-
tional manual methods waiting to be improved, YOLO algorithm object detection continues
to become more accurate and faster; UAVs are becoming more convenient and safer, and if
YBUT can continue to be used to develop innovations in the engineering ﬁeld, then YBUT
can create more value in the engineering ﬁeld.
4.2. Related Applications in the Field of Transportation
With the expansion of human space and the extension of people’s physical movement,
the dependence on transport for daily travel is increasing. This has led to a dramatic
increase in the size of roads and the number of vehicles over the last few decades. When
there are many roads and many means of transport, their management becomes very
important. The legislature has set up various trafﬁc regulations to limit their use to ensure a
stable order in life, but monitoring their compliance accurately and effectively is a problem
that persists. Although there are cameras all over the streets and alleys, this does not fully
detect all violations of the law and does not impose penalties.
To further manage and constrain the various modes of transportation in life, sev-
eral attempts have been made in the ﬁeld of transportation with YBUT. For example,
Feng et al. [ 74] proposed a YOLOv3-based method for UAV detection (see Figure 16).
Omar et al. [ 75] proposed an aerial image vehicle detection method based on the YOLOv4
algorithm (see Figure 17), and Liu et al. [ 76] proposed a method for the automatic detection
and tracking of vehicles in an urban environment by UAVs based on the YOLOv4 and
DeepSORT algorithms. These studies have yielded excellent results in motorized and non-
motorized vehicle recognition and classiﬁcation tasks based on datasets of air trafﬁc images
and have also enabled the automatic detection and tracking of urban vehicles. The accurate
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of motor vehicles and non-motorized vehicles allows for
accurate restraint of their behavior according to road management rules in intelligent trafﬁc
management, while the automatic detection and tracking of vehicles can provide assistance
in the effective punishment of violations. The fundamental applied research on YBUT in
urban trafﬁc further accelerates the intelligent management of urban trafﬁc and contributes
to the creation of a civilized city.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 31 
 
allows for accurate restraint of their behavior according to road manageme nt rules in in-
telligent traffic management, while the automatic detection and tracking of vehicles can 
provide assistance in the effective punishment of violations. The fundamental applied re-
search on YBUT in urban traffic further accelerates the intellige nt management of urban 
traffic and contributes to the creation of a civilized city.  
 
Figure 16. Vehicle detection results based on urban road videos [74].  
 
Figure 17. (a) UAV acquisition images, ( b) UAV image detection results [75].  
Both urban traffic ma nagement applications and urban road management are im-
portant directions for the application of YBUT technology. Silva et al. [77] designed a dis-
tributed UAV platform deploying YOLOv4 to detect road damage (see Figure 18). Zhao 
et al. [78] proposed a YOLOv 3-based algorithm for UAV highway center mark detection, 
YOLO -Highway (see Figure 19). Recently, Ma et al. [79] proposed a new method for road 
damage detection based on YBUT, which experimentally showed better performance than 
previous similar studies and further promoted the application of road damage detection 
technology in urban road management. The intelligent management of urban traffic is not 
only the management of motor vehicles and non -motor vehicles but also the management 
of urban roads. The wides pread application of YBUT in the field of traffic greatly pro-
motes the process of intelligent management and has great significance for the conven-
ience of future residents’ lives. The expansion of the application of YBUT in urban road 
management is another  step forward in the promotion of intelligent urban traffic manage-
ment. Other information regarding YBUT applications in the transportation sector is 
shown in Table 3.  
Figure 16. Vehicle detection results based on urban road videos [74].