to consolidate the existing knowledge present in
semantically similar relation clusters (Valverde-
Rebaza and de Andrade Lopes, 2012). Our model
achieves these objectives by assigning different
weight mass (attention) to nodes in a neighbor-
hood and by propagating attention via layers in
an iterative fashion. However, as the model
depth increases, the contribution of distant enti-
ties decreases exponentially. To resolve this is-
sue, we use relation composition as proposed by
(Lin et al., 2015) to introduce an auxiliary edge
betweenn-hop neighbors, which then readily al-
lows the ﬂow of knowledge between entities. Our
architecture is an encoder-decoder model where
ourgeneralized graph attention model andCon-
vKB (Nguyen et al., 2018) play the roles of an
encoder and decoder , respectively. Moreover,
this method can be extended for learning effec-
tive embeddings for Textual Entailment Graphs
(KOTLERMAN et al., 2015), where global learn-
ing has proven effective in the past as shown by
(Berant et al., 2015) and (Berant et al., 2010).
Our contributions are as follows. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to learn new
graph attention based embeddings that speciﬁcally
target relation prediction on KGs. Secondly, we
generalize and extend graph attention mechanisms
to capture both entity and relation features in a
multi-hop neighborhood of a given entity. Fi-
nally, we evaluate our model on challenging re-
lation prediction tasks for a wide variety of real-
world datasets. Our experimental results indicate
a clear and substantial improvement over state-
of-the-art relation prediction methods. For in-
stance, our attention-based embedding achieves
an improvement of 104% over the state-of-the-art
method for the Hits@ 1metric on the popular Free-
base (FB15K-237) dataset.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
We ﬁrst provide a review of related work in Sec-
tion 2 and then our detailed approach in Section 3.
Experimental results and dataset descriptions are
reported in Section 4 followed by our conclusion
and future research directions in Section 5.
2 Related Work
Recently, several variants of KG embeddings have
been proposed for relation prediction. These
methods can be broadly classiﬁed as: (i) composi-
tional, (ii) translational, (iii) CNN based, and (iv)
graph based models.
Christopher
NolanRevenant Tom HardyLeonardo
DiCaprio
United
KingdomLondonJonathan  
Nolancolleague
born_in nationality?colleague?  
acted_in acted_in
born_in?
capital_ofdirected colleague
brother_ofFigure 1: Subgraph of a knowledge graph contains ac-
tual relations between entities (solid lines) and inferred
relations that are initially hidden (dashed lines).
RESCAL (Nickel et al., 2011),
NTN (Socher et al., 2013b), and the Holo-
graphic embedding model (HOLE) (Nickel et al.,
2016) are examples of compositional based mod-
els. Both RESCAL and NTN use tensor products
which capture rich interactions, but require a large
number of parameters to model relations and are
thus cumbersome to compute. To combat these
drawbacks, HOLE creates more efﬁcient and
scalable compositional representations using the
circular correlation of entity embeddings.
In comparison, translational models
like TransE (Bordes et al., 2013), DIST-
MULT (Yang et al., 2015) and ComplEx (Trouil-
lon et al., 2016) propose arguably simpler models.
TransE considers the translation operation
between head and tail entities for relations. DIST-
MULT (Yang et al., 2015) learns embeddings
using a bilinear diagonal model which is a special
case of the bilinear objective used in NTN and
TransE. DISTMULT uses weighted element-
wise dot products to model entity relations.
ComplEx (Trouillon et al., 2016) generalizes
DISTMULT (Yang et al., 2015) by using complex
embeddings and Hermitian dot products instead.
These translational models are faster, require
fewer parameters and are relatively easier to train,
but result in less expressive KG embeddings.
Recently, two CNN based models have
been proposed for relation prediction, namely
ConvE (Dettmers et al., 2018) and Con-
vKB (Nguyen et al., 2018). ConvE uses 2-D
convolution over embeddings to predict links.
It comprises of a convolutional layer, a fully
connected projection layer and an inner product
layer for the ﬁnal predictions. Different feature
maps are generated using multiple ﬁlters to ex-
tract global relationships. Concatenation of these
feature maps represents an input triple. These
models are parameter efﬁcient but consider each