Learning Attention-based Embeddings for Relation Prediction in
Knowledge Graphs
Deepak NathaniJatin ChauhanCharu SharmaManohar Kaul
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Hyderbad
fdeepakn1019,chauhanjatin100,charusharma1991 g@gmail.com, mkaul@iith.ac.in
Abstract
The recent proliferation of knowledge graphs
(KGs) coupled with incomplete or partial in-
formation, in the form of missing relations
(links) between entities, has fueled a lot of
research on knowledge base completion (also
known as relation prediction). Several re-
cent works suggest that convolutional neural
network (CNN) based models generate richer
and more expressive feature embeddings and
hence also perform well on relation prediction.
However, we observe that these KG embed-
dings treat triples independently and thus fail
to cover the complex and hidden information
that is inherently implicit in the local neighbor-
hood surrounding a triple. To this effect, our
paper proposes a novel attention-based feature
embedding that captures both entity and rela-
tion features in any given entity’s neighbor-
hood. Additionally, we also encapsulate re-
lation clusters and multi-hop relations in our
model. Our empirical study offers insights
into the efﬁcacy of our attention-based model
and we show marked performance gains in
comparison to state-of-the-art methods on all
datasets.
1 Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent knowledge
bases (KBs) as a directed graph whose nodes
and edges represent entities and relations be-
tween entities , respectively. For example, in Fig-
ure 1, a triple (London, capital of, United King-
dom) is represented as two entities: London and
United Kingdom along with a relation (capital of)
linking them. KGs ﬁnd uses in a wide vari-
ety of applications such as semantic search (Be-
rant et al., 2013; Berant and Liang, 2014), dia-
logue generation (He et al., 2017; Keizer et al.,
2017), and question answering (Zhang et al., 2016;
Equal ContributionDiefenbach et al., 2018), to name a few. How-
ever, KGs typically suffer from missing rela-
tions (Socher et al., 2013a; West et al., 2014).
This problem gives rise to the task of knowledge
base completion (also referred to as relation pre-
diction ), which entails predicting whether a given
triple is valid or not.
State-of-the-art relation prediction methods are
known to be primarily knowledge embedding
based models. They are broadly classiﬁed
astranslational models (Bordes et al., 2013;
Yang et al., 2015; Trouillon et al., 2016) and con-
volutional neural network (CNN) (Nguyen et al.,
2018; Dettmers et al., 2018) based models. While
translational models learn embeddings using sim-
ple operations and limited parameters, they pro-
duce low quality embeddings. In contrast, CNN
based models learn more expressive embeddings
due to their parameter efﬁciency and consideration
of complex relations. However, both translational
and CNN based models process each triple inde-
pendently and hence fail to encapsulate the seman-
tically rich and latent relations that are inherently
present in the vicinity of a given entity in a KG.
Motivated by the aforementioned observa-
tions, we propose a generalized attention-based
graph embedding for relation prediction. For
node classiﬁcation, graph attention networks
(GATs) (Veli ˇckovi ´c et al., 2018) have been shown
to focus on the most relevant portions of the graph,
namely the node features in a 1-hop neighborhood.
Given a KG and the task of relation prediction, our
model generalizes andextends the attention mech-
anism by guiding attention to both entity (node)
and relation (edge) features in a multi-hop neigh-
borhood of a given entity / node.
Our idea is: 1) to capture multi-hop rela-
tions (Lin et al., 2015) surrounding a given
node, 2) to encapsulate the diversity of roles
played by an entity in various relations, and 3)arXiv:1906.01195v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jun 2019