triple independently without taking into account
the relationships between the triples.
A graph based neural network model called
R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018) is an exten-
sion of applying graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) (Kipf and Welling, 2017) to relational
data. It applies a convolution operation to the
neighborhood of each entity and assigns them
equal weights. This graph based model does not
outperform the CNN based models.
Existing methods either learn KG embeddings
by solely focusing on entity features or by taking
into account the features of entities and relations in
a disjoint manner. Instead, our proposed graph at-
tention model holistically captures multi-hop and
semantically similar relations in the n-hop neigh-
borhood of any given entity in the KG.
3 Our Approach
We begin this section by introducing the notations
and deﬁnitions used in the rest of the paper, fol-
lowed by a brief background on graph attention
networks (GATs) (Veli ˇckovi ´c et al., 2018). Fi-
nally, we describe our proposed attention archi-
tecture for knowledge graphs followed by our de-
coder network.
3.1 Background
A knowledge graph is denoted by G= (E;R),
whereEandRrepresent the set of entities
(nodes) and relations (edges), respectively. A
triple (es;r;e o)is represented as an edge rbe-
tween nodes esanderinG1. Embedding models
try to learn an effective representation of entities,
relations, and a scoring function f, such that for
a given input triple t= (es;r;e o),f(t)gives the
likelihood of tbeing a valid triple. For example,
Figure 1 shows the subgraph from a KG which
infers missing links represented by dashed lines
using existing triples such as (London, captial of,
United Kingdom) .
3.2 Graph Attention Networks (GATs)
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
(Kipf and Welling, 2017) gather information
from the entity’s neighborhood and all neighbors
contribute equally in the information pass-
ing. To address the shortcomings of GCNs,
(Veli ˇckovi ´c et al., 2018) introduced graph at-
tention networks (GATs). GATs learn to assign
1From here onwards, the pairs “ node /entity ” and “ edge /
relation ” will be used interchangeablyvarying levels of importance to nodes in every
node’s neighborhood, rather than treating all
neighboring nodes with equal importance, as is
done in GCN.
The input feature set of nodes to a layer is x=
f~ x1;~ x2;:::;~ x Ng. A layer produces a transformed
set of node feature vectors x0=f~ x0
1;~ x0
2;:::;~ x0
Ng,
where~ xiand~ x0
iare input and output embed-
dings of the entity ei, andNis number of entities
(nodes). A single GAT layer can be described as
eij=a(W~ xi;W~ xj) (1)
whereeijis the attention value of the edge (ei;ej)
inG,Wis a parametrized linear transformation
matrix mapping the input features to a higher di-
mensional output feature space, and ais any atten-
tion function of our choosing.
Attention values for each edge are the impor-
tance of the edge (ei;ej)0s features for a source
nodeei. Here, the relative attention ijis com-
puted using a softmax function over all the val-
ues in the neighborhood. Equation 2 shows the
output of a layer. GAT employs multi-head atten-
tionto stabilize the learning process as credited to
(Vaswani et al., 2017).
~x0
i= X
j2NiijW~ xj!
(2)
The multihead attention process of concatenating
Kattention heads is shown as follows in Equation
3.
~x0
i=K


k=1 X
j2Nik
ijWk~ xj!
(3)
wherekrepresents concatenation, represents
any non-linear function, k
ijare normalized atten-
tion coefﬁcients of edge (ei;ej)calculated by the
k-th attention mechanism, and Wkrepresents the
corresponding linear transformation matrix of the
k-th attention mechanism. The output embedding
in the ﬁnal layer is calculated using averaging , in-
stead of the concatenation operation, to achieve
multi-head attention, as is shown in the following
Equation 4.
~x0
i= 
1
KKX
k=1X
j2Nik
ijWk~ xj!
(4)
3.3 Relations are Important
Despite the success of GATs, they are unsuitable
for KGs as they ignore relation (edge) features,