text or speech recognition and speech-to-text, depending on
the application. Then, it continues by dividing the text into
tokens. These tokens can be words, punctuation or numbers.
The various NLP tools use different techniques for associating
meaning to each token or combination of tokens. Nonetheless,
the underlying process is similar for all.
NER, one of NLP’s sub-tasks, seeks to ﬁnd and classify
named entities present in a text into speciﬁc and pre-deﬁned
categories [1]. Those categories can be people’s names, ad-
dresses, states, countries, money, organizations, laws or any
other kind of PII. With NER it is possible to automatically scan
text documents, data structures (or any other text ﬁle container)
and understand the importance of those entities in the context
of the text. Performing NER with different NLP tools may lead
to different NER performances due to its internal mechanisms.
Also, a NER system designed within a tool for one project may
execute differently in another project or not do the task at all
[2].
Several applications and usage of machine learning are
based on supervised learning [3], as is NLP. In the exper-
imental part of this paper, different NLP tools are used and
supervised learning is used to train machine learning models in
all the tools. In the case of Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK),
a Naive Bayes classiﬁer [4] and Hidden Markov Models
(HMM) [5] are applied. For Stanford CoreNLP, Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs) are applied. CRFs are probabilistic
models that perform segmentation and labeling of sequential
data [5], which is the case of text used in NLP tasks. Finally,
spaCy uses Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [6] with
pre-trained word vectors [7] to train its models.
III. R ELATED WORK
It is possible to ﬁnd in the literature extensive work and
publications regarding NLP, its characteristics, and its per-
formance. For instance, Omran and Treude [8] perform a
systematic literature review on how to choose an NLP library.
The most commonly mentioned NLP tools are the NLTK,
Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy.
The NLP’s sub-task that is more suitable for the type of
analysis we refer to is NER as this method uses models
to classify the entities (e.g., Persons or Locations) it ﬁnds
in the input text. Jiang et al. [9] reviewed tools to assess
which ones are more accurate in NER. Of course, this can
be applied in a wide variety of ﬁelds. For instance, Ritter et
al. [10] used NER to recognize Named Entities in tweets. On
a different application, Vlachos [11] evaluated NER systems
for biomedical data.
Despite the availability of comprehensive NLP research in
the literature, there is insufﬁcient work relating to NER, PII,
its implications, and possible use cases. There are links with
clinical or biomedical data but not in the broad spectrum
of PII, which encompasses many different kinds of personal
information. We argue that using NLP and NER models can be
a very adequate Privacy Enhancing Technology when applied
in privacy-preserving data analysis (e.g., active or passive
monitoring of text for compliance veriﬁcation) as this avoidsthe usage of dictionary approaches and the involvement of
human operators. Supporting our claims are the results of the
experimental work we conducted with different NLP tools.
IV. NLP T OOLS
NLTK [12] is one of the most well-known NLP tools. It
is community-driven and open-source Python software, which
allows the manipulation of different corpora, categorizing text
or analyzing linguistic structure (e.g., tokenization, Part of
Speech (POS) tagging or NER). Its development and open
source contributions give it a large market adoption for NLP
starters and many other simple other activities. Although
it could have the potential to perform better in production
environments (with further improvements and development),
it usually serves as a base tool for several academic courses
and NLP teaching activities.
The Stanford CoreNLP [13] tool stands out as a reference
tool in the ﬁeld of NLP. The tool is open-source, developed
in Java and, among other features, it is capable of performing
sentiment analysis, dependency parsing, or NER, for instance.
When compared with NLTK, the Stanford CoreNLP offers
additional standard features out of the box (e.g., dependency
parsing). Similar to NLTK, continuous development allows it
to perform better at each new software release - surpassing
NLTK. It is not only used for academic purposes or NLP
introduction, but it is also been more referenced in more
production environments.
In 2016, ExplosionAI introduced spaCy [14] as the fastest
NLP library in the world. The fact is that it is not only fast, but
also performs well against similar tools and supports similar
features. Furthermore, as an advantage, spaCy has both Neural
Networks (NNs) models and Integrated Word Vectors. Also,
with their new tokenization algorithm a better balance between
performance, ease of deﬁnition, and ease of alignment into the
original string are ensured.
V. E XPERIMENTAL APPROACH AND DATA
It was necessary to devise a methodology to determine
to which extent NLP and NER can effectively be used to
reliably detect and identify PII, and ultimately used as Privacy
Enhancing Technologies (PETs). For that purpose, we used
different NLP tools and trained (and tested) NER models
with different data. This allows us to evaluate not only the
models we train but also the NLP tools used: NLTK, Stanford
CoreNLP, and spaCy.
The approach followed is divided into three parts: the
ﬁrst with generic data, the second with publicly available
contracts containing PII, and the third with mixed datasets.
The three parts involve the training and validation of machine
learning models. The following sections provide the necessary
information for each part.
A. Generic Data
We started by gathering generic data that was already tagged
with named entities. For this purpose, we used Kaggle [15]
- an online community for sharing and improving datasets.