The datasets used in the experiments were based on the
Groningen Meaning Bank data [16], which are composed or
public domain English text. The datasets contain, for instance,
news, reports and other public domain publications.
To better evaluate the performance of the tools and respec-
tive models we partitioned the dataset in smaller chunks. The
objective was to assess how the performance of the models
was affected by the datasets’ size (e.g., number of tokens
or sentences). Also, this provided an estimate of the amount
of data (i.e., sentences or tokens) that are necessary to train
models and achieve desirable results.
The dataset had 1.354.149 tokens. Therefore, to evaluate
performance of the NLP tools, as well as the models’ classiﬁ-
cation capabilities using data with different sizes, the dataset
was sliced in smaller portions (5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% ,
50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% and 100%). For each portion was
then applied the 70% and 30% proportion rule for training
and validation, respectively. In the second stage, the dataset
contained 19.838 tokens (equivalent to 1150 sentences). Thus,
no size reduction was performed. The training and validation
proportions of 70%-30% were kept unchanged.
B. Publicly available data with PII
At this point, the procedure was identical to the ﬁrst.
The only difference was the data, which focused on publicly
available data containing PII. The dataset created was a fusion
between contracts available in online sites [17], [18] and other
contracts from the U.S Department of Defense (DoD) [19].
After retrieving publicly available contracts in PDF format,
it was necessary to extract the information and convert it to
text ﬁles using the PyPDF2 Python library. Only then, it was
possible to perform the necessary tokenization and proceed
with the manual tagging of entities.
The focus was on different kinds of entities, namely the ones
described next (which are at the same time PII). For that, it
was necessary to search legal and publicly available datasets
containing these kinds of entities as much as possible. Finally,
it was possible to ﬁnd datasets containing such information.
One kind of source was the U.S. DoD, where they publish
the daily expenses of the military branches [19]; the other
sources are publicly available contracts found online [17], [18].
It is possible to observe that from the total list of entities we
have deﬁned, 68% of them were labeled during the annotation
process.
C. Mixed datasets
To address the generalization capabilities of our models we
merged different datasets for training. Additionally, we used
United States (US) voters’ registration data [20] to increase
the diversity of the dataset.
We generated a mixed dataset that was composed of a
combination of 120K lines of the V oters dataset and 50K lines
of the Kaggle dataset. Moreover, we used different validations
ﬁles. For instance, training models with generic datasets (e.g.,
Kaggle) validating with context-speciﬁc datasets (e.g., U.S
DoD contracts or US voters’ registration data).D. Model Training and Evaluation
For all datasets, it was necessary to divide the original
dataset into two. The ﬁrst part for training (70%) and the
second part for validation (30%). After performing the pre-
processing of the datasets, it was possible to proceed to the
model training and evaluation of each tool. Training a model
requires quality data in sufﬁcient amounts. With the manual-
labeling (also known as gold-labeling) complete, it is possible
to process with the model training. For each tool, the default
settings were kept unchanged.
After training the model, it is necessary to evaluate the
models’ performance. This is, assess how well it predicts
entities using datasets that it has never processed before. For
that, we provide each model with validation datasets which
are equally labeled, as the training datasets. Each model
then classiﬁes the entities in the validation dataset and then
compares the results to the actual tag that corresponds to each
entity.
E. Metrics
Following the previous procedures, after the model evalua-
tion is completed, it is possible to determine the precision,
recall, accuracy, and F1scores of each NER model. This
provides the necessary information to analyze and discuss not
only the models’ performance but the respective capability of
identifying PII.
To analyze and evaluate the performance of the NLP tools
and respective NER system, it is necessary to identify the
number of True Positives (TP), True Negatives (TN), False
Positives (FP) and False Negatives (FN) derived from the
model classiﬁcation. Such values allow the computation of the
Precision and Recall of the models and ultimately the F1score
(a harmonic mean of the two).
The time spent on training each model, as well as the num-
ber of iterations (also known as epochs) were also registered.
With these values, it is also possible to assess the models’
training performance in terms of speed and optimization
capabilities.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The following section describes the results obtained in the
different parts of the experimental work.
A. Generic Data
Figure 1 shows the results of the three NLP tools with
generic data partitioned in different sizes. NLTK obtained a
F1score of 0.47 using the smallest portion of the dataset
(2.5%). Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy reached approximately
0.65. The entire dataset (100%) achieved the best results:
NLTK achieved approximately 0.67, while Stanford CoreNLP
and spaCy obtained 0.84 and 0.86, respectively. There was no
signiﬁcant difference between the 20%-sized dataset and the
larger ones that follow. The F1score difference between the
20%-sized dataset and the full dataset is between 0.03 and
0.05, between Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy.