00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
2.50%5%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%F1 Scores
NLTKStanfordSpacy (<500 iter)Spacy (500 iter)Fig. 1. F 1Scores (NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy)
In our experiments, the worst performance was NLTK.
On the other hand, although Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy
achieved similar results, the best performance was achieved
with spaCy, although with a small margin. The results indicate
that without any comprehensive tuning of the model training
settings, spaCy provides the best results for F1-Score. Addi-
tionally, we observed than training the models for less than
500 iterations provides similar results and requires much less
training time.
Regarding training time, NLTK was the fastest. The elapsed
time was 2 seconds for the smallest dataset and 75 seconds
for the largest dataset. Stanford CoreNLP takes approximately
10 minutes to train the smallest dataset. On the other hand, it
takes approximately 120 minutes to train the largest dataset.
The training time with spaCy differs according to the number
of training iterations. Setting a maximum of 500 iterations,
the training time for the largest dataset was 6000 minutes.
However, when the number of iterations is reduced to approx-
imately half, the same dataset size takes only 2000 minutes
and the F1scores are very similar. Therefore, it is possible
to achieve good results while spending less time training.
According to spaCy’s documentation, developers should ex-
periment with different parameters and ﬁne-tune the model in
order to provide the best results.
B. Publicly Available Data with PII
Figure 2 shows the precision, recall, and F1scores obtained
while evaluating the models that were created from manually-
labeled contracts. It was possible to observe that NLTK’s
best results were approximately 0.45. On the other hand,
Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy reached very similar values
(approximately 0.90). Moreover, the difference between these
two is 0.01, being Stanford CoreNLP the one with better
results in this case.
Regarding the model-training time, the results have shown
that it is not necessary to spend a great amount of time (or
training iterations) to devise a system that is able to correctly
retrieve PII-related entities. The longest session takes approxi-
mately 6500 seconds in spaCy, while Stanford CoreNLP takes
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
NLTKSTANFORDSpaCyF1 Scores
PRECISIONRECALLF1Fig. 2. F 1Scores, Precision and Recall values (NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP
and spaCy)
approximately 1125 seconds and performs similarly in terms
ofF1score .
The less positive aspect is the time necessary for manually
hand-labeling the data fed to the models. Each document took
an average of 4.75 hours of work. The measure indicates the
time spent by one person labeling the entities in the referred
datasets. Afterward, each document was reviewed by at least
one other person for consistency purposes.
It becomes evident that the models perform similarly re-
gardless of having generic or PII-speciﬁc content for training
purposes. By knowing the behavior of the machine learning
algorithms behind such systems, one could say that this should
be the expected outcome. However, the size of the sample
may not fully deﬁne the model’s behavior with other kinds of
data. Nevertheless, we see that with approximately 20 hours
of manual labeling, it is possible to create a model able to
identify entities such as person, city, title, employment details,
and others.
C. Mixed Datasets
Since NLTK and Stanford CoreNLP do not support re-
training, spaCy was the only tool used in this scenario. Figure
3 shows the results obtained while evaluating models using
datasets from different domains, but also re-training existent
models.
In the ﬁrst case, the model was evaluated with the validation
section of the 20% Kaggle dataset and the results were not
good. On the other hand (second and third case), using a
validation dataset that resembles more to the re-training data
shows better results. Therefore, the results of the re-trained
the models (ﬁrst three cases) suggest that the models tend to
forget previous information and retain more recent data.
The last three cases depicted in Figure 3 indicate the
generalization capabilities of spaCy models are low.
VII. D ISCUSSION
Considering all the collected results, it is now possible
to further discuss the lessons learned throughout the exper-
imental work. Therefore, the following section highlights the