Fig. 3. F 1Scores, Precision and Recall values of the training and re-training
sessions with spaCy
main conclusions of this work, the applicability and utility
of our proposal as a Privacy Enhancing Technology (PET),
and ﬁnally, the potential risks and impacts associated with
performing data analysis with such mechanisms.
A. Lessons Learned
Performing each step of our approach allowed us to derive
several conclusions about our work. Not only regarding NLP,
NER or ML but mainly how the combination of such tech-
nologies can be used for the sake of privacy protection. As
such, we highlight the main lessons and ﬁndings of this work:
1) Dataset Size and Classiﬁcation Accuracy: During the
model training with generic data, there was a much larger
sample available. There was a total of 47959 sentences (the
same as 1.354.149 tokens) readily available and labeled.
Dividing the dataset in smaller chunks allowed us to also verify
when (i.e., dataset size) would the classiﬁcation performance
metric ( F1score ) stabilize.
We concluded that 20% of the total dataset size was already
sufﬁcient to provide results that are very similar to the ones
obtained using the full-sized dataset. The proportion of 20% is
equivalent to 9590 total sentences, and the F1score variation is
0.01, 0.03, and 0.05 for NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP, and spaCy,
respectively.
2) Manual-labeling Effort: Manually labeling data is time-
consuming. Nevertheless, it is essential unless there are other
sources of labeled data. However, since PII is a very sensitive
type of information, it is not as readily available as other types
of data. Therefore, it was possible to realize that it is not
feasible (mainly for smaller teams) to manually label large
amounts of data.
To counter this issue, we consider two possibilities. The ﬁrst
is to assess the feasibility and reliability of using a synthetic
data generator [21]. The second possibility is to recur to
online annotation services. However, the latter still depends
on ﬁnding appropriate and sufﬁcient datasets, which is hard.Nevertheless, future work is likely to pursue one of these two
approaches.
3) Data Diversiﬁcation: As previously stated, it is hard
to retrieve quality data that matches our requirements (e.g.,
containing publicly available PII). It is natural since this is
the type of information that should be kept out of the public
domain or out the reach of any individual. Moreover, we
noticed that the generalization capabilities of the models are
not optimal.
At the same time, based on the entities we deﬁned as
PII, we used 68% of them during the labeling process. This
means we are not fully reaching all of our system’s potential
in terms of types of personal data that are identiﬁed. To
overcome this issue, we expect to employ one of the two
possibilities mentioned before (i.e., synthetic data generator
or online annotation services).
B. Applicability as a Privacy Enhancing Technology
The main objective of the work described in this document
was to devise an approach that combines the aforementioned
technologies and provides an effective Privacy Enhancing
Technology. There are several use cases where our approach
could be effectively enforced. Such use cases are described
next.
1) Data Validation: General data validation is enforced in a
variety of services and ﬁelds. From validation of text boxes in
web pages to more complex processes that ensure the delivery
of clean and validated data. With our approach, systems could
be able to not only validate data types and formats but also
the contents. Systems managing text data inputs (e.g., forms)
would be able to distinguish if the inputs match the actual
description. For instance, our system would be capable of
generating a warning if the ”Comments” ﬁelds (or any other
insensitive ﬁeld) would be ﬁlled with sensitive data (i.e., PII).
This way avoiding the submission of sensitive information in
unnecessary circumstances.
2) PII Discovery: The discovery of PII is closely linked
to the previous point. This allows not only to perform data
validation but also to discover previously unidentiﬁed PII.
This kind of monitoring can be applied in several scenarios.
For instance, transactions or information exchanges between
systems and/or users, documents or databases. In fact, any
other kind of big data processing task, always depending
on the context and the privacy implications. This would
allow the system to warn users (i.e., data owners) or systems
administrators so they could take appropriate actions.
3) Permission Checking: Another advantage of our system
is for permission checking purposes. In this case, permission-
based systems would be able to map and verify if the ac-
tual data matches the textual description of the respective
permissions granted. However, in this particular situation,
it would be necessary to devise and implement an Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) module for the extraction of
the meaning of such permissions. In systems where there no
such textual descriptions of the permissions, it is possible to