Using NLP and Machine Learning to Detect Data
Privacy Violations
Paulo Silva, Carolina Gonc ¸alves, Carolina Godinho, Nuno Antunes, Marilia Curado
CISUC, Department of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
pmgsilva@dei.uc.pt, [mariapg,godinho]@student.dei.uc.pt, [nmsa,marilia]@dei.uc.pt
Abstract —Privacy concerns are constantly increasing in differ-
ent sectors. Regulations such as the EU’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) are pressuring organizations to handle the
individual’s data with reinforced caution. As information systems
deal with increasingly large amounts of personal data in essential
services, there is a lack of mechanisms to help organizations in
protecting the involved data subjects.
In this paper, we propose and evaluate the use of Named Entity
Recognition as a way to identify, monitor and validate Personally
Identiﬁable Information. In our experiments, we used three of
the most well-known Natural Language Processing tools (NLTK,
Stanford CoreNLP, and spaCy). First, we assess the effectiveness
of the tools with a generic dataset. Then, machine learning models
are trained and evaluated with datasets built on data that contain
personally identiﬁable information.
The results show that models’ performance was highly positive
in accurately classifying both generic and more context-speciﬁc
data. We observe the relationship between the datasets’ training
size and respective performance and estimate the appropriate size
for model training within this context. Furthermore, we discuss
how our proposal can effectively act as a Privacy Enhancing
Technology as well as the potential risks and associated impacts.
Index Terms —Privacy Violations, Machine Learning, Natural
Language Processing, Personally Identiﬁable Information
I. I NTRODUCTION
Privacy concerns are becoming more evident in most various
sectors. Recent data breaches and privacy scandals have likely
triggered discussion, more speciﬁc policy-making and further
research within the area. To comply with regulations and efﬁ-
ciently increase privacy assurances, it is necessary to develop
mechanisms that can not only provide such privacy assurances
but also with increased automation and reliability. In the
scope of data privacy, the automated monitoring of Personally
Identiﬁable Information (PII) can effectively be measured in
terms of reliability while being properly automated at the same
time.
Certain public or private organizations are legally bound to
release contractual information, to publish anonymized data
or to store sensitive data. Such data may contain sensitive
information (e.g., persons’ names, addresses, identiﬁcation
details, ﬁnancial or employment information) about not only
organizations but individuals as well. The data should be
autonomously and effectively monitored not only due to its
nature but also its size when considering big data. As the data
can be released in an unstructured format (i.e., text), the usageofMachine Learning (ML) naturally qualiﬁes for this task.
Within the ML domain, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
andNamed Entity Recognition (NER) allow for a transparent
monitoring and detection of PII, thus uncovering potential
privacy violations.
In this work, we start by analyzing three NLP tools regard-
ing their characteristics and capabilities. Further on, we used
a generic publicly available dataset to assess the performance
of the NLP tools. It was possible to observe that the F1score
of our models was approximately 90% in the best cases. Then,
we searched for data-sets that contained any type of publicly
available PII like names, addresses, contract numbers or other
related types (e.g., publicly released contracts). Moreover,
we manually tagged the entities to train the models. We
discovered that in the best cases, the F1scores were equally
high, with approximately 90% score. Finally, we assessed the
generalization capabilities of the models. Following, a list of
our main contributions:
1) Evaluation of NLP tools’ performance with general-
purpose and multi-dimension data-sets;
2) Manual labeling (gold-standard) of publicly available
datasets with entities such as names, address, employ-
ment, organizations, and others;
3) Analysis of NLP tools’ performance on correctly retriev-
ing entities classiﬁed as PII on publicly available data;
4) Presentation of proof of concept NER models for PII
monitoring and respective discussion of its applicability
as a Privacy Enhancing Technology.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides the necessary background regarding NLP and
the Machine Learning techniques used in NLP. Section III
presents related work in the ﬁeld. Section V explains the
methodology followed, provides a comparison of the features
and characteristics of the three NLP tools used, the datasets
used and metrics. Section VI presents the experimental results
obtained. Section VII discusses the lessons learned and the
applicability of our proposal. Section VIII concludes the paper
and highlights the main ﬁndings.
II. B ACKGROUND
NLP is a branch of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and ML
that helps computers understand, interpret and manipulate
human language. NLP pipelines usually start by performing