IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2020129
© 2020                                  IMIA and Georg Thieme Verlag KG
Advancing Medical Imaging Informatics by 
Deep Learning-Based Domain Adaptation
Anirudh Choudhary*1, Li Tong*2, Yuanda Zhu3, May D. Wang1, 2, 3
1 Department of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA
2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University, GA, USA
3 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA
Summary
Introduction: There has been a rapid development of deep 
learning (DL) models for medical imaging. However, DL requires a large labeled dataset for training the models. Getting large-scale labeled data remains a challenge, and multi-center data -
sets suffer from heterogeneity due to patient diversity and varying imaging protocols. Domain adaptation (DA) has been developed to transfer the knowledge from a labeled data domain to a relat -
ed but unlabeled domain in either image space or feature space. 
DA is a type of transfer learning (TL) that can improve the perfor -
mance of models when applied to multiple different datasets. 
Objective : In this survey, we review the state-of-the-art DL-
based DA methods for medical imaging. We aim to summarize recent advances, highlighting the motivation, challenges, and 
opportunities, and to discuss promising directions for future work 
in DA for medical imaging.
Methods: We surveyed peer-reviewed publications from leading biomedical journals and conferences between 2017-2020, that reported the use of DA in medical imaging applications, grouping 
them by methodology, image modality, and learning scenarios.
Results: We mainly focused on pathology and radiology as appli-
cation areas. Among various DA approaches, we discussed domain transformation (DT) and latent feature-space transformation (LFST). We highlighted the role of unsupervised DA in image segmentation 
and described opportunities for future development. 
Conclusion: DA has emerged as a promising solution to deal with 
the lack of annotated training data. Using adversarial techniques, unsupervised DA has achieved good performance, especially for segmentation tasks. Opportunities include domain transferability, 
multi-modal DA, and applications that benefit from synthetic data.
Keywords
Medical Imaging Informatics, deep learning, domain adaptation, 
domain transformation, latent feature space transformation, 
precision medicine
Yearb Med Inform 2020:129-38
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-17020091   Introduction
Medical imaging informatics utilizes digital 
imaging processing and machine learning (ML) to improve the efficiency, accuracy, and 
reliability of imaging-based diagnosis [1]. 
During the past few years, medical imaging 
informatics has made remarkable progress due to the increasing availability of data and the rapid development of deep learning (DL) techniques [2]. However, fundamental 
challenges hinder the effective deployment 
of deep learning models to clinical settings. 
Annotated medical datasets are limited due to the tedious labeling process [2] and are not easily shared due to privacy concerns [3, 4]. While multicenter datasets can increase the amount of annotated data, these datasets suffer from heterogeneity due to varying hospital procedures and diverse patient 
populations [5, 6]. Due to a distribution 
shift (also known as domain-shift) between the available training dataset and the dataset encountered in clinical practice, pre-trained models trained by one dataset may fail for another dataset. 
1.1   What is Transfer Learning and 
Domain Adaptation
Transfer learning (TL) [7] is a technique 
that applies knowledge learned from one domain and one task to another related 
domain and/or another task, when there 
is insufficient labeled data for traditional 
supervised learning. For medical imaging, a domain usually refers to images or features, 
while the task refers to segmentation, clas
-sification, etc. Mathematically, X and Y being 
random variables, where X is d-dimensional 
feature space with marginal probability dis -
tribution p(X) and Y  is a labeled vector with 
conditional probability distribution p(Y|X), 
we use D ={X, p(X)} to represent domain and T={Y , p̂(Y|X)} to represent task, where p̂  is 
learnt using a function (e.g. neural network). If both source (D
S) and target domains (DT) 
are similar, i.e., DS ~ DT, then DS and DT can 
use the same ML model for similar tasks (T
S~TT). However, if DS≠DT or TS≠TT, the 
ML model trained on the source domain might have decreased performance on the target domain (D
T). TL can be categorized 
into three types based on the relationships between domains and/or tasks:
1. Inductive TL requires some labeled data. 
While the two domains may or may not 
differ (D
S~DT  or DS≠DT), the target and 
source tasks are different (TS≠TT), for e.g. 
3D organ reconstruction across multiple 
anatomies;
2. Transductive TL requires labeled source data and unlabeled target data with re
-
lated domains (DS~DT) and same tasks 
(TS=TT), while the marginal probability 
distributions differ ( p(XS)≠p(XT)), for 
e.g., lung tumor detection across X-Ray 
and computed tomography images;
3. Unsupervised TL does not require labeled data in any domain and has different tasks (T
S≠TT), for e.g. , classifying cancer for 
different anatomies using unlabeled his -
tology images.
Domain Adaptation (DA) is a transductive TL approach that aims to transfer knowledge 
across domains by learning domain-invariant * Equal Contributing First Authors
Published online: 2020-08-21