130
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2020Choudhary et al
transformations, which align the domain 
distributions (see Figure 1-b). DA assumes 
that the source data is labeled, while the target domain can be (a) fully labeled data 
(i.e., supervised setting); (b) a small set of 
labeled data (i.e., semi-supervised setting); 
or (c) completely unlabeled data (i.e., unsu
-
pervised setting). 
1.2   Using Domain Adaptation to 
Improve Model Training in Medical 
Imaging
In biomedical imaging, due to the exis -
tence of multi-modality imaging (e.g ., 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
positron emission tomography (PET)), DA has advantages over conventional semi-supervised learning or unsupervised learning. Cross-modal DA transfers labels 
between distinct, but somewhat related, 
image modalities (e.g ., MRI and computed 
tomography (CT)). Single-modality DA adapts different image distributions within the same modality [8] (Figure 2).1.2.1   Challenge of Limited Training Data
Developing accurate DL models requires large scale training data covering a wide range of input variations. However, in biomedical imaging, due to concerns over patient privacy [3,4] and lack of manual annotation of images by clinical experts [9], few well-labeled data
-
sets are available for training. This situation is worse for rare diseases, where a low number of positive cases lead to significantly unbal
-
anced datasets [10]. 
DA can mitigate the lack of well-anno -
tated data by augmenting target domain data, either by generating synthetic labeled images from source images or aligning source and target image features and training a task network on them [11, 12, 112]. For example, MRI achieves higher 
resolution for soft tissue imaging compared 
to CT [13]. As such, MRI is preferred for neuroimaging, and brain MRI annotations are easily accessible. On the other hand, CT imaging is fast and less expensive and may be preferred in trauma situations [14]. Thus, through DA, annotated MRI scans from historical subjects can be combined with CT to reduce the number of image acquisitions needed. As another example, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) stained images are widely available, while immunohistochemistry (IHC) images, which clearly highlight nu
-
clei via specific biomarkers [15], are not. DA methods can translate multi-stained H&E-stained images to the IHC domain, making nuclei detection easier [16].
1.2.2   Challenge of Dataset Variations
To train robust DL models, many studies rely on images aggregated from multiple institutes such as NCI/NIH The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [17] and Stanford’ s large chest ra
-
diograph dataset, CheXpert [18]. The data in these repositories are heterogeneous due to varying hospital processes (image acquisition platforms or data preparation protocols), dif
-
ferent demographics of patient populations (ethnicity, gender, age), or different patho
-
logical conditions [5]. Specifically, pathology images have stain variations [19] while MRIs are susceptible to varying magnetic fields and contrast agents [20]. Such intra- or in
-
Fig. 1   a) Transfer learning (TL) and its different types; b) Overview of domain adaptation; c) Organization of this survey paper.