IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2020131
Advancing Medical Imaging Informatics by Deep Learning-Based Domain Adaptation
ter-dataset variations cause the training and 
test dataset to have different distributions, resulting in a domain-shift which impacts model generalization [21, 22]. Diversifying 
the training data by creating larger datasets is a 
possible solution, but recent medical imaging studies [21, 23, 24] have shown that it does not guarantee improved generalization. DA methods try to minimize the dataset variation, while retaining the distinguishing aspects 
for task classifier, and have been shown to 
generalize well in image segmentation tasks for multiple modalities [25-27].
The organization of the survey paper is 
illustrated in Figure 1-c. Section 2 introduces our survey methodology in identifying and selecting relevant medical imaging studies. Section 3 presents various DL-based frame
-
works in the DA literature and the current best practices for medical imaging. Section 4 summarizes the current DA challenges and future opportunities. 2   Materials and Methods
In this survey, we examined publications between 2017-2020. We considered the pro
-
ceedings of leading peer-reviewed journals and conferences, including IEEE Transactions 
on Medical Imaging, the International Con
-
ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI), Medical Image Analysis (Elsevier), IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), and the International 
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning (MIDL). Additionally, we identi
-
fied a few relevant works from arXiV and PubMed, which were not found in review 
proceedings. Our search keywords included ‘Domain Adaptation’, ‘Transfer Learning’,’ Cross Modality’, ‘Multimodal’ and ‘Medical Image Adaptation’, and ‘Medical Images’. We found that radiology and pathology were the most common application areas (characteris
-
tics of our results are illustrated in Figure 3-a and Figure 3-c). Cross-modality segmentation is observed more extensively in radiology compared to other areas. MRI, CT, and PET maintain better relative morphological-con
-
sistency of organs and provide complementa -
ry information for disease detection [30]. On the other hand, histopathology with smaller objects, such as nuclei, are prone to artifacts during cross-modal translation [31].
3   Deep Learning-based 
Domain Adaptation
DL-based DA is achieved using various 
representation learning strategies such as aligning the domain distributions, learning Fig. 2   a) Summary of domain adaptation methodologies employed in medical imaging; b) Different scenarios encountered in cross-modality [16, 28] and single-modality [25, 29] domain adaptation.