Pareto Multi-Task Learning
Xi Lin1, Hui-Ling Zhen1, Zhenhua Li2, Qingfu Zhang1, Sam Kwong1
1City University of Hong Kong,2Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
xi.lin@my.cityu.edu.hk, huilzhen@um.cityu.edu.hk, zhenhua.li@nuaa.edu.cn
{qingfu.zhang, cssamk}@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
Multi-task learning is a powerful method for solving multiple correlated tasks simul-
taneously. However, it is often impossible to ﬁnd one single solution to optimize
all the tasks, since different tasks might conﬂict with each other. Recently, a novel
method is proposed to ﬁnd one single Pareto optimal solution with good trade-off
among different tasks by casting multi-task learning as multiobjective optimization.
In this paper, we generalize this idea and propose a novel Pareto multi-task learning
algorithm (Pareto MTL) to ﬁnd a set of well-distributed Pareto solutions which
can represent different trade-offs among different tasks. The proposed algorithm
ﬁrst formulates a multi-task learning problem as a multiobjective optimization
problem, and then decomposes the multiobjective optimization problem into a
set of constrained subproblems with different trade-off preferences. By solving
these subproblems in parallel, Pareto MTL can ﬁnd a set of well-representative
Pareto optimal solutions with different trade-off among all tasks. Practitioners can
easily select their preferred solution from these Pareto solutions, or use different
trade-off solutions for different situations. Experimental results conﬁrm that the
proposed algorithm can generate well-representative solutions and outperform
some state-of-the-art algorithms on many multi-task learning applications.
1 Introduction
Figure 1: Pareto MTL can ﬁnd a set
of widely distributed Pareto solutions
with different trade-offs for a given MTL.
Then the practitioners can easily select
their preferred solution(s).Multi-task learning (MTL) [ 1], which aims at learning
multiple correlated tasks at the same time, is a popular
research topic in the machine learning community. By
solving multiple related tasks together, MTL can further
improve the performance of each task and reduce the
inference time for conducting all the tasks in many real-
world applications. Many MTL approaches have been
proposed in the past, and they achieve great performances
in many areas such as computer vision [ 2], natural lan-
guage processing [3] and speech recognition [4].
Most MTL approaches are proposed for ﬁnding one sin-
gle solution to improve the overall performance of all
tasks [ 5,6]. However, it is observed in many applications
that some tasks could conﬂict with each other, and no
single optimal solution can optimize the performance of
all tasks at the same time [7]. In real-world applications,
MTL practitioners have to make a trade-off among differ-
ent tasks, such as in self-driving car [ 8], AI assistance [ 9]
and network architecture search [10, 11].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.