How to combine different tasks together and make a proper trade-off among them is a difﬁcult
problem. In many MTL applications, especially those using deep multi-task neural networks, all tasks
are ﬁrst combined into a single surrogate task via linear weighted scalarization. A set of ﬁxed weights,
which reﬂects the practitioners’ preference, is assigned to these tasks. Then the single surrogate task
is optimized. Setting proper weights for different tasks is not easy and usually requires exhaustive
weights search. In fact, no single solution can achieve the best performance on all tasks at the same
time if some tasks conﬂict with each other.
Recently, Sener and Koltun [ 12] formulate a multi-task learning problem as a multi-objective opti-
mization problem in a novel way. They propose an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd one Pareto optimal
solution among different tasks for a MTL problem. However, the MTL problem can have many (even
an inﬁnite number of ) optimal trade-offs among its tasks, and the single solution obtained by this
method might not always satisfy the MTL practitioners’ needs.
In this paper, we generalize the multi-objective optimization idea [ 12] and propose a novel Pareto
Multi-Task Learning (Pareto MTL) algorithm to generate a set of well-representative Pareto solutions
for a given MTL problem. As shown in Fig. 1, MTL practitioners can easily select their preferred
solution(s) among the set of obtained Pareto optimal solutions with different trade-offs, rather than
exhaustively searching for a set of proper weights for all tasks.
The main contributions of this paper are:1
We propose a novel method to decompose a MTL problem into multiple subproblems with
different preferences. By solving these subproblems in parallel, we can obtain a set of
well-distributed Pareto optimal solutions with different trade-offs for the original MTL.
We show that the proposed Pareto MTL can be reformulated as a linear scalarization
approach to solve MTL with dynamically adaptive weights. We also propose a scalable
optimization algorithm to solve all constrained subproblems with different preferences.
Experimental results conﬁrm that the proposed Pareto MTL algorithm can successfully ﬁnd
a set of well representative solutions for different MTL applications.
2 Related Work
Multi-task learning (MTL) algorithms aim at improving the performance of multiple related tasks by
learning them at the same time. These algorithms often construct shared parameter representation to
combine multiple tasks. They have been applied in many machine learning areas. However, most
MTL algorithms mainly focus on constructing shared representation rather than making trade-offs
among multiple tasks [5, 6].
Linear tasks scalarization, together with grid search or random search of the weight vectors, is the
current default practice when a MTL practitioner wants to obtain a set of different trade-off solutions.
This approach is straightforward but could be extremely inefﬁcient. Some recent works [ 7,13] show
that a single run of an algorithm with well-designed weight adaption can outperform the random
search approach with more than one hundred runs. These adaptive weight methods focus on balancing
all tasks during the optimization process and are not suitable for ﬁnding different trade-off solutions.
Multi-objective optimization [ 14] aims at ﬁnding a set of Pareto solutions with different trade-offs
rather than one single solution. It has been used in many machine learning applications such as
reinforcement learning [ 15], Bayesian optimization [ 16,17,18] and neural architecture search [ 10,19].
In these applications, the gradient information is usually not available. Population-based and gradient-
free multi-objective evolutionary algorithms [ 20,21] are popular methods to ﬁnd a set of well-
distributed Pareto solutions in a single run. However, it can not be used for solving large scale and
gradient-based MTL problems.
Multi-objective gradient descent [ 22,23,24] is an efﬁcient approach for multi-objective optimization
when gradient information is available. Sener and Koltun [ 12] proposed a novel method for solving
MTL by treating it as multi-objective optimization. However, similar to the adaptive weight methods,
this method tries to balance different tasks during the optimization process and does not have a
systematic way to incorporate trade-off preference. In this paper, we generalize it for ﬁnding a set of
well-representative Pareto solutions with different trade-offs among tasks for MTL problems.
1The code is available at: https://github.com/Xi-L/ParetoMTL
2