Energies 2021 ,14, 5364 9 of 17
blockage and interruption costs under varying network nodes. Therefore, such a solution
increases the ratio of anonymous calls of route maintenance and route re-adjustment.
Furthermore, such solutions do not determine the reliability of wireless channels under a
dynamic environment, which results in the inability to transmit sensors’ data on a robust
route. Accordingly, the most processing time is wasted in computing the optimal route
and leads to high data delay. However, the proposed AI-EPP algorithm separates the
IoT network into various regions using hop count and network data is transmitted by
multi-tiers. Further, it minimizes the route breakages and the re-establishment of alternate
routes in case of a high data generation rate. Moreover, it efﬁciently manages wireless links’
and their available capacity for the delivery of sensitive data on time.
In Figures 7 and 8, the experimental analysis presents the improvement in terms of
energy consumption of proposed AI-EPP by 28% and 30% than the existing solutions. This
is due to selecting the most competent nodes in terms of resource as cluster heads with the
least transmission distance to both centroid and BS. The proposed AI-EPP offers a graph-
based technique based on dividing the nodes into different clusters, reducing the proportion
of energy consumption on the node level. The public key certiﬁcate-based cryptography
mechanism in the proposed AI-EPP signiﬁcantly reduces the chances of intrusions for re-
directing the data packets towards prohibited points and decreases the unnecessary energy
consumption of nodes. The proposed solution also exploits the lightweight computing
functions for providing data security and avoids the chances for a malicious node to
generate high intrusion on the transmission channels. In Figures 9 and 10, the experimental
analysis shows that the proposed AI-EPP reduces the ratio of malicious packets by 40%
and 37% compared to existing solutions. This is due to the proposed AI-EPP algorithm
incorporating the public key-based digital certiﬁcates for routing nodes, and accordingly,
only the authorized nodes are eligible for data transmission. The computed trust value
in the proposed AI-EPP is based on the nodes’ local information rather than the global
facts of the entire network ﬁeld that signiﬁcantly increases the strength for identifying the
malicious nodes with nominal cost. Furthermore, AI-EPP offers centralized authority for
digital certiﬁcates’ issuance and manages data routing, minimizing malicious activities.
Figures 11 and 12 illustrate the analysis of the proposed AI-EPP algorithm with
other solutions in terms of runtime overhead. The results have proven its signiﬁcant
improvement by 33% and 21%, respectively. It is due to providing the minimum routing
cost solution in determining the optimal routes for medical data. In addition, a graph-
based approach imposes the least overheads on exchanging the control messages among
sensors and increases the routes’ strength. Moreover, the BS acts as a central authority to
provide the selected routes’ authorization and avoid the extra messages among neighbors
to negotiate. Unlike other solutions that enforce high control overhead for achieving data
security, the proposed AI-EPP algorithm preserves privacy among medical sensors using
the least computational-powered exclusive-OR function. Figures 13 and 14 demonstrate
the performance analysis of the proposed AI-EPP algorithm than existing solutions for link
disconnectivity under a varying number of nodes. It is seen that the AI-EPP algorithm
improved by 13% and 17%, respectively. The cost function operates on multiple factors and
each time its archives optimal data routing even in the presence of network threats. The
symmetric digital certiﬁcates offer trustworthiness criteria for mutual authentication among
nodes with the collaboration BS. Unlike other solutions that impose an unbalanced load on
routing nodes, the proposed AI-EPP algorithm efﬁciently utilizes the link performance in
terms of interference and strength of the transmission system. Figures 15 and 16 depict
the performance analysis of the complexity for the AI-EPP algorithm against an existing
solution. To analyze the complexity, we estimate the processing time while requesting the
needed data from the application user and obtain the process data back to their ends. It is
seen that the proposed solution reduces the processing time by 37% and 23% as compared
to other solutions. This is due because it optimizes the communication services for time and
constraint resources. Furthermore, ﬂooding of control messages is reduced that signiﬁcantly
decreased the complexity time for data processing. Moreover, BS performed the role of