Energies 2021 ,14, 5364 7 of 17
authority (CA) and can be valuable for two-way mutual authentication along with privacy-
preserving routing. All the selected cluster heads must be registered with BS and obtained
digital certiﬁcates. Without the digital certiﬁcate, the particular cluster head can not
participate in the routing phase. The registration and veriﬁcation phases consist of the
following steps.
Cluster head igenerates a secret key Skand shared it with BS over the secure channel.
It embedded Skwith identity ID, timestamp Tsand create a request packet Req p(ID,Sk,U).
The Req pis forwarded to BS for issuing digital certiﬁcates. The Req pis encrypted using a
master secret key of MS kof BS as given in Equation (4).
E(MS k(IDjjTsjjU)+r0 (4)
where r0denotes the random number.
Upon receiving the Req pfrom cluster head, BS ﬁrst veriﬁes identities IDs from its
global table, and accordingly, it generates the certincluding RSA signature [ 44]S0to verify
its authenticity as given in Equation (5).
BS!i:cert(ID,Ts,Sk,S0) (5)
After obtaining the BS certiﬁcates, the cluster heads iand jexchange their certiﬁcates
with each other to prove two-way mutual authentication before transmitting. Furthermore,
the digital certiﬁcates are usable for only the particular period Dt, and afterward, the cluster
heads are required to resend Req ptowards BS for the issuance of cert.
In addition, the r0is useful to prevent the malicious node from resending the Req p
packet towards BS. Such a mechanism in the proposed algorithm prevents the replay
threat and ensures reliable message forwarding between routing nodes. Further, digital
certiﬁcates are digitally signed by the master secret key of BS MS kthat indicates its validity.
Before transmitting the routing data, both clusters heads iand i+1exchange certwith
each other. Upon receiving, they are decrypted to recover the secret keys Skas given in
Equation (6).
Sk:D(cert(MS k),i) (6)
After the completion of the registration and mutual veriﬁcation phases, the block of
data messages M0,M1,. . ..,MnMset as encrypted blocks Ciindependently by using
Skand XoRfunction as given in Equation (7).
Ci=MSk (7)
The cluster head i+1is selected from the chain and decodes the incoming encrypted
blocks with the same Sk. Later, it performs the same hashing procedure to generate
Ci+1with its actual data message Mandoperation. Furthermore, received hash code
Ciis linked to ensuring blockchain and distributed security Eto support data integrity as
given in Equation (8).
E=Xor(Ci, . . . . Cn) (8)
Afterward, the pattern of Ciblocks are encrypted using MS kof BS and forwarded to
cloud systems. Upon receiving, the decryption function is applied to integrate the Ciand
MS k.
Algorithm 1 gives the ﬂow of the proposed work.