Energies 2021 ,14, 5364 2 of 17
through some developing next-generation wireless techniques. However, the traditional
data analysis techniques are incompatible to extract useful health information; therefore,
most academics are focusing on intelligent methods with the internet of medical things
for a precise and thorough exploration of patients’ sensitive data. Health services widely
adopt the internet of medical items due to its signiﬁcant impact on diagnosing disease
and facilitating treatments with the least communication cost. The medical applications
are comprised of three main phases. In the ﬁrst phase, wearable sensors collected the pa-
tients’ data and forwarded them to a local administrator or coordinator. The second phase
communicates the patients’ data to the server or sinks node with the intermediate devices
over the wireless transmission system. Finally, the medical data is stored on some cloud
service providers; thus, medical professionals judge the patients’ condition and provides
suitable actions. In the ﬂat-based structure with the same processing, receiving, forward-
ing, and storage capabilities. Moreover, in the ﬂat-based structure, many researchers
have been proposed a cluster-based solution [ 10–12] to divide the medical sensors into
different clusters with one cluster head in each cluster. Some applications are also based
on a hierarchical structure [ 13–15], and the data aggregation capabilities are separated
based on different levels. The massive medical data is stored on cloud servers and moves
wirelessly over the insecure forwarding medium. Therefore, secure and privacy-preserving
solutions for sustainable systems are demanding factors and need to maintain the resources
efﬁciently [ 16–19]. The purpose of this research work is to explore blockchain, which is an
emerging technology [ 20,21] to improve the performance of the healthcare system against
security extortions with efﬁcient data management. The technology of blockchain is a
distributed database, which is comprised of various blocks that are linked together using
irreversible chains. A block is a single element, and it is composed of information related to
a speciﬁc transaction. Recently, blockchain is an emerging technology and has been applied
by many researchers to secure conﬁdential data over insecure transmission systems [ 22,23].
The main contributions of our proposed solution are:
i. It presents a graph-oriented model for collecting and distributing network informa-
tion with an accessible and efﬁcient system.
ii. Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques are utilized for producing the least error-prone
communication with decreasing delays by avoiding unnecessary malicious trafﬁc.
iii. A reliable and authentic sharing system is modeled against threats by supporting
symmetric digital certiﬁcates.
iv. The distributed security is provided by exploiting blockchain technology in which
data is encrypted and dispersed in a decentralized model.
v. The measurement of the proposed work with a set of simulation-based experi-
ments has demonstrated signiﬁcant performance with other schemes in a trustless
environment.
The rest of the research article is organized as follows. A discussion of related work is
presented in Section 2. Section 3 offers and explains the main components of the proposed
algorithm. Section 4 analyzes the performance of the proposed algorithm than existing
work through simulations. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
In wireless technology using IoT [ 24–26], several smart sensors and physical objects
are distributed in smart cities to support real-time systems. Furthermore, one or more Base
Station (BS), which has unlimited resources, is connected to the internet, facilitating many
application users simultaneously. In a wireless sensor network (WSN)-based medical sys-
tem, the Denial of Service (DOS) attacks are categorized into three different approaches, i.e.,
standalone, distributive/cooperative, and hierarchical [ 27,28]. Each sensor node has been
equipped with its defense agent in a standalone approach and can only identify the attack
by itself. In the distributed defense approach, a global defense system is generated based on
various agents’ collaboration. Its performance is better than the standalone defense system
and is usually preferred for ﬂat topologies. In a hierarchical defense approach, the cluster