Energies 2021 ,14, 5364 4 of 17
privacy. The authors of [ 42] developed a secure data collection scheme for IoT-based
healthcare systems named SecureData, which aims to cope with data security. It comprises
four main layers. It utilizes a lightweight ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware-
based cipher and secret cipher share algorithms. For the cloud computing layer, the
proposed solution applied a distributed database technique that includes several cloud
data servers to ensure privacy for patients’ data. The performance results are validated
through simulations and it is proven that the proposed solution is signiﬁcantly efﬁcient for
saving security risks for IoT-based healthcare applications.
IoT technology is widely utilized for data collection and offers heterogeneous services
for healthcare systems. The public health data collecting a vast number of patient’s data,
which need to be processed and evaluated to diagnose diseases for a timely and appropriate
cure. However, due to the restricted structure and rapid collapse of medical sensors’, there
are many communication threats that expose patients’ information, therefore, it is a demand
for trustworthiness with a secured network. It is also noticed that most of the existing
solution increases the management cost in sustaining and handling the network data.
Moreover, many secured solutions have been developed for IoT networks and tackle
with privacy-preserving, but with the unnecessary complexity and runtime overhead.
Therefore, this research article presents an AI-enabled privacy-preserving with big data
transferring using blockchain technology, which aims to offer a secured network and
attain data conﬁdentiality with optimized services. It also enhances the availability of
network resources and provides reliability for public health data without compromising
the constraint parameters and communication links.
3. Proposed Algorithm
In this section, we explain the detailed overview of our proposed algorithm. The
proposed algorithm is based on two main components. The ﬁrst component uses a graph-
based modeling and artiﬁcial intelligence technique to arrange the network for stable
communication, which is comprised of regions with cluster heads. The sub-graphs are also
constructed to reduce the complexity and congestion in the forming of consistent routes
from local sensors to sink nodes and eliminate the redundant links. On the other hand, the
second component presents an authentication phase based on symmetric digital certiﬁcates,
which increases the network strength against unauthorized nodes. Moreover, data security
for integrity is obtained using blockchain technology, which leads to trustworthy commu-
nication in distributed approach and ensures a sustainable healthcare system. Figure 1
demonstrates the main components of the proposed algorithm. Moreover, its communica-
tion ﬂow is depicted in Figure 2. For the convenience of describing the proposed solution,
the used notations are summarized in Table 1.
Energies  2021 , 14, 5364 5 of 18 
 
  
Figure 1. Components of the proposed algorithm. 
 
Figure 2. Communication flow of the AI-EPP algorithm. 
Table 1. List of notations.  
Notations Definitions 
𝐺(𝑁, 𝜖)  graph with N nodes and 𝜖 edges 
𝐺ᇱ(𝑁ᇱ,𝜖ᇱ) The Subgraph with  𝑁ᇱ And 𝜖ᇱ edges 
𝑊௜ Weighted edges 
𝑇(𝑣) trust value 
𝑁𝐸 ௜ residual energy 
𝑁𝐷 ௜ node density 
𝑇𝑥 transmission power 
𝑅𝑆𝑆𝐼  received signal strength interference 
𝑀௞ beacon message threshold 
𝑑 distance AI-Enabled PRIVACY-PREServing with Big Data TransferringGraph modelingTrusted 
establishmentDistribited data 
security
Figure 1. Components of the proposed algorithm.