Energies 2021 ,14, 5364 3 of 17
head is responsible for detecting an attack for its members and performing appropriate
security actions with efﬁcient energy efﬁciency [ 29,30]. The authors [ 31] proposed intrusion
detection in homogeneous and heterogeneous WSNs, proposing two detection models for
classifying the malicious nodes. The detection probability is based on the distance traveled
by the malicious node, the likelihood of detecting the malicious node, and the average
distance traveled by the malicious node parameters. In [ 32], authors have proposed a
multi-level intrusion detection system based on an immune theory known as Danger
theory. The proposed solution uses the various functions of immune cells to design the
multi-level intrusion detection system. The proposed solution is based on battery power,
message or data size, and data transfer parameters to detect malicious activities.
Furthermore, a few nodes were placed near BS to perform immune nodes’ roles and
speciﬁc processing capabilities. In [ 33], the authors proposed an improved secure authenti-
cation and data encryption scheme for medical systems using the Internet of things (IoT). It
provides user anonymity and avoids network threats of replay and password/sensed data
disclosure. Moreover, the authors modiﬁed the authentication process and decreasing the
redundancy in the design phase. It was veriﬁed that the proposed solution is more efﬁcient
in terms of performance than other schemes. The authors of [ 34] established an association
with body sensors using tokens, and afterward, a secret key is shared to provide data
security. The proposed solution encrypts and decrypts the health data with two phases of
the authentication method using the private key. The collected data is forwarded to the
server using blockchain technology. The security analysis described the feasibility of the
proposed solution for securing healthcare information. In [ 35], the authors proposed a user
authentication scheme and data transmission mechanism to provide privacy and security.
It offers efﬁcient monitoring facilitates to medical experts and comprehensive treatment
to patients. It uses smart cards and passwords, so only authorized medical experts can
access patient information. In addition, a secure cryptosystem has been applied to form a
data transmission mechanism. Furthermore, the proposed work can cope with common
network attacks. The authors in [ 36], proposed a ﬁne-grained EHR access control scheme
and provides a secure standard model. The proposed solution generates ofﬂine encrypted
data before knowing EHR data and access policies and it offers secure communication for
the mobile cloud. The extensive simulation experiments are performed and it is proven
effective performance in the comparison of other solutions. In [ 37], the authors emphasize
ﬂexible compute-intensive task ofﬂoading to a local cloud, which aims to improve the
network performance for energy consumption, cost, and operation speed. They proposed
a fruit ﬂy optimization-based task ofﬂoading (FOTO) algorithm, which improves the data
ofﬂoading and allocation of network resources with affordable energy consumption. Its
performance is veriﬁed in terms of different realistic factors and demonstrates a signiﬁcant
improvement from other existing work.
The secure knowledge and cluster-based intrusion detection mechanism proposed
in [38], aims to handle generated intrusions. It stores the particular events triggered
by the node in the network ﬁeld, and the knowledge base is situated on the BS. Based
on inference engine cluster heads, the proposed solution stores the events data into the
knowledge base. The authors of [ 39] proposed intrusion detection based on state context
and hierarchical trust in WSN. The proposed solution is based on the dynamic state context
and hierarchical trust of sensor nodes. In the proposed solution, the trust evaluation and
the self-adaptation detection threshold are used to detect malicious nodes’ behavior. In [ 40],
the authors developed a biometric-based security framework using resource-constrain-
oriented and wearable sensors. It extracts the heartbeats from ECG signals and analyses
time-domain-based biometric features. The proposed framework is signiﬁcantly optimizing
the security and transmission for medical applications. In [ 41], the authors explored
privacy-protected data collection challenges and presented a practical framework called
Privacy Protector, patient privacy-protected data collection. It consists of secret sharing and
shares repairing for compromised and lost patients’ information. The proposed framework
uses a distributed database, which comprises multiple cloud servers and guaranteed data