Validation accuracy % Validation accuracy % Test accuracy % 
Best test model Best validation 
model Figure 3: (Left) Validation vs. test accuracy in NASBench-
101. (Right) Zoomed in on the highly accurate region. Each
model (point) is the validation accuracy from a single train-
ing run. Test accuracies are averaged over three runs. This
plot demonstrates that even knowing the validation accu-
racy of every possible model is not sufﬁcient to predict
which model will perform best on the testset.
the oracle method would select based on the validation ac-
curacy of 95:15% has a test set accuracy of 94:08%. This
means that the oracle does not select the model with the
highest test set accuracy. The global optimum on the test
set is 94:32%. However, since this model cannot be found
using extensive validation, one should not expect this model
to be found using a well-performing architecture search al-
gorithm. A more reasonable goal is to reliably select a
model that has similar quality to the one selected by the
oracle. Furthermore, it is important to realize that even an
oracle approach has variance. We have three training runs
for each model, which allows us to run multiple variations
of the “oracle”. This simulates the impact of random vari-
ations on the ﬁnal result. Averaged over 100oracle experi-
ments, where in each experiment we randomly select one of
3 validation results, the best validation accuracy has a mean
95:13% and a standard deviation 0:03%. The test accuracy
has a mean of 94:18% and a standard derviation 0:07%.
3.1.2 Random search: a lower bound baseline
Recently, Li et al. [13] questioned whether architecture
search methods actually outperform random search. Be-
cause this depends heavily on the search space and Li et
al.[13] did not investigate the NASBench-101 search space
we need to check this ourselves. Therefore we replicate the
random baseline from NASBench-101 by sampling archi-
tectures without replacement. After training, we pick the
architecture with the highest validation accuracy and report
its result on the test set. Here we observe that even when we
train and validate 2000 models, the gap to the oracle is large
(Figure 6). For random search the average test accuracy is
GCN ClassifierGCN Regressorinaccurate modelsmodelsaccurate modelsaccuraciesFigure 4: Neural Predictor on NASBench-101. It is a cas-
cade of a classiﬁer and a regressor. The classiﬁer ﬁlters out
inaccurate models and the regressor predicts accuracies of
accurate models.
Figure 5: Binary classiﬁer to ﬁlter out inaccurate models in
NASBench-101. In this example, 172models (left) are sam-
pled to cross validate the classiﬁer. The right ﬁgure shows
the performance of the classiﬁer on unseen test models.
93:66% compared to 94:18% for the oracle. This implies
thatthere is a large margin for improvement over ran-
dom search. Moreover, the variance is quite high, with a
standard deviation of 0:25%.
3.1.3 Regularized evolution: a state of the art baseline
In the original NASBench-101 publication, Regularized
Evolution [19] was the best performing method. We repli-
cated those experiments using the open source code and
their hyper-parameter settings (available in the supplemen-
tary material). Regularized evolution is signiﬁcantly bet-
ter than random as shown in Figure 6. However even after
2000 models are trained, it is still clearly worse than the ora-
cle (on average) with an accuracy of 93:97% and a standard
deviation of 0:26%.
3.1.4 Neural Predictor
Having set our baselines, we now describe the precise Neu-
ral Predictor setup and evaluation.
Setting up the GCN The graph representation of a
model is a DAG with up to 7nodes. Each node is
represented by an one-hot code of “[ input ,conv1x1 ,
conv3x3 ,max-pool ,output ]”. The GCN has three
Graph Convolutional layers with the constant node repre-