can be carried out efﬁciently because evaluating a model
using the predictor is cheap. The third step is nothing more
than traditional validation where we only evaluate a well
curated set of Kmodels. While the method outlined above
might seem straightforward, it is very effective:
The Neural Predictor strongly outperforms random
search on NASBench-101. It is also about 22:83times
more sample-efﬁcient than Regularized Evolution, the
best performing method in the NASBench-101 paper.
The Neural Predictor can easily handle different search
spaces. In addition to NASBench-101, we evaluated it
on the ProxylessNAS [4] search space and found that
the predicted architecture is as accurate as Proxyless-
NAS and clearly better than random search.
The architecure selection process uses two of the most
ubiquitous tools from the ML toolbox: random sam-
pling and supervised learning. In contrast, many ex-
isting NAS approaches rely on reinforcement learning,
weight sharing, or Bayesian optimization.
The most computationally intensive components of the
proposed method (training Nmodels in step 1 and K
models in step 3) are highly parallelizable when sufﬁ-
cient computation resources are available.
2. Neural Predictor
The core idea behind the Neural Predictor is that carrying
out the actual training and validation process is the most
reliable way to ﬁnd the best model. The goal of the Neural
Predictor is to provide us with a curated list of promising
models for ﬁnal validation prior to deployment. The entire
Neural Predictor process is outlined below.
Step 1: Build the predictor using Nsamples. We train
Nmodels to obtain a small dataset of (architecture, vali-
dation accuracy) pairs. The dataset is then used to train a
regression model that maps an architecture to the predicted
validation accuracy.
Step 2: Quality prediction. Because architecture eval-
uation using the learned predictor is efﬁcient and trivially
parallelizable, we use it to rapidly predict the accuracies of
a large number of random architectures. We then select the
topKpredicted architectures for ﬁnal validation.
Step 3: Final validation on Ksamples. We train and
validate the top Kmodels in the traditional way. This al-
lows us to select the best model based on the actual valida-
tion accuracy. Even if our predictor is somewhat noisy, this
step allows us to use a more reliable measurement to select
our ﬁnal architecture for deployment.
Training N+Kmodels is by far the most computation-
ally expensive part of the Neural Predictor. If we as-
sume a constant compute budget, NandKare key hyper-
parameters which needs to be set; we will discuss this next.2.1. Hyper-parameters in the Workﬂow
Hyper-parameters for (ﬁnal) model training are al-
ways needed if we train a single model or we perform an
architecture search. In this respect the Neural Predictor is
no different from other methods. We found that using the
same hyper-parameters for all models we train is an effec-
tive strategy, one that was also used in NASBench-101.
Trade-off between NandKfor a ﬁxed budget: If we
increase N, the number of samples used to train the Neu-
ral Predictor, we can expect the predictor to become more
accurate. However, to maintain a ﬁxed compute budget, we
must decrease Kin order to increase N.
IfKis large and the predictor proposes a good set of ar-
chitectures for ﬁnal validation, the precise ranking of these
architecture is not that important.
However, if we use more training data to improve the
predictor, we have a small set of Kmodels for ﬁnal evalua-
tion. In this case, the performance predictor must be able to
reliably identify high-quality models from the search space.
This might be a hard task and it is possible that trying out
more models is more effective than using more data to get a
small improvement in predictive quality. Because it is dif-
ﬁcult to theoretically predict the optimal trade-off, we will
investigate this in the experimental setting.
To ﬁnd a lower bound on Nwe could iteratively increase
Nuntil we observe a good cross-validation accuracy. This
means that contrast to some other methods such as Regu-
larized Evolution [19], ENAS [18], NASNet [27], Proxy-
lessNAS [4], there is no need to repeat the entire search
experiment in order to tune this hyper-parameter. The same
applies to the hyper-parameters and the architecture of the
Neural Predictor itself.
The hyper-parameters of the Neural Predictor can be
optimized by cross-validation using the Ntraining samples.
In contrast, RL or Evolution-based search methods would
require us to collect more training samples in order to try
out a new hyper-parameter conﬁguration. We tried many
options for the architecture of the predictor. Due to space
constraints we will limit our discussion to Graph Convo-
lutional Networks. A comparison against other regression
methods can be found in the supplementary material.
2.2. Modeling by Graph Convolutional Networks
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are good at
learning representations for graph-structured data [11, 22]
such as a neural network architecture. The graph convolu-
tional model we use is based on [11], which assumes undi-
rected graphs. We will modify their approach to handle neu-
ral architectures represented as directed graphs.
We start with a D0-dimensional representation for each
of the Inodes in the graph, giving us an initial feature vec-
torV02RID0. For each node we use a one-hot vec-
tor representing the selected operation. An example for