InferenceTime(ms)TruevalidationaccuracyPredictedaccuracy
TruetestaccuracyInferenceTime(ms)InferenceTime(ms)Figure 10: Comparison between random search, ProxylessNAS and Neural Predictor. Left: Frontier models predicted by
the Neural Predictor. Middle: Validation accuracy of each found frontier models. Right: Test accuracy of each found
frontier model. (Each test accuracy is averaged over 5training runs under different initial weight values. Error bars with 95%
conﬁdence interval are also plotted in the ﬁgure.)
higher than 76%. This demonstrates the generalization of
our Neural Predictor to unseen data.
Finding high quality mobile sized models We now use
the predictor to select frontier models with good trade-offs
between accuracies and inference times. We randomly sam-
pleN=112,000 models with inference times between
75ms and 85ms, and predict their accuracies as shown in
Figure 10 (left). As a sanity check, we also predict the
quality of the ProxylessNAS model. The predicted valida-
tion accuracy is 76:0%which is close to its true validation
accuracy 76:3%.
The next step is selecting KPareto optimal models.
However, because the predictor can make mistakes, we need
a soft version of Pareto optimality. To do so, we sort the
models based on increasing inference time. In the regular
deﬁnition, a model is Pareto optimal if no faster model has
higher quality. In our setup, we deﬁne a model as ”soft-
Pareto optimal” when the predicted accuracy is higher than
the minimum of the previous Jmodels. In our experiments
we set J= 6. This leaves us with 137promising models in
green in Figure 10 (left).
Allk= 137 models are then trained and validated. This
allows us to obtain a traditional Pareto frontier as shown in
Figure 10 (middle). The architectures of those true frontier
models are included in the supplementary material. The
Neural Predictor outperforms the random baseline and
is comparable to ProxylessNAS. Recall that the random
baseline trained 256models. This is the same number of
models we trained in total for our method ( N= 119 models
for training the predictor and K= 137 models selected for
ﬁnal validation). For test set comparisons we train our mod-
els and our reproduction of ProxylessNAS for 360 epochs.
The results are shown in Figure 10 (right).Now we observe
that the gap between the Pareto frontier of the neural pre-dictor and the random baseline is stable on unseen data. To
obtain a frontier for ProxylessNAS, one could run multiple
searches to reduce/increase the inference time. We opt to
reduce the number of ﬁlters in each layer to 0:92to obtain
a faster model. The results show that the Neural Predictor
and ProxylessNAS perform comparably.
4. Discussion and Related Work
The effectiveness of NAS vs random search has been
questioned recently [13]. On NASBench-101 the Neural
Predictor and Regularized Evolution are clearly better than
random search. We also observed that the Neural Predictor
is about 22:83times more efﬁcient than Regularized Evolu-
tion on NASBench-101.
In the ProxylessNAS search space we saw that the Neu-
ral Predictor and ProxylessNAS produce models of similar
quality. We believe that implementing and using the Neu-
ral Predictor is more straightforward but running a single
ProxylessNAS search requires fewer resources. Training
allN+K= 256 models for the entire Neural Predic-
tor experiment took 47.5 times as much compute as a sin-
gle ProxylessNAS search. In practice the gap is actually
much smaller because optimizing the hyper-parameters of
the Neural Predictor has negligible cost but trying out a new
hyper-parameter conﬁguration for ProxylessNAS requires a
full search. On top of that, the Neural Predictor is more
effective at targeting different latency targets than Proxy-
lessNAS, which needs a search per target. Furthermore, in
the ideal setting where we can completely parallelize model
training for the Neural Predictor ( N= 119 models for train-
ing in parallel followed by K= 136 for validation in par-
allel) it would ﬁnish in half the time of a ProxylessNAS
search. Based on this analysis we believe that the Neural
Predictor and ProxylessNAS are complementary. Choosing