viously bad models ﬁrst by predicting whether each model
will achieve an accuracy above 91%. This allows the the
second stage to focus on a narrower accuracy range, which
makes it more reliable.
Both stages share the same GCN architecture but have
different output layers. A classiﬁer trained on these N=
172models has a low False Negative Rate as shown in Fig-
ure 5 (right). This implies that the classiﬁer will ﬁlter out
very few actually good models.
If we only use a single stage, the MSE for the validation
accuracy is 1.95 (averaged over 10 random splits). By in-
troducing the ﬁltering stage this reduces to 0.66. In our ﬁnal
results in in Figure 6 we will also include an evaluation of
the predictor without the ﬁltering stage.
Results using N= 172 (or0:04% of the search space)
for training are shown in Figure 6. We used N= 172
models to train the predictor. Then we vary K, the number
of architectures with the highest predicted accuracies to be
trained and validated to select the best one. Therefore, “the
number of samples” in the ﬁgure equals N+Kfor Neural
Predictor. In Figure 6 (left), our Neural Predictor signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms Regularized Evolution in terms of sam-
ple efﬁciency. On the test set, the mean validation accuracy
is comparable to that of the oracle after about 1000 sam-
ples. The sample efﬁciency in validation accuracy trans-
fers well to test accuracy in terms of both the total num-
ber of trained models in Figure 6 (middle) and wall-clock
time in Figure 6 (right). After 5000 samples, Regularized
Evolution reaches validation and test accuracies of 95:06%
and94:04% respectively; our predictor can reach the same
validation 12:40faster and the same test 22:83faster.
Another advantage we observe is that Neural Predictor has
small search variance.
NvsKand ablation study. We next consider the prob-
lem of choosing an optimal value of Nwhen the total num-
ber of models we’re permitted to train, N+K, is ﬁxed.
Figure 7 summarizes our study on N. A Neural Predictor
underperforms with a very small N(43or86), as it cannot
predict accurately enough which models are interesting to
evaluate. In Figure 3 we have shown that some models are
higher ranked according to validation accuracies than test
accuracies. This can cause the test accuracy to degrade as
we increase K.
Finally, we consider the case where Nis large (e.g., N=
860) butKis small. In this case we clearly see that the
increase in quality of the GCN cannot compensate for the
decrease in evaluation budget.
3.2. ImageNet Experiments
While the NASBench-101 dataset allows us to look at the
behavior in a well controlled environment, it does not allow
us to evaluate whether the approach generalizes to larger
scale problems. It also does not address the issue of ﬁndinghigh quality inference time constrained models. Therefore,
to demonstrate that our approach is more widely applicable
we look at this use case in our second set of experiments on
ImageNet [6] with the ProxylessNAS search space [4]. We
will compare our results to a random baseline and our own
reproduction of the ProxylessNAS search. In this search
space, the goal is to ﬁnd a good model that has an inference
time around 84 ms on a Pixel-1 phone.
Search space The ProxylessNAS search space is illus-
trated in Figure 8. It does not have the cell-based struc-
ture from NASBench-101; it instead requires independent
choices for the individual layers. The layers are divided up
into blocks, each of which has its own ﬁxed resolution and a
ﬁxed number of output ﬁlters. We search over which layers
to skip and what operations to use in each layer. (The ﬁrst
layer of a block is always present.) There are approximately
6:641017models in the search space. Because this search
space is so large, we cannot generate the oracle baseline; we
must instead rely on the random search and ProxylessNAS
re-implementations we discuss next.
3.2.1 Baselines
The random search baseline samples 256 models with
inference times between 75ms and 85ms. All these models
are trained for 90 epochs.Then, we look at which models
are Pareto optimal (i.e. have good tradeoffs between infer-
ence time and validation quality). All Pareto optimal mod-
els were then trained for 360 epochs and evaluated on the
test set. The results are shown in Figure 10. More imple-
mentation details are in the supplementary material.
ProxylessNAS [4] is an efﬁcient architecture search al-
gorithm based on weight sharing and reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). It trains a large neural network where different
paths can be switched on or off to mimic speciﬁc architec-
tures in the search space. The RL controller assumes that for
a single network all decisions can be made independently
(i.e. the probability distribution over architectures is factor-
ized). To train the shared weights of the large model, we
repeat the process of (i) sampling an architecture from the
RL controller and (ii) training it for a single step. To up-
date the RL controller, another batch is sampled. This time
the batch is evaluated on the validation set, and this result
is used in combination with additional information (i.e. the
latency) to compute a reward used to update the RL con-
troller.
In the original publication, ProxylessNAS reports an
accuracy of 74.6% for their best model; our reproduc-
tion of that model achieves 74.9% accuracy. We also re-
implemented the search algorithm itself. By repeating the
search 5 times we obtain an average accuracy of 75.0% and
a variance of 0.1.Since these results are close together we
consider this sufﬁciently good as a basis for comparison for