Noisy Recurrent Neural Networks
Soon Hoe Lim
Nordita, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
and Stockholm University
soon.hoe.lim@su.seN. Benjamin Erichson
University of Pittsburgh
School of Engineering
erichson@pitt.edu
Liam Hodgkinson
ICSI and Department of Statistics
UC Berkeley
liam.hodgkinson@berkeley.eduMichael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
UC Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu
Abstract
We provide a general framework for studying recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
trained by injecting noise into hidden states. Speciﬁcally, we consider RNNs
that can be viewed as discretizations of stochastic differential equations driven by
input data. This framework allows us to study the implicit regularization effect of
general noise injection schemes by deriving an approximate explicit regularizer in
the small noise regime. We ﬁnd that, under reasonable assumptions, this implicit
regularization promotes ﬂatter minima; it biases towards models with more stable
dynamics; and, in classiﬁcation tasks, it favors models with larger classiﬁcation
margin. Sufﬁcient conditions for global stability are obtained, highlighting the
phenomenon of stochastic stabilization, where noise injection can improve stability
during training. Our theory is supported by empirical results which demonstrate
that the RNNs have improved robustness with respect to various input perturbations.
1 Introduction
Viewing recurrent neural networks (RNNs) as discretizations of ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
driven by input data has recently gained attention [ 7,27,16,49]. The “formulate in continuous time,
and then discretize” approach [ 38] motivates novel architecture designs before experimentation, and
it provides a useful interpretation as a dynamical system. This, in turn, has led to gains in reliability
and robustness to data perturbations.
Recent efforts have shown how adding noise can also improve stability during training, and con-
sequently improve robustness [ 35]. In this work, we consider discretizations of the corresponding
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) obtained from ODE formulations of RNNs through the
addition of a diffusion (noise) term. We refer to these as Noisy RNNs (NRNNs). By dropping the
noisy elements at inference time, NRNNs become a stochastic learning strategy which, as we shall
prove, has a number of important beneﬁts. In particular, stochastic learning strategies (including
dropout) are often used as natural regularizers, favoring solutions in regions of the loss landscape with
desirable properties (often improved generalization and/or robustness). This mechanism is commonly
referred to as implicit regularization [40,39,50], differing from explicit regularization where the
loss is explicitly modiﬁed. For neural network (NN) models, implicit regularization towards wider
minima is conjectured to be a prominent ingredient in the success of stochastic optimization [ 67,28].
Indeed, implicit regularization has been linked to increases in classiﬁcation margins [ 47], which can
lead to improved generalization performance [ 51]. A common approach to identify and study implicit
regularization is to approximate the implicit regularization by an appropriate explicit regularizer
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).