14 
 value at the cost of displacing some jobs may well be worth implementing. Social alignment 
simply requires that the balance of the useful and deleterious effects reflects what society would 
choose as the optimal balance. 
 
Social welfare functions  are a widely used concept to weigh benefits and costs that can be 
applied for the ideal social alignment of AI systems. Social welfare functions are a generalization of utility functions to social choices and work in a similar fashion: Given a set of 
possible choices for society, a social welfare function assigns to each choice a welfare score 
that captures how desirable it is for society, and the choice that obtains the highest score is by definition the preferred one that society would adopt. A widely used example are utilitarian (also called Benthamite) welfare functions, which sum up the utilities of all members of society with 
equal weight. A specific case among utilitarian social welfare functions that evaluate 
consumption choices is when individuals are attributed utility functions that are linear in 
consumption—in that case, social welfare is simply the sum of all consumption, and maximizing 
social welfare is equivalent to maximizing economic efficiency, i.e., maximizing total 
consumption without any regard for distributive concerns. Conversely a Rawlsian (or maximin) 
social welfare function captures the desire to maximize the utility of the worst-off member of 
society, reflecting a strong desire for equality. 
 
The analogy to utility functions makes social welfare functions an appealing concept for AI 
developers—utility maximization is a cornerstone of training AI systems. This makes it important 
to be aware of the limitations of social welfare functions. One limitation of social welfare 
functions as commonly used is that they focus on consequentialist specifications of individual 
utility, which may miss other considerations that society views as important for ethical decision 
making, e.g., deontological considerations.
15 Imposing a bad welfare function, even with the 
best of intentions, will create social harm. Another important limitation is that social welfare 
functions pre-suppose a complete set of social preferences that are well-defined over all 
choices, but there are many situations in which this may not be achievable. This is what we will 
turn to next.  
Disagreement and partial social preferences 
Social alignment can only occur where there are well-defined social preferences. However, 
members of society frequently disagree on what are the most desirable choices. Unfortunately, 
there is no general way to compile the preferences of multiple individuals into well-defined and 
rational social preferences over all available choices. Condorcet (1785) observed that 
democratic voting will not in general produce a full set of rational social preferences.16 Arrow 
(1950) showed in his doctoral thesis that this is a general property of all mechanisms to aggregate individual preferences into social preferences, except for a dictatorial rule whereby a 
 
15 Although it is possible to add such considerat ions with a negative weight in consequentialist 
specifications of welfare functions, it is  difficult to determine desirable weights. 
16 Specifically, when three or more people are asked to express their preferences over three or more 
alternative choices in pairwise votes, they frequent ly arrive at outcomes like A > B, B > C and C > A, 
making it impossible to establish a full order of the available social choices.