20 
 surveillance and privacy when surveillance was very labor-intensive and correspondingly costly 
to undertake, so governments focused surveillance only on very high-value targets, such as 
suspected high-value criminals. Legal constraints on mass surveillance would have been 
redundant, given the high cost of surveillance. Now that AI systems can perform many forms of 
surveillance cheaply at large scale, new legal constraints on surveillance activities have become 
necessary.  
More generally, every time a new AI capability is developed, they may bring up new social 
alignment problems that call for new social norms. Aside from privacy norms, additional 
examples in areas that we already touched upon include the need for new norms for AI systems 
that become increasingly adept at manipulating consumers, new fairness norms for AI systems that make high-impact decisions that have hitherto been reserved to humans. As the labor 
market effect of AI and other forms of automation become more severe—and more pernicious 
for workers—there is also a new need for norms for when and how AI developers should 
compensate the exposed workers. Even more starkly, if AI makes human workers economically 
redundant, society will need to establish new norms for how to provide humans with income 
when labor income is no longer an option (see Korinek and Juelfs, 2022).  
Social Alignment Norms Imposed on Whom?  Up until the recent past, governance to ensure 
the social alignment of AI systems has relied entirely on society imposing norms on the 
operators of AI systems, who were in turn charg ed with ensuring the alignment of their systems. 
This case, which we may call social alignment by extension, is illustrated in panel (a) of Figure 2, which employs arrows to indicate that an entity imposes norms on another entity. Such an 
arrangement would be all that is needed if (i) the operator was perfectly aligned with the social 
norms, and (ii) if the direct alignment between the operator and the AI system held perfectly.  
However, when one of these two conditions is violated, it makes it desirable for society to 
directly impose social norms on AI systems, as illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 2. Let us 
consider each of the two conditions in turn. 
 Society       
 ↓   Society  
 Operator   ↙ ↘  
 ↓   Operator → AI System  
 AI System       
(a) Social alignment by extension (b) Social alignment imposed on AI 
Figure 2: Two modes of imposing social alignment norms on AI systems