5 
 But our concept of agency is broader than humans. It also includes non-human entities such as 
organizations or governments, which can be described as pursuing their own sets of goals. For 
example, a business organization may be described as following the goal of producing a 
product to earn profits; a university as advancing research and education; a government as 
pursuing the safety and well-being of its citizens.  
 
And, importantly for the purposes of this article, our concept also includes artificial intelligence. 
Many modern AI systems are directly programmed to maximize a specific objective function, 
making them act in a goal-oriented way. More broadly, AI systems are agents in the sense that 
we define because they are designed to pursue s pecific goals, for example classifying images, 
driving cars, controlling robots etc.  
 
In our characterization of agency, we explicitly ask whether it is “useful” to describe an entity as 
pursuing a goal. This implies that the delineation is fluid and depends on the context. For 
example, if we start with a very simple mechanical structure and transform it into a progressively 
more intelligent robot, there is no specific threshold at which it becomes an agent—but it will 
become more and more efficient and useful to describe it according to the goals it pursues rather than by the physical laws describing its mechanical structure. To provide further 
examples, it will rarely be useful to describe a rock as an agent, but there will be many 
situations in which it is useful to describe a Boston Dynamics Spot robot
5 as an agent. 
Moreover, the same entity may be usefully described as an agent in some situations and contexts but not in others. For example, we may want to describe a robot as an agent while it is 
operating but as a piece of metal when we recycle it for scrap.    
 
Goals:  In the social sciences, an entity’s goals (or objectives) are frequently described using a 
set of preferences, i.e., an ordering that describes how the entity values different outcomes 
relative to each other. For example, a preference relation such as A > B reflects that the entity 
prefers outcome A over outcome B.
6 
 There is a dualism between an agent’s goals and her actions—we can either describe the 
actions which emanate from her goals or describe the goals which drive her actions. When an 
agent’s goals are fully specified in a given environment, the agent’s actions are also fully 
specified (except where there are ties) because we can work out what actions the agent will find 
optimal to take, and vice versa because we can infer what their goals are from their actions. We 
can simply translate back and forth from goal space into action space.  
Simple depictions of agents in the social sciences frequently take an agent’s goals as a primitive 
that is exogenously given, for example by postulating a certain utility function for the agent. 
 
5 See https://www.bostondynamics.com/products/spot 
6 Another way to express goals is in the form of a “utility function” u(X)  that assigns a numerical value to 
each possible X which ranks the different possibilitie s. Utility functions are more restrictive than 
preference orderings. In ot her words, every utility function defines a set of preferences, but not every set 
of preferences can be captured by a ut ility function. For example, for le xicographic preferences, doing so 
is impossible.