7 
 Economists and other social scientists have long studied principal-agent relationships, i.e., how 
to align the actions of agents with the outcomes desired by principals (see e.g. Jensen and 
Meckling, 1976, for one of the most influential contributions). In that body of work, the principal 
and agent have exogenously given goals that differ from each other, and imperfect information 
makes it difficult for the principal to observe whether the agent has acted in her best interest or has abused the discretion she was afforded. The main research question centers around how 
the principal can provide the agent with incentives to act in her interest—for example, how to 
include carrots and sticks in work contracts to incentivize workers to exert the optimal level of 
effort. 
 In AI alignment, by contrast, the question is different and in some sense more fundamental: how 
to endow an agent with goals that lead to outcomes that are desired by the principal.
10 AI 
alignment is usually described as goal alignment, but what ultimately matters for the principal are the agent’s actions. When the relationship between goals and actions is clear and is known 
perfectly and when the goals of principal and agent coincide, then there is no direct alignment 
problem. In Figure 1, this would correspond to each of the mappings that are indicated with 
arrows holding perfectly, i.e., (1) the principal has identified the goals that will lead to her desired actions well, (2) they are correctly conveyed to the agent, who (3) in turn translates the 
conveyed goals into the desired actions. However, this is an idealized benchmark.  
 
Delegation Principal  
Agent 
Action space Desired actions  Pursued actions 
 ↕ (1)      ↕ (3) 
Goal space Desired goals ↔ 
(2) Pursued goals 
 
Figure 1: Principal-agent alignment in action space and in goal space 
 
 
10 On the surface, the two described situations - inc entivizing a human agent with distinct goals to pursue 
the principal’s goals versus creating an AI agent from  scratch who pursues the principal’s goals - seem 
very different. However, given the dualism between actions and goals, there is in fact a deeper 
equivalence between the two. Addres sing the classic principal-agent problem in economics can be 
viewed as a situation in which the principal has only li mited ability to affect the agent’s architecture (e.g. to 
reprogram the agent’s primal drive to avoid hard work) and needs to find workarounds (“incentives”) to make the agent pursue the desired goal. Programmers frequently experience similar situations. For 
example, the architecture of ML libraries, say Tens orFlow, constrains how they can write their code and 
makes some results far easier to obtain than others. In  other situations, they need to write workarounds 
building on clunky legacy applications to efficiently obtain the desired behavior.  Conversely, human principals sometimes have the ability to “reprogram” agents. For example, parents 
greatly appreciate the importance of instilling prop er goals into their offspring; managers and military 
leaders know the importance of “inspiring” their agents to pursue desired goals;  and a significant part of 
our human culture (religion, morals, etc) revolves around reprogramming humans’ goals in a way to make our societies operate more harmoniously.