22 
 Regarding direct alignment, we need to work on determining, conveying and implementing the 
goals that we want AI systems to pursue in a robust manner. Regarding social alignment, 
society needs to determine what social goals and norms we want AI systems to pursue. Social 
preferences can only determine a partial ordering over all available choices. It is important to 
expand that ordering as much as possible by resolving social disagreements and conflicts, and 
to appeal to our better angels as we do this so that our preferences reflect our ethical values. To 
the extent that society finds agreement, implementing our preferences also requires developing 
the requisite institutions. We argue that this may be facilitated by imposing norms on the 
developers and operators of AI systems as well as by creating new norms that are directly 
imposed on AI systems.   
As AI systems have become more powerful and their use in our world has become more 
widespread in recent years, we have also witnessed a growing number of cases of social 
alignment failures, from automated decision systems with biases against disadvantaged groups 
to social networks that increase polarization and undermine our political systems. Yet progress 
is continuing, and the powers of our AI systems are growing, making it urgent to accelerate 
research on how to better address the social alignment of AI. Otherwise, if we already have difficulty addressing the AI alignment problems we face now, how can we hope to do so in the 
future when the powers of our AI systems have advanced by another order of magnitude? 
Promoting the social welfare of humans in the Age of AI therefore requires understanding 
creating the right governance mechanisms to address the social AI alignment problem. 
Economics has a rich toolkit to offer to support that effort. 
 
References 
Armstrong, Stuart, Nick Bostrom, and Carl Shulman (2016), “Racing to the precipice: a model of 
artificial intelligence development.” AI & Society 31(2): 201-206 
 
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1950). "A Difficulty in the Concept of Social Welfare," Journal of Political 
Economy. 58 (4): 328–346. 
 Bajgar, Ondrej and Jan Horenovsky (2021), Human Rights as a Basis for Long-term AI Safety 
and Regulation. 
 
Baum, Seth D (2020), Social Choice Ethics in Artificial Intelligence, AI & Society 35(1), pp. 165-
176. 
 
Bessen, James, Stephen M. Impink, Lydia Reichensperger and Robert Seamans (2021), “Ethics and AI Startups.” https://scholarship.law.bu.edu/faculty_scholarship/1188   
 Bostrom, Nick (2014), Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies , Oxford University Press.