19 
 ethics or employing teams that directly focus on AI ethics and society (Bessen et al., 2021). 
Similarly, social norms among the broader public can translate into consumer pressure—not 
purchasing from AI companies that don’t live up to their expectation of social alignment.  
 
However, social norms alone are insufficient to govern our complex modern societies. They are 
most effective at the human community level.  Non-human entities such as corporations and 
governments are not directly susceptible to social norms—only indirectly via their human agents—opening the door to what some have called “administrative evil” (see e.g. Young et al., 
2021). More formal governance modes such as laws and regulations are therefore 
indispensable.  
Laws and Regulations impose constraints on agents that are enforced with formal, state-
backed or -administered penalties. There are several ways which such legal constraints can contribute to social alignment. 
 
● Prohibitions and mandates: There are some uses of AI that society will deem too harmful 
to allow, and for these it may make sense to pass legislation which forbids them. For example, the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots has launched an effort to ban lethal 
autonomous weapons that could kill without human oversight.
18 Similarly, mandates can 
be enacted to ensure that AI systems meet certain socially desirable minimum standards, for example in the realm of safety. A closely related measure is to assign 
harmed individuals rights that can be enforced via litigation (see e.g., Kessler, 2010).  
 
● Taxes and subsidies: Taxes and subsidies are a classic fix for externalities, and they 
apply just as well to the case of social AI alignment. They are preferable to outright bans 
and mandates when an activity creates externalities so the unregulated amount of that activity would be undesirable, but when a total ban would be excessive. Moreover, the 
revenue from taxes can be distributed to those who experience the harms.
19 For 
example, tracking of individuals represents a privacy intrusion but may also offer some useful benefits. Instead of banning it outright, imposing taxes or user fees may reduce it 
to a more desirable level. Similarly, if society’s goals include an equitable income 
distribution, excessive automation that destroys jobs and undermines worker incomes 
could be taxed, with the resulting revenue distributed to workers losing their jobs, but it 
would be undesirable to ban automation.  
New norms for social AI alignment 
The growing powers and capabilities of AI systems create new and ever more powerful ways in 
which the public interest may be infringed upon, i.e., new externalities, which call for new social norms and create new potential forms of social misalignment. When AI systems gain new 
capacities, society can be unprepared to govern. For example, society had one set of norms for 
 
18 See https://www.stopkillerrobots.org/ 
19 Allowing the harmed individuals themselves to impose a user fee is equivalent to taxing the harm and 
distributing the revenue to the harmed individuals.