9 
 Example 1: Ted develops a new resume screening algorithm. Since he wants the system to be 
free of racial bias, he leaves out the variable “race” from the training dataset. However, the 
system quickly learns correlates of race such as name, address, and educational institution from 
the existing bias in the training dataset and uses these to arrive at biased hiring decisions.  
 
This represents a failure of direct alignment. Ted was eager to avoid racial bias but did not 
realize that his implementation led to precisely the bias that he was concerned about. 
 
Example 2: Mark develops a recommendation model to maximize user engagement on a social  
network platform. When he finds out that the system leads to stark increases in political polarization, he does not change course. 
 
This represents a failure of social alignment. The AI system pursued—and successfully 
achieved—its assigned goal, but it imposed large externalities on society by increasing 
polarization. 
III. Direct alignment 
From the perspective of a principal operating an AI system, there are three interrelated challenges to ensuring direct alignment of an AI system: the first is the challenge of determining 
what goals to pursue, the second is conveying the goal to an AI system, and the third is getting 
the AI system to correctly translate the goal into actions.  
Determining the goal 
The first challenge is to work out the principal’s goals, i.e., to translate the principal’s desired 
outcomes into abstract goals. Determining what we want can be difficult. Human goals are not 
easily interpretable; they are often amorphous or intuitively understood but difficult to express. Our brains are opaque and pursue multiple value dimensions depending on circumstances (see 
e.g., Juechems and Summerfield, 2019). When we are not sure what we want, it is difficult to 
align an AI system with our goals.  
 
A key aspect of determining the principal’s goal is how to scope the goal appropriately so it does 
not conflict with other goals that are valuable to the principal. Humans have a broad set of goals 
that involve many different subgoals that we automatically and often subconsciously weigh 
against each other when they are in conflict. When we determine what goals to assign to AI 
systems, we have to ensure that the systems do not optimize one subgoal to the detriment of others. This becomes more and more important as our AI systems become more powerful and 
their capacity to optimize over a single goal increases.  
 
Example 3: Mark develops a recommendation model to maximize user engagement on a social 
network platform. He is dismayed to find out that the system also increases political polarization.