13 
 Theoretically, ideal social alignment could also be achieved if an AI system is operated by a true 
altruist who implements society’s preferences . Most human beings are not purely egoistic but 
also care about the well-being of others—they have altruistic preferences, meaning they explicitly consider and accommodate the preferences of a broader group than just themselves. 
Their consideration of the welfare of others may range from minor, i.e., they care about others 
much less than about themselves, to perfect altruism, i.e., their decision making considers the 
welfare of another person just as much as their own. The direct alignment problem only 
considers the effects of the AI system on others to the extent that the person or entity creating 
the system is altruistic. If those who set AI goals are perfectly altruistic, like this theoretical 
altruist, then the social alignment problem is solved—their individual goals will be aligned to social goals. However, whenever the preferences that the altruist perceives about society differ 
from society’s actual preferences—or whenever society’s preferences change—the supposed 
altruist would become a dictator. This is a significant risk whenever there is no democratic 
process that represents a corrective force to express society’s preferences.  
 
As reflected in the term, ideal social alignment  is more a conceptual benchmark than a guideline 
for actual implementation. Even in a well-functioning representative democracy, it is unlikely that 
society will agree on all outcomes. However, the benchmark is useful to sharply delineate the 
differences between direct and social alignment. 
 
Externalities: At the center of the distinction between direct and social alignment are 
externalities. In our context, externalities exist whenever an AI system affects others without their agreement and without the beneficiary compensating others for it. For example, an AI 
system that engages in surveillance of individuals or otherwise intrudes into their privacy 
imposes externalities onto them. Likewise, a system that manipulates consumers into buying 
goods on false pretexts inflicts externalities on its victims. Similarly, a system that evaluates applicants for jobs, loans, or other transactions but engages in unfair discrimination imposes 
externalities on its subject. At a society-wide leve l, a system that promises social engagement to 
its users but creates echo chambers and deteriorates democratic processes while doing so inflicts significant externalities on society at large. Similarly, AI systems that displace human 
jobs without generating sufficient new jobs depress economy-wide labor demand, reduce 
wages, and thereby contribute to rising inequality. These effects represent what economists call 
pecuniary externalities because they arise from changes in market prices (in the given case, 
declines in workers’ wages). AI systems may also confer positive externalities on society—for 
example, a tool that aids in scientific discovery may have benefits for society that are far greater than the benefits that the developer of the tool obtains. 
 
Framed this way, the goal of social alignment is to internalize the externalities of AI systems—
making sure that AI systems consider the benefits and costs not only for their operators but also 
for all other members of society. In some cases, society may view the potential externalities of 
an AI system as so harmful that it is best for the system not to be implemented. For example, 
many forms of mass surveillance may simply be too harmful to be worth any benefits they create. In general, however, it is not necessarily desirable to reduce all externalities to zero, just 
to properly take them into account. For example, an AI system that creates large amounts of