4 
 will generally require external interventions and a broader governance framework. We discuss 
how regulatory solutions provided by social norms, laws, markets, and architecture could be 
used to achieve social alignment, and we highlight  the importance of AI governance to achieve 
social alignment.  
We believe ensuring that AI systems satisfy both direct and social alignment will become ever 
more important in the future. Currently, we delegate fairly narrow tasks to AI systems — we ask 
them to classify images, rank our search results, recommend movies and music, and 
autocomplete bits of our emails. But we are st arting to use AI in increasingly higher stakes 
environments, like evaluating loan and job applicants, financial trading, utility management, and national defense. Importantly, the range and complexity of tasks that we turn over to our AI systems are continuing to grow. 
 
AI Alignment — the challenge of how to endow AI systems with goals that are consistent with 
our goals — becomes ever more important as delegation from humans to AI systems (i) 
happens more often, creating more opportunities for misalignment to cause harm; (ii) involves 
higher stakes situations, where misalignment would be more costly or even catastrophic; and 
(iii) occurs in situations where we have less ability to provide oversight, which makes it more difficult to assess whether the system is aligned and less likely that we catch alignment failures 
early.  
II. Concepts 
We start by clarifying several theoretical concepts that are relevant for our discussion of alignment. Readers who are most interested in the comparison of direct and social alignment 
may wish to skip to the following section. 
Agents and goals 
Agents:  We call entities that interact with their environment “agents” whenever it is useful to 
describe them as pursuing goals.4 A goal is a summary description of what an entity is 
attempting to achieve. Humans clearly fit our description of agents—we think of ourselves and 
each other as pursuing goals, and this is useful because inferring people’s goals makes for a 
more efficient description of what to expect from them next. For example, if a driver sees a 
person walking straight up to a crosswalk, it is useful to infer that the person’s goal is to cross 
the street, and this is more efficient than to ponder how the person’s leg movements will 
translate into the person’s physical location over the ensuing seconds.  
 
 
4 This is a shallow definition of agency that is, however , useful for our purposes here. It is inspired by but 
distinct from Dennett’s work on st ances (see e.g. Dennett, 1987). In di fferent contexts, other definitions 
may be more useful - for example, in ethics, a moral a gent is an entity that is morally accountable for its 
actions. For an elaboration on alternative concepts of  agency, see e.g. Franklin and Graesser (1996) or 
Orseau et al. (2018).