11 
  
Example 1 above described a resume screening system that resulted in biased hiring decisions 
because of biased training data that was not corrected for. This is an example of an 
implementation failure. 
Distinguishing direct alignm ent from social alignment 
The described challenges of direct alignment also apply to social alignment. The key difference 
is that the first step, determining the goal, no longer involves a single principal who is operating 
the system, but instead the broader goals of others in society who would be impacted by the AI 
system. This is what makes the social alignment of AI a central theme of AI governance. 
 
Many contributions in the existing literature on AI alignment refer to either direct alignment or 
social alignment without explicitly addressing the distinction between the two and the necessity of paying attention to both. For example, Paul Christiano (2018b) appears to focus largely on 
direct alignment in his definition of intent alignment: “AI A is aligned with an operator H, if A is 
trying to do what H wants it to do.” It is possible that the operator in this definition wants the AI 
to do something that will impose large exter nalities on others. Yudkowsky (2004) seems to 
describe a form of social alignment in defining an alignment benchmarked that he terms coherent extrapolated volition (CEV) as “our wish if we knew more, thought faster, were more 
the people we wished we were, had grown up farther together...” He explicitly refers to “ our 
wish...had [ we] grown up farther together.”  
 Other definitions are unclear on whether they imply direct or social alignment. Christiano 
(2018a) defines the project of alignment as “aligning AI systems with human interests,” leaving 
unspecified which humans these interests belong to. For example, Stuart Russell (2019) defines 
the problem of value alignment as ensuring that we do not “perhaps inadvertently, imbue 
machines with objectives that are imperfectly aligned with our own” (p. 149). Brian Christian 
(2020), author of “The Alignment Problem,” defines the titular problem as “how to ensure that 
these models capture our norms and values, understand what we mean or intend, and, above all, do what we want” (p. 19). Both of these definitions do not make it clear who “we” or “our” 
refers to—all of humanity, some representative group, a synonym for one? Evan Hubinger (2020) writes that an AI agent is “impact aligned (with humans) if it doesn't take actions that we 
would judge to be bad/problematic/dangerous/catastrophic.” It is not clear who these “humans” 
are—just the principals/operators, or all humans—or how large a consensus this “we” has to 
attain. 
 
accomplish the goal, but some implementation failu re causes the system to crash before doing so, 
perhaps it should not be viewed as a failure of alignment.