18 
 Assessing AI impacts: A precondition for evaluating social alignment is knowing about the 
impacts and potential externalities generated by an AI system. Sometimes harms arise without 
the operator of an AI system even being aware of it, and the operator may not have sufficient 
incentives to find out. Moreover, lack of transparency makes it easier to cover up harms. AI 
impact assessments could help. Lessons can be learned from environmental impact 
assessments (EIAs), which are routinely require d for actions of government agencies, or for 
government-funded, -permitted or -licensed activities—for example, for building a highway, airport, or oil pipeline. AI impact assessments could quantify the potential risks and benefits of 
AI systems. Such assessments could be mandated for AI projects that are implemented by 
government entities, that receive government funding, or that have sufficiently broad societal effects. They could also be used on a voluntary basis, just like EIAs have become relatively 
common in the private sector. 
 
Existing norms:  Once the potential externalities of an AI system are known, the next question 
is how social norms, regulations, and laws can ensure the social alignment of AI systems. Society already has a rich set of norms for social alignment that have evolved over centuries, 
consisting of informal social customs and habits as well as formal laws and regulations. These norms constrain the behaviors of both individual humans and non-human agents such as 
governments, corporations, or nonprofits. Whenever these entities operate AI systems, the 
existing norms that they are subject to by extension represent norms for the behaviors of their 
AI systems. To provide a stark example, a civilian must not program an AI-based robot to kill 
someone.  
The social alignment of the operators of AI systems thus leads to a certain “default” level of 
social alignment for AI. Conversely, when these actors violate the social norms that they are 
subject to, they give rise to alignment probl ems that we may call social misalignment from 
violating existing norms. We start by discussing how informal and formal social norms address 
social alignment. Then we discuss why we believe that it is also increasingly desirable to 
impose new constraints directly on AI systems in addition to existing norms on their operators in 
order to guarantee that AI systems are socially aligned. 
Informal social norms are constraints on agents’ behavior that are enforced in an informal, 
decentralized way by a community. Social norms have evolved together with humanity to 
facilitate human cooperation. They can be seen in action, for example, when employees, 
consumers, or shareholders pressure companies to abstain from behaviors that they view as 
unethical.  
 The importance of informal social norms is frequently underemphasized—for example in 
economic analyses, when individuals are counterfactually depicted as perfectly selfish actors—
and there is significant room for improving social  AI alignment by establishing the right norms 
within the AI ecosystem (see e.g., Klinova, 2022). Social norms can be powerful in driving the behavior of individual humans. For example, so cial norms among AI developers as to what 
types of systems are considered ethical and des irable and what is considered unethical provide 
effective constraints on what systems AI companies develop. We can already see the effect of social norms on AI development in that many AI companies have begun creating codes of