3 
 I. Introduction 
 
We are building artificially intelligent systems which are increasingly competent and general. 
Already, AI systems can have impacts that occur almost instantly and anywhere in the world.1 
While speed and reach are factors that AI shares with other technologies like malware or 
nuclear weapons, AI systems are also different, becoming increasingly autonomous and 
behaving like agents of their own.  
 
When we delegate tasks to AI systems, an important challenge is to endow the systems with 
“desirable goals” — this is frequently labeled the AI alignment problem. For a good survey of 
recent research on AI alignment see, e.g., Ngo (2020). However, when speaking of alignment, it 
is important to be explicit about whose goals an AI system is aligned with. This paper 
distinguishes between two types of AI alignment that are both important in AI development but that require distinct governance approaches:  
 
Direct alignment: when an AI system is pursuing goals consistent with the goals of its operator, 
irrespective of whether it imposes externalities on other parties.
2  
 Social alignment: when an AI system is pursuing goals that are consistent with the broader 
goals of society, taking into account the welfare of everybody who is impacted by the system.   
There are multiple challenges to achieving direct alignment, including identifying the right goal to 
give to an AI system, conveying that goal, and getting the AI system to correctly implement the 
goal.
3 Social alignment adds the challenge of including all of those impacted — not merely the 
operator of a system — to the extent that society views this as desirable when determining what goal to give the system.  
What would it entail to consider all those affected? We describe a conceptual benchmark for 
social alignment based on welfare economics that we call ideal social alignment  and analyze 
how social alignment differs from direct alignment in that it considers externalities. We provide 
examples of ideal social welfare functions that could, in principle, be employed to formally study social alignment. Since ideal social alignment is unattainable in practice, we explain how it is 
possible to determine a partial ordering of social preferences and that in practice, social 
alignment means aligning AI systems with this more limited set of instructions. Social alignment 
 
1 An example are AI-powered financial trading systems (see e.g. Boukheroua a and Shabsigh, 2021). 
2 Throughout the paper, we use the convention of refe rring to the entity that is creating, operating, and 
controlling an AI system as the “operator.” In principle, each of these tasks could be performed by 
different entities, adding additional complexi ty to the challenge of AI alignment. 
3 There are many alternative ways of defining alignment but with similar flavor. For example, an AI system 
could be aligned to the human’s instructions, intentio ns, revealed preferences, informed preferences, 
interests, or values, among other options. See Gabriel (2020) for a fuller discussion.