10 
 This is a classic example of specifying an excessively narrow goal and obtaining unexpected 
side effects. In the described example, Mark did not anticipate that his recommendation model 
would also affect the political views of its users.  
Conveying the goal  
After a principal determines the content of her goals, she faces the technical challenge of 
transmitting the goal to an AI system. When humans convey goals to each other in natural 
language, they understand the context, which makes it easier to resolve ambiguities.  
 
It is more challenging to convey goals to AI systems. AI systems do not share the same 
understanding of the world that we humans share and will likely not be able to resolve 
ambiguities by making common-sense deductions. Instead, we need to translate the goal into 
something machine readable and provide the instructions, training, or feedback necessary for the system to “understand” and execute. Part of the challenge is to clarify what our concepts 
mean. For example, if we told an AI system to “make us happy,” what do we mean by that term? 
Do we mean pure hedonic experience, do we mean general life satisfaction, or any other range of viable meanings?  
 
Example 4: Tim tells his AI-powered smartphone assistant to “call Jon” as he gets ready to go 
out and party. He is embarrassed that his 11 p.m. phone call wakes up his boss rather than 
reaching his brother, who is listed as “Jonathan” in his contact list. 
 This is an example of an AI system misinterpreting the goal of its principal because it did not 
correctly understand the context. A human assistant would have known not to call a work 
contact late at night and would have understood that “Jon” may refer to “Jonathan.” 
 
Sometimes, the challenges of determining and conveying can be addressed jointly. For 
example, inverse reinforcement learning allows an AI system to learn the objective function of 
its principal through observing their behavior (Ng and Russell, 2000). Through this method, the 
content and form of the goal blend together. 
Implementing the goal 
Once the principal’s goals are transmitted to the agent, they need to be implemented through 
appropriately chosen actions by the AI system. Implementation has many technical aspects that we will not discuss here.
12 These include ensuring a system is free of bugs and robust, including 
that it operates reliably in circumstances other than what it was initially trained and tested on. While implementation is key for getting a result that the principal is happy with, some do not 
view it as a pure component of alignment.
13 
 
12 For a thorough and cutting-edge technical introduction see e.g. Russell and Norvig (2020). 
13 For example, some definitions of alignment only capture the intentions of the AI system, not the 
outcome, whether ex ante the AI system was trying to achieve the human’s goal. If an AI system tries to