8 
 In practice, misalignment between the principal’s desired and realized outcomes can arise in 
any of the three steps outlined in the figure. This allows us to distinguish the source of alignment 
problems into the following categories: 
 
(1) Identifying the principal’s desired goals:  The principal needs to figure out what her goals 
are. 
(2) Conveying the goals to the agent:  Next, the principal needs to correctly transmit her 
desired goals to the agent so the agent can pursue them. 
(3) Translating the goals into actions:  The agent needs to correctly implement the 
transmitted goals by pursuing the corresponding actions. 
 Below, we will elaborate on each of these steps in detail. 
 
As we observed before, the term “AI alignment problem” is frequently used to describe step (2), 
or a combination of steps (1) and (2), i.e., how to provide an AI system with a set of goals that 
correctly reflect our goals, whereas the term “AI control problem” is used to capture the broader 
challenge of how to ensure that the actions of an AI system are desirable.
11 However, the three 
steps illustrated in our figure are closely related to each other. If the mappings described in 
steps (1), (2) and (3) held perfectly, it would be possible to focus exclusively on how to align the 
goals of human principals and AI agents. In practi ce, however, it will be necessary to consider 
all four steps simultaneously as they cannot be cleanly separated from each other. 
Direct and social alignment of AI 
So far we have discussed how to ensure that the actions performed by an AI system reflect the desires of a principal. However, we have been silent on who exactly the principal is. We 
distinguish two separate concepts, direct and social  alignment, that relate to whether we view 
the principal as the operator of an AI system or as society at large. The distinction between the two has not been sufficiently recognized in the existing literature on AI alignment. 
 
As defined in the introduction, we use the term direct alignment  to refer to whether an AI 
system is pursuing goals that are consistent with the goals of its operator, and social alignment 
to refer to whether an AI system is pursuing goals that are consistent with the broader goals of society, taking into account everybody who is affected by the system and internalizing any 
externalities. The two forms of alignment problems are also related to the broader challenge of 
developing cooperative AI (see e.g., Dafoe et al, 2020). 
 
In the following two sections, we will discuss the challenges of direct and social alignment in 
detail and will elaborate further on when the two differ from each other. But before doing so, let us provide two examples to highlight the difference between the two. 
 
 
11 For example, Bostrom (2014) describes value alignm ent as one element of AI control alongside other 
mechanisms such as ca pability controls.