6 
 Then they proceed to analyze what actions the agent would take to achieve the most desired 
outcome. However, such descriptions risk over-simplifying the behavior of human agents by 
leaving out subgoals, competing goals, or constraints on the described goal. For example, 
humans track the distance between current and desired states across multiple value dimensions 
that are in tension with each other in ways that change dynamically over time (see e.g., 
Juechems and Summerfield, 2019). This may pose significant challenges in determining human 
goals and may, for example, produce behavior that is inconsistent with any utility function.7 As 
we will discuss in more detail below, the difficulty of correctly determining goals is a major challenge for AI alignment.  
Delegation and alignment 
Delegation is when an entity charges another with the fulfillment of her goals. Following the 
language of economics, we use the term “principal” for the entity that delegates a task and “agent” for the entity who is charged with the task.
8  
 Examples of delegation are as old as humanity itself and could already be found in hunter 
gatherer societies.
9 As societies became more complex and hierarchical, the delegation of tasks 
and the need for goal alignment also started to involve governmental or religious organizations and, later, corporations. Humans and organizations both started to delegate tasks to each other 
to better accomplish their goals. For example, entrepreneurs founded corporations to pursue 
their goals, and corporations hired workers.  
 Successful delegation is advantageous for the principal by enabling her to better accomplish her 
goals. The reasons for this advantage include that the agent may have a comparative 
advantage in the task at hand, such as different or greater capabilities than the principal, better 
knowledge, or simply a lower opportunity cost of time. To make delegation successful, there 
needs to be a sufficient degree of alignment between the principal and the agent, but the 
principal also needs to provide the agent with a sufficient degree of discretion—a point that is 
not typically emphasized in traditional principal-agent theory in economics but that was already 
made by Weber (1922) and that is also emphasized in the recent literature on AI governance 
(see e.g., Young et al, 2021). In particular, the agent needs sufficient freedom of action to employ her greater capabilities, her better knowledge and judgment or her additional time to be 
useful to the principal. However, this freedom of  action is what creates problems when there is 
misalignment.  
 
7 Specifically, for a set of preferences to map into a utility function requires several technical assumptions 
that may be violated, including comple teness, transitivity, and continuity. 
8 Unfortunately this nomenclature involves some overl oading of the term “agent” - in the previous section, 
we called any entity that can be described as pursuing  a goal as an agent; in this section, we follow the 
conventions of principal-agent theory.  Throughout the remainder of this article, the meaning of the term 
will be clear from the context. 
9 In fact, some of the interactions among other social  species such as bees or ants can also be described 
as simple forms of delegation.