12 
 IV. Social alignment 
In contrast to the direct alignment problem, which looks at whether an AI system is consistent 
with the goals of its operator, the social alignment problem looks at whether the system pursues 
goals that are consistent with the goals of society at large.  
In the following, we start by describing a benchmark for social alignment based on welfare 
economics that we call ideal social alignment . We analyze how social alignment differs from 
direct alignment by emphasizing that it considers externalities on others. We provide examples 
of ideal social welfare functions that could, in principle, be employed to formally study social 
alignment. However, we also lay out the practi cal difficulties of establishing what society’s 
preferences are, and we analyze how to deal with situations in which there is no clear way of mediating conflicting objectives within society. See also Baum (2017) for a description of the 
difficulties in establishing society-wide ethics for AI.  
Next, we analyze to what extent existing norms (broadly defined) for the operators of AI systems 
are sufficient to ensure that the systems are socially aligned. We distinguish two sets of 
problems that give rise to misalignment: The first arises when the operators of AI systems 
violate existing social norms and are themselves  not socially aligned; the second arises when 
our current social norms are insufficient to address some novel externality caused by new AI 
capabilities. Achieving social AI alignment requires progress on both fronts. We describe a set 
of policy tools that can be used to further the social alignment of AI. 
Ideal social alignment 
To describe a simple idealized benchmark for social AI alignment, we impose two assumptions. 
First, we assume that society has a complete and well-defined set of preferences over all 
choices that are relevant for the AI system. Second, we assume that society itself creates, 
operates, and fully controls the AI system. Under these idealized conditions, the challenges of 
social alignment of AI would be reduced to the challenges of direct alignment that we described 
in the previous section, since society would essentially act as the operator. 
 Technically speaking, the first assumption of complete preferences implies that society’s 
preferences define a full ordering of all the available choices, i.e., that whenever society faces a 
set of choices, say A, B or C, there are social preferences that tell us how they rank compared 
to each other, which ones are preferred, or which ones are equally desirable for society.
14 One 
possible ranking would be for example A > B > C. As we will explore further below, this is a strong assumption; in practice, there are many areas in which society does not have such clear 
preferences.  
 
 
14 In mathematics, a full ordering (or total order) is a bi nary relation on a set that satisfies, among other 
conditions, that it is transitive and that any two elements are comparable. See e.g. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_order  The assumption that society’ s preferences represent a full 
ordering is also a necessary condition for de scribing them via social welfare functions.