17 
 For purposes of illustration, and without being exhaustive, we discuss a few different exemplary 
spheres of social alignment:  
 
Group-level: A social alignment problem could manifest at the group level—for example, within 
a community, club, university, corporation, or ci ty. If an AI system run by members of the group 
imposes externalities on the group that violate the social norms within the group, it is socially misaligned at the group level. 
 
Country-Level: For many questions, individual countries are the most important sphere at 
which to consider social alignment. In the modern world (perhaps with the exception of the EU), 
most laws and regulations originate at the country level since countries are the politically most 
powerful actors. This is also true for AI regulation to forestall alignment problems.  
 
However, social alignment at the country level is not necessarily sufficient—countries are 
frequently subject to competitive dynamics, especially in the military context, where advances in 
AI may give rise to significant shifts in power dynamics (see e.g., Armstrong et al, 2016). This 
directly leads to the next and widest sphere at which social alignment is desirable.  
World-level: Social alignment at the world level is the broadest, least restrictive, but perhaps 
also most fundamental sphere of alignment for AI systems. It requires that an AI system 
pursues desired outcomes on which humanity at large broadly agrees. Although there are many 
areas of significant disagreements among the world’s citizens, there are also areas of almost-universal agreement. Examples include the desirability of basic forms of AI safety to avoid 
human extinction, or that the most momentous decisions undertaken by autonomous weapons 
systems should have humans in the loop (e.g. Human Rights Watch, 2012). Another area of 
near-universal agreement may be that it is undesirable to develop a super-human AI system 
that displaces all human labor without ensuring that humans have sufficient material resources 
to survive such a radical shift. Articulating and formalizing global social norms on these topics is 
a pressing area of concern. 
Implementing social alignment 
No matter in which sphere, attaining social alignment of an AI system may be more challenging 
than attaining direct alignment—the main goal for the creator of an AI system is to solve the 
direct alignment problem so that the system pursues the outcomes he desires. Social alignment 
may be an afterthought. 
 
The social alignment of an AI system would be ensured if its operator is perfectly altruistic and 
internalizes all externalities that the system imposes on others in an ethical fashion. However, more generally, the operator may not care about imposing harm on others as long as the 
system achieves the outcomes they desire for themselves. In the following, we discuss the 
available avenues to achieve social alignment.