15 
 single member of society dictates all choices.17 These negative results imply that it is generally 
not possible to come up with the complete set of preferences that would be necessary for AI 
systems to implement the ideal social alignment that we described above. However, that does 
not imply that we need to give up on social alignment entirely. 
 
Instead, social alignment can still focus on aligning AI systems with those social preferences 
that can be clearly established.  Even though members of society may not agree on how to rank 
all available choices, they will agree on how to rank many of the most important choices. They may agree that A > B and A > C but may not be able to rank B and C relative to each other. The 
social choices over which there is general agreement within society represent a partial ordering of all the available choices. We can increase the set of choices for which a social preference 
can be established if we weaken the standard from universal agreement to somewhat lower 
standards, e.g., near-universal agreement. For example, society will generally agree that it is 
desirable to save lives or to refrain from actively  discriminating against minorities, even if a small 
fraction of the population disagrees. The resulting partial ordering provides a limited set of instructions for social choices—even though it cannot identify a full set of social preferences that 
apply to all circumstances.   
Social alignment requires that AI systems observe the partial ordering provided by social 
preferences.  Formally, we call an AI system socially aligned if its choices correspond to the 
partial ordering implied by social preferences. Conversely, an AI system violates social alignment if it makes choices that contradict the partial ordering implied by social preferences, 
i.e., if society generally agrees that it would make different choices. 
 
Given the partial nature of the ordering implied by social preferences, there will be situations in 
which society genuinely disagrees, so social preferences do not provide instructions for what a socially aligned AI system should do. Existing social norms cannot provide guidance for the AI 
system or its operator what choices to make. In some contexts, there may not be a preferred 
social choice, but there may be agreement among members of society that AI systems and their 
operators should have the liberty and freedom to make their own choices, for example the 
freedom of how to design a new product or how to compete in the market (while respecting the 
rules). In open societies, such freedoms are in themselves an important value.  
 
However, in other contexts, unresolved conflicts within society imply that the choices of AI 
systems and their operators are likely to be contentious, no matter what choice they make. One 
of the fundamental goals of governance is to resolve such conflicts, to determine how to 
establish social preferences in such situations, and how to establish norms that encapsulate 
these preferences. The question of what social preferences ought to be in the realm of AI—and 
over which social choices they are defined—is a central theme of AI governance. 
  
 
17 Even seemingly straightforward mechanisms such as  a welfare function that is the sum of utility 
functions of all members of  society will not satisfactorily address th e problem, since it may lead to Pareto-
dominated outcomes. See Eckersley (2019) for a fulle r description of the problem in the context of AI 
alignment.