16 
 Rights-based approaches are a common mechanism by which society represents partial social 
preferences because they reflect certain defined entitlements and freedoms for members of 
society while leaving ample space for other choices over which there may be disagreement. For 
example, one of the most fundamental rights-based approaches, human rights, encapsulates a 
set of basic rights and freedoms for which there is general agreement among the countries 
adopting the declaration that all human beings are entitled to them (Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, 1948). In the digital realm, an example is the EU’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR, 2016), which adds many new rights that have become relevant only 
recently, for example the right of access to information or the right to be forgotten. Bajgar and 
Horenovsky (2021) describe how rights-based approaches may be useful for long-term AI safety and regulation. 
Spheres of social alignment  
The social alignment problem can manifest at several different scales, ranging from small 
subgroups of society to larger spheres such as humanity as a whole. The commonality between them is that they all include cases where someone other than the AI system’s operator is 
affected by externalities.  
 
In general, the extent of agreement within a group decreases with group size. Smaller 
communities may find it easier to come to an agreement on what outcomes are desirable for an 
AI system to pursue than larger groups of people such as the citizens of a nation or humanity as 
a whole. This implies that group preferences will lead to increasingly partial orderings as the group size increases, i.e., larger groups will agree less on what outcomes to pursue than 
smaller, more homogenous groups.  
 
A good example of how attitudes towards social alignment differ depending on group size is 
when there are competitive dynamics between subgroups of society. Consider two large 
corporations developing AI systems that are in  fierce competition with each other—when one 
corporation improves its system, it gains market share at the expense of the other. The stakeholders of each corporation, including its workers, shareholders, and suppliers, form a 
subgroup of society, and this subgroup has a clear interest in the corporation doing well. If a corporation’s AI system pursues outcomes that are in the collective interest of that subgroup, 
then the system is socially aligned at the subgroup level, i.e., at the level of the corporation.  
 
Looking outside the corporation, there are clearly negative externalities between the two 
corporations. However, our social norms at the national and international level allow for such 
competition and do not find competitive dynamics objectionable as long as they benefit 
consumers and satisfy other applicable laws. The partial ordering reflecting our society-wide norms includes the requirement to act lawfully, to avoid biases, etc., but gives corporations 
freedom to engage in lots of actions, including the freedom to compete with each other. Under 
the described circumstances, the corporation’s AI system is aligned at the society-wide level 
even though it imposes large negative externalities on competitors.