21 
 When the operator of an AI system is not in compliance with social norms, then imposing social 
norms directly on AI systems may substitute for the operator’s lack of compliance. Such an 
arrangement may also make it easier to monitor the social alignment of the operator. Consider 
for example an unethical corporation that pursues blind profit maximization to the detriment of 
other values of society. If the AI systems deployed by such a corporation need to satisfy certain 
enforceable norms—such as being unbiased—then the space for unethical behavior of the 
corporation is curtailed. In fact, norms imposed on AI systems may even make it possible to 
regulate behaviors that violate social norms but used to be difficult to regulate before. For 
example, when lending decisions were made individually by loan officers, it was harder to 
establish whether they were unbiased than it is with algorithms. 
When an operator is generally aligned with social norms but has not fully solved the direct 
alignment problem between her and an AI system, then norms that are imposed directly on the 
AI system may also help. Such norms can be thought of as best practices, and they may 
contribute to all three steps of the direct alignment problem that we laid out above—determining 
the right goal, conveying the goal, and implementing the goal. For example, they may help a 
well-intended but inexperienced entrepreneur to ensure that the AI system she develops does 
not unintentionally impose harm on society. 
As AI systems become more agentic and have ever more discretion over decisions that used to 
be reserved for humans, we believe that imposing norms directly on AI systems is becoming 
increasingly important.20 
V. Conclusion  
As AI systems become more powerful and are deployed in a growing number of areas, aligning them with our goals becomes ever more vital. Ho wever, the expression “our goals” is often used 
too loosely. It is crucial to emphasize that AI alignment has two distinct dimensions—direct and 
social alignment. The two dimensions require somewhat different approaches, but we need to 
solve both to ensure a future that is desirable for humanity. Direct alignment ensures that AI 
systems pursue goals consistent with the objectives of their operators, irrespective of whether 
they impose externalities on other parties. By contrast, social alignment ensures that AI systems 
pursue goals that are consistent with the broader objectives of society, internalizing externalities and taking into account the welfare of everybody who is impacted by them.  
 
Modern AI systems have the capacity to powerfully  optimize for the goals that we endow them 
with. They are becoming better and better at doing what we are asking them to do and reaching their programmed goals—no matter if these goals correspond to our true goals or if we 
mistakenly assign them the wrong goals, for example excessively narrow subgoals that lead to 
disastrous unintended side effects because they  fail to fully capture what we want.  
 
 
20 In related work, Korinek (2021) proposes the esta blishment of an AI Control Council to further these 
objectives.