Wherekis a coefﬁcient and inversely proportional to vari-
ance. In this case, the mean value ( i.e.,µ) of the approx-
imated distribution is encouraged to be small, due to im-
posing a L2norm. Hence, we can discard corresponding
channels safely.
3.4. Variational Pruning on Channels
We optimize ELBO with the KL-divergence mentioned
above to obtain the distribution of channels salience γ,
whereγ∼q(γ|φ= (µ,σ)). Then we remove redundant
channel based on the following criterion.
Based above section, obtained channel saliency γobeys
a gaussian distribution. Consider to the centrality prop-
erty of gaussian, samples distribute around the expectation.
When the expectation µis close to zero and variance is
small, the probability of variable γis close to zero. Based
on this idea, we eliminate redundant channels when the op-
timized parameters are less than thresholds, i.e.,(µ,σ)<
(τ,θ). The pseudocode of variational constitutional neural
networks pruning is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Variational CNN Pruning
Input:Npairs data {(xi,yi)}N
i=1,Cchannels{γi}C
i=1
Output: φ,w
1:forepoch= 1toKdo
2:qφ(γ) =/producttextC
i=1q(γi)
3:γi∼ N(µi,σi)
4:L(φ,w)≃ LA
D(φ,w)−DKL(qφ(γ)||p(γ)).
5: Optimize :L(φ,w)
6: Update Parameters
7: fori= 1toCdo
8: ifui< τ,σi< θthen
9: Pruning the i-channel
10: end if
11: end for
12:end for
The algorithm is implemented in BNas a special layer,
called variational pruning layer. We do not introduce extra
parameter here and all operations can be integrated in this
layer. The variational pruning layer is easy to implement
as a separate module, which can be inserted to any existing
framework.
4. Experiments
In this section, we carry out extensive experiments to
evaluate the performance of the proposed method on im-
age classiﬁcation task. Three representative networks, in-
cluding VGG Net [37], DenseNet [17], and ResNet [13],
are chosen for compression. We report the performances on
CIFAR and ImageNet datasets, and compare to state-of-the-
arts. All these experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method.4.1. Implementation Details
Training Strategy. For CIFAR, the learning rate is set
as 0.1, and divided by 10 at the 150 and 240 epochs, respec-
tively. We train networks for 300 epochs and with batch size
of 256. For ImageNet, the learning rate is set as 0.1, and di-
vided by 10 at 60 and 90 epochs. We train them with batch
size of 256 and 120 epochs for total. All these networks are
optimized by stochastic gradient decent (SGD), with nes-
terov momentum 0.9 and weight decay 10−4. Random ﬂip
and crop are applied for data augmentation on CIFAR and
ImageNet datasets.
Compression Metric. Channels, Parameter and FLOPs
(ﬂoating point operations) are used to measure network
compression. Channels indicate the memory footprint. Pa-
rameter and FLOPs denote the storage space and compu-
tation cost, respectively. In this paper, we only count pa-
rameter and FLOPs over convolutional layer, because the
proposed method focuses on channel-level compression of
convolutional neural networks. In addition, we only count
multiply operation for FLOPs.
Pruning Details. All models are trained from scratch
as baseline. We prune unimportant channels based on the
distribution of the proposed channel saliency. When the pa-
rameters of the distribution are less than thresholds, the cor-
responding channel will be removed from the model. The
thresholds τandθare empirically set as 0.02 and 0.01, re-
spectively. We set the variance of prior and approximated
posterior to be identical for simplifying the KL loss, which
beneﬁts for training [8]. Different from prior arts, the pro-
posed method does not need ﬁne-tuning to reﬁne the pruned
model.
4.2. Results on CIFAR­10
The purpose of our approach is pruning redundant chan-
nels for saving storage space and computation consumption.
We conduct our experiments on CIFAR-10 dataset with
three classic deep networks: VGG, DenseNet and ResNets.
Channels, parameters and FLOPs are used to measure the
performance of the pruning models. The experiment results
are reported in Table 1.
VGG Net. For VGG net, the 16-layer (13-Conv + 3FC)
model is adopted to perform on CIFAR-10 dataset. We re-
move 62% channels while keeping the accuracy at 93.18%,
which is slightly lower than baseline. Notably, more than
70% of the parameters are reduced and nearly 40% compu-
tation is saved. This greatly facilitates VGG model, popular
backbone for object detection and semantic segmentation,
to deploy on mobile devices.
DenseNet. For DenseNet, we remove 60% inefﬁcient
channels with only 1% drop of accuracy. This is extremely
meaningful for DenseNet which consumes a vast amount
of memory, because the reduction of channels will decrease
memory footprint directly. We also save more than half stor-
2784