networks inference directly. However, most of these prun-
ing approaches [1, 7, 16] need re-training stage to restore
comparable accuracy, which increases computational com-
plexity and is not friendly for operation. In contrast to these,
our method conducts channel pruning with no desire of re-
training stage, while keeping favorable performance in both
compression and speedup.
3. Variational CNN Pruning
In this section, we propose a variational Bayesian
scheme for channel pruning in convolutional networks:
Variational CNN Pruning . First, we reformulate the Batch
Normalization layer, by extending scale factor to shift term,
called channel saliency . Instead of deterministic value, we
estimate the distribution of channel saliency via variational
inference. To further facilitate pruning, a sparsity-inducing
prior is imposed on the channel saliency. Then we prune re-
dundant channels based on distributions of channel saliency
via a simple criterion. Our method is implemented as a
variational-pruning layer, which can be inserted into any
existing framework without special design.
3.1. Batch Normalization Revisit
Batch Normalization ( BN) [18] has been introduced in
current convolutional neural networks as a standard layer,
which improves training speed and accelerates convergence
process. This great performance beneﬁts from normaliz-
ing activation distribution by using the mini-batch statistics
(i.e.,σBandµB).xinandxoutare represented as input
and output activation map, respectively, and Bdenotes the
mini-batch. BNlayer performs normalization as follows:
BN(x) =xin−µB/radicalbig
σ2
B+ǫ;xout=γ·BN(x)+β (1)
whereµBandσBdenote the mean and standard deviation
of input activations over B. An afﬁne transformation is ap-
plied on normalized activations by a linear function learn-
able parameter, i.e.,scale factor γand shift factor β.
Batch Normalization ( BN) has been inserted between
convolution and non-linearity layer, constituting a basic cell
in modern networks. γandβare channel-wise parameters
on models, with function of scaling and shifting. Param-
eterγcan represent the effectiveness coefﬁcient of corre-
sponding channels and no parameter need to be introduced.
Because of this characteristic, it makes sense to choose the
parameter γas a factor to indicate the importance of con-
volution channel [27]. However, two signiﬁcant issues are
ignored here:
1) we notice the fact that parameters γandβare inde-
pendent in BN. Thus, eliminating unimportant channel with
smallγ′s value is an improper manner, due to ignoring the
inﬂuence of shift term. For example, a channel has zerovalue ofγbut with a big value of β. Pruning this channel
is arbitrary, because activations of this channel are not zero
and still contribute effect to the next layer.
2) The value of parameter in hidden layer changes dras-
tically after several iterations in training stage. This means
that the value ( e.g., scale factor) is dynamical. Determining
the effect of layer by only observing a value of the param-
eter is not sufﬁcient. We argue that this is one signiﬁcant
cause for performance degradation after pruning [27].
To remedy this, we reformulate Batch Normalization
layer in Equation 1 as follows:
xout=γ·BN(x)+˜β, (2)
where,˜β=γ·β. (3)
We extend the scale factor γon shift term β, while still
maintaining afﬁne function of BN. In the case, the parame-
terγcan be directly utilized as factors on channels, called
channel saliency , because activation of each channel is to-
tally depended on γ. Rather than through the value of γ, we
prune unimportant channels based on the distribution of γ,
which is estimated by variational inference (more details in
Sec 3.2). We do not introduce any parameters in BNlayer
and the reformulated BNlayer can be inserted into any ex-
isting frameworks.
3.2. Variational Inference on Channel Saliency
Instead of deterministic value, we prune channel with the
distribution of channel saliency. Obviously, this method
is more stable and interpretable, because the distribution
contains rich information and has good mathematical prop-
erty. Thus, we estimate distribution of channel saliency via
Bayes rule. More details are discussed as follows:
Consider a dataset D={(xi,yi)}N
i=1,xis input data
andyis corresponding label. Our goal is to learn a model
with parameter γof the conditional probability p(y|x,γ).
Parameter γischannel saliency deﬁned in previous section
and we leverage γto determine the effect of each channel.
After obtaining the prior knowledge of γ(prior distribu-
tion), we can inference the posterior distribution of γwith
Bayes rule. However, computing such a posterior distribu-
tionp(γ|D) =p(γ)p(D|γ)/p(D)is difﬁcult, because the
p(D) =/integraltext
p(D,γ)dγis a computation-intractable integral.
It is hard to obtain distribution of channel saliency directly.
Hence, an effectively approximated method, variational in-
ference, is introduced to tackle this problem. Compared to
MCMC, variational inference is a good choice, beneﬁting
from its solidly theoretical property and small computation
cost.
In variational inference, instead of computing the true
posterior distribution directly, we assume a parameterized
distribution qφ(γ)to approximate p(γ|D). By this way, the
2782