to conduct several iterations of alternative pruning and re-
training, which is very time-consuming and not friendly for
operation in practice. 2) Stability : layer-alternative param-
eter optimization approach inevitably suffers from instabil-
ity. Namely, parameters of hidden layers may change dras-
tically during consecutive iterations. This results in arbi-
trary removal of some channels during optimization, which
is NOT interpretable. This eventually causes unexpected
performance degradation after pruning.
To address aforementioned issues, we re-formulate the
channel pruning problem within a Bayesian probabilistic
learning framework ( i.e., in contrast to previous determin-
istic methods), called variational CNN pruning , to yield
compact, stable, interpretable and ﬂexible compression.
To avoid introducing additional parameters, the proposed
probabilistic pruning framework directly operates on re-
deﬁned scaling factor in Batch Normalization (BN). Dif-
ferent from [27], we extend the scaling factor to include
bias term, called channel saliency , and still keep the lin-
ear form of Batch Normalization. Instead of deterministic
value computation, we regard each channel saliency as a
random variable and seek a proper probabilistic distribution
to model it.
Thus, unimportant layers could be pruned based on the
distribution of the channel saliency. However, directly esti-
mating these distributions involves intractable multidimen-
sional integral in Bayesian manner. We therefore introduce
a stochastic variational inference [20] to estimate the distri-
bution of channel saliency induced by a sparse prior. Our
Bayesian framework possesses the following advantages.
First, by directly applying probabilistic learning on the scal-
ing factor ( i.e., our method can also be represented as a
variational-pruning layer ), no additional parameter is in-
troduced in deep CNN model learning, therefore ours can be
directly plugged into any off-the-shelf deep learning pack-
age, without any requirements for special network compo-
nent design. Second, the proposed method conducts chan-
nel pruning with no desire of re-training step. Therefore,
computational efﬁciency is improved. Third, being formu-
lated in a probabilistic way, optimization process becomes
stable and interpretable. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-
10 show that we can prune up to 74% channels with little
accuracy loss. On ImageNet, the ResNet-50 achieves better
performance than baseline while about 40% channels are
removed.
2. Related Work
Tensor Decomposition. Jaderberg et al. [19] obtain
CNNs substantial speedups via low-rank decomposition.
Denil et al. [5] remove redundant parameters in deep learn-
ing model by using a few weight values to represent each
feature map, which saves a large number of the memory
and computation consumption. Techniques of matrix de-composition, SVD, is introduced to approximate the weight
matrix in neural networks in [6]. In [42], Tensor Ring (TR)
factorization technology is applied to compress deep neu-
ral networks. However, these methods are impracticable,
because of involving the computation-expensive decompo-
sition operations.
Network Quantization. Courbariaux et al. [4] pro-
pose a method to quantize the network weight with binary
value. To obtain signiﬁcant improvement for computation
efﬁciency, Gupta et al. [10] leverage stochastic rounding to
represent weight by a 16-bit wide ﬁxed-point. In [3], net-
work weights are hashed into different groups. For each
group, shared weights are saved with same hash index. To
further compress networks, Tung et al. [40] combine weight
pruning and quantization in a single learning framework.
Rastegari et al. [36] propose XNOR-Networks which im-
pose XNOR and bitcount operations on convolution layer
to quantize weights. Park et al. [34] propose a method for
quantizing weights and activations based on weighted en-
tropy. These low-bit approximation methods usually suffer
form accuracy loss.
Non-structured Pruning. Inspired by neurobiology,
optimal brain damage [22] and optimal brain surgeon [12]
are proposed to remove parameters in networks for sav-
ing storage through an analysis of the Hessian of the loss
function. However, these heuristic based methods are
computationally-intensive and cannot boost running time.
Han et al. [11] judge the importance of weights in net-
work based on magnitude and remove redundant ones with
small value. A data-free algorithm is proposed in [39] to
eliminate the superﬂuous neurons in fully-connected layers.
Lebedev et al. [21] boost ConvNets speed by group-wise
sparsity operations. Wang et al. [41] propose a density-
diversity penalty on weight to compress fully-connected
networks. Pavlo et al. [32] remove unimportant kernels
based on brute-force search and restore the performance of
compressed networks via ﬁne-tuning. These non-structured
pruning methods [22,24,38] need special software and hard-
ware to speedup inference, due to the irregular sparsity in
weight tensor.
Structured Pruning. Wen et al. [43] exploit CNNs
compression at different grains via imposing L1norm on a
group of weights. Li et al. [23] propose an one-shot pruning
and retraining strategy to compress ﬁlters across multiple
layers. Liu et al. [27] leverage the scale factor of Batch Nor-
malization layer [18] to remove non-efﬁcient channels and
ﬁne-tune the pruned model to restore the comparable accu-
racy. He et al. [14] propose a method that reduces redun-
dant channels based on LASSO regression and least square
reconstruction. [29, 47] transform network pruning into an
optimization problem and perform channel selection in a
layer-wise manner via greedy algorithms. All these struc-
tured pruning methods are hardware friendly, i.e., boosting
2781