4.6. Self-adaptive decision aid system
The state-of-the-art decision aid systems in manufacturing rely on mathematical op-
timization techniques to suggest decisions to the user. Such models are ecient and
easy to explain, but not 
exible. ASSISTANT will render them self-adaptive. Besides
using accurate and up to date estimated parameters (including the various costs) from
the domain models, ASSISTANT will automatically learn the business logic (the con-
straints). The automatic generation of models mostly concerns the process planning
and scheduling twins, since the production planning models are generic enough to be
implemented in most factories without modications. In process planning, the required
operations along with the necessary resource skills, are inferred from the CAD model.
First, we extend the assembly by a disassembly method to manufactured parts. Then, a
resource-skill comparison automatically infers the resources (internal or to be bought)
able to perform a task. In addition, we provide tools (e.g., random forest) to learn the
impact of a process plan on the quality of products and processes and on long-term
costs and worker satisfaction. The resulting decision tree will be translated into math-
ematical optimization models to nd the process plan with the required quality, cost,
and worker conditions and satisfaction. For scheduling, ASSISTANT will provide a
model acquisition tool that enriches basic scheduling models with learned constraints.
As a reinforcement learning approach, model acquisition evaluates the feasibility of a
proposed schedule with simulations. Based on the set of proposed schedules and their
feasibility, model acquisition generates the tightest set of constraints that excludes all
infeasible plans (schedules). Finally, for all digital twins, based on the set of proposed
plans and nal plans validated by the users, the model acquisition tools automatically
learn additional constraints leading to the plans the user wants.
4.7. Decision aid for robust and adaptable manufacturing
ASSISTANT provides prescriptive analytics considering the uncertainty contained in
the digital twin. This uncertainty can be represented by scenario samples or uncer-
tainty sets. Then, a mathematical representation of the manufacturing system which
includes decisions that are taken in a robust way to perform well on all scenarios.
In addition, wait-and-see recourse actions for each scenario which allow reaction to
foreseen probabilistic events are designed and optimized. Process planning will ac-
count for demand uncertainties, possible machine failures, etc. and consider recourse
actions such as resource (human/robot) movements and modular equipment replace-
ments. Production planning is mostly impacted by demand, lead time, capacity, and
yield uncertainties. Recourse actions include express deliveries of components from
local suppliers; subcontracting part of production; adjusting production capacity with
temporary labor; reallocation of components that were reserved to end-items that can
no longer be manufactured.
4.8. AI based controller for actuation and reactive decisions
ASSISTANT will provide an AI-based controller for safe actuation on the shop 
oor.
Once the user validates the plan in intelligent process planning, production planning,
and scheduling intelligent digital twin, the controller communicates these plans to the
right resources (machine, robot, etc.). ASSISTANT will provide pattern recognition,
deep learning, or statistical learning to detect situations leading to bad product quality,
machine breakdowns, and deviations from the plan. If such a situation is detected,
20