components in manufacturing can be characterized by autonomous intelligent sens-
ing, interconnection, collaboration, learning, analysis, decision-making, and execution
of human, machine, material, environment, and information processes in the whole
system and its life cycle
Even though a direct adaptation of AI components could be made in the industrial
sector, several technical, ethical, legal, and security challenges need to be overcome.
At a higher level, these challenges include: (1) the need of processing data at speed,
(2) the need for skilled human resources who are able to operate and understand AI
techniques for supporting the acceleration of executions on heterogeneous systems,
(3) the ethical dimension of using AI in manufacturing environments, and (4) the
legal requirements that dene a framework in which AI components can operate and
construct a dimensional landscape where the manufacturing sector can provision or
use techniques to full internal and external needs.
At a lower level, challenges are dierent depending on the domain of application
and functionalities involved.
Key challenges include the complexity of aggregating and analyzing data in general,
yet meaningful, ways. In the bigger picture, ML and data analytics have not been su-
ciently explored for manufacturing system design, production planning, nor scheduling,
Shang and You (2019). Recently, to address such challenges, programming abstractions
based on regular expressions and quantitative aggregation iterators were formalized to
synthesize a safe code with performance guarantee: Abbas, Alur, Mamouras, Mang-
haram, and Rodionova (2018); and optimization components (Beldiceanu, Carlsson,
Douence, & Simonis, 2016).
ASSISTANT contributes to the use of AI methods for high-level manufacturing deci-
sions such as process and production planning. The resulting approaches will provide
the right level of recongurability since they hedge against uncertainties well charac-
terized through machine learning. Unlike most existing black-box AI methods, AS-
SISTANT relies on the acquisition of explicable models. To overcome the challenge
of data acquisition, data cleaning, and data condentiality (which are related to the
higher-level challenge of processing data at speed) , ASSISTANT provides a standard-
ized data fabric, building on technology-neutral and highly ecient communication
patterns, it supports instrumentation and integration of diverse legacy systems, as
well as the use of distributed (edge/fog/cloud) computing resources for analysis and
training on data. Building on the data fabric and the interconnected digital twins, we
will adapt the framework to the manufacturing context, and improve the design and
operation of production systems.
To overcome the challenges related to the ethical dimensions, as we will describe
later on, specic approaches built into responsible AI considerations are included.
3.2. Acquire robust optimization parameterized models
Discrete optimization relies on models that are typically executed by solvers, e.g.
Mixed Integer Programming, Constraint Programming solvers. Technology indepen-
dent modeling languages like MiniZinc (Nethercote et al., 2007) incorporate global
constraints as building blocks (Beldiceanu, Carlsson, & Rampon, 2012) to come up
with concise models. While usually built by experts, a recent new line of research tends
to acquire models from data Bessiere, Koriche, Lazaar, and O'Sullivan (2017); Kumar,
Teso, and De Raedt (2019), where global constraints are used as a learning bias to
acquire models from a limited amount of data (Beldiceanu et al., 2016).
11