ARTICLE TEMPLATE
The ASSISTANT project: AI for high level decisions in
manufacturing.
G. Casta~ n ea, A. Dolguib, N. Kousic, B. Meyersd, S. Theveninb, E. Vyhmeistera,
P-O. Ostberge
aInsight Centre for Data Analytics, University College Cork, Cork - Ireland
bIMT Atlantique, LS2N - UMR CNRS 6004, F-44307 Nantes, France;
cLaboratory for Manufacturing Systems & Automation, University of Patras, Patras, Greece
dCodesignS, Flanders Make vzw, Belgium
eDepartment of Computing Science, Ume a University / BiTi Innovations, Sweden
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled October 2, 2022
ABSTRACT
This paper outlines the main idea and approach of the H2020 ASSISTANT (LeArn-
ing and robuSt deciSIon SupporT systems for agile mANufacTuring environments)
project. ASSISTANT is aimed at the investigation of AI-based tools for adaptive
manufacturing environments, and focuses on the development of a set of digital twins
for integration with, management of, and decision support for production planning
and control. The ASSISTANT tools are based on the approach of extending gen-
erative design, an established methodology for product design, to a broader set of
manufacturing decision making processes; and to make use of machine learning, opti-
mization, and simulation techniques to produce executable models capable of ethical
reasoning and data-driven decision making for manufacturing systems. Combining
human control and accountable AI, the ASSISTANT toolsets span a wide range
of manufacturing processes and time scales, including process planning, production
planning, scheduling, and real-time control. They are designed to be adaptable and
applicable in a both general and specic manufacturing environments.
KEYWORDS
Articial intelligence, Data analytics, Digital twins, Decision aid, Recongurable
manufacturing systems, Process and production planning, Scheduling and
real-time control
1. Introduction
This paper presents the main scientic ideas of the European project ASSISTANT.
With a multidisciplinary consortium combining key skills in AI, manufacturing,
edge computing and robotics ( Assistant, project EU, ICT 38: AI for manufacturing ,
n.d.), ASSISTANT is focused on the development of AI-based tools that capture and
streamline the work
ows of adaptive manufacturing environments. In particular, AS-
SISTANT will design and develop a set of digital twins: AI systems that incorporate
manufacturing domain knowledge and utilize machine learning (ML), optimization,
CONTACT A. Dolgui. Email: alexandre.dolgui@imt-atlantique.fr