sembly line in the remanufacturing context. The design of a disassembly line follows
the same steps as in assembly, but there is a need for more 
exibility to deal with the
unknown quality of the disassembled parts. This quality issue may lead to random
process duration, or even dierent operations depending on the state of the item. In
this context, the digital twin for real-time execution could help select the right oper-
ation depending on the quality of the part discovered during disassembly. Finally, the
intelligent digital twin for production planning can improve operations management in
remanufacturing facilities. In particular, this tool may alleviate the issues associated
with the uncertainty about the number of end-of-life items collected.
6. Conclusion
This paper outlines the objectives and the main approach of the European research
project ASSISTANT (November 2020 - October 2023). Building on a generative design
approach, ASSISTANT aims to produce a set of AI-based tools that support operators
and actors of adaptive manufacturing environments and increase the 
exibility, e-
ciency, and robustness of manufacturing environments. The ASSISTANT tools cover
the entire cycle of manufacturing decisions, ranging from process selection to produc-
tion system design, and include tools applicable at multiple time scales for detailed
planning, scheduling, and real-time control of manufacturing. ASSISTANT produces
a set of digital twins that are capable of adapting to manufacturing environments and
promotes a generative design-based methodology where tools continuously retrain and
learn from manufacturing data, and synthesize predictive and prescriptive models that
adjust to the reality of the shop 
oor at multiple decision levels. The ASSISTANT dig-
ital twins are used in conjunction with ML to train models, predict parameters and
characterize parameters, as well as inferring constraints for planning processes.
Acknowledgement(s)
This project is funded by the European Commission under the framework program
Horizon 2020, grant agreement n °101000165. The authors extend their gratitude to
all academic and industrial participants in the project.
References
Aameri, B., Cheong, H., & Beck, J. C. (2019). Towards an ontology for generative design of
mechanical assemblies. Applied Ontology ,14(2), 127{153.
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo, E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., . . . others (2016). Ten-
sor
ow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.04467 .
Abbas, H., Alur, R., Mamouras, K., Mangharam, R., & Rodionova, A. (2018). Real-time
decision policies with predictable performance. Proceedings of the IEEE ,106(9), 1593{
1615.
Assistant, project eu, ict 38: Ai for manufacturing. (n.d.).
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101000165 . (Accessed: 2021-08-05)
Batta a, O., Dolgui, A., & Guschinsky, N. (2020). Optimal cost design of 
ow lines with re-
congurable machines for batch production. International Journal of Production Research ,
58(10), 2937{2952.
23