learning (e.g., learning physical restrictions) that optimize the entire process globally.
3.4. The extension of generative design to all manufacturing decisions
We would like to be able to generate suitable/optimal process plans, production plans,
schedules, etc. In order to explore the possibilities in an automated way, we need to
be able to model the "design space", i.e., the possible production plans, schedules,
etc. This is a research challenge, given the multitude of domains that are joined in
a manufacturing system. We tackle this challenge by creating a domain model that
covers this design space (see also the citations). This domain model serves as input for
both coarse grained learning (structure of the model, i.e., execution order of schedule),
as well as ne-grained learning (i.e., learning exact parameter values).
Coarse grained \learning and inference" (in fact not an ML approach) will be done
by optimization algorithms. For examples:
determining an optimal process plan or schedule based on cost, throughput etc.
This uses optimization algorithms based on a decision problem in combination
with cost/throughput/... simulation
determining an optimal schedule. This uses an optimization that heavily relies
on uncertainties (availability of an operator, chance of breakdown, etc.).
Fine grained learning and inference will be done to determine model parameters.
For examples:
statistical analysis of historical data to determine distributions representing un-
certainty.
estimation of parameter distributions. This is achieved based on statistical anal-
ysis of the historical data. Parameters can be predicted using e.g., Bayesian
networks.
The process of developing such AI solutions will be supported by a knowledge graph
that contains a domain model and links it to data, models and other existing artefacts
within a manufacturing context. This knowledge graph can be explored and queried
for data, information, models. Examples are:
scattered data can be easily queried to perform statistical analysis. The results
can be stored as parameters with uncertainty in the knowledge graph (e.g., like-
lihood of a machine breaking down as a probability distribution).
a Bayesian network can be extracted from the parameters in the knowledge graph
that are modelled with uncertainty.
a process plan outline (what resources, skills, tasks, etc. exist) can be extracted
to serve as input for nding an optimal process plan.
Generative design is automated by a technique called computational design synthe-
sis (CDS) , (Chakrabarti et al., 2011). CDS aims at assisting designers through rapid
exploration of the space of possible designs. The use of CDS in the early conceptual
design phase requires the use of abstractions and formal models, and builds on do-
main modeling (Helms, Shea, & Hoisl, 2009) and DSL, in particular for the design
of manufacturing/assembly lines, (Herzig, Berx, Gadeyne, Witters, & Paredis, 2016).
The methods return optimal solution with regard to cost and throughput, outputted
as formal architectural models. To the best of our knowledge, generative design has
only been used to design products and production systems. We will extend the use of
generative design to production planning and scheduling, allowing the user to specify
13