and simulation techniques to construct digital replicas of manufacturing environment
elements and tools capable of producing, reasoning on, and evaluating production
plans. To facilitate deep integration of systems and harness value from data, the digital
twins will structure and expose information in the form of knowledge graphs (domain
models) that allow data scientists and external end users to embed domain knowledge
in, and use the twins without detailed understanding of the underlying systems.
The ASSISTANT tools are aimed to facilitate integration of complex manufacturing
systems with diverse data sets into singular logical systems for automation and
operation of complex collaborative production systems that can be dynamically re-
congured on demand. The ASSISTANT project aims to make concrete contributions
towards increased productivity, 
exibility, and robustness in manufacturing systems;
as well as making advances towards sustainable learning and knowledge transfer
in complex systems through integration of human experience and machine intelligence.
AI technologies are extensively used today for automation and learning in the de-
livery of digital services in the cloud computing oerings of companies such as Google,
Facebook, and Amazon. However, while these services are commercially successful,
scalable, and widely applicable in conventional ICT environments, large parts of the
underlying business models are based on harnessing the economy of scale eects of mas-
sive data centers which is not directly transferable to manufacturing. The reality and
needs of manufacturing industries that make this approach challenging include the fact
that manufacturing often targets production of dedicated products (instead of general-
ized services), using specialized tools (instead of generic ICT platforms), and addresses
small markets (instead of broad ICT-based or integrated business segments). Certain
AI-related technologies have since long been adapted and developed for manufacturing,
e.g., automated machine tuning and predictive quality inspection, but manufacturing
AI tends to be applied at ne-grained decision making levels which makes it hard to
scale these eorts. To extend the capabilities of manufacturing AI systems and make
them more applicable in broader scenarios, ASSISTANT employs a combination of pre-
dictive and prescriptive analytics techniques to embed AI technologies in higher-level
manufacturing decision making such as process planning, production planning, and
scheduling. To retain human control and system accountability, ASSISTANT develops
a generative design framework for optimal interaction between human decision making
and AI-based decision support. As dened in (Aameri, Cheong, & Beck, 2019), gener-
ative design is an approach to iterative design where users can specify goals expressed
in terms of objectives and mathematical constraints, and software applications develop
sets of feasible and/or optimal design solutions for human evaluation. While generative
design was originally developed for iterative product design, the ASSISTANT project
develops tools to extend the technique to other manufacturing decisions.
Application and use of AI technologies require extensive amounts of data. Use of
AI for production planning and control also places requirements for timely delivery
(real time) of high quality data. Manufacturing environments tend to be rich sources
of data, albeit typically diverse and heterogeneous in nature. A well-developed use of
such data would allow the extension or improvement of models and processes within
the manufacturing domain. In so doing, applications like Design for Six Sigma and
Design for Manufacturing, can use AI to extract the required knowledge from various
phases of the product life cycle.
The path to extract that information and produce the required knowledge has been
proposed following three possible links: (1) dynamically generate knowledge bases, (2)
determine minimum information requirements, and (3) data-interoperability support.
2