The rst two are strongly linked to AI. ASSISTANT can be linked to both processes
by considering that: knowledge graphs, model constructions, and generative design
are linked to (1), while an understanding of the minimum information needed to
construct sound models, and therefore providing them to the system, is linked to (2).
As expected, the linked behaviours to be constructed by AI should be provided with
enough representability and curated to produce useful knowledge.
To meet the projects' data management and curation needs, ASSISTANT denes
an architecture with a set of digital twins (to be embedded in manufacturing envi-
ronments) that make data available through a shared data management platform: the
ASSISTANT data fabric.
In summary, ASSISTANT employs a combination of generative design techniques
and machine learning to develop tools for data-driven production management deci-
sions. ASSISTANT goes beyond the current state of the art use of digital twins by:
(1) Incorporating machine learning to automate the development of digital twin
data models from IoT/ERP/MES data, including estimation and management
of model parameter uncertainties.
(2) Iteratively applying machine learning mechanisms to continuously retrain and
improve digital twin data models.
(3) Basing on the synergy between machine learning and digital twins, extending the
concept of generative design to cover a broader set of manufacturing processes,
including process planning itself.
ASSISTANT provides products and services that are usable in a wide range of
manufacturing processes leading to agile production processes and improved quality
of products and processes. First, ASSISTANT will foster the adoption of predictive
analytics in a wide range of manufacturing processes. Despite the short return on
investment of prescriptive analytics tools, most manufacturers are not using such
tools due to the high initial investment or lack of personalization. The implementation
of prescriptive analytics tools requires high consulting costs to adapt software. AS-
SISTANT will provide model acquisition from data that will reduce these costs since
the software will automatically adjust to the requirements of the shop 
oor. This will
result in the large-scale adoption of prescriptive analytics in manufacturing. Second,
ASSISTANT aims to transfer the recent development of adaptive stochastic/robust
optimization to manufacturing companies. Such techniques provide decisions (process
planning, production planning, scheduling) that are not only robust to various uncer-
tainties but select the states (resource usage, inventory level) to react appropriately
when unknown parameters unfold. The intelligent digital twin for process planning
(resp. production planning and scheduling) will lead to production systems (resp.
production plan and schedule) with the right level of agility. Finally, ASSISTANT
will provide an intelligent twin for 
exible process planning that accounts for quality.
This tool assists the process engineer in selecting the resources and equipment of the
manufacturing system, as well as the ne-tuning of the operation parameters, and
deciding when and where to perform quality checks. Thanks to the availability of
historical process plans and their resulting product/process quality, the user will be
able to design a process plan that leads to high product/process quality and foresee
alternative process plans in case of defects or machine breakdown. Also, the real-time
controller will provide a real-time update in the production schedule and process plan
in case of a defective operation or machine breakdown.
Our objective is not to have AI systems replacing humans, but humans working
3