ASSISTANT intends to advance the state of the art of model acquisition in two
ways. First, we will address the question of learning parameterized models that can
be transposed to several situations, i.e. a model should not become invalid if we
add/remove a machine: in the context of manufacturing, typical parameters are num-
bers/type/capacity/speed of machines, task characteristics, cost matrices and depen-
dency graphs. Second, we will initiate a line of research where model acquisition in-
teracts smoothly with digital twins to converge to more realistic models. It has been
shown that discrete optimization models have a strong structure which allows one to
acquire models from a restricted set of samples, Beldiceanu et al. (2016). To get more
realistic models we aim to integrate digital twins into the learning process in a smart
way: rather than considering the huge amount of simulated data generated by a digital
twin, we plan to use active learning, Bessiere et al. (2017), to query digital twins in a
focused way in order to converge to more robust models.
3.3. Machine learning to learn digital twin's parameters and uncertainties
The digital twin has been introduced as a virtual representation of real objects
(Glaessgen & Stargel, 2012). In a manufacturing context, the digital twin is composed
of interconnected physical and functional models of resources, products and systems.
The purpose is to improve production by carrying out autonomous decision-making
in planning and operation (Boschert & Rosen, 2016). Feedback of the information
and decisions to the previous planning phases are part of the concept Kahlen,
Flumerfelt, and Alves (2017). The concept envisages a production-phase-spanning
use of the resulting models and information in dierent software tools for increased

exibility and closed-loop operations. Digital twins were rst introduced for product
design by using CAD models and simulations. Later, the concept was extended to
planning, operation and maintenance (Funk & Reinhart, 2017; Ivanov, Dolgui, Das,
& Sokolov, 2019). Digital twins consist of multiple models from various domains.
These domain models focus on conceptual modeling of a complex problem domain
in order to gain better understanding. Languages such as UML and SysML permit
automatic translation to executable/analyzable models. To tackle a specic domain
idiom, domain-specic languages (DSL) were created, (Kelly & Tolvanen, 2008) .
Major industry software providers such as IBM, ORACLE and SIEMENS already
oer digital twins (e.g., Watson Internet of Things), that incorporate a machine
learning aspect, especially in the context of IoT. Similarly, domain modeling is useful
for many AI tools, e.g. TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016).
As ASSISTANT needs to deal with the complex, heterogeneous domains (i.e., sev-
eral aspects of production lines), we will start from the above-described approaches
combining AI and domain modeling. Contrary, to existing twins who use ML primarily
for specic prediction tasks, we will enhance digital twins with machine learning for
prescriptive analytics in manufacturing to make decisions leading to 
exible and ro-
bust manufacturing decisions in the design, operation, and real-time stages. Further-
more, we will use human-understandable AI, by incorporating white-box modelling
techniques in domain modeling, including behavioral models of schedules, machine
behavior. Another aspect is that these domain models and AI algorithms explicitly
need to take into consideration uncertainties. Therefore, we will extend domain model-
ing languages to support the modeling of uncertainties. In addition, we will use digital
twins to produce more realistic explicable decision aid models based on reinforcement
12