are driven by the use of human-centric considerations, the ART principles, and those
derived from EU requirements and regulations (e.g., AI act and Trustworthy require-
ments). In ASSISTANT, the main strategy used to dene the scope of the integration
of responsible AI considerations implies the fullment of a human-centric approach
within the architectural denition. To do this, rst, a technical denition of what is
proposed to be built must be dened. This technical denition is constructed by a set of
requirements established by each digital twin component within ASSISTANT. Then,
the integration of responsible AI considerations is performed in a recursive process,
allowing modication of the dened technical architecture.
To gather the requirements within the project, an integrated-requirements engineer-
ing methodology is proposed. The foundations of the methodology are formed by the
stakeholder's current processes and practices. To secure the acceptance of ASSISTANT
by its end-users, all stakeholders are involved in the design of the ASSISTANT archi-
tecture and, therefore, in the denition of the current processes and practices. The
current practices re
ect an image of current processes and contain several challenges.
These challenges constitute the major drivers for the project and, ultimately, the foun-
dation for the requirements. Two main types of requirements are distinguished, the
end-user requirements and the IT requirements.
The end-user requirements are points of improvement and are valid for the whole
project. They represent the main business drivers of the project, and need to be satis-
ed by the project outcomes. The IT requirements are based on the use cases desired
scenario, and target the development by specifying software and hardware function-
alities. The requirements are obtained by performing a deep analysis of the users'
needs (production managers, process engineers, but also workers), based on interviews,
questionnaires, and on-site workshops. The information about current processes, main
problems and their underlying causes, KPIs for decisions, as well as ethical concerns on
the use of AI in manufacturing is collected. The current situation of process and pro-
duction planning, scheduling, and real-time control is analyzed. Then the requirements
for the intelligent digital twins are established.
Based on these requirements, the global architecture is designed. The role of the
overall architecture of ASSISTANT is to provide a framework for individual sub-
architectures to collaborate in a common cause. The key for this approach is to intro-
duce interoperability (i.e., information, technical, and visualisation interoperability)
on the dierent sub-architectures.
Once the technical architecture is dened, the recursive process for integrating mod-
ications that secure the human-centric considerations is implemented. In addition,
ASSISTANT considers aspects that are preconditions for ethical conduct on account-
ability and eective, meaningful transparency. Therefore, we will carefully select the
programming language level, foreseeable system behavior, API design, and interfaces.
The architecture should also ensure stakeholders transparency, accountability, and
foreseeability. Moreover, ASSISTANT incorporates requirements imposed by positive
laws on fundamental rights protections such as the General Data Protection Reg-
ulation, non-discrimination legislation, labor law, among others. ASSISTANT then
observes legal obligations that are democratically legitimated and enforceable under
the Rule of Law.
17