Data-driven: The twins will ensure a continuous link from the data generated
by IoT devices to the decision aid tools and decision-makers. Data availability
is one of the main challenges for the use of AI in manufacturing, and we will
develop a data fabric for automatic data cleaning and reconstruction to manage
the full life cycle of the data. In addition, the data fabric uses domain knowledge
to integrate data from heterogeneous sources: IoT devices, industrial data, and
market data (e.g. demand, energy prices). The data allow a precise estimate (and
continuous updating) of the model parameters and their variability.
Self-adaptive: The intelligent digital twins will self-adapt based on feedback from
the shop 
oor, past simulations, and user interactions. ASSISTANT will investi-
gate the possibility of automatically enhancing the prescriptive analytics models
by using AI adaptive representations. For example, decision-makers often mod-
ify solutions suggested by decision support systems manually. Algorithms will
be developed to learn these modications to adapt the models.
Collaborative: The intelligent twins oer graphical interfaces to help process
engineers and production directors make decisions through generative design,
with tools to visualize the solution pace, tools to compare dierent solutions,
and chatbots. In addition, the real-time digital twin helps workers input and
visualize the tasks to perform by means of wearable devices (augmented reality
glasses and smartwatches).
Explainable: Human planners will remain responsible for all signicant decisions.
Thus, decision aid models need to be explainable. More precisely, despite the
constant automated changes in the decision aid models, humans will continue to
understand and visualize them. Finally, the user will be able to interact easily
(e.g., add constraints, modify decisions) through the generative design approach.
Ethical-by-design: Responsible AI considers the process in which AI is devel-
oped, incorporated, and its interactions with human operators. ASSISTANT will
be ethical-by-design and ethical-in-design. These ethical design approaches en-
sure compliance, security, data protection, privacy by design, fairness - including
gender, race and religious aspects of operators - and explicablity through formal
analysis and representation of regulatory principles as well as incorporating the
stakeholder's inputs in the solution. Furthermore, \ethical in design" aims at
developing and using AI in proper and veriable ways.
Safe, reactive, and easily integrated: due to an adequate selection of computation
resources (cloud/fog/edge), the tool will allow the user to have control over the
resources used for computation in such a way that condential data remains
within the company's premise, or circulate in an encrypted fashion to fog or
cloud computers.
Autonomous: The intelligent digital twin network autonomously actuates the
decision validated by the decision-makers. Moreover, a control loop may suggest
to the user to: (1) replan the production when the current plan is not imple-
mentable; (2) recongure the production system when the production capacity
is not adapted to the demand.
Fig. 2 illustrates the concept of ASSISTANT. The architecture of the intelligent dig-
ital twin networks follows the classical three-step framework (perception, reasoning,
actuation). The gure is related to Fig 1 by considering that the perception (IOT and
external sources) and the actuation (actions based on the process planning production
planning, scheduling, and real time components) are linked to the digital twin compo-
nents. The linkage between the digital twin and the actuation components (i.e. factory
8