These intelligent digital twins enhance advanced planning systems with machine
learning and data analytics not only to predict the values of uncertain parameters
based on data available from the shop and external sources, but also to enhance the
accuracy of the decision models by learning the behavior of a constantly changing shop

oor, and to estimate conditions outside normality that could cause problems.
Following recent trends, we can undoubtedly predict that future manufacturing sys-
tems will be highly digitalized and recongurable with hyper-dynamic workers. Con-
sequently, ASSISTANT focuses on factories with production processes, and assembly
lines where multiple product variants are processed and where digital twins already
partially exist. Such production systems are composed of multiple stations, where the
resources (workers/robots/tools) can move from one station to another.
The following intelligent twins will be developed:
The process planning twin helps the process engineer design a manufacturing sys-
tem that can be re-congured while maintaining a high level of product/process
quality and without escalating costs. This twin computes the possible process
plans, and it selects the possible conguration of the shop 
oor. The goal is to
design a factory with enough congurations to deal with the various scenarios
of future demands. Machine learning approaches may automatically detect the
resources and equipment able to perform a certain process. Besides the ability
to perform a task, the tool may predict the speed and quality associated with a
process plan. We will use AI methods to analyze the data and to evaluate the
specic process plans. The goal is to develop AI techniques to predict the quality
and eciency of a process plan. The resulting prediction model will be included
in the optimization algorithm to nd a process plan that respects the takt time,
quality requirements, and other KPIs.
The production planning twin helps the production manager to operate an ag-
ile factory. This intelligent twin adjusts the production capacity to the demand
(species the shop 
oor conguration, sets the worker requirement, subcontracts
labor, sets number of functional assembly lines), and places the orders of com-
ponents with the suppliers. In addition, this twin accounts for various sources of
uncertainties such as demand, production defects, process durations, etc.
The scheduling twin allocates the operations to the resource, and it assigns a
precise moment to perform each operation.
The real-time control twin executes the plans on the manufacturing systems in
real-time. It incorporates a hierarchical modelling approach to represent the re-
sources and their capabilities virtually, as well as the manufacturing tasks that
need to be executed. During the manufacturing process execution, this model
synthesizes real time sensor data coming from cameras, laser scanners, force sen-
sors, creating an enhanced model with autonomous, CNN based, 3D semantic
mapping. Based on this real time reconstruction of the environment and the
process, the intelligent twin detects anomalies in the process and products, and
it updates the parameters of the equipment when required. For instance, time
series analysis can be extended to consider data streams from captors on the ma-
chines. As a result, this twin can detect correct machine cycles, and it can detect
situations leading to product or process quality issues. In addition, the twin de-
tects deviations from the plan and triggers feedback to other twins to update the
plans when required. Finally, machine learning tools detect dangerous situations,
modifying the settled actuation of automated resources when required.
These aspiring digital twins will have the following characteristics:
7