the digital twins, and the orchestration system incorporates statistical and machine
learning tools to characterize and predict the workloads of the systems. Combined,
these tools constitute a foundation for an autonomous resource management system
capable of intelligent load balancing and decision support for storage management, e.g.,
through recommendations of how to make best use of the diverse resources of cloud
edge computing landscapes. The system is also intended to incorporate scheduling
and planning algorithms, as well as tools that allow predictive evaluation management
strategy decisions.
The overall design of the orchestration system will be human-centric, and allow users
to visualize where the data is sent and keep complete control on data 
ows and place-
ment decisions. The platform will be based on established technology-neutral mech-
anisms such as JSON-based REST services, Google protocol buers, and OpenSSL
for secure messaging, and built on state of the art Python, R, and Matlab libraries
for time-series and deep learning techniques, as well as providing interfaces that allow
integration with modern resource management tools such as Kubernetes, docker, and
Istio service meshes. Overlap and integration of the data fabric into existing man-
agement frameworks such as the I4.0 Asset Administration Shell and the Reference
Architectural Model RAMI 4.0 will be studied in the project.
4.4. Human centric decision cockpits
In our intelligent twins, users will create process plans, production plans, and schedules
through generative design approaches. Consequently, the cockpits provide chatbots,
tools for plans visualization (including precedence graphs, process plans, Gantt charts,
and production tables), tools to highlight the dierences between various solutions,
and interfaces to add ltering constraints describing the desired solutions. In addition,
we will investigate the use of wearable devices to help inexperienced workers perform
manufacturing operations or maintenance.
4.5. Predictive analytics tools
Ignoring manufacturing uncertainties leads to suboptimal decisions. Nevertheless, the
inclusion of uncertainty increases the model complexity, and consequently compu-
tation time and memory consumption. Thus, the decision-makers must be able to
select carefully the types of uncertainties to include in the prescriptive analytics. We
distinguish the unknown and the stochastic parameters. The former might vary sig-
nicantly, but their variance does not have a critical impact on the decisions (e.g.,
the diameter precision of a drilled hole). They are replaced by their estimates. AS-
SISTANT provides machine learning tools to estimate them as accurately as possible.
The latter are included in the decision models because manufacturers want to hedge
against them. ASSISTANT provides prescriptive analytics to learn the representation
of uncertainty from measurements or domain knowledge which can be a probability
distribution represented by its type (e.g., Normal) and parameters (e.g., mean, vari-
ance), a non-parametric Bayesian network, a convex uncertainty set convenient for
robust optimization, fuzzy variables, etc.
19