targeted KPI, while the software returns solutions within a specied range.
3.5. Data driven optimization in manufacturing
Automatic decision support in tactical and operational manufacturing decisions relies
on optimization/operation research techniques. With the development of computing
technologies, software providers started to propose Advanced Planning Systems
(APS) (Stadtler, 2005) to model the production process. The future of APS lies in
the incorporation of data analytics techniques, to represent the possible values that
uncertain data can take better, (Thevenin, Adulyasak, & Cordeau, 2021). Techniques
to include data analytics into the linear program classically used in APS have been
developed (Bertsimas, Gupta, & Kallus, 2018; Thevenin, Adulyasak, & Cordeau,
2022), but their application in manufacturing remains scarce (Zhao, Ning, & You,
2019). While APSs have a large added value for companies, they remain largely
under-utilized because of their costs, and because it requires qualied planners to
ensure the APS receive accurate data, and to analyze the output of the plan.
Similarly, many approaches have been developed to design conventional manufac-
turing lines, they can be adapted or replaced to meet the new challenges posed by
recongurable manufacturing systems (Hashemi-Petroodi, Dolgui, Kovalev, Kovalyov,
& Thevenin, 2020; Koren, Gu, & Guo, 2018; Yelles-Chaouche, Gurevsky, Brahimi, &
Dolgui, 2020). While dierent approaches have been developed to use the 
exibility
of RMS eciently by automatizing process planning (Batta a, Dolgui, & Guschinsky,
2020), the issues of designing recongurable lines have not yet been suciently studied.
On the one hand, the discrepancy between the data used by the system and what
is happening in the company leads to poor decisions from APS. In ASSISTANT, the
intelligent digital twins make decisions based on real-time data. On the other hand,
historical data analyzed with machine learning techniques allow predictions about the
values of various unknown parameters to be obtained. We aim to integrate the resulting
characterization of the uncertainties of such parameters to create plans that are robust
to the uncertainties. Finally, to be aligned with the requirements and changes of the
shop 
oor ASSISTANT aims to develop a tool to automatically build the scheduling
models based on data. ASSISTANT will provide a method to design recongurable
production lines with the right level of recongurability, while maintaining the required
product/process quality. This will be achieved by using data analytics techniques to
build the uncertainty sets, and by using machine learning to learn the implication of
a process plan on the quality of the products and process.
3.6. Human interaction and safe human-robot collaboration
There are more and more robots in the manufacturing industry, and they take over
regular the regular 
ow of operations, whereas human workers handle the production
peaks Thevenin, Mebarki, and Chatellier (2021). In this context, the human factor
plays a crucial part in manufacturing systems (Hashemi-Petroodi, Thevenin, Kovalev,
& Dolgui, 2020). As such, robotic support of humans for a collaborative assembly
greatly enhances those systems (Michalos et al., 2014). There are several industrial
applications regarding humans in manufacturing systems, e.g. BMW and Audi AG
introduced cooperative robots to work near human operators in Spartanburg and
Ingolstadt plants. Indirect Human Robot Collaboration (HRC) is achieved by various
14