the controller reacts instantly. When simple adjustments are not possible, the plan
is updated. To ensure the safety of the worker during process plan reconguration,
robots we will use deep learning to detect obstacles as well as human presence and
behavior.
5. Discussion
ASSISTANT encompasses research, development, and validation. With respect to re-
search, the goal of the project is to:
(1) Provide a platform for dierent scientic communities (optimization, machine
learning, and manufacturing) that allows them to address key challenges in a
holistic way, such as robustness of systems, adaptability, and recongurability.
(2) Build on scientic advances in both statistical and symbolic machine learning.
The goal is to cover the range of descriptive, predictive and prescriptive anal-
ysis using the most appropriate techniques. Finding correlations in data can
be done using statistics (e.g., to nd trends in a data stream). Based on such
correlations, predictions can be achieved using a neural network (e.g., for pre-
dictive maintenance). Machine learning and discrete optimizations, implemented
by e.g., constraint programming or mixed-integer programming, can be used for
optimizing manufacturing systems (e.g., generating optimal production plans,
optimal settings, etc.).
(3) Automate optimization analyses. In the current state, optimization software is
used in a per-case manner (e.g., manual creation of production scheduling mod-
els) with some given assumptions. This is not adequate in a recongurable en-
vironment. We intend to generate models and software components from the
available data.
(4) Employ digital twins as validation components for what-if analysis using AI.
Digital twins oer a way to simulate scenarios correctly, hence supporting engi-
neers in their decision process. In order to support this, ASSISTANT will design
the communication between a digital twin and AI models, so that they can be
more easily converted into operational and executable AI solutions.
(5) Create human-centric interaction with the AI system, where the reasons behind
decisions or suggestions provided by the AI system are easily explained. Oper-
ations and engineers need to be kept in the loop of the output of digital twins
and AI solutions by means of interpretable explanations.
With respect to development, the full life cycle of production systems is addressed
going from the specication of a manufacturing or assembly line up to the execution of
tasks in machines/workstations. The architecture manages the data throughout the all
life cycle of system, and supports human-centric interfaces at several decision points.
ASSISTANT validates and applies its research by means of three concrete industrial
cases, by Stellantis, Atlas Copco and Siemens Energy, as well as a demonstrator case
by Flanders Make. A complete solution will be implemented for each case considered.
This starts with data collection, creation of digital twins and usage of AI tools for
decision support for process planning, production planning, production scheduling
and real-time control.
All developed material including tools, demonstrations, use cases, architectures,
algorithms, code, etc. will be made public after the project is completed.
The ASSISTANT research project fosters collaboration between researchers working
21