in the elds of AI and experts in manufacturing. The ASSISTANT consortium is
composed of Academics on AI ethics (UCC, EUV), AI and Edge Computing (UCC,
BITI), AI and Optimization (IMT, UCC), Production Industry (LMS, FLM, TUM), as
well as technology providers (INTRASOFT, FLM, SIEMENS AG), and manufacturers
(SIEMENS Energy, ATLAS COPCO, PSA).
ASSISTANT aims to improve decision-making in manufacturing from the design of
the manufacturing system, its operation management, and the control of its execution.
To enhance these decision aid tools, we will use the massive amount of data generated
on the shop 
oor to automatically acquire elements (constraints, objectives) of mathe-
matical models and constraints programming models. These decision models will also
account for uncertainties for the parameters that cannot be predicted accurately. As a
result, the decision aid modules will automatically adapt to changes of conguration
of the shop 
oor. In addition, the modules associated with each type of decision will
communicate through a feedback process. Thus, the decision validated by the decision-
maker will automatically be actuated on the shop 
oor. This set of modules yields an
intelligent digital twin network, and its creation requires several breakthroughs:
Developing tools to acquire optimization models by combining the recent in
machine learning and digital twins;
Investigating the use of machine learning to learn the parameters of the digital
twin's model (simulation model, optimization models, etc.);
Enhancing forecasting methods to predict a probability distribution of an un-
certainty set rather than a single value;
Extending the generative design approach to production system design, produc-
tion planning, and scheduling;
Investigating data-driven optimization to design assembly lines;
Investigating stochastic programming for practical production planning prob-
lems;
Developing AI system for safe, fence-less, human-robot collaboration.
The recent breakthroughs related to AI were provided by the GAFA, and they
mostly aim to provide online customized services. Transferring these breakthroughs to
the manufacturing industry is a challenge. The GAFA are early AI adopters who have
large business models, AI is their core activity, and they acquired maturity in these
technologies. In addition, these companies have access to a massive amount of data via
their online services. On the contrary, the core business of the manufacturing industry
is production. Manufacturers need dedicated software to address pressing issues on
the shop 
oor, such as reducing production costs, increasing service levels, improving
quality, detecting defects, improving safety.
While ASSISTANT focuses on improving manufacturing decisions on the shop 
oor,
the idea of the project may be extended to other applications. This includes appli-
cation to logistics where decisions include network design, warehousing, distribution,
routings, and last-mile deliveries. Indeed, these types of applications are often solved
with operation research models, and more and more devices such as GPS trackers and
RFID tags, are used to track information. The ideas may also apply to services such as
health care management, where decisions include the location of health care facilities
and their capacity, the stang, the assignment of patients to rooms and sta, nurse
scheduling.
The ASSISTANT concept would also be valuable in a remanufacturing context.
First, the process planning tool may be extended to deal with the design of a disas-
22