2. Objective of the project
This section describes the current industrial challenges before providing the main
concept of our project.
2.1. Challenge for industry
The manufacturing industry is undergoing a paradigm shift from mass production to
mass customization and more recently mass individualization. As a result, companies
tend to increase the size of their product assortments, launch new products more fre-
quently, and constantly adjust their production processes (acquire new equipment). In
this context, their survival depends on their recongurability, adaptability, and 
exibil-
ity. This paradigm shift has led to technological advances (such as recongurable man-
ufacturing systems and adaptable factories), where resources can be removed, added,
and replaced quickly. To manage such agile production systems smoothly, manufactur-
ing companies are increasingly adopting information technologies to have a complete
and accurate view of their processes on the shop 
oor. Such technologies are often
referred to as the "internet of things" (IOT), and they include: RFID, various auto-
matic sensors on machines and products, and manufacturing execution systems, among
others. In addition, simulation tools that accurately describe the conguration of the
system are available for reliable oine testing without disturbing the online physical
environment.
ASSISTANT aims to rely on recent advances on optimization, simulation, predictive
analytics, prescriptive analytics, and machine learning to help manufacturing compa-
nies from various sectors to reduce costs, increase product and process quality, shorten
unplanned downtime, and increase production throughput.
ASSISTANT aims to tackle the following manufacturing challenges:
(1) Complex production planning challenge: production planning is more and more
complex because the number of end items and components increases, and ac-
counting for the capacity of 
exible resources is dicult. In addition, with the
constant changes many parameters (e.g., demand, processing times, component
arrival dates) vary signicantly, and they are dicult to forecast accurately.
(2) Product and process quality challenge: the lack of regularity and consistency
in the production process makes it dicult for manufacturers to ensure prod-
uct/process quality. In addition, new tools and equipment are frequently acquired
or modied, and their performance is dicult to predict.
(3) Hyper dynamic worker challenge: manufacturing systems are more and more
robotized, and most systems will become hybrid with humans and machines.
Typically, robots handle the regular 
ow, whereas operators bring 
exibility. In
such a system, workers become hyper-dynamic, and they are more exposed to
injuries.
(4) Unsustainable industrial practices: the manufacturing industry must address en-
vironmental and social challenges. While industrial practices have focused on
economic performance, more and more industries consider sustainability assess-
ment methods and indicators to alter purely economic-based strategies.
5