4.2. The data fabric
To provide a unied platform for data management and storage, ASSISTANT realizes
an intelligent data fabric that provides data structures, domain models, and commu-
nication subsystems to abstract underlying technical heterogeneities and connecting
manufacturing, IoT, and AI systems in a shared communication system. Conceptually,
the ASSISTANT data fabric can be seen to be composed of three parts: a live data
streaming architecture, a storage architecture, and a domain-model based integration
architecture. The live data streaming architecture (which is based on the Streamhan-
dler platform developed by INTRASOFT) is responsible for integration with external
equipment, data acquisition, and live data streaming. For the data fabric, Streamhan-
dler acts as an intermediary and data acquisition front-end that provides stream pro-
cessing capabilities and integrates the storage architecture part of the data fabric
through data stream connectors. The storage architecture denes a service-oriented
architecture for data storage, management, and composition where data of dierent
types (e.g., structure, unstructured, and time series based) are eciently stored and
tagged with metadata for classication, search, and processing.
As part of the data analysis tasks, ASSISTANT will develop pattern recognition
tools based on constraints to detect and clean missing or unreliable data, and the
storage architecture provides light-weight data processing capabilities through a 
ex-
ible plug-in system where plug-in tools can be triggered explicitly or reactively (e.g.,
based on the presence of metadata tags in new data sets). In the integration layer,
which serves to provide a context-oriented interface to data and data storage systems,
an ontology architecture for integration of data from various internal sources (captors
that monitor product and process quality, RFID, MES, ERP systems, etc.) and exter-
nal sources (data from customers, equipment supplier, energy supplier, raw material
supplier, outsourcer data, etc.), tailored for prescriptive analytics, will be developed.
Such an ontology will dierentiate decisions to be make, parameters of the system,
and KPIs. Besides data, the digital representation will include simulation models (e.g.,
discrete event system, multi-body simulations) to incorporate the process operation
rules. Combined, these three subsystems provide a 
exible data storage management
platform tailored to the type of data and context of the project - adaptive manufac-
turing systems.
4.3. Data orchestration intelligence
To facilitate the seamless integration and scalability required to process and manage
the type and amount of data produced in agile manufacturing environments, highly
capable communication platforms are needed. The ASSISTANT data fabric's storage
architecture is designed as a 
exible service-oriented architecture that can be dynam-
ically managed through use of modern cloud native orchestration systems. Towards
this end, ASSISTANT will develop a management system for the storage architecture
composed of two parts: a simulation platform for evaluation of resource management
strategies, and a set of AI based tools for autonomous orchestration of the storage
architecture services.
Based on simulation and AI, the orchestration system can be conceptually seen as
a digital twin dedicated to the management of computational resources (similar to
the way the ASSISTANT digital twins manage manufacturing resources). The data
fabric simulation engine models the data 
ows both the manufacturing systems and
18