tive analytics based on an optimization data-driven model. Techniques such
as constraint programming are used in this step. The data-driven nature
of the model relies on the usage of the data available in the real time fac-
tory digital twins that are automatically updated based on the changes in
the shop 
oor. The explicability of the decision-making tool is achieved
through the deployment of a visualization interface. Thanks to this inter-
face, inexperienced users can assess the model and modify it based on their
experience, if needed. AI methods such as search based heuristics and meta
heuristics and optimization methods are used to generate optimal decisions
considering the factory uncertainty. Through the visualization interface the
user can study the suggested plan and lter the solutions by tightening
the targeted KPI values. Then, the selected solutions are validated through
the virtual factory simulation. While the simulation is negative, the models
are iteratively enriched through model acquisition techniques to learn to
represent the reality of shop 
oors better.
(c) The nal step focuses on reactive decision-making in terms of generating
strategies to react in a fast and ecient way to unforeseen events. These
strategies vary from simple decision rules easily understandable by the pro-
duction manager, to fast re-optimization techniques based on the model
designed in step (b), or black box neural network policies.
(3) Actuation: After the validation of the generated plan, the real-time-control mod-
ule dispatches the scheduled tasks to the resources involved, including robots,
machines and human operators. Dedicated interfaces to each resource are de-
ployed to enable communication with the machine and robots, while wearable
devices are used to include the human operators in the loop. The execution
of the schedule is continuously monitored to track the progress and detect un-
expected events that may occur. In the latter case, the actuation attempts to
re-schedule the remaining work. An automatic alert is triggered if the schedule
cannot be modied autonomously, and human intervention is needed. The data
captured by the real-time-control module are used to update the real time digital
reconstruction of the factory.
3. State of the art
As ASSISTANT is a multi-disciplinary project, we provide below a short state of the
art in the main elds of the project, and we explain how this state of the art must be
extended to realize the vision of our project.
3.1. AI for high level manufacturing decisions
The adoption of data-driven modeling and the underpinning use of IoT and machine
learning technologies are widely considered to have revolutionized the manufacturing
industry. However, adoption and market penetration are slow and often incremental.
For example, ML techniques for smart manufacturing processes have been demon-
strated in shop 
oor control (Wang & Jiang, 2019), predictive maintenance (Yam, Tse,
Li, & Tu, 2001), and online scheduling (Hammami, Mouelhi, & Said, 2017), among
other tasks.
In general, the incorporation of Machine Learning or Articial Intelligence (AI)
10