together with AI systems in optimal complementarity. In ASSISTANT, through
the use of decision cockpits, wearable devices, and chatbots, humans will work in
collaboration with the AI modules, intervene in the process without disrupting it and
contribute seamlessly to the decision-making. The working environment will be human
friendly, providing comfort and promoting cooperation to achieve higher eciency
levels in manufacturing. This goal will require an optimal distribution of workers
and machines on the shop 
oor. More precisely, ASSISTANT will provide tools for
supporting process engineers, the production managers, and the human operators.
The process planning twin will assist the process engineers with the design of a
recongurable manufacturing system, reducing the amount of expert work required
to set up the system and account for quality issues and the workers' well-being. The
production managers will be able to track the status of the process in real-time, also
allowing them to validate recovery plans in case of unplanned events. In addition,
the production planning and scheduling twins help to plan manufacturing operations.
ASSISTANT's AI modules will automate these processes. However, the production
managers can seamlessly interact, by entering targeted KPIs, and modifying solutions
by hand based on the human experience that AI lacks and on information/knowledge
absent from the computer system, resulting in ecient collaboration. Tools for
support of human operators provide a clear view of the operation status and give the
ability to interact with the process, allowing real-time decisions made by humans and
better human-robot interaction. ASSISTANT's AI systems will reduce the strain on
the human workers by balancing tasks between the humans and the other available
resources. Particular focus will be given to allocating the strenuous and repetitive
tasks to the robots, allowing humans to work on more delicate operations with
condence and comfort.
Our project's outcomes leverage AI to impact employment and quality of jobs
positively and, at the same time, support the production of a legal and ethical
framework for AI at the European level. Recongurable production systems are
supposed to support humans in production but often lead to an increased required
skill set, which can easily lead to stress and overstrain. ASSISTANT wants to solve
these problems through AI-based methods by supporting and further including
humans with individual skill sets. As a result, humans have a heightened awareness
of critical and safety tasks in their job. This increases the on the job motivation due
to an assistive system, and it results in better human working conditions and health.
ASSISTANT aims to initiate the path of AI introduction into working environments
and systems that enhance human capabilities and empower individuals and society
while respecting human autonomy and self-determination. ASSISTANT will mobilize
a research landscape far beyond direct project funding, involve and engage European
industry, reach relevant social stakeholders, and create a unique reference point
within the AI4EU ecosystem that provides a manifold return on investment for the
European economy and society. ASSISTANT will contribute to building a unique
framework in which industry, SMEs, and academics in the manufacturing arena can
understand and apply the trustworthy AI guidelines requirements as an actionable
plan from the company's workers to the business units.
The paper is an extension of Beldiceanu et al. (2021), and it successively presents
the objective and the main vision of the project in section 2, a state of the art in
section 3, the main scientic building blocks of the project (section 4, a discussion
(section 5), and a conclusion (section 6).
4