human detection applications Liu and Wang (2017); Lv, Feng, Ran, and Zhao (2014),
while direct HRC can be achieved through the use of wearable devices that provide
real-time data Michalos, Karagiannis, Makris, Tok calar, and Chryssolouris (2016).
Apart from some small-scale experimental installations where humans have a more
active role, most of the above applications have not reached the production site.
ASSISTANT aims to improve the support of the human operator both in the con-
text of indirect and direct interaction with robots: i) we aim at more reliable human
recognition than previous applications, extracting the human's status and intentions in
order to adapt to their behavior, entering a ii) direct interaction state when required:
wearable devices, such as AR glasses or smart watches will provide a set of sensors
giving input data for deep learning methods to extract models of humans' status and
intentions. ASSISTANT will comply fully with ethics requirements concerning human
safety in collaborative manufacturing systems.
3.7. Sustainable metrics in manufacturing companies.
Manufacturing companies measure managing metrics (KPIs) related to each sustain-
able pillar, namely economic, environmental, and social components. The optimization
at the dierent levels (e.g. strategic, tactical, or operational plan generation) will ac-
count for these sustainability pillars, and the company's stakeholders will x the levels
of participation of each pillar.
Manufacturing companies have broad know-how in expressing their interest on eco-
nomic representative KPIs. These KPIs will be evaluated based on the net benets
associated with the decisions, which are linked directly or indirectly to objective func-
tions variables established in the optimization processes,
The social perspective KPIs will be evaluated based on, but not limited to, the eth-
ical frameworks. These KPIs are fundamentally based on Organizational values-based
KPIs, Ethical requirements based KPIs (i.e., derived from the European Trustworthy
guidelines), Risk-based AI considerations linked to the social pillar and other socially
based considerations and constraints that do not violate regulatory considerations
specied by the previously dened instruments.
Finally, the environmental perspectives will be evaluated based on standardized
tools or KPIs correlated to environmental concerns. Dierent approaches and met-
rics are currently used in the manufacturing sector (e.g. Life Cycle Assessment) that
enforce the use of energy sustainable features, such as carbon emission and energy con-
sumption. Therefore, our approach seeks to include such metrics during the reasoning
processes.
4. Main scientic building blocks of the project
This section describes the tools requires to realize our vision. As shown in Figure 3,
the framework requires the following components: (1) denition of an ethical-by-design
architecture; (2) design of a data fabric leading to a real-time digital picture of the
manufacturing system; (3) creation of a data orchestration ensuring data safety and
short-latency; (4) creation of a human-centric framework; (5) development of predic-
tive analytics tools to estimate uncertain parameters; (6) creation of self-adaptive data
driven mechanisms and architecture in each intelligent twin; (7) development of de-
cision aid algorithms for robust and agile planning; (8) development of an AI-based
controller for actuation and reactive decision for real time control.
15