about 3000 posts under the subreddits dealing with
mental illness and about 300 posts for each of the
general topic subreddits. This also ensured a good
balance of class labels. While selecting the eight
general topic subreddits, we not only selected sub-
reddits that have sufﬁciently high number of posts,
but also ensured that we cover a broad range of
topics. Table 1 shows the statistics collected for
each subreddit. The dataset was preprocessed to
remove any URLs or usernames that could poten-
tially contain sensitive information. This was done
keeping in mind that the dataset will be released
publicly for the purpose of extending this research
work.
To gauge the data quality we ran some analysis.
We manually went over the lowest voted posts for
each mental illness subreddit. We wanted to estab-
lish that texts from these posts expressed emotions
from people discussing corresponding mental ill-
ness it is labelled as. Table 2 presents excerpts of
lowest voted post from each mental illness subred-
dit.
We also certiﬁed that the general topic subred-
dits did not have a high similarity with the posts
corresponding to other the other 5 subreddits. This
was done to ensure that we do not have any false
negatives while assigning truth labels. We counted
the number of posts the mental illness terms ap-
peared in, for each subreddit. The subreddits cor-
responding to mental illnesses had a much higher
count of these words. In addition to this, we
compared the cosine similarity between some of
the highest/lowest posts of mental illness subred-
dits and the general topic subreddits and manually
compared the results to ﬁnd that this distance was
higher than the distance between two posts of the
mental illness subreddits.
We also attempted to augment the data using
Easy Data Augmentation Wei and Zou (2019) to
boost the performance of our model. However, we
did not observe an apparent shift in our evaluation
metrics- explained by the fact the EDA is meant to
perform best for smaller datasets ( 5000 sample
sizes). So, we decided to not advance in that route.
4 Model
In this section, we describe our model architec-
ture for the multi-class mental illness classiﬁca-
tion task. We propose a RoBERTa based clas-
siﬁer in order to accomplish this. In addition,
we also compare the proposed model against anLSTM Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) based
classiﬁer and a BERT Devlin et al. (2018) based
classiﬁer to demonstrate the superiority of our ap-
proach. Since this is an entirely new dataset, there
is no established baseline, so the LSTM model will
serve as the baseline for our experiments. We also
showcase our gains over BERT, the most widely
used transformer model today for text classiﬁca-
tion. All our models were implented in Pytorch
Paszke et al. (2019). The Transformer models
were implemented with the help of the Hugging-
Face Transformers Wolf et al. (2019) library.
4.1 LSTM based classiﬁer
LSTMs(Long Short-Term Memory) were the state
of the art models when it came to text classiﬁca-
tion before the advent of Transformers. They will
serve as our baseline. First we tokenized the sen-
tences using NLTK3and converted them to lower
case to create our vocabulary. In order to get rid of
words that might not exist, we removed all words
from our vocabulary that appear only once. We
also added padding andunknown to our vocabu-
lary in order to account for padding and unknown
tokens respectively. Each sentence was repre-
sented using a sequence of length 512 and this
forms our input to the LSTM model. We used a
2 layer LSTM for all our experiments with an em-
bedding layer of size 100 and a hidden layer size of
256. Dropout Srivastava et al. (2014) with a prob-
ability of 0.5 was used in order to achieve regu-
larization. We used standard cross-entropy loss as
the loss function. During training, Adam Kingma
and Ba (2014) was the optimizer of choice, with
a learning rate of 0.005. The model was trained
for a total of 25 epochs with a batch size of 32.
Gradient clipping was used to prevent exploding
gradients.
4.2 BERT based classiﬁer
BERT(Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers) has been the biggest break-
through in the NLP domain in the recent past with
state of the art results in a myriad of NLP tasks.
Since its inception, better models with gains have
been trickling along, but BERT continues to be
the most popular model for text classiﬁcation even
today. The BERT classiﬁer comprises a ﬁne-tuned
BERT model followed by a dropout layer and a
fully connected layer. We ﬁne-tuned a pre-trained
3https://www.nltk.org/