well because of the presence of similar unstruc-
tured user data online.
The advent of transformers and BERT Devlin
et al. (2018) has caused quite a stir in the NLP
community because of the state-of-the-art results
it was able to produce in various NLP tasks. In
this work, we use a RoBERTa Liu et al. (2019)
based classiﬁer, which has a similar architecture
to BERT with an improved pre-training procedure.
RoBERTa’s effective and efﬁcient performance on
unstructured data and its ability to learn contextual
information compelled us to explore and capitalize
its power to categorize online user generated texts
into various classes of Mental Illness.
We identify ﬁve broad classes of mental ill-
nesses - depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder,
ADHD (Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disor-
der), PTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) and
an additional ’None’ class (which does not pertain
to any mental illness). We train a multi-class clas-
siﬁer on the data crawled from online user data.
Based on our experiments, we present encourag-
ing results that demonstrate that social media data
has the potential to complement standard clini-
cal procedures in the prognosis of mental health
amongst two broad categories of users - ones who
are seeking help online and ones who are unbe-
knownst of their condition.
2 Related Work
In the recent past, people have increasingly turned
to social media to share and seek counsel on the
topic of mental health. This has prompted re-
searchers to utilize the information and apply a
plethora of techniques in NLP and Machine Learn-
ing in order to assist people who might require
help. Most of the recent research has revolved
around Reddit data as in the case of Kim et al.
(2020), Gkotsis et al. (2017), Sekulic and Strube
(2019), Zirikly et al. (2019). Prior to this recent
shift to Reddit data, a lot of the earlier research
was focused on utilizing Twitter data as in the case
of Orabi et al. (2018), Benton et al. (2017), Cop-
persmith et al. (2015).
There have been a wide variety of approaches
ranging from classical NLP techniques to neu-
ral network based deep learning methods. Cop-
persmith et al. (2015) used character level lan-
guage models to examine how likely a sequence
of characters is to be generated by a user with
mental health issues. Benton et al. (2017) eval-uated a standard regression model, a multilayer
perceptron single-task learning (STL) model, and
a neural MTL model on detecting multiple types
of mental health issues. Orabi et al. (2018) uti-
lized word embeddings in tandem with a variety
of neural network models like CNNs and RNNs
to detect depression. Gkotsis et al. (2017) ex-
perimented with Feed Forward Neural Networks,
CNNs, SVMs and Linear classiﬁers to perform bi-
nary classiﬁcation on mental health posts. Sekulic
and Strube (2019) came up with the approach of
using Hierarchical Attention Networks(HANs) to
detect a wide range of mental health issues like
Depression, ADHD, Anxiety etc. and trained a bi-
nary classiﬁer for each of the disorders. The most
recent work on this was by Kim et al. (2020) who
proposed a CNN-based classiﬁcation model. Once
again though, each disorder had its own separate
binary classiﬁer to perform the detection.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt at
treating this problem as a multi-class classiﬁca-
tion problem, where a single classiﬁer can not
only detect the disorder, but, also accurately clas-
sify the type of disorder that the person is refer-
ring to in their post. In addition, this is also the
ﬁrst work that harnesses the incredible capabilities
of an advanced Transformer based algorithm like
RoBERTa to solve this difﬁcult problem.
3 Dataset
The Reddit API was used to crawl 13 subred-
dits and 17159 posts text and title text to obtain
data for this research work. The text from com-
ment threads was not collected as it tended to di-
verge from the main topic of the subreddit. Out
of the 13 subreddits, 5 can be directly associated
with a mental illness. They are: bipolar ,adhd ,
anxiety ,depression and ptsd . The posts in
these subreddits were assigned a class label cor-
responding to the name of the subreddits. The
remaining 8 subreddits were chosen from a wide
range of topics. They are music ,travel ,india ,
politics ,english ,datasets ,mathematics and
science . These general topic subreddits were
combined together and assigned the class label
none .
While collecting data, we ensured that the num-
ber of upvotes for each post in all subreddits is
more than 10. We also set a minimum post to-
ken length of 30 tokens. This is so that we retain
quality in the dataset. We approximately crawled