Detection and Classiﬁcation of mental illnesses on social media using
RoBERTa
Ankit Murarka
IBM Corporation
Research Triangle Park, NC
ankit.murarka1
@ibm.comBalaji Radhakrishnan*
balag59@gmail.comSushma Ravichandran*
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
sushma.ravichandran
@ibm.com
Abstract
Given the current social distancing regulations
across the world, social media has become
the primary mode of communication for most
people. This has resulted in the isolation of
many people suffering from mental illnesses
who are unable to receive assistance in per-
son. They have increasingly turned to social
media to express themselves and to look for
guidance in dealing with their illnesses. Keep-
ing this in mind, we propose a solution to de-
tect and classify mental illness posts on social
media thereby enabling users to seek appro-
priate help. In this work, we detect and clas-
sify ﬁve prominent kinds of mental illnesses-
depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, ADHD
and PTSD by analyzing unstructured user data
on social media platforms. In addition, we are
sharing a new high-quality dataset to drive re-
search on this topic. We believe that our work
is the ﬁrst multi-class model that uses a Trans-
former Vaswani et al. (2017)-based architec-
ture such as RoBERTa Liu et al. (2019) to an-
alyze people’s emotions and psychology. We
also demonstrate how we stress-test our model
using behavioral testing. With this research,
we hope to be able to contribute to the public
health system by automating some of the de-
tection and classiﬁcation process.
1 Introduction
During these unprecedented times when the world
is plagued by COVID19, a large number of people
have been showing symptoms of clinical anxiety
or depression1. This can be attributed to a myr-
iad of reasons including, but not limited to, lock
down, mandatory social distancing, higher unem-
ployment, economic depression and work-related
stress.
In a report published earlier this year, the Amer-
ican Foundation for Suicide Prevention found
*These authors contributed equally
1https://afsp.orgthat people experience anxiety (53%) and sadness
(51%) more often now than before the coronavirus
pandemic. Additionally, as per the report, despite
physical distancing guidelines, Americans social-
ize with friends and families at a similar frequency
as they used to before the lockdown orders con-
ﬁrming that physical distancing and isolation can
contribute to increase in anxiety, stress or depres-
sion.
In the past decade, social media has transformed
how people interact with each other. Apart from
sharing factual information and news, people ac-
tively partake in sharing their day to day activ-
ities, experiences, feelings, opinions, hopes, de-
sires, and emotions online. These texts provide in-
formation which can be used to identify the mental
health individuals. Furthermore, the current state
of enforced social distancing and isolation has pro-
pelled more people to express their emotions on
social media as it provides them with an accessi-
ble platform to share their thoughts with others,
many a times, in search for help.
Our research work utilizes user data, especially
the kind pertaining to emotions as this class of data
can give us valuable insights about the mental state
of a person; and, in turn, our work has the potential
to assist in the diagnosis and analysis of various
mental disorders. This study aims to bridge the
gap between people in search of help and experts
who can provide the needed help.
Due to the paucity of adequate annotated and
structured user data in this domain, we decided to
generate our own dataset by crawling subreddits
on reddit.com2pertaining to our use case as a lot
of users were found to have shared their feelings
there. Although Reddit was the sole source of our
dataset, we believe that this study can be seam-
lessly extended to other social media platforms as
2https://www.reddit.comarXiv:2011.11226v1  [cs.LG]  23 Nov 2020