Input Actual Predicted
often times i’ll get distracted from my thoughts either by external inﬂuences
or just another idea coming in, and then i have to spend a good 5 minutes
trying to work out what i was thinking about again.adhd adhd
once i come down from ﬂashbacks or panic attacks, i get really bad disas-
sociation. sometimes lasting for days. does anyone else go through this.
any tips on how to stop it. i tried grounding but im so far gone it doesn’t
help.ptsd ptsd
i can’t sit still when i get my eyebrows done, and when i’m in class i usually
doodle to focus. i pay attention very well in school regardless of that, and
drawing helps me focus.anxiety adhd
i’m ﬂying from dallas to hong kong in january and it’s 17 hours. i’ve ﬂown
12-13 hour ﬂights before and they really mess with me. so i’m wondering -
what are your tips for not going crazy on such a long ﬂight? ps: i’m terrible
at sleeping on planes. thinking about taking some sleepy meds to see if it’ll
helpnone anxiety
Table 5: Results: Interesting Examples
illness related posts. Even with just the titles, the
model is able to classify the none class with an
f1 score of more than 0.9. This gives us hope that
this model will suffer from very few false positives
when it comes to mental illness detection on social
media.
An even more crucial property of our model can
be noticed in the confusion matrices for posts and
posts+titles in Figure 1. When using posts, just 3
illness related posts across the entire test dataset
were misclassiﬁed as non-illness posts. This num-
ber further reduces to 0 when using titles+posts.
This shows that the model will detect mental ill-
ness posts correctly nearly every single time, thus
ensuring that posts from people who are seeking
help never go unnoticed when this solution is de-
ployed in the real world.
When it comes to the class wise performance
amongst the mental illnesses, the two best per-
forming classes are adhd and ptsd whereas the
two worst performing classes are depression and
anxiety .
The performance of depression andanxiety
classes can be attributed to a few factors. The aver-
age number of words per post for depression and
anxiety are the least for any given class. For in-
stance, depression posts have roughly 53% lesser
textual data when compared to ptsd posts. In
addition, studies show that depression might of-
ten occur in tandem with another mental illness
and our data and results back this up as well.
Thedepression word occurs in 12% of anxietyposts, 12% of ptsd posts and 31% of bipolar
posts. Similarly, anxiety occurs in 20% of ptsd
posts, 12% of adhd posts and 14% of bipolar
posts. This implies that the model cannot give high
importance to the mention of these class names
like it can with rest of the illnesses, thus mak-
ing the classiﬁcation of these 2 classes that much
harder.
This can also explain the relatively lower preci-
sion scores(higher number of False Positives) for
depression and anxiety . When the other ill-
nesses(excluding depression and anxiety ) are
misclassiﬁed, they are almost always misclassi-
ﬁed as either depression oranxiety , as can be
viewed in Figure 1. In the same ﬁgure, we can
see that depression andanxiety are often mis-
classiﬁed as each other due to the reason that they
commonly occur together.
There are more posts in the adhd and ptsd
classes that mention the words depression and
anxiety than their respective class names itself.
One would assume that this would result in sub-
par results, but, these classes actually perform the
best. This really showcases the true potential of
our model, where it doesn’t just rely on mention of
class names, but has a strong understanding of the
context of the post itself. Additionally, the symp-
toms or descriptions provided for these classes
could be strong, unique and discriminative enough
for the model to be able to classify them correctly
even with all the mentions of other class names.
In Table 5 we have documented a few interest-