ing results we observed in the test set. In the ﬁrst
two examples on the table, the RoBERTa model
was able to classify the posts correctly without the
presence of class names in the input. The pre-
diction is based purely on contextual information
learnt about the class labels during the training
process. The next two results are interesting be-
cause the truth label assigned to the input text may
or may not correspond to actual mental illness de-
scribed in the text. Since, we are not domain ex-
perts ourselves, we would need expert interven-
tion to substantiate this theory. As a part of future
work, getting professionals to annotate our dataset
might help strengthen the model for such exam-
ples.
6 Behavioral Testing
Although the classiﬁcation metrics analyzed in the
previous section are generally regarded sufﬁcient
in estimating the performance of Bert-based mod-
els, a recent inclination of NLP researchers to be-
havioral testing inspired us to stress test our mod-
els as well.
For all our tests, we used our proposed
RoBERTa model and applied these tests to inputs
that were either titles or posts. Since we hope to
extend our model to other social media platforms,
we do not always expect input texts to have a title
as well as a descriptive text/post. We adopted the
Checklist approach Ribeiro et al. (2020) which in-
volve tests conducted to comprehensively analyze
the model’s performance.
6.1 Synonym Replacement
Synonym replacement is a kind of Invariance Test
where label-preserving perturbations are made
to the test set. As labels, the root form of
the mental illnesses was chosen- depress ,ptsd ,
anxiou/anxiet ,bipolar and adhd . Python’s
NLTK package and WordNet were used for these
tests.
This test is conducted such that the root words
are not perturbed when modifying the test set. For
each post, 10% of the tokens were randomly se-
lected (not including the stop words or the root
words). Each token was then replaced with one
of its synonyms. We used the same logic for titles.
We set a max and min on the number of tokens to
be selected for replacement - this was (4, 30) for
posts and (1, 5) for titles. Since each token was
replaced with a synonym, the class label for thesamples was not changed. We did this for 10, 50
and 100 percent of the test set and observed re-
sults.
In all three cases, we expect the classiﬁcation
metrics to drop. For the case when 10% of the
test case was modiﬁed the drop was much lower
as compared to when 100% of the test case was
modiﬁed. The results are documented in Table 6.
When comparing these results to those in Table 4
we ﬁnd that the drop in each category is about 2-
4% for posts and 5-7% for titles. The lower drop
can be attributed to the fact that synonym replace-
ment does not alter the semantics of the input text.
Therefore the model was able to draw sufﬁcient
information from the input.
6.2 Masking
We also performed a Directional Expectation test
on the model. This is similar to the previous test
but is instead performed only on labels. The la-
bels, as deﬁned in the previous subsection, are a
list of the root form of mental illness class labels.
We noticed that the root words appear often in our
input texts. This behavioral test was performed to
observe our model’s dependency on these words.
For all the tests below, we modiﬁed only those to-
kens that contained a root word.
In the ﬁrst case, for every post from a subreddit
related to a mental illness, the root form of its class
label was removed from the input. For example,
the input text: I feel happy for some time and then
depressed again. I’m deﬁnitely bipolar from the
r/bipolar subreddit, was modiﬁed to I feel happy
for some time and then depressed again. I’m def-
initely . Note that changes were not made to the
word depressed in the input. The class label for
each modiﬁed sample was not changed after the
perturbations. Like the previous subsection, these
tests were performed on 10, 50 and 100% of the
test set.
In the second case, instead of entirely remov-
ing the tokens, we replaced it with a generic to-
kenillness . We expected this modiﬁcation to
retain some semantic information that was lost in
the previous test. However, we found that adding
a generic token introduced some noise which re-
duced the overall performance of the model.
Lastly, the tokens were replaced by a randomly
chosen root form of a mental illness other than its
class label. With this test, we expect to force the
model to pick between the label and non label to-