1 3second, modern societies are characterised by a wide-ranging general openness for 
addressing problems of different kinds through engineering and digital approaches. 
Digital technologies are often perceived as progressive, effective, modern, fascinat -
ing and, because of their technological nature, as politically neutral12—and thus are 
frequently perceived as preferable over alternative, old-fashioned, ideological inter -
ventions to address problems. Yet, the preference for technological solutions tends 
to create a dynamic to narrow down the perception and the analytical understanding 
of problems to their technological dimension.
The substantive point of criticising technosolutionism, however, is not to deny 
that digital solutions can be effective and desirable. It stands beyond doubt that AI-
based and other advanced technologies do contribute in meaningful ways to address -
ing many problems and that using them can provide better outcomes, relieve humans 
from tiresome work and can also help address social, environment, medical and 
other challenges. Some problems indeed have technological solutions and others can 
be addressed at least partly with the help of technologies. The substantive point of 
the criticism is rather that the ethics of AI in particular (as the ethics of technol -
ogy in general) has to broaden its focus and must not only inquire whether the use 
of a particular technology is ethical or how it can be made more ethical. Instead, 
an ethical  AI ethics will have to also have to settle whether a particular problem 
ought, morally, to be conceived of as a technological problem and consequently be 
addressed with the help of (AI-based) technology in the first place. This is because 
problems of a non-technological nature may call for solutions that lie (at least pri -
marily) outside of the realm of technology: a social or political problem will be bet -
ter addressed through low-tech or even no-tech solutions, even when an AI-based 
high-tech strategy could also contribute to addressing some of their aspects.
An ethical AI ethics will thus carefully seek a comprehensive understanding of 
perceived problems that does not, from the outset, self-limit its attention to the prob -
lems’ technological side. Avoiding the technosolutionist mindset means to remain 
open for a problem’s social, political, economic and other dimensions and looking 
for solutions in these domains, as well.
Importantly, the need to avoid a technosolutionist mindset applies also to many 
problems that become obvious or aggravated through the use of technology. Think, 
for example, of ‘algorithmic bias’ when a computer programme generates unfair 
outcomes that systematically advantage or disadvantage specific social groups (e.g. 
Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018 ). An appropriate solution to this problem must not limit 
itself to a technological solution, because algorithmic bias is not so much a problem 
of technology but primarily a symptom and thus indicative of a fundamental social 
problem.13 Even if algorithmic  bias will be reduced or eliminated through improved 
programming and better data input, the problem of actual  bias, discrimination and 
12 But cf. W inner’s seminal paper on the politics of artifacts (Winner 1980 ).
13 This holds tr ue also for the outcomes of recommender algorithms, e.g. in social media presenting 
increasingly radical and extreme content to its users in order to generate attention. Here again, this is 
no automatism of the algorithm, but reflective of the interest of the service providers to keep people 
engaged. The providers prioritise their own commercial interests over the social interest.J.-C. Heilinger Page10of20 61