1 3unfairness in our societies would persist. Actual solutions will only be found on the 
social level, while technological solutions will even in the best case provide nothing 
but cosmetic improvements at the symptom level, leaving the origins, structures and 
underlying social dynamics and structural injustices untouched.
That is why an additional, important risk connected to the pursuit of technologi -
cal solutions to social problems lies in the potentially very high opportunity costs. If 
scarce resources (finances, attention, human ingenuity, etc.) are primarily directed 
towards technological solutions, these very resources cannot be deployed for other 
strategies to address the respective problems. Thus each decision to ‘techno-solve’ 
any problem bears a burden of proof to show that technology does indeed provide 
the most promising strategy to address the problem.
2.3  The Procedural Dimension
The ethics of AI deserves scrutiny also with regard to its own (institutionalised) 
practice, its standards and its methods. The main criticism to be raised here is that 
many committees or fora to deliberate and determine ethical standards for AI-based 
technology frequently fail, for systemic reasons, to meet the standards of independ -
ent, ethically informed, critical deliberation and decision-making and consequently 
only provide distorted ethical assessments. In the following, I discuss this issue with 
a particular focus on the European AI landscape, but related arguments about the 
influence of particular, strategic interests can also be made for other world areas.
2.3.1   Identifying Experts
It is hardly astonishing that large multi-national corporations, standing in harsh 
competition with one another regarding market shares, growth and profits, have only 
a limited and rather specific interest in an independent, critical ethical assessment of 
their practices. Corporate ethics units, in varying degrees, serve different purposes 
than providing actual ethics assessments, among them: reducing the likelihood of 
legal and ethical scandals that would create reputational damage; increasing aware -
ness for and compliance with existing moral and legal standards and regulations 
among the company’s employees; showcasing ethical awareness to meet societal 
expectations or for reputational gains; and reducing the need for further external, 
political interventions and regulations because of ethical self-commitment and self-
control. To this end, many companies have established corporate ethics boards, offer 
ethics trainings to their employees or fund ethics research relevant to the company’s 
interests inside or outside of the company.14 Corporate interest in ethics recently 
even seems to have started to cool down, now that it is increasingly becoming clear 
how independent ethics raises issues that might conflict with, even run directly 
14 A r ecent example from Germany is the Facebook-funded chair for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence at 
the Technical University Munich.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page11of2061