1 3A global infrastructure lies in the background of devices running AI-based appli -
cations, an infrastructure marked by massive, structural injustice: Persistently and 
systemically, the advantages and disadvantages are unequally distributed between 
different groups of actors, as analysis of the production and supply chain, data 
extraction, disposal and the unequal distribution of power, influence and profits 
makes abundantly clear. Thus, the consequences and risks of developing and using 
AI go far beyond the issues discussed in the dominating debates that thus need to be 
expanded through an inclusion of the voices of all who are, in one way or another, 
affected by the development, use and disposal of such technologies.
2.2.2   Technosolutionism
A second substantive challenge for the ethics of AI arises from a very fundamen -
tal question: Prior to securing the ethical use of AI to address a problem, it needs 
to be asked and re-considered whether AI is indeed a suitable means to address a 
problem in the first place (cf. Riley, 2008 , ch. 2; Morozov, 2013 ). The grounds for 
this challenge lie in the fact that in some cases AI-based technologies are deployed 
to address problems that could be better addressed by non AI-based interventions. 
A general preference for prioritising technological over non-technological solutions 
may lead to choosing an ultimately unsuitable strategy. The worldview—some may 
say: the ideology—to address diverse human problems primarily  with the help of 
technology and engineering, including problems in the fields of politics and soci -
ety, education, public health and law, can be called ‘technological solutionism’ 
(Morozov, 2013 ).
Technosolutionism is a wide-spread phenomenon, in no way limited to the 
deployment of AI-based technologies. Examples thus go beyond apps to fix social 
problems (e.g. an app to secure consent before engaging in sexual activity) and 
include the medicalisation of social problems (e.g. administering drugs to pupils 
with ADHD), or geo-engineering such as solar radiation management to reduce the 
Earth’s albedo in order to reduce global warming that results from environmental 
pollution, etc.11
Two related dynamics strengthen the inclination to rely on technological solutions 
to all kinds of problems. First is a dynamic resulting from the sheer existence of a 
powerful tool that makes humans want to use it. Holding a hammer in one’s hands 
makes one approach the world in a specific way: the tool itself creates an invitation 
to use it. The same holds true for advanced medical, technological or other tools for 
which novel uses are thought up simply as the result of their availability. In such 
cases, the availability of certain technologies can lead to an incentive to ‘reverse 
engineer’ applications for which the technologies would serve as solutions. And 
11 The pr oblem of technosolutionism can be discussed in terms of relational injustice: Examples abound 
that can show how a dominating group and perspective deploys its preferred (technological) tools to 
address a problem that, from the perspective of those most affected, could or should be tackled by differ -
ent means. The fear that sexual self-determination and evolving, ongoing consent or dissent, for example, 
will not be respected cannot be appeased by an app that, instead, will strengthen the position of a poten -
tial perpetrator who can claim that consent was given.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page9of2061