1 3build machines and infrastructure, to develop the programs, to collect and clean data 
and to train algorithms (cf. Crawford, 2021 , chs. 1–2).6
Thus, a first basic and conceptual criticism with implications for any appreciation 
of AI ethics is that the term AI itself can give rise to misleading intuitions , which 
may subsequently also influence AI ethics itself by creating an idea of the technol -
ogy under consideration that does not match with its reality.
2.1.2   AI as Infrastructure
Next to this terminological issue, an additional conceptual question about the scope 
of AI ethics deserves attention. AI-based applications can be used in a wide variety 
of areas, ranging from health and mobility, over communication and consumption, 
to research, warfare and entertainment. That is why Andrew Ng has proposed to 
compare AI with electricity.7 As electricity too, AI is increasingly becoming per -
vasive and ambient in modern societies—its tasks ranging from ‘the general (learn -
ing, reasoning, perception, and so on) to the specific, such as playing chess, proving 
mathematical theorems, writing poetry, driving a car, or diagnosing diseases’ (Rus -
sel & Norvig, 2021 , 19). Thus, AI is becoming a ubiquitous part of infrastructure. 
Given that AI ‘is relevant to any intellectual task; it is truly a universal field’ (ibid.), 
one may even wonder about the need for and benefits of identifying AI as a distinct 
ethical topic.
Unlike other subfields in applied ethics—such as medical ethics, animal ethics, 
environmental ethics or the ethics of nuclear technology—the ethics of AI seems to 
lack a clearly limited and specific subject area , insofar as AI is using advanced algo -
rithms, mathematics and statistics and modern computer technologies to address a 
large range of heterogeneous problems. On this understanding, AI no longer consti -
tutes a narrower subject area, in a similar way as electricity -supported strategies to 
solve problems do not constitute a worthwhile subfield of the ethics of electricity.
This, of course, is a quite provocative claim challenging many contributions to a 
presumably distinctive AI ethics. But the provocation helps to appreciate the need to 
assess AI-based technologies as an increasingly important element of contemporary 
societies, and to embed this assessment in broader debates about ethics and justice. 
Modern societies, however, are shaped by electricity, etc. and importantly also by 
AI. Yet, limiting  the ethical assessment narrowly on the AI-based components itself 
seems problematic for the reasons just provided: Labelling a field in a misleading 
way comes with the danger of triggering false expectations, fears and hopes, that 
risk to lastingly distort an entire debate. And narrowing attention to a ubiquitous 
tool that is becoming part of everyday infrastructure in modern societies comes with 
the risk of getting the focus of ethical attention wrong. The ethical questions arising 
in modern societies are certainly inevitably influenced  (e.g. mirrored, consolidated, 
6 This claim, ho wever, does not conflict with the claim that AI technologies are also ‘artificial’, but 
Crawford wants to direct more attention to the ‘natural’ underpinnings and enabling conditions of the 
technology.
7 https://  www.  wipo.  int/ wipo_  magaz  ine/ en/ 2019/  03/ artic le_ 0001.  htmlJ.-C. Heilinger Page6of20 61