1 3Group on Artificial Intelligence— an influential advisory body to the European Com -
mission on AI and AI ethics—declared almost euphorically that AI is.
a promising means to increase human flourishing, thereby enhancing individ -
ual and societal well-being and the common good, as well as bringing progress 
and innovation. In particular, AI systems can help to facilitate the achievement 
of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, such as promoting gender bal -
ance and tackling climate change, rationalising our use of natural resources, 
enhancing our health, mobility and production processes […]. (HLEG 2019 )
Such all-encompassing praise indicates the enormous hopes and ambitions, 
including hope for progress in morally and socially relevant dimensions, that inspire 
and justify the development of AI-based applications: AI promises to contribute to 
the good, to just and sustainable human lives and living together on our planet.
The aim of the present paper is to subject such claims and the practice of AI 
ethics itself, which seeks to provide normative orientation and guidance for the 
development and use of AI, to a critical analysis. To this end, I proceed as follows. 
Section  1 will briefly introduce the dominating normative and methodological 
assumptions, and outline the main topics currently discussed in current ethics of AI. 
Section 2 will develop critical thoughts about the current state of AI ethics, high -
lighting conceptual, substantive and procedural challenges that affect the practice of 
AI ethics. Based on this critical analysis, Sect. 3 will draw constructive conclusions 
and propose several concrete strategies by which AI ethics could and should develop 
further.
The normative reflections and proposals made in this paper are based on the 
ideal of relational equality . Relational egalitarians take the equal moral value of 
all human beings as the normative bedrock for ethical practice in all dimensions of 
human life and seek to secure conditions under which all can relate to and interact 
with one another on a footing of equality. Equality, in this relational understanding, 
is a feature of interactions between people and groups of people that can be influ -
enced by different factors (e.g. economic, political, technological). Relational equal -
ity is particularly sensitive to asymmetrical relations of unjustifiably unequal influ -
ence and domination that often lead to unequal and unjust distributions of benefits 
and burdens. Relational egalitarianism aspires to realise more egalitarian distribu -
tions where possible, conducive to securing sufficiency for all and the common good 
(Anderson, 1999 ; Heilinger, 2020 ; Lippert-Rasmussen, 2018 ; Wolff, 1998 ). Bring -
ing a relational egalitarian account of justice to the normative assessment of AI is 
meant to expand the focus of AI ethics to pay more attention to the social, economic, 
political and environmental background structures within which AI is developed and 
used (cf. D’Ignazio and Klein, 2020 ). Furthermore, looking at the development and 
use of AI from this perspective helps also to make pre-existing ethical and social 
issues visible in a new way.1 The ultimate goal of the critical analysis offered in the 
1 Cf. A bebe et al. ( 2020 ) who argue that computing can act ‘as a synecdoche – a part that stands in for 
the larger whole in discourse and critique. Computing can offer us a tractable focus through which to 
notice anew, and bring renewed attention to, old problems’.J.-C. Heilinger Page2of20 61