1 3Ethical reflections and arguments in scholarly publications as well as in policy 
documents and tech industry guidelines4 often proceed as a discussion of (a) risks 
and opportunities, or of (b) rules and principles, or of (c) visions and ideals of AI, 
mirroring the three different normative theories that shape the tradition of Western 
moral philosophy: consequentialism, deontology and virtue ethics.
The aforementioned ethical questions can thus first be raised and discussed by 
weighing the hopes and promises against potential risks or problematic, harmful 
consequences  resulting from designing and using AI-based technologies (cf. e.g. 
Coeckelbergh, 2020 ). Second, as already firmly established in other fields of applied 
ethics such as bioethics and medical ethics, the ethical discussion can work along 
the lines of formulating principles  that are expected to provide orientation regarding 
what, morally, ought to be done—similar to a catalogue of duties (cf. Jobin et al., 
2019 ). Third, the ethical evaluation can proceed with the formulation of ideals  and a 
positive vision to establish goals either for a good, ‘virtuous’ use of AI or even a vir -
tuous AI itself  (cf. Vallor, 2016 ). And, of course, the three strategies are not mutually 
exclusive and, in the different contributions to the ethical debate, can often be found 
to be employed in parallel. To illustrate this claim with the first substantive ques -
tion in mind—the one addressing issues of understanding, explaining and control -
ling AI—the consequentialist discussion focusses on weighing potential risks of an 
AI that can or cannot be controlled, explained or understood; the deontic discussion 
would established a principled demand that AI must be explainable and implement 
measures to secure it as much as possible; and the aretic discussion could either call 
for virtues in those who develop and use AI or stress the ideal or vision of explain -
able AI and directly demand that AI-based applications be virtuous, e.g. ‘trustwor -
thy’, themselves (more on this below, in Sect. 2).
AI ethics thus presents itself as a many-voiced debate involving different perspec -
tives that centres, in quite heterogeneous contributions, around a set of canonical 
questions and deploys a set of normative tools for ethical analysis and decision-
making. Yet, from a normative meta-perspective that scrutinises the current stand -
ards and the dominating practices in AI ethics, several critical questions arise. These 
questions range from conceptual issues about determining the exact topic of the 
debate, over some basic normative assumptions that underlie it, to the procedures of 
actual ethical decision-making. In the following, I will identify and briefly discuss—
with no claim to completeness—several such normatively relevant meta-questions 
about AI ethics. The idea is to offer an ethical reflection of the ethics of AI, or, in 
other words, to work towards an ethics of the ethics of AI .
2  AI E thics: an Ethical Critique
When scrutinising AI ethics in its currently dominating form, three dimensions 
deserve particular attention because of their theoretical and practical impact on the 
normative discussions and assessments made: the conceptual  dimension that defines 
4 F or an overview cf. Hagendorff ( 2020 )J.-C. Heilinger Page4of20 61