1 3developed, aggravated, etc.) by AI-based technologies. But focusing narrowly on 
the AI technologies themselves is insufficient to capture what is morally at stake. 
Instead, the larger social context, the political, economic, cultural dynamics on both 
a domestic and the global level need to be seen and scrutinised as the field within 
which ubiquitous AI exercises its influence. As the following section will further 
illustrate, the conceptual critique prepares for a substantive expansion of the scope 
of AI ethics.
2.2  The Substantive Dimension
Two substantive criticisms deserve particular attention and call for complementing 
and extending the dominating set of questions and debates in AI ethics listed above. 
The first substantive criticism acknowledges the important fact that AI technologies 
are infrastructure also in the sense that they require massive amounts of material 
resources, of human labour, and thus give rise—not only through their computa -
tional power but also through their material existence—to numerous ethical issues 
that are connected to the use of AI. The second criticism challenges from an ethi -
cal perspective the tendency to rely on AI-based technologies in the first place to 
address all kinds of problems.
2.2.1   From the Cloud into the Mines
Kate Crawford and Vladan Joler have undertaken a detailed analysis of what they 
call the ‘Anatomy of an AI System’ (Crawford & Joler, 2019 ). The ‘anatomical 
map’ they sketch shows the massive amounts of human labour, data and planetary 
resources that are required to develop, build, run and ultimately discard AI-based 
technologies. Their discussion focuses exemplarily on the life cycle of Amazon’s 
‘Echo’-device, the company’s smart speaker running the integrated, voice-controlled 
intelligent personal assistant service called ‘Alexa’. A visually appealing map of the 
‘anatomy’ of this AI system debunks the myth of AI as a solely cloud-based, bodi -
less and thus clean form of intelligence and instead brings to light how the small 
and elegant Echo-device, offering impressive and convenient cloud-based services, 
actually presupposes and hides a massive and very down-to-earth background of 
resource extraction, energy consumption, waste production, exploitative labour, 
power imbalances and benefit accumulation among some.
The exemplary analysis of one device has shown the ethically weighty fact that 
AI-based technologies are demanding large amounts of different resources, a fact 
largely neglected in the AI-ethical literature. Awareness for the environmental and 
human costs of these systems is increasingly receiving attention in the AI-ethical 
literature, e.g. with regard to the energy needed for training neural networks (Bender 
et al., 2021 ; Strubell et al., 2019 ); when showing that AI-based technologies cannot 
only be used to develop strategies for sustainable cities, farming etc. but are in them -
selves challenges for sustainability (Brevini, 2020 ; van Wynsberghe, 2021 ); or when 
providing a full ‘Atlas of AI’ that exposes the power-relationships, political and eco -
nomic and planetary dynamics and costs of AI systems generally (Crawford, 2021 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page7of2061