1 33  S teps Towards a More Ethical AI Ethics
The preceding pages have, from a normative perspective, identified six challenges 
for AI ethics: misleading intuitions resulting from the notion ‘artificial intelligence’; 
a misconception of the topic of AI ethics by failing to recognise that AI is ubiquitous 
and part of modern societies’ infrastructure; an insufficient consideration of non-
AI issues lurking in the background of using AI-based technologies; the persistence 
of a technosolutionist mindset inclined to address all sorts of problems (tech and 
non-tech) with the help of AI and other high-tech solutions; a strong and distortive 
influence of particular (e.g. commercial, political) interests on the overall AI-ethics 
debate; and the insufficient integration of independent and critical philosophical and 
ethical expertise.
These issues—labelled as two conceptual, two substantive and two procedural 
issues—are ethical  issues, insofar as they point out ethically relevant shortcom -
ings in the existing debate. Making AI ethics more ethical thus requires to address 
these issues. In the following section, I will take up the preceding critique to outline 
potential directions and steps towards an improved, ethical AI ethics. Insofar as my 
proposal broadens the scope of AI ethics and invites increased consideration of the 
social, economic, political and environmental background structures within which 
novel AI systems are being developed and used, it can be understood as an argument 
for embedding AI ethics into AI justice.18
3.1  Conceptual Steps
In or der to make AI ethics more sure-footed and avoid distortions that result from 
conceptual unclarity, an explicit conceptual specification of the subject of AI ethics 
will be necessary. Of course, those working in the field are aware of the challenges 
mentioned above, but the ethical discourse that involves different types of players 
and is accompanied by significant public and lay interest can only gain through such 
clarifications. Being outspoken about the actual capacities and limitations of the dif -
ferent technologies and being realistic in the assessment of future developments—
that include also the increasing likelihood of the next, upcoming AI winter (Floridi, 
2020 )—will provide a much needed factual basis for addressing the pressing ethical 
issues at hand. In this context, it is also important not to limit the ethical attention to 
the specifics of AI-based technologies, but acknowledge that AI is becoming part of 
the ambient infrastructure in modern societies. Such a refocussing will thus include 
a dual movement of conceptual narrowing (leading e.g. to reduced interest in a pre -
sumed singularity or to decreased fear of an evil super-intelligence) and conceptual 
broadening (leading to analysing AI even more in its social context ).
Taking such conceptual clarifications seriously would impact in particular on the 
quality of the ethical discussions. It will contribute to a much needed toning down 
18 In par ticular, the substantive and procedural steps are committed the ideal of relational equality (see 
above).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page15of2061