1 3words, the purpose of this political advisory group might have been to provide ‘eth -
ics washing’ (Metzinger, 2019 ).
‘Ethics washing’—or ‘ethics theatre’—is to engage in ethical discussions and 
the formulation of ethical self-commitments with the intention to prevent or at least 
delay effective legal regulations. This interest can primarily be found in the industry, 
for which regulations are often costly. To this end, AI-developing companies are 
establishing internal ethics units or funding research activities in AI ethics in public 
universities. In the present case, the industry’s interest was advanced and supported 
even with the help of the European Commission.
Given the dominance of industry and industry-friendly politics in the field of AI 
ethics, many resulting ethical guidelines for AI tend to insufficiently include inde -
pendent (academic) ethics expertise. Even if the European guideline rightly directs 
ethical attention towards numerous ethics issues, provides important ethical orienta -
tion and may be more advanced and concerned with the common good than exist -
ing policy documents from other countries or world regions,17 the described lopsid -
edness in the group’s composition contributes to severe conceptual distortions that 
turn out to be, from a normative perspective, highly problematic. I will illustrate this 
claim with regard to the guideline’s core concept, ‘trustworthy’ AI.
2.3.2   Neglec ting Expertise and Trusting AI
The document’s guiding ethical idea is the ideal of ‘trustworthy AI’. Trustworthi -
ness of an AI system is defined as comprising three components: AI ‘should be law-
ful, complying with all applicable laws and regulations; it should be ethical , ensur -
ing adherence to ethical principles and values; and it should be robust , both from a 
technical and social perspective, since, even with good intentions, AI systems can 
cause unintentional harm’ (HLEG 2019 , 6). For the authors, the entity worthy of 
trust thus is primarily the AI system itself and its ‘inherent properties’, even though 
it is admitted that also ‘the humans behind’ AI systems and ‘the qualities of the 
socio-technical systems involving AI systems’ are supposed to be worthy of trust—
in analogy to human trust in aviation, nuclear power or food safety. But it makes all 
of a difference to trust in something or to trust in the people and institutions behind 
something.
The ethics guidelines gloss over this difference and label something, an AI sys -
tem, as trustworthy that for principled (conceptual) reasons to be explained below 
cannot and should not be considered worthy of trust (Bryson, 2018 ). ng so amounts 
to, as Metzinger, one of the few ethics expert members of the group, critically 
remarked, a brilliant marketing coup lulling appropriate ethical concern and neces -
sary critical analysis with the help of a euphonic epithet (Metzinger, 2019 ).
Here is, briefly, the conceptual argument against the possibility of trustworthy 
AI that deploys the fundamental distinction between trust and reliance also in 
the realm of AI. Practical reliance is a ‘common core’ of trust (Hawley, 2019 , 2), 
and the informed rational expectation that people will do certain things is part of 
17 F or an overview cf. Jobin et al. ( 2019 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page13of2061