Vol.:(0123456789)https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-022-00557-9
1 3
RESEARCH ARTICLE
The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique
Jan‑Christoph Heilinger1 
Received: 13 January 2022 / Accepted: 18 June 2022 / 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
The paper presents an ethical analysis and constructive critique of the current prac -
tice of AI ethics. It identifies conceptual substantive and procedural challenges and 
it outlines strategies to address them. The strategies include countering the hype and 
understanding AI as ubiquitous infrastructure including neglected issues of ethics 
and justice such as structural background injustices into the scope of AI ethics and 
making the procedures and fora of AI ethics more inclusive and better informed with 
regard to philosophical ethics. These measures integrate the perspective of AI jus -
tice into AI ethics, strengthening its capacity to provide comprehensive normative 
orientation and guidance for the development and use of AI that actually improves 
human lives and living together.
Keywords  Artificial intellig ence · Ethics · Structural injustice · Trust · AI justice
People around the globe increasingly encounter, use and benefit from AI in their 
daily lives in one form or another. AI-based applications range from web-based maps 
and navigation services to digital behavioural technologies such as mobile health 
apps, from recommender algorithms in online stores to parking aids, and AI-based 
services in policing, the legal system, etc. Also, less exciting but tedious tasks—
such as analysing immense amounts of data in different domains, or determining 
the next date for a maintenance check of a machine—can, fortunately, increasingly 
be done by AI-based systems, relieving humans from burdensome work. Once they 
are well set up, such AI-based systems work quickly and effectively through vast 
amounts of data that cannot be handled by humans. And they do so more reliably 
than humans because machines—unlike humans—are not distracted by fatigue, hun -
ger or the like.
AI figures among the most advanced tools humanity has developed to date, yet 
its potential for future development remains vast. That is why the High-Level Expert 
 * Jan-Chr istoph Heilinger 
 jc.heiling er@rwth-aachen.de
1 RWTH Aachen University, Applied Ethics, Theaterplatz 14, 52062 Aachen, GermanyPublished online: 7 July 2022Philosophy & Technology (2022) 35: 61