1 3paper thus is to constructively support ongoing efforts to complement and improve 
the current practice of AI ethics from the mentioned normative perspectives, so that 
AI’s inevitably massive impact on how humans live and live together will be as good 
as possible.
1  T he Practice of AI Ethics
By now, a number of central ethical issues and problems have been identified and 
established as ‘core questions’ arising in the context of AI2:
• How can we understand, explain and control—if ever—the internal workings 
within a complex AI system (cf. e.g. Kempt et al., 2022 ; Mittelstadt et al., 2019 )?
• Who bears responsibility in the event of harm resulting from the use of an AI 
system (cf. e.g. Santoni de Sio & Mecacci, 2021 ; Sparrow, 2007 )?
• How can AI systems be prevented from reflecting existing discrimination, biases 
and social injustices based on their training data, thereby exacerbating them (cf. 
e.g. Bender et al., 2021 ; Benjamin, 2019 ; Friedman & Nissenbaum, 1996 )?
• How can the privacy of people be protected, given that personal data can be col -
lected and analysed so easily by many (cf. e.g. Véliz, 2020 ; Zuboff, 2015 , 2019 )?
• How can autonomous human decision-making be protected against undue influ -
ence and deskilling resulting from the use of AI (cf. e.g. Lara & Deckers, 2020 ; 
Lu, 2016 ; Mills, 2020 ; Reiner & Nagel, 2017 )?
• How can it be prevented that an uncontrollable, potentially malicious, super-
intelligence will, one day, put its own goals above those of humans (cf. e.g. Bos -
trom, 2014 )?
Given the significant economic potential, the far-reaching (geo-) political impli -
cations and the social and ethical salience of AI-based technologies, it is not aston -
ishing that next to scholars in the fields of applied ethics and computer sciences, 
corporations and political institutions have also become involved in the ethical 
debates. The ethical discourse is thus shaped by contributions from the perspective 
of the economy, politics and academia.3 Consequently, the numerous documents 
that are potentially relevant to the ethical debate about AI are quite heterogeneous 
and include reports and position papers from policy advisory bodies; guidelines and 
white papers as self-commitments from companies and research institutions; check -
lists or questionnaires as handouts for designers; and scholarly publications from all 
disciplines involved, especially computer science and engineering, management and 
business studies, sociology and STS and philosophy/(applied) ethics.
2 F or an overview cf. Coeckelbergh ( 2020 ), Fjeld et al. ( 2020 )
3 This is not to deny that others also contribute to the ethical debates, in particular individual users and 
engaged citizens, civil society initiatives and non-profit organisations, journalism and fictional storytell -
ing in film and literature.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page3of2061