1 3the key concepts employed to define the topic of the debate; the substantive  dimen -
sion of determining which ethical question can legitimately be raised within AI eth -
ics; and the procedural  dimension regarding the methods and practices employed to 
generate ethical assessments.
2.1  The Conceptual Dimension
The notions deployed to define the topic of AI ethics, on the one hand, shape the 
normative intuitions with which people approach AI. On the other, they also deter -
mine what is considered part of AI ethics—and what not. That is why a conceptual 
critique provides the grounds for and is an integral element of the normative critique 
of the practice of AI ethics.
2.1.1   Intelligent? Artificial?
The critical appreciation of the merits and flaws of the current ethical debate about 
AI starts with a closer look at the concept of AI itself. ‘Artificial intelligence’ is first 
of all a rather broad technical umbrella term for a number of complex computer 
technologies that—based on huge amounts of data—are very powerful in pattern 
recognition, classification, decision-making and prediction and thus can perform 
tasks in different fields that normally require human intelligence. Among computer 
scientists, however, the term AI is used less frequently than in public and ethical 
discourse. Instead, computer scientists usually name more precisely the particu -
lar AI method they use, such as machine learning, neural networks or deep learn -
ing, each of which constitutes a particular subset of the former (Russel & Norvig, 
2021 ). One of the reasons AI is rather rarely mentioned by computer scientists may 
be their awareness of the fact that AI—at least in its current forms—is, to pick up 
Kate Crawford’s provocative formulation, neither intelligent, nor artificial  (Craw -
ford, 2021 , 7).
Certainly, AI can process immense amounts of data and perform highly special -
ised tasks, but this has little to do with a general creative and cross-sectoral intel -
ligence of humans. A chess computer cannot control drones, a skin cancer detection 
algorithm can neither translate between different languages nor help me exercise 
regularly, etc. And at the current state of research, it is not yet foreseeable how—and 
if ever—a general , i.e. non-specialised, form of machine ‘intelligence’ can be devel -
oped.5 Furthermore, far from being merely artificial, AI systems are at the same 
time highly natural: they rely on numerous natural resources, on raw materials and 
energy resources extracted from the earth, on countless hours of human labour to 
5 This claim can be tr ue even if talk of  artificial general  intelligence can be, on occasion, found among 
developers and computer scientists, cf. https://  openai.  com/  about/ : ‘Our mission is to ensure that artificial 
general intelligence benefits all of humanity’.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page5of2061