1 3could provide a solution to a problem that is seen as worthy of attention, one has 
to ask whether a low-tech or even a no-tech solution would might be available 
and maybe even preferable. When taking into consideration all costs incurred 
by AI-based technologies (including negative externalities that may only further 
increase structurally unjust background conditions), low- or no-tech solutions 
may turn out to be, from a normative perspective, the preferable option.
3.3  Procedural Steps
The challenges discussed above also carry procedural implications for how AI 
ethics should be practiced. Here again, two demands follow. First, as a matter of 
justice, it is essential to include in ethical debates worthy of this name the voices 
of all affected. Limiting participation in and contributions to the debate to the 
already influential economic or political agents in the field is a severe ethical 
flaw. From the exploration and development of novel ideas over the discussion 
of regulatory frameworks to the assessment of the actual, practical outcome of 
technological changes in societies and communities, the voices of all affected 
need to be heard. Community-oriented ‘design ethics’ and ‘design justice’ pro -
vide already important experience and guidance for future improvements in this 
direction (Costanza-Chock, 2020 ): Political bodies should rely more on citizen 
advisory groups, and also corporations should be more inclusive in consider -
ing the social impact of their products. Any ethical and responsible develop -
ment of novel, AI-based technologies and applications cannot occur in corpora -
tions alone. Ultimately, the willingness to make genuine efforts to build socially 
beneficial technologies (instead of building profitable products advancing the 
financial interests and growth of the company) requires a cultural and attitudinal 
development and change in much of the established corporate practice, and thus 
has to be considered as a long term project. However, if AI is really to advance 
the common good, the pursuit of this project is worthwhile and contributing to it 
will be an integral element of AI ethics.
A second procedural implication of the mentioned challenges consists in a 
call to include the best available ethical experiences and knowledge into the AI 
ethics debates that are, so far, very rarely dominated by trained ethicists. The 
border between technical and ethical issues cannot be drawn in a way that would 
allow a functional separation; ethics and technical issues have to be considered 
jointly from the outset. Also the conceptual tools to discuss ethical challenges 
and ideals must not be used uncritically lest they generate more confusion than 
provide orientation. Two parallel strategies can be recommended here: one con -
sists in seeing to it that trained philosophical ethicists learn to (better) communi -
cate with practitioners and policy makers in the field and will be included more 
and heard better in the relevant debates; the other consists in training and edu -
cating not only ethicists but also provide more substantive training about ethics 
and justice to all those working in the computer sciences, engineering and in 
politics (cf. Riley, 2008 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page17of2061