1 3To provide two more details: First, the financial gains made from AI-based sys -
tems are distributed in an extremely unequal way as comparing the annual financial 
gains of, say, Amazon’s CEO on the one extreme end and the underpaid labour -
ers working under dangerous and exploitative conditions in the Cobalt mines on the 
other extreme end, clearly shows.8 And second, the lasting harm for humans and the 
environment that results from toxic waste that remains once the devises are not in 
use any more.9 Both details are issues of distributive injustice that, from the perspec -
tive of relational egalitarianism, is a consequence of existing asymmetries in power 
and influence that allow some to dominate others.
Some may object that these issues are nothing but the normal background  which 
may be regrettable or not, but not directly relevant for a discussion of the ethics of 
AI technologies. Similarly in medical ethics, the objection could continue, where 
concern for the environmental costs of running hospitals or the unequal income dis -
tribution between the different groups that contribute to the functioning of a health 
system also does not figure in our engagement with topics of medical ethics. Thus, 
focussing on the distinctive  issues that arise through the very use of AI-based appli -
cations should be at the centre of AI ethics and nothing else.
A reply to this objection can be twofold. First, medical ethics has in recent years 
started to direct more attention to the connections between providing health ser -
vices to patients, e.g. in hospitals, on the one hand, and its environmental impact, 
e.g. on the climate and on population health, on the other. Attention to context and 
background is thus emerging in other fields, as well. And second, it is a longstand -
ing mistake to assume that an ethical assessment could limit itself to what is done 
by some (developers, users, etc.) while ignoring the influence of presumably nor -
mal and thus acceptable background conditions, that, at closer reflection, may turn 
out to be morally unjustifiable and indicative of structural injustice (Young, 2006 , 
120–121; McKeown, 2021a , 2021b ). An adequate understanding of the ethical 
issues thus requires assessing the social structures within which action takes place, 
because such social structures can make the positive moral valence of apparently 
innocent, well-intended and unproblematic actions shift.10 Only by expanding the 
focus of moral attention—which will lead to embedding but not to replacing the 
established questions of AI ethics mentioned above—can an adequate ethical assess -
ment be provided.
10 Insof ar as AI ethics integrates these issues, it can very well be called ‘critical theory’, as suggested by 
Waelen ( 2022 ).8 The countless full y unpaid  users who, through interacting with the Echo-device, provide important 
training opportunities that help develop and improve the product further, matter too. The massive differ -
ences in financial gains achieved by the different contributors to the entire infrastructure necessary for 
the device to function are not only an instance of distributive injustice (where adequate compensation 
would be required for all those who contribute to the entire cooperative system), but indicative of a more 
basic relational injustice that can be captured in terms of domination and intentional clustering of advan -
tages for some and of disadvantages for others (Rawls 1999 ; Young 1990 ; Young 2011 ).
9 Her e again, harm caused to the environment is not a regrettable and unintended effect of the business 
practice; instead, externalising costs are an essential element of accumulating benefits in growth- and 
profit-oriented corporations (Hickel 2020 ).J.-C. Heilinger Page8of20 61