1 3trusting them. But while trust involves  reliance, following Baier’s seminal contri -
butions, there is wide agreement in philosophy that trust exceeds  mere reliance 
(Baier, 1986 ).
What now is the distinctive feature missing in cases of mere reliance and present 
in cases of trust? It is that it goes beyond the informed and rational expectation that 
someone will act in certain ways and includes a normative  and an affective  com -
ponent (Ryan, 2020 ). The normative component in an interpersonal relationship of 
trust is that the trusting person assumes the trusted person will have certain norma -
tive reasons, i.e. should  act as expected (Simpson, 2012 ). Yet, regrettably, even the 
best normative reasons do not always lead to corresponding action. Trust includes 
the expectation that the trusted person will indeed act upon them, but leaves open 
the possibility that she might also betray the trusting person. Correspondingly, a 
particular affective dimension exists in the relationship of trust that is absent when 
merely relying on something or someone: If the trusted person fails to act upon 
the normative reasons, the reactive attitude on the side of the trusting person goes 
beyond mere disappointment (which would also be appropriate in case a computer 
malfunctions, or the bad weather spoils my plans for the week-end). Beyond disap -
pointment, the betraying person, because of her agential features that allow her to 
act upon reasons, will become an appropriate target for moral criticism or blame.
AI cannot act by following reasons, it cannot explain the outcomes of its decisions 
by giving reasons, and it is not an appropriate target for moral critique or blame. AI 
is a sophisticated tool, not a moral agent (Véliz, 2021 ), on which we may rely, but 
which we must—for conceptual reasons—not trust. Talking about trustworthy AI 
seems to elevate AI systems to the status of moral agents, which is not only factually 
wrong, but also morally dubious, because it hides or reduces the moral responsibil -
ity of the appropriate potential targets of trust: those who develop and implement 
AI. These persons and institutions, however, have—for prudential reasons—to earn 
trust before it becomes rational for anyone to trust them.
Talk of trustworthy AI anthropomorphises technology, obscures agency and 
reduces the perceived urgency of the need to track responsibility and set boundaries 
for the development and implementation of AI systems. This misconception of AI 
as potential bearer of trust—uncritically taken up in countless documents about AI 
ethics—can be explained in at least two different ways: as a result of an intentional 
strategy to label something ‘problematic with a positive attribute; or as the regret -
table outcome of the confusion of considering AI as actually ‘intelligent’ in a sense 
comparable to human intelligence and free will. Honi soit qui mal y pense?  Given 
the perfect alignment of this conceptual confusion with the commercial interests of 
the AI-developing and AI-using corporation to delay and avoid regulation, suspi -
cion may be in order and support the diagnosis of intentional ethics washing through 
the European Commission’s High-Level Expert Group. For Metzinger the debate is 
set. The entire ‘Trustworthy AI narrative is, in reality, about developing future mar -
kets and using ethics debates as elegant public decorations for a large-scale invest -
ment strategy’ (Metzinger, 2019 ). In any case, even a more moderate reading vin -
dicates a morally highly problematic conclusion: AI ethics is strongly influenced 
by various political and economic interests that put ethics under the risk of being 
instrumentalised.J.-C. Heilinger Page14of20 61