1 3in a partly overexcited debate about a ‘hyped’ topic.19 A more composed attitude 
in parts of the debate would be desirable, also in order to support more appropriate 
decisions in different fields, such as funding decisions for AI research and AI-ethics 
research. The amount of (public and private) funding made available for AI ethics 
seems out of proportion, given that other ethical challenges—the climate, the pan -
demic, but also different questions from the field of (global) social justice, medical 
ethics, animal ethics, etc.—urgently call for ethical attention, too.
3.2  Substantive Steps
The mentioned challenges also come with substantive implications affecting the 
type of questions that should be discussed within the field of AI ethics. First, AI eth-
ics should, as a matter of justice, expand its focus beyond the development and use 
of AI-based applications to include the structural background conditions required 
for such development and use. Losing sight of the social, cultural, economic and 
political environment when focussing narrowly on the moral quality of specific acts 
is a mistake (that, however, can also occur in moral and political philosophy and 
other fields of applied ethics). In this case, one simply assumes—but unjustifiably 
so—that the background would constitute something like the normal, and morally 
uncontroversial baseline that can be excluded from the ethical analysis that concen -
trates on what some agent is ng here and now. Instead, the unequal and asymmetric 
relations of privilege, power and influence deserve full attention when it comes to 
providing normative guidance about the practical development and use of specific 
technologies.
If more attention is being directed towards the structural context of a respective 
specific act or decision, the entire supply chain for, the ongoing (natural and human) 
resource use of and the distribution of different types of costs and benefits arising 
throughout the entire life cycle of a technology will become part of the moral sit -
uation under consideration. Attention will also be directed towards those who are 
affected by the development and use of novel technologies in an indirect way, e.g. 
by being excluded from its use and the connected benefits. As a starting point for 
addressing the structural dimension of the respective technologies could be to ask: 
Who benefits from the novel development? How? At which costs that are born by 
whom?20
While, of course, not every discussion always has to include the full structural 
background, increasing awareness for the conditions under which the development, 
production and use of AI-based technologies occurs would be an important exten -
sion and correction of a debate that too often excludes it.
The second substantive implication of the challenges discussed above is to 
avoid narrowing down, even within the field of AI ethics, the search for solu -
tions to technological  strategies. In every case where an advanced technology 
19 Cf. e.g. the Better Images of AI  initiative collecting illustrations of AI that avoid clichéd and mislead -
ing visualisations ( https://  bette  rimag  esofai. org/).
20 F or a longer list of ethically relevant ‘who’-questions, cf. D’Ignazio and Klein ( 2020 ), in particular p. 27.J.-C. Heilinger Page16of20 61