1 3contrary to the primarily financial interests of corporations.15 Corporate ethics thus 
has to walk the thin line of providing, as much as possible, independent and critical 
ethics assessments, while being and remaining on the payroll of the corporation.
Whether or not such dependency makes independent assessment principally 
impossible cannot be discussed here. Instead, I want to scrutinise another type of 
ethics committee, namely an ethics expert advisory group to support political 
decision-making.
Above, I have already quoted the enthusiastic endorsement of AI from the ‘Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’, a document published in April 2019 by the High-
Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (preceding the publication of ‘Policy 
and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy AI’ in June 2019). This group 
was established by the European Commission to provide independent ethical advice 
on the development and use of AI-based technologies and provide a case in point.
In international comparison, the policy document is exemplary. It identifies, at 
the behest of a political body, numerous ethics issues arising in the context of AI 
and calls for a systemic approach to address them by assigning responsibility to 
‘all actors and processes that are part of the [AI-] system’s socio-technical context 
throughout its entire life cycle’ (HLEG 2019 , 5). With this, the European demand 
for the development and implementation of ‘trustworthy AI’ needs to be compared 
and contrasted at the global level in particular to the US-American digital ambitions 
to develop AI as a driver of ‘disruptive innovation’ (cf. e.g. Girasa, 2020 ) and the 
Chinese development and use of AI as controlled by and in the interest of the state 
(cf. e.g. Roberts et al., 2021 ). But looking at the genesis and content of the European 
strategy from an ethics perspective exposes both an institutional-procedural problem 
and a resulting normative-conceptual problem.
The Independent High-Level Expert Group comprised of more than fifty mem -
bers, mostly from industry with a tiny fraction of ethics experts, only some of which 
were philosophers.16 As important as the involvement of the industry in regula -
tory processes from the very beginning may be, in order to secure acceptance and 
compliance in the future, such an unbalanced composition of the group—largely 
excluding also representatives of users and civil society—clearly conflicts with the 
ambition to provide independent and comprehensive ethical expertise. Yet, the com -
position of the expert group does not seem coincidental but fully in line with the 
political preferences of the European Commission and its interest to advance the 
standing and business opportunities of European corporations on the global mar -
ket. Given this ambition, however, the primary interest in ethics will hardly have 
to establish sound ethical standards and regulations for the development and use of 
AI-based technologies. For this, a larger share of trained ethicists, sociologists and 
civil and human rights advocates would have been an obvious imperative. Instead, 
the interest in ethics was, so it seems, motivated by a perceived need to unburden 
AI-based technologies from its partly uncanny and unethical appearance. In other 
15 Cf. t he debate about the role of Timnit Gebru at Google and the circumstances of the termination of 
her contract, cf. Tiku ( 2020 ), Ghaffary ( 2021 ).
16 See lis t on https://  www.  aepd.  es/ sites/  defau  lt/ files/  2019-  12/ ai- defin  ition.  pdf.J.-C. Heilinger Page12of20 61