Imitation Learning from Imperfect Demonstration
of the ground truth value. In addition, experiments with
different levels of noise are conducted to further justify their
robustness to noisy labelers.
To further reduce the additional cost to learn an optimal
policy, we consider a more realistic setting that the given
demonstrations are partially equipped with conﬁdence. As
a result, the goal of this work is to utilize imperfect demon-
strations where some are equipped with conﬁdence while
some are not (we refer to demonstrations without conﬁdence
as “unlabeled demonstrations”).
In this work, we consider the setting where the given im-
perfect demonstrations are a mixture of optimal and non-
optimal demonstrations. The setting is common when the
demonstrations are collected via crowdsourcing (Serban
et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2018) and learn-
ing from different sources such as videos (Tokmakov et al.,
2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Supancic III & Ramanan, 2017;
Yeung et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018), where demonstrations
can be generated from different policies.
We propose two methods, two-step importance weighting
imitation learning (2IWIL) and generative adversarial imi-
tation learning with imperfect demonstration and conﬁdence
(IC-GAIL), based on the idea of reweighting but from differ-
ent perspectives. To utilize both conﬁdence and unlabeled
data, for 2IWIL, it predicts conﬁdence scores for unlabeled
data by optimizing the proposed objective based on empir-
ical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1998), which has
ﬂexibility for different loss functions, models, and optimiz-
ers; on the other hand, instead of directly reweighting to
the optimal distribution and perform GAIL with reweight-
ing, IC-GAIL reweights to the non-optimal distribution and
match the optimal occupancy measure based on our mixture
distribution setting. Since the derived objective of IC-GAIL
depends on the proportion of the optimal demonstration
in the demonstration mixture, we empirically show that
IC-GAIL converges slower than 2IWIL but achieves bet-
ter performance, which forms a trade-off between the two
methods. We show that the proposed methods are both
theoretically and practically sound.
2. Related work
In this section, we provide a brief survey about making
use of non-optimal demonstrations and semi-supervised
classiﬁcation with conﬁdence data.
2.1. Learning from non-optimal demonstrations
Learning from non-optimal demonstrations is nothing new
in IL and reinforcement learning (RL) literature, but previ-
ous works utilized different information to learn a better pol-
icy.Distance minimization inverse RL (DM-IRL) (Burchﬁel
et al., 2016) utilized a feature function of states and assumedthat the true reward function is linear in the features. The
feedback from human is an estimate of accumulated reward,
which is harder to be given than conﬁdence because multi-
ple reward functions may correspond to the same optimal
policy.
Semi-supervised IRL (SSIRL) (Valko et al., 2012) extends
the IRL method proposed by Abbeel & Ng (2004), where
the reward function can be learned by matching the feature
expectations of the optimal demonstrations. The difference
from Abbeel & Ng (2004) is that in SSIRL, optimal and
sub-optimal trajectories from other performers are given.
Transductive SVM (Sch ¨olkopf et al., 1999) was used in
place of vanilla SVM in Abbeel & Ng (2004) to recognize
optimal trajectories in the sub-optimal ones. In our set-
ting, the conﬁdence scores are given instead of the optimal
demonstrations. DM-IRL and SSIRL are not suitable for
high-dimensional problems due to its dependence on the
linearity of reward functions and good feature engineering.
2.2. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with conﬁdence data
In our 2IWIL method, we train a probabilistic classiﬁer with
conﬁdence and unlabeled data by optimizing the proposed
ERM objective. There are similar settings such as semi-
supervised classiﬁcation (Chapelle et al., 2006), where few
hard-labeled data y2f0;1gand some unlabeled data are
given.
Zhou et al. (2014) proposed to use hard-labeled instances
to estimate conﬁdence scores for unlabeled samples using
Gaussian mixture models and principal component analy-
sis. Similarly, for an input instance x, Wang et al. (2013)
obtained an upper bound of conﬁdence Pr(y= 1jx)with
hard-labeled instances and a kernel density estimator, then
treated the upper bound as an estimate of probabilistic class
labels.
Another related scheme was considered in El-Zahhar & El-
Gayar (2010) where they considered soft labels z2[0;1]as
fuzzy inputs and proposed a classiﬁcation approach based
on k-nearest neighbors. This method is difﬁcult to scale
to high-dimensional tasks, and lacks theoretical guarantees.
Ishida et al. (2018) proposed another scheme that trains a
classiﬁer only from positive data equipped with conﬁdence.
Our proposed method, 2IWIL, also considers training a
classiﬁer with conﬁdence scores of given demonstrations.
Nevertheless, 2IWIL can train a classiﬁer from fewer con-
ﬁdence data, with the aid of a large number of unlabeled
data.
3. Background
In this section, we provide backgrounds of RL and GAIL.