Imitation Learning from Imperfect Demonstration
Yueh-Hua Wu1 2Nontawat Charoenphakdee3 2Han Bao3 2Voot Tangkaratt2Masashi Sugiyama2 3
Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) aims to learn an opti-
mal policy from demonstrations. However, such
demonstrations are often imperfect since collect-
ing optimal ones is costly. To effectively learn
from imperfect demonstrations, we propose a
novel approach that utilizes conﬁdence scores ,
which describe the quality of demonstrations.
More speciﬁcally, we propose two conﬁdence-
based IL methods, namely two-step importance
weighting IL (2IWIL) and generative adversar-
ial IL with imperfect demonstration and conﬁ-
dence (IC-GAIL). We show that conﬁdence scores
given only to a small portion of sub-optimal
demonstrations signiﬁcantly improve the perfor-
mance of IL both theoretically and empirically.
1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) has become of great interest because
obtaining demonstrations is usually easier than designing
reward. Reward is a signal to instruct agents to complete the
desired tasks. However, ill-designed reward functions usu-
ally lead to unexpected behaviors (Everitt & Hutter, 2016;
Dewey, 2014; Amodei et al., 2016). There are two main
approaches that can be used to solve IL: behavioral cloning
(BC) (Schaal, 1999), which adopts supervised learning ap-
proaches to learn an action predictor that is trained directly
from demonstration data; and apprenticeship learning (AL),
which attempts to ﬁnd a policy that is better than the expert
policy for a class of cost functions (Abbeel & Ng, 2004).
Even though BC can be trained with supervised learning ap-
proaches directly, it has been shown that BC cannot imitate
the expert policy without a large amount of demonstration
data for not considering the transition of environments (Ross
et al., 2011). In contrast, AL approaches learn from inter-
acting with environments and optimize objectives such as
1National Taiwan University, Taiwan2RIKEN Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan3The University
of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Yueh-Hua Wu
<d06922005@csie.ntu.edu.tw >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008).
A state-of-the-art approach generative adversarial imitation
learning (GAIL) is proposed by Ho & Ermon (2016). The
method learns an optimal policy by performing occupancy
measure matching (Syed et al., 2008). An advantage of
the matching method is that it is robust to demonstrations
generated from a stochastic policy. Based on the concept
proposed in GAIL, variants have been developed recently
for different problem settings (Li et al., 2017; Kostrikov
et al., 2019).
Despite that GAIL is able to learn an optimal policy from
optimal demonstrations, to apply IL approaches to solve
real-world tasks, the difﬁculty in obtaining such demon-
stration data should be taken into consideration. However,
demonstrations from an optimal policy (either deterministic
or stochastic) are usually assumed to be available in the
above mentioned works, which can be barely fulﬁlled by
the fact that most of the accessible demonstrations are im-
perfect or even from different policies. For instance, to train
an agent to play basketball with game-play videos of the
National Basketball Association, we should be aware that
there are 14.3 turnovers per game1, not to mention other
kinds of mistakes that may not be recorded. The reason why
optimal demonstrations are hard to obtain can be attributed
to the limited attention and the presence of distractions,
which make humans hard to follow optimal policies all the
time. As a result, some parts of the demonstrations may be
optimal and the others are not.
To mitigate the above problem, we propose to use conﬁ-
dence scores, which indicate the probability that a given
trajectory is optimal. An intuitive example to collect the
conﬁdence scores is crowdsourcing, where data can be hard-
labeled as being optimal or non-optimal by multiple labelers.
We can extract conﬁdence from the proportion of labelers
giving a particular label, which corresponds to the probabil-
ity that the instance has this label. Another example is when
it is difﬁcult to judge whether the demonstration is optimal.
A labeler may rate a score digitized from 0;0:1;:::; 1and
we can use it as conﬁdence. Since the attained conﬁdence
may not be perfect, to show the practicality of our methods,
in our experiments, we use estimated conﬁdence instead
1https://www.basketball-reference.com/
leagues/NBA_stats.html