Grid search and random search
One of the simplest strategies is grid search, in which all possible combinations of given discrete parameter spaces
are evaluated. Continuous parameters have to be discretized beforehand. Another approach is random search, in
which hyperparameter values are drawn randomly (e.g., from a uniform distribution) from a speciﬁed hyperparameter
space. Bergstra and Bengio (2012) show that for neural networks random search is more eﬃcient in searching good
hyperparameter speciﬁcations than grid search.
Sequential model-based optimization
Sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) is a very successful tuning strategy that iteratively tries to ﬁnd the best
hyperparametersettingsbasedonevaluationsofhyperparametersthatweredonebeforehand. SMBOisgroundedinthe
“black-box function optimization” literature (Jones et al., 1998) and achieves state-of-the-art performance for solving a
number of optimization problems (Hutter et al., 2011). We shortly describe the SMBO algorithm implemented in the
R package mlrMBO (Bischl et al., 2017), which is also used in the R package tuneRanger (Probst, 2018) described
in Section 3.5. It consists of the following steps:
1. Specify an evaluation measure (e.g., the AUC in the case of classiﬁcation or the mean squared error in the case
of regression), also sometimes denoted as “target outcome” in the literature, an evaluation strategy (e.g., 5-fold
cross-validation) and a constrained hyperparameter space on which the tuning should be executed.
2. Create an initial design, i.e., draw random points from the hyperparameter space and evaluate them (i.e., evaluate
the chosen evaluation measure using the chosen evaluation strategy).
3. Based on the results obtained from the previous step following steps are iteratively repeated:
(a) Fit a regression model (also called surrogate model, e.g., kriging (Jones et al., 1998) or RF) based on all
already evaluated design points with the evaluation measure as the dependent variable and the hyperparam-
eters as predictor variables.
(b) Propose a new point for evaluation on the hyperparameter space based on an inﬁll criterion. This criterion
is based on the surrogate model and proposes points that have good expected outcome values and lie in
regions of the hyperparameter space where not many points were evaluated yet.
(c) Evaluate the point and add it to the already existing design points.
3.4 Existing software implementations
Several packages already implement such automatic tuning procedures for RF. We shortly describe the three most
common ones in R:
•mlrHyperopt (Richter, 2017) uses sequential model-based optimization as implemented in the R package ml-
rMBO. It has predeﬁned tuning parameters and tuning spaces for many supervised learning algorithms that are
part of the mlrpackage. Only one line of code is needed to perform the tuning of these algorithms with the pack-
age. In case of ranger, the default parameters that are tuned are mtry(between 1 and the number of variables
p) and the node size (from 1 to 10), with 25 iteration steps (step number 3 in the previous subsection) and no
initial design. In mlrHyperopt , the standard evaluation strategy in each iteration step of the tuning procedure
is 10-fold cross-validation and the evaluation measure is the mean missclassiﬁcation error. The parameters, the
evaluation strategy and measure can be changed by the user. As it is intended as a platform for sharing tuning
parameters and spaces, users can use their own tuning parameters and spaces and upload them to the webservice
of the package.
•caret(Kuhn, 2008) is a set of functions that attempts to streamline the process for creating predictive models.
When executing rangerviacaretit automatically performs a grid search of mtryover the whole mtryparameter
space. By default, the algorithm evaluates 3 points in the parameter space (smallest and biggest possible mtry
and the mean of these two values) with 25 bootstrap iterations as evaluation strategy. The algorithm ﬁnally
chooses the value with the lowest error rate in case of classiﬁcation and the lowest mean squared error in case of
regression.
8