perform on average worse, since they are built based on suboptimal variables (that were selected out of a small set of
randomly drawn candidates): possibly non-important variables are chosen. We have to deal with a trade-oﬀ between
stability and accuracy of the single trees.
As default value in several software packages mtryis set toppfor classiﬁcation and p=3for regression with pbeing
the number of predictor variables. In their paper on the inﬂuence of hyperparameters on the accuracy of RF, Bernard
et al. (2009) conclude that mtry =ppis a reasonable value, but can sometimes be improved. They especially outline
that the real number of relevant predictor variables highly inﬂuences the optimal mtry. If there are many relevant
predictor variables, mtryshould be set small because then not only the strongest inﬂuential variables are chosen in the
splits but also less inﬂuential variables, which can provide small but relevant performance gains. These less inﬂuential
variables might, for example, be useful for the prediction of a small group of observations that stronger variables fail
to predict correctly. If mtryis large, however, these less inﬂuential variables might not have the chance to contribute
to prediction because stronger variables are preferably selected for splitting and thus “mask” the smaller eﬀects. On
the other hand, if there are only a few relevant variables out of many, which is the case in many genetic datasets, mtry
should be set high, so that the algorithm can ﬁnd the relevant variables (Goldstein et al., 2011). A large mtryensures
that there is (with high probability) at least one strong variable in the set of mtrycandidate variables.
Further empirical results are provided by Genuer et al. (2008). In their low dimensional classiﬁcation problems
mtry =ppis convenient regarding the error rate. For low dimensional regression problems, in their examplespp
performs better than p=3regarding the mean squared error. For high dimensional data they observe lower error rates
for higher mtryvalues for both classiﬁcation and regression, corroborating Goldstein et al. (2011).
Computation time decreases approximately linearly with lower mtryvalues (Wright and Ziegler, 2017), since most
of RF’s computing time is devoted to the selection of the split variables.
2.1.2 Sampling scheme: sample size and replacement
The sample size parameter determines how many observations are drawn for the training of each tree. It has a similar
eﬀect as the mtryparameter. Decreasing the sample size leads to more diverse trees and thereby lower correlation
between the trees, which has a positive eﬀect on the prediction accuracy when aggregating the trees. However, the
accuracy of the single trees decreases, since fewer observations are used for training. Hence, similarly to the mtry
parameter, the choice of the sample size can be seen as a trade-oﬀ between stability and accuracy of the trees.
Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) carried out an empirical analysis of the dependence of the performance on the
sample size. They concluded that the optimal value is problem dependent and can be estimated with the out-of-bag
predictions. In most datasets they observed better performances when sampling less observations than the standard
choice (which is to sample as many observations with replacement as the number of observations in the dataset).
Setting it to lower values reduces the runtime.
Moreover, Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) claim that there is no substantial performance diﬀerence between
sampling with replacement or without replacement when the sample size parameter is set optimally. However, both
theoretical (Janitza et al., 2016) and empirical results (Strobl et al., 2007) show that sampling with replacement may
induce a slight variable selection bias when categorical variables with varying number of categories are considered. In
these speciﬁc cases, performance may be impaired by sampling withreplacement, even if this impairment could not be
observed by Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) when considering averages over datasets of diﬀerent types.
2.1.3 Node size
Thenodesize parameter speciﬁes the minimum number of observations in a terminal node. Setting it lower leads to
trees with a larger depth which means that more splits are performed until the terminal nodes. In several standard
software packages the default value is 1 for classiﬁcation and 5 for regression. It is believed to generally provide good
results (Díaz-Uriarte and De Andres, 2006; Goldstein et al., 2011) but performance can potentially be improved by
tuning it (Lin and Jeon, 2006). In particular, Segal (2004) showed an example where increasing the number of noise
variables leads to a higher optimal node size.
Our own preliminary experiments suggest that the computation time decreases approximately exponentially with
increasing node size. In our experience, especially in large sample datasets it may be helpful to set this parameter to
3