Note that most hyperparameters are so-called “tuning parameters”, in the sense that their values have to be
optimized carefully—because the optimal values are dependent on the dataset at hand. Optimality here refers to
a certain performance measure that have to be chosen beforehand. An important concept related to parameter
tuning is overﬁtting: parameter values corresponding to complex rules tend to overﬁtthe training data, i.e. to yield
prediction rules that are too speciﬁc to the training data—and perform very well for this data but probably worse for
independent data. The selection of such sub-optimal parameter values can be partly avoided by using a test dataset
or cross-validation procedures for tuning. In the case of random forest the out-of-bag observations can also be used.
We will see that for random forest not all but most presented parameters are tuning parameters. Furthermore,
note that the distinction between hyperparameters and algorithm variants is blurred. For example, the splitting rule
may be considered as a (categorical) hyperparameter, but also as deﬁning distinct variants of the RF algorithm.
Some arbitrariness is unavoidable when distinguishing hyperparameters from variants of RF. In the present paper,
considered hyperparameters are the number of candidate variables considered at each split (commonly denoted as
mtry), the hyperparameters specifying the sampling scheme (the replaceargument and the sample size), the minimal
node size and related parameters, the number of trees, and the splitting rule.
This paper addresses speciﬁcally the problem of the choice of parameters of the random forest algorithm from two
diﬀerent perspectives. Its ﬁrst part presents a review of the literature on the choice of the various parameters of RF,
while the second part presents diﬀerent tuning strategies and software packages for obtaining optimal hyperparameter
values which are ﬁnally compared in a benchmark study.
2 Literature Review
In the ﬁrst section of this literature review, we focus on the inﬂuence of the hyperparameters on the prediction
performance, e.g., the error rate or the area under the ROC Curve (AUC), and the runtime of random forest, while
literature dealing speciﬁcally with the inﬂuence on the variable importance is reviewed in the second section. In Table
1 the diﬀerent hyperparameters with description and typical default values are displayed.
Hyperparameter Description Typical default values
mtry Number of drawn candidate variables in each splitpp,p=3for regression
sample size Number of observations that are drawn for each tree n
replacement Draw observations with or without replacement TRUE (with replacement)
node size Minimum number of observations in a terminal node 1 for classiﬁcation, 5 for regression
number of trees Number of trees in the forest 500, 1000
splitting rule Splitting criteria in the nodes Gini impurity, p-value, random
Table 1: Overview of the diﬀerent hyperparameter of random forest and typical default values. nis the number of
observations and pis the number of variables in the dataset.
2.1 Inﬂuence on performance
As outlined in Breiman (2001), “[t]he randomness used in tree construction has to aim for low correlation while
maintaining reasonable strength” . In other words, an optimal compromise between low correlation and reasonable
strength of the trees has to be found. This can be controlled by the parameters mtry, sample size and node size
which will be presented in Section 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3, respectively. Section 2.1.4 handles the number of trees, while
Section 2.1.5 is devoted to the splitting criterion.
2.1.1 Number of randomly drawn candidate variables ( mtry)
One of the central hyperparameters of RF is mtry, as denoted in most RF packages, which is deﬁned as the number of
randomly drawn candidate variables out of which each split is selected when growing a tree. Lower values of mtrylead
to more diﬀerent, less correlated trees, yielding better stability when aggregating. Forests constructed with a low mtry
also tend to better exploit variables with moderate eﬀect on the response variable, that would be masked by variables
with strong eﬀect if those had been candidates for splitting. However, lower values of mtryalso lead to trees that
2