3.1 Tunability of random forest
Random forest is an algorithm which is known to provide good results in the default settings (Fernández-Delgado et al.,
2014). Probst et al. (2018) measure the “tunability” of algorithms and hyperparameters of algorithms and conclude
that random forest is far less tunable than other algorithms such as support vector machines. Nevertheless, a small
performance gain (e.g., an average increase of the AUC of 0.010 based on the 38 considered datasets) can be achieved
via tuning compared to the default software package hyperparameter values. This average performance gain, although
moderate, can be an important improvement in some cases, when, for example, each wrongly classiﬁed observation
implies high costs. Moreover, for some datasets it is much higher than 0.01 (e.g., around 0.03).
As outlined in Section 2, all considered hyperparameters might have an eﬀect on the performance of RF. It is
not completely clear, however, which of them should routinely be tuned in practice. Beyond the special case of RF,
Probst et al. (2018) suggest a general framework to assess the tunability of diﬀerent hyperparameters of diﬀerent
algorithms (including RF) and illustrate their approach through an application to 38 datasets. In their study, tuning
the parameter mtryprovides the biggest average improvement of the AUC (0.006), followed by the sample size (0.004),
while the node size had only a small eﬀect (0.001). Changing the replaceparameter from drawing with replacement to
drawing without replacement also had a small positive eﬀect (0.002). Similar results were observed in the work of van
Rijn and Hutter (2018). As outlined in Section 2.1.4, the number of trees cannot be seen as tuning parameter: higher
values are generally preferable to smaller values with respect to performance. If the performance of RF with default
values of the hyperparameters can be improved by choosing other values, the next question is how this choice should
be performed.
3.2 Evaluation strategies and evaluation measures
A typical strategy to evaluate the performance of an algorithm with diﬀerent values of the hyperparameters in the
context of tuning is k-fold cross-validation. The number kof folds is usually chosen between 2 and 10. Averaging the
results of several repetitions of the whole cross-validation procedure provides more reliable results as the variance of
the estimation is reduced (Seibold et al., 2018).
In RF (or in general when bagging is used) another strategy is possible, namely using the out-of-bag observations
to evaluate the trained algorithm. Generally, the results of this strategy are reliable (Breiman, 1996), i.e., approximate
the performance of the RF on independent data reasonably well. A bias can be observed in special data situations
(see Janitza and Hornung, 2018, and references therein), for example in very small datasets with n<20, when there
are many predictor variables and balanced classes. Since these problems are speciﬁc to particular and relatively rare
situations and tuning based on out-of-bag-predictions has a much smaller runtime than procedures such as k-fold
cross-validation (which is especially important in big datasets), we recommend the out-of-bag approach for tuning as
an appropriate procedure for most datasets.
The evaluation measure is a measure that is dependent on the learning problem. In classiﬁcation, two of the
most commonly considered measures are the classiﬁcation error rate and the Area Under the Curve (AUC). Two
other common measures that are based on probabilities are the Brier score and the logarithmic loss. An overview of
evaluation measures for classiﬁcation is given in Ferri et al. (2009).
3.3 Tuning search strategies
Search strategies diﬀer in the way the candidate hyperparameter values (i.e., the values that have to be evaluated with
respect to their out-of-bag performance) are chosen. Some strategies specify all the candidate hyperparameter values
from the beginning, for example, random search and grid search presented in the following subsections. In contrast,
other more sophisticated methods such as F-Race (Birattari et al., 2010), general simulated annealing (Bohachevsky
et al., 1986) or sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) (Jones et al., 1998; Hutter et al., 2011) iteratively use
the results of the diﬀerent already evaluated hyperparameter values and choose future hyperparameters considering
these results. The latter procedure, SMBO, is introduced at the end of this section and used in two of the software
implementations that are presented in the sections 3.4 and 3.5.
7