a value higher than the default as it decreases the runtime substantially, often without substantial loss of prediction
performance (Segal, 2004).
Note that other hyperparameters than the node size may be considered to control the size of the trees. For example,
the R package party(Hothorn et al., 2006) allows to set the minimal size, minbucket , that child nodes should have
for the split to be performed. The hyperparameters nodesize andminbucket are obviously related, since the size of all
parent nodes equals at least twice the value of minbucket . However, setting minbucket to a certain value does not in
general lead to the same trees as setting nodesize to double this value. To explain this, let us consider a node of size
n= 10and a candidate categorical predictor variable taking value 1 for n1= 9of then= 10observations of the node,
and value 0 for the remaining observation. If we set nodesize to 10 and do not put any restriction on minbucket (i.e.,
set it to 1), our candidate variable can be selected for splitting. If, however, we proceed the other way around and set
minbucket to 5 while not putting any restriction on nodesize (i.e., while setting it to 2), our candidate variable cannot
be selected, because it would produce a—too small—child node of size 1. On the one hand, one may argue that splits
with two large enough child nodes are preferable—an argument in favor of setting minbucket to a value larger than
one. On the other hand, this may yield a selection bias in the case of categorical variables, as demonstrated through
this simple example and also discussed in Boulesteix et al. (2012a) in the context of genetic data.
Furthermore, in the R package randomForest (Liaw and Wiener, 2002), it is possible to specify maxnodes , the
maximum number of terminal nodes that trees in the forest can have, while the R package partyallows to specify the
strongly related hyperparameter maxdepth , the maximal depth of the trees, which is the maximum number of splits
until the terminal node.
2.1.4 Number of trees
The number of trees in a forest is a parameter that is not tunable in the classical sense but should be set suﬃciently
high (Díaz-Uriarte and De Andres, 2006; Oshiro et al., 2012; Probst and Boulesteix, 2017). Out-of-bag error curves
(slightly) increasing with the number of trees are occasionally observed for certain error measures (see Probst and
Boulesteix, 2017, for an empirical study based on a large number of datasets). According to measures based on the
mean quadratic loss such as the mean squared error (in case of regression) or the Brier score (in case of classiﬁcation),
however, more trees are always better, as theoretically proved by Probst and Boulesteix (2017).
The convergence rate, and thus the number of trees needed to obtain optimal performance, depends on the dataset’s
properties. Using a large number of datasets, Oshiro et al. (2012) and Probst and Boulesteix (2017) show empirically
that the biggest performance gain can often be achieved when growing the ﬁrst 100 trees. The convergence behaviour
can be investigated by inspecting the out-of-bag curves showing the performance for a growing number of trees. Probst
and Boulesteix (2017) argue that the error rate is not the optimal measure for that purpose because, by considering
a prediction as either true or false, one ignores much of the information output by the RF and focuses too much on
observations that are close to the prediction boundary. Instead, they recommend the use of other measures based
on the predicted class probabilities such as the Brier score or the logarithmic loss, as implemented in the R package
OOBCurve (Probst, 2017).
Note that the convergence rate of RF does not only depend on the considered dataset’s characteristics but possibly
also on hyperparameters. Lower sample size (see Section 2.1.2), higher node size values (see Section 2.1.3) and smaller
mtryvalues (see Section 2.1.1) lead to less correlated trees. These trees are more diﬀerent from each other and
are expected to provide more diﬀerent predictions. Therefore, we suppose that more trees are needed to get clear
predictions for each observation which leads to a higher number of trees for obtaining convergence.
4