•tuneRFfrom the randomForest package implements an automatic tuning procedure for the mtryparameter.
First, it calculates the out-of-bag error with the default mtryvalue (square root of the number of variables pfor
classiﬁcation and p=3for regression). Second, it tries out a new smaller value of mtry(default is to deﬂate mtry
by the factor 2). If it provides a better out-of-bag error rate (relative improvement of at least 0.05) the algorithm
continues trying out smaller mtryvalues in the same way. After that, the algorithm tries out larger values than
the default of mtryuntil there is no more improvement, analogously to the second step. Finally the algorithm
returns the model with the best mtryvalue.
3.5 The tuneRanger package
As a by-product of our literature review on tuning for RF, we created a package, tuneRanger (Probst, 2018), for
automatic tuning of RF based on the package rangerthrough a single line of code, implementing all features that we
identiﬁed as useful in other packages, and intended for users who are not very familiar with tuning strategies. The
package tuneRanger is mainly based on the R packages ranger(Wright and Ziegler, 2017), mlrMBO (Bischl et al.,
2017) and mlr(Bischl et al., 2016). The main function tuneRanger of the package works internally as follows:
•Sequentialmodel-basedoptimization(SMBO,seeSection3.3)isusedastuningstrategywith30evaluatedrandom
points for the initial design and 70 iterative steps in the optimization procedure. The number of steps for the
initial design and in the optimization procedure are parameters that can be changed by the user, although the
default settings 30 resp. 70 provide good results in our experiments.
•As a default, the function simultaneously tunes the three parameters mtry, sample size and node size. mtryvalues
are sampled from the space [0;p]withpbeing the number of predictor variables, while sample size values are
sampled from [0:2n;0:9n]withnbeing the number of observations. Node size values are sampled with higher
probability (in the initial design) for smaller values by sampling x from [0;1]and transforming the value by the
formula [(n0:2)x]. Thetunedparameterscanbechangedbytheuserbychangingtheargument tune.parameters ,
if, for example, only the mtryvalue should be tuned or if additional parameters, such as the sampling strategy
(sampling with or without resampling) or the handling of unordered factors (see Hastie et al. (2001), chapter
9.2.4 or the help of the rangerpackage for more details), should be included in the tuning process.
•Out-of-bagpredictionsareusedforevaluation, whichmakesitmuchfasterthanotherpackagesthatuseevaluation
strategies such as cross-validation.
•Classiﬁcation as well as regression is supported.
•The default measure that is optimized is the Brier score for classiﬁcation, which yields a ﬁner evaluation than
the commonly used error rate (Probst and Boulesteix, 2017), and the mean squared error for regression. It can
be changed to any of the 50 measures currently implemented in the R package mlrand documented in the online
tutorial (Schiﬀner et al., 2016): http://mlr-org.github.io/mlr-tutorial/devel/html/measures/index.html
•The ﬁnal recommended hyperparameter setting is calculated by taking the best 5 percent of all SMBO iterations
regarding the chosen performance measure and then calculating the average of each hyperparameter of these
iterations , which is rounded in case of mtryand node size.
Installation and execution
In the following one can see a typical example of the execution of the algorithm. The dataset monks-problem-1 is
taken from OpenML. Execution time can be estimated beforehand with the function estimateTimeTuneRanger which
trains a random forest with default values, multiplies the training time by the number of iterations and adds 50 for
the training and prediction time of surrogate models. The function tuneRanger then executes the tuning algorithm:
library(tuneRanger)
library(mlr)
library(OpenML)
monk_data_1 = getOMLDataSet(333)$data
monk.task = makeClassifTask(data = monk_data_1, target = "class")
9