4 Conclusion and Discussion
The RF algorithm has several hyperparameters that may inﬂuence its performance. The number of trees
should be set high: the higher the number of trees, the better the results in terms of performance and
precision of variable importances. However, the improvement obtained by adding trees diminishes as more
and more trees are added. The hyperparameters mtry, sample size and node size are the parameters that
control the randomness of the RF. They should be set to achieve a reasonable strength of the single trees
without too much correlation between the trees (bias-variance trade-oﬀ). Out of these parameters, mtryis
most inﬂuential both according to the literature and in our own experiments. The best value of mtrydepends
on the number of variables that are related to the outcome. Sample size and node size have a minor inﬂuence
on the performance but are worth tuning in many cases as we also showed empirically in our benchmark
experiment. As far as the splitting rule is concerned, there exist several alternatives to the standard RF
splitting rule, for example those used in conditional inference forests (Hothorn et al., 2006) or extremely
randomized trees (Geurts et al., 2006).
The literature on RF cruelly lacks systematic large-scale comparison studies on the diﬀerent variants and
values of hyperparameters. It is especially scarce as far as the impact on variable importance measures is
concerned. This is all the more regrettable given that a large part of the data analysts using RF pay at
least as much attention to the output variable importances as to the output prediction rule. Beyond the
special case of RF, literature on computational methods tends to generally focus on the development of new
methods as opposed to comparison studies investigating existing methods. As discussed in Boulesteix et al.
(2018), computational journals often require the development of novel methods as a prequisit for publication.
Comparison studies presented in papers introducing new methods are often biased in favor of these new
methods—as a result of the publication bias and publication pressure. As a result of this situation, neutral
comparison studies as deﬁned by Boulesteix et al. (2017) (i.e., focusing on the comparison of existing methods
rather than aiming at demonstrating the superiority of a new one, and conducted by authors who are as a
group approximately equally competent on all considered methods) are important but rare.
The literature review presented in this paper, which is to some extent disappointing in the sense that
clear guidance is missing, leads us to make a plea for more studies investigating and comparing the behaviors
and performances of RF variants and hyperparameter choices. Such studies are, in our opinion, at least as
important as the development of further variants that would even increase the need for comparisons.
In the second part of the paper, diﬀerent tuning methods for random forest are compared in a benchmark
study. The results and previous studies show that tuning random forest can improve the performance although
the eﬀect of tuning is much smaller than for other machine learning algorithms such as support vector ma-
chines (Mantovani et al., 2015). Out of existing tuning algorithms, we suggest to use sequential model-based
optimization (SMBO) to tune the parameters mtry, sample size and node size simultanously. Moreover, the
out-of-bag predictions can be used for tuning. This approach is faster than, for example, cross-validation.
The whole procedure is implemented in the package tuneRanger . This package allows users to choose the
speciﬁc measure that should be minimized (e.g., the AUC in case of classiﬁcation). In our benchmark study
it achieved on average better performances than the standard random forest and other software that imple-
ment tuning for random forest, while the fast tuneRF function from the package randomForest can be
recommended if computational speed is an issue.
References
Belgiu, M. and Drăguţ, L. (2016) Random forest in remote sensing: A review of applications and future
directions. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing ,114, 24–31.
16