The computation time increases linearly with the number of trees. As trees are trained independently from each
other they can be trained in parallel on several CPU cores which is implemented in software packages such as ranger
(Wright and Ziegler, 2017).
2.1.5 Splitting rule
The splitting rule is not a classical hyperparameter as it can be seen as one of the core properties characterizing the
RF. However, it can in a large sense also be considered as a categorical hyperparameter. The default splitting rule of
Breiman’s original RF (Breiman, 2001) consists of selecting, out of all splits of the (randomly selected mtry) candidate
variables, the split that minimizes the Gini impurity (in the case of classiﬁcation) and the weighted variance (in case
of regression). This method favors the selection of variables with many possible splits (e.g., continuous variables or
categorical variables with many categories) over variables with few splits (the extreme case being binary variables,
which have only one possible split) due to multiple testing mechanisms (Strobl et al., 2007).
Conditional inference forests (CIF) introduced by Hothorn et al. (2006) and implemented in the R package party
and in the newer package partykit (Hothorn and Zeileis, 2015) allow to avoid this variable selection bias by selecting
the variable with the smallest p-value in a global test (i.e., withoutassessing all possible splits successively) in a ﬁrst
step, and selecting the best split from the selected variable in a second step by maximizing a linear test statistic. Note
that the global test to be used in the ﬁrst step depends on the scale of the predictor variables and response variable.
Hothorn et al. (2006) suggest several variants. A computationally fast alternative using p-value approximations for
maximally selected rank statistics is proposed by Wright et al. (2017). This variant is available in the rangerpackage
for regression and survival outcomes.
When tests are performed for split selection, it may only make sense to split if the p-values fall below a certain
threshold, which should then be considered as a hyperparameter. In the R package partythe hyperparameter mincri-
terionrepresents one minus the p-value threshold and in rangerthe hyperparameter alphais thep-value threshold.
To increase computational eﬃciency, splitting rules can be randomized (Geurts et al., 2006). To this end, only a
randomly selected subset of possible splitting values are considered for a variable. The size of these subsets is speciﬁed
by the hyperparameter numRandomCuts in the extraTrees package and by num.random.splits inranger. If this
value is set to 1, this variant is called extremely randomized trees (Geurts et al., 2006). In addition to runtime reduction,
randomized splitting might also be used to add a further component of randomness to the trees, similar to mtryand
the sample size.
Until now, none of the existing splitting rules could be proven as superior to the others in general regarding the
performance. For example, the splitting rule based on the decrease of Gini impurity implemented in Breiman’s original
version is aﬀected by a serious variable selection bias as outlined above. However, if one considers datasets in which
variables with many categories are more informative than variables with less categories, this variable selection bias—
even if it is in principle a ﬂaw of the approach—may accidentally lead to improved accuracy. Hence, depending on the
dataset and its properties one or the other method may be better. Appropriate benchmark studies based on simulation
or real data have to be designed, to evaluate in which situations which splitting rule performs better.
Regarding runtime, extremely randomized trees are the fastest as the cutpoints are drawn completely randomly,
followed by the classical random forest, while for conditional inference forests the runtime is the largest.
2.2 Inﬂuence on variable importance
The RF variable importance (Breiman, 2001) is a measure reﬂecting the importance of a variable in a RF prediction
rule. While eﬀect sizes and p-values of the Wald test or likelihood ratio tests are often used to assess the importance
of variables in case of logistic or linear regression, the RF variable importance measure can also automatically capture
non-linear and interaction eﬀects without specifying these a priori (Wright et al., 2016) and is also applicable when
more variables than observations are available. Several variants of the variable importance exist, including the Gini
variable importance measure and the permutation variable importance measure (Breiman, 2001; Strobl et al., 2007).
In this section we focus on the latter, since the former has been shown to be strongly biased. The Gini variable
importance measure assigns higher importance values to variables with more categories or continuous variables (Strobl
et al., 2007) and to categorical variables with equally sized categories (Boulesteix et al., 2012a) even if all variables are
independent of the response variable.
5