Many of the eﬀects of the hyperparameters described in the previous section 2.1 are expected to also have an
eﬀect on the variable importance. However, speciﬁc research on this inﬂuence is still in its infancy. Most extensive is
probably the research about the inﬂuence of the number of trees. In contrast, the literature is very scarce as far as the
sample size and node size are concerned.
2.2.1 Number of trees
More trees are generally required for stable variable importance estimates (Genuer et al., 2010; Goldstein et al., 2011),
than for the simple prediction purpose. Lunetta et al. (2004) performed simulations with more noisy variables than
truly associated covariates and concluded that multiple thousands of trees must be trained in order to get stable
estimates of the variable importance. The more trees are trained, the more stable the predictions should be for the
variable importance. In order to assess the stability one could train several random forests with a ﬁxed number of
trees and check whether the ranking of the variables by importance are diﬀerent between the forests.
2.2.2 mtry, splitting rule and node size
Genuer et al. (2010) examine the inﬂuence of the parameter mtryon the variable importance. They conclude that
increasing the mtryvalue leads to much higher magnitudes of the variable importances. As already outlined in
Section 2.1.5 the random forest standard splitting rule is biased when predictor variables vary in their scale. This has
also a substantial impact on the variable importance (Strobl et al., 2007). In the case of the Gini variable importance,
predictorvariableswithmanycategoriesornumericalvaluesreceiveonaverageahighervariableimportancethanbinary
variables if both variables have no inﬂuence on the outcome variable. The permutation variable importance remains
unbiased in these cases, but there is a higher variance of the variable importance for variables with many categories.
This could not be observed for conditional inference forests combined with subsampling (without replacement) as
sampling procedure and therefore Strobl et al. (2007) recommend to use this method for getting reliable variable
importance measures.
Grömping (2009) compared the inﬂuence of mtryand the node size on the variable importance of the standard
random forest and of the conditional inference forest. Higher mtryvalues lead to lower variable importance of weak
regressors. The values of the variable importance from the standard random forest were far less dependent on mtry
than the ones from the conditional inference forests. This was due to the much larger size (i.e., number of splits until
the terminal node) of individual trees in the standard random forest. Decreasing the tree size (for example by setting
a higher node size value) while setting mtryto a small value leads to more equal values of the variable importances of
all variables, because there was less chance that relevant variables were chosen in the splitting procedures.
3 Tuning random forest
Tuning is the task of ﬁnding optimal hyperparameters for a learning algorithm for a considered dataset. In supervised
learning (e.g., regression and classiﬁcation), optimality may refer to diﬀerent performance measures (e.g., the error rate
or the AUC) and to the runtime which can highly depend on hyperparameters in some cases as outlined in Section 2.
In this paper we mainly focus on the optimality regarding performance measures.
Even if the choice of adequate values of hyperparameters has been partially investigated in a number of studies
as reviewed in Section 2, unsurprisingly the literature provides general trends rather than clear-cut guidance. In
practice, users of RF are often unsure whether alternative values of tuning parameters may improve performance
compared to default values. Default values are given by software packages or can be calculated by using previous
datasets (Probst et al., 2018). In the following section we will review literature about the “tunability” of random
forest. “Tunability” is deﬁned as the amount of performance gain compared to default values that can be achieved by
tuning one hyperparameter (“tunability” of the hyperparameter) or all hyperparameters (“tunability” of the algorithm);
see Probst et al. (2018) for more details. Afterwards, evaluation strategies, evaluation measures and tuning search
strategies are presented. Then we review software implementations of tuning of RF in the programming language R
and ﬁnally show the results of a large scale benchmark study comparing the diﬀerent implementations.
6