Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategies for Random Forest
by Philipp Probst, Marvin Wright and Anne-Laure Boulesteix
February 27, 2019
Abstract
The random forest algorithm (RF) has several hyperparameters that have to be set by the user, e.g., the number
of observations drawn randomly for each tree and whether they are drawn with or without replacement, the number
of variables drawn randomly for each split, the splitting rule, the minimum number of samples that a node must
contain and the number of trees. In this paper, we ﬁrst provide a literature review on the parameters’ inﬂuence on the
prediction performance and on variable importance measures.
It is well known that in most cases RF works reasonably well with the default values of the hyperparameters
speciﬁed in software packages. Nevertheless, tuning the hyperparameters can improve the performance of RF. In the
second part of this paper, after a brief overview of tuning strategies we demonstrate the application of one of the most
established tuning strategies, model-based optimization (MBO). To make it easier to use, we provide the tuneRanger
R package that tunes RF with MBO automatically. In a benchmark study on several datasets, we compare the
prediction performance and runtime of tuneRanger with other tuning implementations in R and RF with default
hyperparameters.
1 Introduction
The random forest algorithm (RF) ﬁrst introduced by Breiman (2001) has now grown to a standard non-parametric
classiﬁcation and regression tool for constructing prediction rules based on various types of predictor variables without
making any prior assumption on the form of their association with the response variable. RF has been the topic of
several reviews in the last few years including our own review (Boulesteix et al., 2012b) and others (Criminisi et al.,
2012; Ziegler and König, 2014; Biau and Scornet, 2016; Belgiu and Drăguţ, 2016). RF involves several hyperparameters
controlling the structure of each individual tree (e.g., the minimal size nodesize a node should have to be split) and
the structure and size of the forest (e.g., the number of trees) as well as its level of randomness (e.g., the number
mtryof variables considered as candidate splitting variables at each split or the sampling scheme used to generate
the datasets on which the trees are built). The impact of these hyperparameters has been studied in a number of
papers. However, results on this impact are often focused on single hyperparameters and provided as by-product of
studies devoted to other topics (e.g., a new variant of RF) and thus are diﬃcult to ﬁnd for readers without profound
knowledge of the literature. Clear guidance is missing and the choice of adequate values for the parameters remains a
challenge in practice.
It is important to note that RF may be used in practice for two diﬀerent purposes. In some RF applications, the
focus is on the construction of a classiﬁcation or regression rule with good accuracy that is intended to be used as a
prediction tool on future data. In this case, the objective is to derive a rule with high prediction performance—where
performance can be deﬁned in diﬀerent ways depending on the context, the simplest approach being to consider the
classiﬁcation error rate in the case of classiﬁcation and the mean squared error in the case of regression. In other
RF applications, however, the goal is not to derive a classiﬁcation or regression rule but to investigate the relevance
of the candidate predictor variables for the prediction problem at hand or, in other words, to assess their respective
contribution to the prediction of the response variable. See the discussion by Shmueli et al. (2010) on the diﬀerence
between “predicting” and “explaining”. These two objectives have to be kept in mind when investigating the eﬀect of
parameters. Note, however, that there might be overlap of these two objectives: For example one might use a variable
selection procedure based on variable importance measures to obtain a well performing prediction rules using RF.
1arXiv:1804.03515v2  [stat.ML]  26 Feb 2019