WA VEGLOW: A FLOW-BASED GENERATIVE NETWORK FOR SPEECH SYNTHESIS
Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA Corporation
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose WaveGlow: a ﬂow-based net-
work capable of generating high quality speech from mel-
spectrograms. WaveGlow combines insights from Glow [1]
and WaveNet [2] in order to provide fast, efﬁcient and high-
quality audio synthesis, without the need for auto-regression.
WaveGlow is implemented using only a single network,
trained using only a single cost function: maximizing the
likelihood of the training data, which makes the training
procedure simple and stable. Our PyTorch implementation
produces audio samples at a rate of more than 500 kHz on
an NVIDIA V100 GPU. Mean Opinion Scores show that it
delivers audio quality as good as the best publicly available
WaveNet implementation. All code will be made publicly
available online [3].
Index Terms —Audio Synthesis, Text-to-speech, Gener-
ative models, Deep Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
As voice interactions with machines become increasingly
useful, efﬁciently synthesizing high quality speech becomes
increasingly important. Small changes in voice quality or
latency have large impacts on customer experience and cus-
tomer preferences. However, high quality, real-time speech
synthesis remains a challenging task. Speech synthesis re-
quires generating very high dimensional samples with strong
long term dependencies. Additionally, humans are sensi-
tive to statistical imperfections in audio samples. Beyond the
quality challenges, real-time speech synthesis has challenging
speed and computation constraints. Perceived speech quality
drops signiﬁcantly when the audio sampling rate is less than
16kHz, and higher sampling rates generate even higher qual-
ity speech. Furthermore, many applications require synthesis
rates much faster than 16kHz. For example, when synthesiz-
ing speech on remote servers, strict interactivity requirements
mean the utterances must be synthesized quickly at sample
rates far exceeding real-time requirements.
Currently, state of the art speech synthesis models are
based on parametric neural networks. Text-to-speech synthe-
sis is typically done in two steps. The ﬁrst step transforms the
text into time-aligned features, such as a mel-spectrogram [4,
5], or F0frequencies and other linguistic features [2, 6]. Asecond model transforms these time-aligned features into au-
dio samples. This second model, sometimes referred to as a
vocoder, is computationally challenging and affects quality as
well. We focus on this second model in this work. Most of the
neural network based models for speech synthesis are auto-
regressive, meaning that they condition future audio samples
on previous samples in order to model long term dependen-
cies. These approaches are relatively simple to implement
and train. However, they are inherently serial, and hence can’t
fully utilize parallel processors like GPUs or TPUs. Models
in this group often have difﬁculty synthesizing audio faster
than 16kHz without sacriﬁcing quality.
At this time we know of three neural network based mod-
els that can synthesize speech without auto-regression: Par-
allel WaveNet [2], Clarinet [7], and MCNN for spectrogram
inversion [8]. These techniques can synthesize audio at more
than 500kHz on a GPU. However, these models are more dif-
ﬁcult to train and implement than the auto-regressive models.
All three require compound loss functions to improve audio
quality or problems with mode collapse [9, 7, 8]. In addi-
tion, Parallel WaveNet and Clarinet require two networks, a
student network and teacher network. The student networks
underlying both Parallel WaveNet and Clarinet use Inverse
Auto-regressive Flows (IAF) [10]. Though the IAF networks
can be run in parallel at inference time, the auto-regressive
nature of the ﬂow itself makes calculation of the IAF inefﬁ-
cient. To overcome this, these works use a teacher network
to train a student network on a approximation to the true like-
lihood. These approaches are hard to reproduce and deploy
because of the difﬁculty of training these models successfully
to convergence.
In this work, we show that an auto-regressive ﬂow is un-
necessary for synthesizing speech. Our contribution is a ﬂow-
based network capable of generating high quality speech from
mel-spectrograms. We refer to this network as WaveGlow, as
it combines ideas from Glow [1] and WaveNet [2]. Wave-
Glow is simple to implement and train, using only a single
network, trained using only the likelihood loss function. De-
spite the simplicity of the model, our PyTorch implementa-
tion synthesizes speech at more than 500kHz on an NVIDIA
V100 GPU: more than 25 times faster than real time. Mean
Opinion Scores show that it delivers audio quality as good as
the best publicly available WaveNet implementation trained
on the same dataset.arXiv:1811.00002v1  [cs.SD]  31 Oct 2018