(a) Unprocessed part segmentation on same class (b) Part segmentation of multiple objects of different class
Figure 4. Part segmentation by capsule association. Having pre-trained the auto-encoder, we append a ﬁnal part-supervision layer and use a
limited amount of data to specialize the capsules on object parts. ( a) across the shapes of the same class capsules capture semantic regions.
(b) inter-class part segmentation. Colors indicate different capsule groups and ( b) uses only a simple median ﬁlter to smooth the results.
Table 5. Part segmentation on ShapeNet-Part by learning only on
thex%of the training data.
Metric SONet- 1% Ours-1% SONet-5% Ours-5%
Accuracy 0.78 0.85 0.84 0.86
IoU 0.64 0.67 0.69 0.70
Conv-Layer Dynamic-Routing Conv-Layer Dynamic-Routing
Figure 5. Distribution of 10 randomly selected capsules on the re-
constructed shape after unsupervised autoencoder training a) with
dynamic routing, b) with a simple convolutional layer.
4.2. Qualitative results
3D Object Part Segmentation with Limited Data We
now demonstrate the regional attention of our latent capsule
and their capacity to learn with limited data. To this end, we
trained 3D-PointCapsNet on the ShapeNet-Part dataset [5]
for part segmentation as explained in §3, with a supervision
of only1−5%part labeled training data. We tested our
network on all of the available test data. To specialize the
capsules to distinct parts, we select as many capsules as the
part labels and let the per-capsule classiﬁcation coincide to
part predictions. Predicted capsule labels are propagated
to the related points. For the sake of space, we compared
our results only with the state of the art on this dataset, the
SO-Net [23]. We use identical evaluation metrics as SO-
Net [23]: Accuracy andIoU(Intersection over Union), and
report our ﬁndings in Tab. 5. Note that, when trained on 1%
of input data, we perform 7%better than SO-Net. When the
amount of training data is increased to 5%, the gap closes
but we still surpass SO-Net by 2%, albeit training a smaller
network to classify latent-capsules rather than 3D points.Does unsupervised training lead to specialized capsules?
It is of interest to see whether the original argument of the
capsule networks [30, 14] claiming to better capture the in-
trinsic geometric properties of the object still holds in the
case of our unsupervised 3D-AE. To this aim, we ﬁrst show
in Fig. 5 that even with lack of supervision the capsules spe-
cialize on local parts of the model. While these parts may
sometimes not correspond to the human annotated part seg-
mentation of the model, we still expect them to concentrate
on semantically similar regions of the 2-manifold. Fig. 5
visualizes the distribution of 10 capsules by coloring them
individually and validates our argument.
To validate our second hypothesis, stating that such clus-
tering arises thanks to the dynamic routing, we replace the
DR part of the AE with standard PointNet-like layers pro-
jecting the 1024×64PPC to 642capsules and repeat the ex-
periment. Fig. 5 depicts the spread of the latent vectors over
the point set when such layer is employed as opposed to DR.
Note that using this simple layer instead of DR both harms
the reconstruction quality and yields an undesired spread of
the capsules across the shape. We leave it as a future work
to study the DR energy theoretically and provide more de-
tails on this experiment in the supplement.
Semi-supervision guides the capsules to meaningful
parts. We now consider the effect of training in steering
the capsules towards the optimal solution in the task of su-
pervised part segmentation. First, we show in Fig. 4 the re-
sults obtained by the proposed part segmentation: ( a) shows
part segmentation across multiple shapes of the same class.
These results are also unﬁltered and the raw outcome of our
network. ( b) depicts part segmentation across a set of object
classes from Shapenet-Part. It also shows that some minor
confusions present in ( a) can be corrected with a simple me-
dian ﬁlter. This is contrary and computationally preferable
to costly CRFs smoothing the results [37].
Next, we observe that, as training iterations progress, the
randomly initialized capsules specialize to parts, achieving
1015