Source Shapes Latent Interpolation of a Single Part Target Shapes
Figure 6. Part interpolation on the Shapenet-Part [42] dataset. ( left)The source point cloud. ( right)Target shape. ( middle)Part interpo-
lation. Fixed part is marked in light blue and the interpolated part is highlighted. Capsules are capable of performing part interpolation
purely via latent space arithmetic.
Figure 7. Visualizing the iterations of unsupervised AE training
on the airplane object. For clear visualization, we fetch the col-
ors belonging to the ∼20 capsules of the wing-part from our part
predictions trained with part supervision.
a good part segmentation at the point of convergence. We
visualize this phenomenon in Fig. 7, where the capsules
that have captured the wings of the airplane are monitored
throughout the optimization procedure. Even though the
initial random distribution is spatially spread out, the re-
sulting conﬁguration is still part speciﬁc. This is a natural
consequence of our capsule-wise part semi-supervision.
Part Interpolation / Replacement Finally, we explore
the rather uncommon but particularly interesting applica-
tion of interpolating, exchanging or switching object parts
via latent-space manipulation. Thanks to the fact that 3D-
PointCapsNet discovers multiple latent vectors speciﬁc to
object attributes/shape parts, our network is capable of per-
forming per-part processing in the latent space. To do
that, we ﬁrst spot a set of latent capsule pairs belonging to
the same parts of two 3D point shapes and intersect them.
Because these capsules explain the same part in multiple
shapes, we assume that they are speciﬁc to the part under
consideration and nothing else. We then interpolate linearly
in the latent space between the selected capsules. As shown
in Fig. 6 the reconstruction of intermediate shapes vary
only at a single part, the one being interpolated. When the
interpolator reaches the target shape it replaces the source
part with the target one, enabling part-replacement . Fig. 8
further shows this in action. Given two shapes and latent
capsules of the related parts, we perform a part exchange
by simply switching some of the latent capsules and recon-Input Shapes Cut-Paste Our Replacement
 Input Shapes Cut-Paste Our Rep.
Figure 8. Part replacement. Performing replacement in the latent
space rather than Euclidean space of 3D points yields geometri-
cally consistent outcome.
structing. Conducting a part exchange directly on the input
space by a cut-and-place would yield inconsistent shapes as
the replaced parts would have no global coherence.
5. Conclusion
We have presented 3D Point-Capsule Network, a ﬂexible
and effective tool for 3D shape processing and understand-
ing. We ﬁrst presented a broad look to the common point
cloud AEs. With the observation that a one dimensional
latent embedding, the choice of the most preceding auto-
encoders, is potentially sub-optimal, we opted to summarize
the point clouds as a union of disjoint latent basis functions.
We have shown that such choice can be implemented by
learning the embedded latent capsules via dynamic routing.
Our algorithm proved successful on an extensive evaluation
on many 3D shape processing tasks such as 3D reconstruc-
tion, local feature extraction and part segmentation. Having
a latent capsule set rather than a single vector also enabled
us to address new applications such as part interpolation and
replacement. In the future, we plan to deploy our network
for pose estimation and object detection from 3D data, cur-
rently two of the key challenges in 3D computer vision.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Yida Wang,
Shuncheng Wu and David Joseph Tan for fruitful discus-
sions. This work is partially supported by China Scholar-
ship Council (CSC) and IAS-Lab in the Department of In-
formation Engineering of the University of Padova, Italy.
1016