N x 128Max
Pool
Max
PoolDynamic 
Routing
(DR)
Mx2 Random Grid
Unsupervised
Reconstruction
Chamfer 
Loss
Input
Point
Cloud3D Capsule-Encoder 3D Capsule-Decoder
Latent
Capsules
1024 x 16N x 3
Primary
Point
Capsules64 x 64Unsupervised
ReconstructionLocal
Patches
MLP
An MLP
per Replica
Figure 2. 3D Point Capsule Networks. Our capsule-encoder accepts an N×3point cloud as input and uses an MLP to extract N×128
features from it. These features are then sent into multiple independent convolutional-layers with different weights, each of which is max-
pooled to a size of 1024 . The pooled features are then concatenated to form the primary point capsules (PPC) (1024×16). A subsequent
dynamic routing clusters the PPC into the ﬁnal latent capsules . Our decoder, responsible for reconstructing point sets given the latent
features, endows the latent capsules with random 2D grids and applies MLPs (64−64−32−16−3)to generate multiple point patches.
These point patches target different regions of the shape thanks to the DR [30]. Finally, we collect all the patches into a ﬁnal point cloud and
measure the Chamfer distance to the input to guide the network to ﬁnd the optimal reconstruction. In ﬁgure, part-colors encode capsules.
temporal frames of the video. Yet, to the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the ﬁrst to devise a capsule network specif-
ically for 3D point clouds, exploiting their sparse and un-
structured nature for representing 3D surfaces.
3. Method
3.1. Formulation
We ﬁrst follow the AtlasNet convention [11] and present
a uniﬁed view of some of the common 3D auto-encoders.
Then, we explain our 3D-PointCapsNet within this geomet-
ric perspective and justify its superiority compared to its an-
cestors. We will start by recalling the basic concepts:
Deﬁnition 1 (Surface and Point Cloud)
A 3D surface (shape) is a differentiable 2-manifold embed-
ded in the ambient 3D Euclidean space: M2∈R3. We
approximate a point cloud as a sampled discrete subset of
the surface X={xi∈ M2∩R3}.
Deﬁnition 2 (Diffeomorphism)
A diffeomorphism is a continuous, invertible, structure-
preserving map between two differentiable surfaces.
Deﬁnition 3 (Chart and Parametrization)
We admit an open set U∈R2and a diffeomorphism C:
M2/mapsto→U∈R2mapping an open neighborhood in 3D to
its 2D embedding. Cis called a chart . Its inverse, Ψ≡
C−1:R2/mapsto→ M2is called a parameterization .
Deﬁnition 4 (Atlas)
A set of charts with images covering the 2-manifold is called
anatlas :A=∪iCi(xi).A 3D auto-encoder learns to generate a 3D surface X∈
M2∩RN×3. By virtue of Dfn. 3 Ψdeforms a 2D point set
to a surface. The goal of the generative models that are of
interest here is to learn Ψto best reconstruct ˆX≈X:
Deﬁnition 5 (Problem)
Learning to generate the 2-manifolds is deﬁned as ﬁnding
function(s) Ψ(U|θ) : Ψ(U|θ)≈X[11].θis a lower di-
mensional parameterization of these functions: |θ|<|X|.
Theorem 1
Given that C−1exists,Ψ, chosen to be a 3-layer MLP , can
reconstruct arbitrary 3D surfaces.
Sketch of the proof. The proof is given in [41] and follows
from the universal approximation theorem (UAT).
Theorem 2
There exists an integer Ks.t. an MLP with Khidden units
universally reconstruct Xup to a precision ǫ.
Sketch of the proof. The proof follows trivially
from Thm. 1 and UAT [11].
Given these deﬁnitions, some of the typical 3D point de-
coders differentiate by making four choices [26, 11, 41]:
1. An open set Uor discrete grid U≡P={pi∈R2}.
2. Distance function d(X,ˆX)between the reconstruction
ˆXand the input shape X.
3. Parameterization function(s) Ψ.
4. Parameters (θ)ofΨ:Ψ(U|θ).
1011