3D Point Capsule Networks
Yongheng Zhao✝ ✥•Tolga Birdal✝*•Haowen Deng✝*Federico Tombari✝
✝Technische Universit ¨at M ¨unchen, Germany✥University of Padova, Italy
*Siemens AG, M ¨unchen, Germany
Abstract
In this paper, we propose 3D point-capsule networks, an
auto-encoder designed to process sparse 3D point clouds
while preserving spatial arrangements of the input data. 3D
capsule networks arise as a direct consequence of our uni-
ﬁed formulation of the common 3D auto-encoders. The dy-
namic routing scheme [30] and the peculiar 2D latent space
deployed by our capsule networks bring in improvements
for several common point cloud-related tasks, such as ob-
ject classiﬁcation, object reconstruction and part segmen-
tation as substantiated by our extensive evaluations. More-
over, it enables new applications such as part interpolation
and replacement.
1. Introduction
Fueled by recent developments in robotics, autonomous
driving and augmented/mixed reality, 3D sensing has be-
come a major research trend in computer vision. Conversely
to RGB cameras, the sensors used for 3D capture provide
rich geometric structure, rather than high-ﬁdelity appear-
ance information. This is proved advantageous for those
applications where color and texture are insufﬁcient to ac-
complish the given task, such as reconstruction/detection of
texture-less objects. Unlike the RGB camera case, 3D data
come in a variety of forms: range maps, fused RGB-D se-
quences, meshes and point clouds, volumetric data. Thanks
to their capability of representing a sparse 3D structure ac-
curately while being agnostic to the sensing modality, point
clouds have been a widespread choice for 3D processing.
The proliferation of deep learning has recently leaped
into the 3D domain and architectures for consuming 3D
points have been proposed either for volumetric [28] or
sparse [26] 3D representations. These architectures over-
came many challenges brought in by 3D data, such as order-
invariance, complexity due to the added data dimension and
local density variations. Unfortunately they often discard
•First two authors contributed equally to this work.
Cut-and-Paste
(a) Part Interpolation
(b) Part Replacement
(c)Part Segmentation with 1% of Training DataGround Truth
Our Result
Source Shape Target Shape
Our Replacement
Input Shape
with Desired Part
Shape to Modify
Figure 1. Our 3D-PointCapsNet improves numerous 3D tasks
while enabling interesting applications such as latent space part
interpolation or complete part modiﬁcation, an application where
a simple cut-and-paste results in inconsistent outputs.
spatial arrangements in data, hence falling short of respect-
ing the parts-to-whole relationship, which is critical to ex-
plain and describe 3D shapes; maybe even more severe than
in the 2D domain due to the increased dimensionality [2].
In this work we ﬁrst present a uniﬁed look to some
well known 3D point decoders. Within this view, and
based on the renowned 2D capsule networks (CN) [30], we
propose the unsupervised 3D point-capsule networks (3D-
PointCapsNet), an auto-encoder for generic representation
learning in unstructured 3D data. Powered by the built-in
routing-by-agreement algorithm [30], our network respects
the geometric relationships between the parts, showing bet-
ter learning ability and generalization properties. We design
our 3D-PointCapsNet architecture to take into account the
sparsity of point clouds by employing PointNet-like input
layers [26]. Through an unsupervised dynamic routing, we
organize the outcome of multiple max-pooled feature maps
into a powerful latent representation. This intermediary la-
tent space is parameterized by latent capsules - stacked la-
tent activation vectors specifying the features of the shapes
and their likelihood.
Latent capsules obtained from point clouds alleviate the
restriction of parameterizing the latent space by a single,
1
1009