of how BN model development and application are being joined with
manyothertoolsandmodelframeworksforavarietyofenvironmental
assessmentandmanagementobjectives.Webrieflyreviewthecurrent
stateandrecentadvancesofBNmodeling,andthenprovideexamples
of an emerging new era of integrating BN models with other frame-
worksandtools.Lastly,wepresentavisionofnextadvancestocome,
concluding with a perspective on ensuring scientific and decision-
makingcredibility,withcautionsonacceleratedmodeladvancements.
2. The cutting edge of BN modeling
The field of BN modeling is advancing swiftly with the number of
journal articles using BNs continuing to rise, including a recent era of
exponential growth (Marcot, 2017). Recent developments in BN mod-
elingarereviewedinthefollowingsections.
2.1. RecentadvancesinBNmodelstructureandapplications
AnumberofrecentadvancesinBNmodelstructureandapplication
havefollowedadiversetrackoftopics,generallyrelatedtoidentifying
and exploring system dynamics and aiding decision management
(Fig.1).
Classification. One area of resurgence is in new approaches to the
classification problem,viz., Bayesianclassifiers andmachinelearning.
BN classifiers include a wide variety ofalgorithms starting with naive
Bayesandvariantsthereof(BielzaandLarrañaga,2014).Relatedtothis
are algorithms for Bayesian learning of probability structures from
empiricaldata(e.g., Tsamardinosetal.,2006; DoandBatzoglou,2008).
Latentvariables. Acommonprobleminecologicalorenvironmental
modelingistheinfluenceoflatentvariables,whichareeffectsinferred
fromtherelationamongobservedvariablesbutwhicharenotdirectly
observed (Marcot, 2017). Machine-learning algorithms used in para-
meterizingtheprobabilityvaluesinBNmodels,suchastheexpectation
maximization algorithm (Do and Batzoglou, 2008), can, to some de-
gree, account for the influence of latent variables and missing data
(Lauritzen,1995).
ArelatedproblemishowtovalidateBNmodelsdevelopedentirely
from expert elicitation with no case-file data by which to structure orparameterizethemodel.Suchmodelsportraylogicalorcausalrelations
among variables as inferred by expert knowledge, but these relations
often are influenced by unspecified, latent variables (de Waal et al.,
2016).Pitchforth and Mengersen (2013) proposed methods for evalu-
ating confidence in the validity of such models even in the dearth of
empirical data and presence of latent variables, thus providing avalidation framework for expert-elicited BNs. de Waal et al. (2016)
suggested several approaches to handling latent variables in BNs, in-
cluding explaining uncertainties associated with latent variables,
parameterizing the probability values of BNs so as to directly address
the roles of latent variables, and addressing uncertainty in model va-
lidation.
Depicting model confidence. Although BN models explicitly in-
corporate uncertainty, there is no common method for depicting and
quantifyingthedegreeofconfidenceintheunderlyingprobabilityva-
luesofthemodelandintheresultingposteriorprobabilitycalculations.
That is, uncertainty measures can be inferred from the probability
distributions of states calculated in the model, but these are not ne-
cessarily the same as the degree of confidence (lever of certainty) of
that probability distribution. Pitchforth and Mengersen (2013) char-
acterized confidence in BN model behavior as consisting of threecomponents of structure confidence, discretization confidence, and
parameterization confidence. For use in BN model validation, they
further adduced 7 common dimensions of validity as used in psycho-
metry: nomological, face, content, concurrent, predictive, convergent,
anddiscriminantvalidity,which,collectively,pertaintothedegreeof
concordancewithinacceptednormsandcredibilitywithinaparticular
discipline.
A more quantitative method of depicting BN model confidence, as
developed by Van Allen et al. (2008), entails estimating error bars
aroundposteriorprobabilitycalculationsfromBNs,whichthendepict
thedegreeofuncertainty(orconfidence)inmodeloutcomes.Errorbars
forBNsaretermedcredibleintervals,whichprovidetherangeofmodel
outcomeswithinaspecifiedprobabilitylevel(Marcot,2012),butwhich
arenotoftenreportedinBNmodelingprojects.Sucherrorbarsshould
not be confused with frequentist confidence intervals. Hamilton et al.
(2015)usedcredible intervalstomeasurethestrengthoftherelation-
ship between suitability of habitat of a crayfish and environmental
predictorvariables.
Links to GIS. Probability outcomes from BN models for evaluating
localconditionshavebeenusedasinputtoGISsystemstocreatemapsdepicting habitat quality of wildlife species (Raphael et al., 2001;
Havronetal.,2017). Kininmonthetal.(2014) presentedamodelwhich
combined spatial datasets, spatial models, and expert opinion in anintegratedBN-GISstructureforevaluatingboatingdamagetotheGreat
Barrier Reef of eastern Australia. Dlamini (2010) developed a BN-GIS
modelthatusesgeographically-referencedremotesensingMODISdatato analyze wildfire in Swaziland. BN programs that integrate or inter-
sectwithGISincludeGeoNetica
®(NorsysInc.),HUGIN®(HUGINExpert
A/S), and Ecosystem Management Decision Support (EMDS, Reynolds
etal.,2014)thatintegratestheGeNIeBNmodelingplatformwithtwo
GIS components of ArcMap®(Esri) and open-source QGIS. Gonzalez-
Redin et al. (2016) BNs linked to GIS to map trade-offs of ecosystem
services in the French Alps to inform planning decisions. Several pro-
jectshaveexplicitlyintegratedGISandBNmodelingframeworks,such
astheQGISplug-inforBNsdevelopedby Landuytetal.(2015) andthe
integrationoftheGeNIeBNmodelingframeworkintotheArcGIS-basedEcosystem Management Decision Support system (emds.mountain-
viewgroup.com).
Dynamic Bayesian networks. Other recent variations on the tradi-
tionalBNmodelingthemeincludedynamicBayesiannetworks(DBNs)
thatmodelatimeseriesofconditionsandcontingencies,suchaswith
oscillating predator-prey dynamics (Fig. 2). DBNs typically contain
feedback loops which are not allowed in the directed acyclic graph
structureofBNs,but canbemodeled whenBNsaretime-expandedso
that the entire BN structure is replicated for different time periods so
that the links become acyclic. In some cases, DBNs have been made
spatially explicit by integrating with geographic information systems
(GIS;e.g.,Cheeetal.,2016).AvariantofDBNsarethoseoperatingin
realtimeinresponsetodiscreteorcontinuousinputs,suchasforpre-dicting highway crashes (Hossain and Muromachi, 2012) and in ana-
lyzinggenenetworks(Kimetal.,2003).Newapproachestostructuring
Fig. 1.Examples of various Bayesian network (BN) modeling objectives, and
associated categories of recent advances in BN model applications and in-
tegration(see Table1forabbreviations).B.G.Marcot,T.D.Penman Environmental Modelling and Software 111 (2019) 386–393
387