DBNscombine methods fromstaticand dynamicnetworks (Vlasselaer
etal.,2016). Uusitaloetal.(2018) usedDBNswithhiddenvariablesto
modelmajorstructuralchangesofaBalticSeafoodweb,and Orphanou
etal.(2014) used“temporalBayesiannetworks”(TBNs,asynonymfor
DBN) to evaluate temporal relationships in clinical data for medical
diagnosis and prognosis. Their hidden variables represented un-
observed processes contributing to the changes and resulted in DBN
modelsthatreflectedknowndynamicsofthefoodwebsystem.
Bayesian decision networks. Bayesian decision networks (BDNs) ex-
tendBNmodelsbyexplicitlyincludingdecisionandutilitynodes(e.g.,
Bartonetal.,2008).Decisionnodesaredeterministicnodesthatdepict
uniquemanagementdecisions,andutilitynodesarecontinuousnodes
that estimate a cost or benefit of a given outcome resulting from a
decision.BDNsuseutilitynodestocalculateoverallexpectedvaluesof
all costs or benefits of alternative management decisions, given the
probability structure of the model, and can be highly useful in risk
analysis and risk management arenas. For example, Loyd and DeVore
(2010)developed a BDN to advise on alternatives for management of
feral cats in the United States. Catenacci and Guipponi (2013) used a
BDN as a basis for adaptation planning to sea-level rise. A further
variation of BDNs is with dynamic decision networks (DDNs) thatessentiallymerge decisionnetworkswithtime-expandeddynamicnet-works.DDNsweredevelopedby Murrayetal.(2004) toguideselection
ofteachingtutorials,andby Penmanetal.(2015a) toadviseonredu-
cingriskoflossofhomestowildfire.BNshavealsobeenusedtoassess
value of information to optimize resource use decisions, such as the
fisheriesindustry(Kuikkaetal.,1999).
Depicting causality in structural equation models. BN modeling has
beencomparedtostructuralequationmodeling(SEM)inthatbothcan
be used to depict causal networks and influences and can analyze de-
greeofcausality(Pearl,1998, 2000).Thetwoapproachesdifferinthat
SEM is a general suite of statistical tools usually using frequentist,
multivariateapproaches(althoughsomeSEMapproachesalsosupport
Bayesian estimation), whereas BNs use conditional probabilities and
Bayes' theorem. A main difference is that SEMs are purely statistical
tools developed, for example, totest hypotheses or to test whether an
assumed causal relation in the graph is significant, whereas BNs are
probabilistic models (trainable by data) mainly for investigating the
consequencesofconditionsoreventsonoutcomes,ordeducingcausal
conditionsresultinginanoutcome.
Morerecently, Lietal.(2018) comparedandcombinedBNandSEM
modelingtoevaluatetheinteractiveinfluenceoflanduseandclimate
Fig. 2.Example of a dynamic Bayesian network of a dampened oscillating predator-prey system of Canadian lynx (Lynx canadensis) and snowshoe hare (Lepus
americanus),demonstrating(a)thecollapsedmodelwithfeedbackloopsand(b)themodelexpandedto4timeintervalsshowingpopulationinteractions(basedon
O'Donoghueetal.,1997).B.G.Marcot,T.D.Penman Environmental Modelling and Software 111 (2019) 386–393
388