changeonstreammacroinvertebrates.TheyfirstusedSEMtodevelopa
conceptual influence diagram of causal effects, that is, the network
structureofvariablesandtheirlinkages,andthentheybuiltprediction
anddiagnosticBNsfromthesameconceptualmodel.UsingSEMhelped
identifyandjustifythelinksusedintheBNmodels.Theirresultssug-
gestedthatmodelingallcausalfactorstogetherintheSEMconceptual
model and in the subsequent BN model provided a more robust un-
derstanding ofhowpositiveeffects fromclimate changecouldmollify
negativeinfluencesfromlanduse.
Neural networks. A somewhat different variant of BN modeling ap-
pears in Bayesian neural nets, that is, using Bayesian learning to de-
termine neural network node weights. Neural networks are typically
trained using a variety of approaches including variants of gradient
descent and least-squares methods to minimize loss functions of vari-
ablessinglyorinconjugation.UsingBNscanbringgreaterefficiencyin
adjustingnodeweightparametersbasedonpriorknowledge.Bayesian
neural networks have been used to forecast energy load requirements
(Lauretetal.,2008),solarirradiation(Yacefetal.,2012),stockmarket
performance (Ticknor, 2013), and internet traffic loads (Auld et al.,
2007).
Continuous Bayesian networks. Another area of recent interest and
progress is in developing continuous BN models where quantitative
variablesarenotdiscretizedintoexclusivestaterangesbutinsteadare
represented by continuous values such as equations or statistical dis-
tributions.ContinuousBNscanbeconstructedusingprogrammingtools
suchasUNINET(Cookeetal.,2007; Delgado-Hernándezetal.,2012),
WinBUGS(Kery,2010),AgenaRisk®(Neiletal.,2007),Hugin®(Madsen
et al., 2003), and GeNIe (Druzdzel, 1999). Other BN modeling and
graphicalmodelingsoftwarealsocandealwithcontinuousnodes1ifthe
multivariatenormalisassumed(A.Hanea,pers.comm.)
Hybrid Bayesian networks. Some researchers have developed BN
modelswithbothdiscreteandcontinuousvariableswherethelatterarenot discretized (Aguilera et al., 2010; Castillo et al., 1998; Driver and
Morrell, 1995). These types of models are referred to as hybrid BNs
(HBNs;Hanea et al., 2006). A special case of HBNs, called non-para-
metricBNs(NPBNs),wasreviewedby Haneaetal.(2015).NPBNswere
initially devised for continuous-only BNs but are used in situations of
HBNsaswell. Haneaetal.(2010) developedaNPBNmethodologywith
data mining to develop prediction models. Hradsky et al. (2017) used
NPBNstomodelapresence-absencecontinuousresponseofwildlifeto
fireageclassesandterrestrialvegetationclassesdepictedwithdiscrete
variables.
Object-oriented Bayesian networks. A further area of recent explora-
tion is with object-oriented Bayesian networks (OOBNs) and dynamic
object-oriented Bayesian networks (DOOBNs) (Bangsø et al., 2004;
Benjamin-Fink and Reilly, 2017). For example, OOBNs and DOOBNs
have been used to model health impacts of cyanobacteria blooms
(Johnson et al., 2010), viability of populations of cheetahs (Acinonyx
jubatus)inNamibia(Johnsonetal.,2013),andissuesofwaterresource
management (Phan et al., 2016). The tools Hugin
®and AgenaRisk®
providefortrueOOBNmodeling,andGeNIe®alsocanbeusedassuch
althoughitisnotatrueOOBNframework.
Agent-based modeling. Related to OOBNs is the merging of agent-
basedmodelsandBNs.Agent-basedmodels(An,2012)aresimulations
of the dynamics, such as movement patterns, of individual objects.
Nielsen and Parsons (2007) developed a model of consensus-building
where individual agents were represented by BNs that expressed a
range of possible agreements. Sun and Müller (2013) presented a BN
agentmodeltoexploretheeconomicsofecosystemservicesandland-
usedecision-making.
State-and-transition modeling. Another area of integration is with
state-and-transition models (STMs) that are used to project future
proportions or amounts of conditions, such as landscape vegetationconditionsandspeciesresponses,underknownorhypothesizedratesofchange (Mason et al., 2017). STMs project future conditions, such as
area coveredinvegetationtype categories,bymultiplyingamatrix of
current area in each category by a matrix of probabilities depicting
transitionstothesameorothercategories(e.g., Jorgensonetal.,2015).
InahybridSTM-BNmodel,transitionprobabilitiesareestimatedfrom
calculations in the BN network that account for environmental influ-
encesoneachvegetationtypecategory. Basharietal.(2009) developed
an integrated STM-BN model, as expanded upon by Nicholson and
Flores (2011), to inform management decisions in rangelands of
Queensland,Australia. Cheeetal.(2016) integratedSTMsandBNsina
geographicinformationsystem(GIS),withobject-orientedconcepts,to
model spatial and temporal changes in an Australian woodland and a
wetlandinFlorida.
QuantumBayesiannetworks. BNsarebeing increasinglyusedinthe
area of quantum information theory as quantum Bayesian networks
(QBNs;Tucci,1995).QBNsareconstructedtorepresentoutcomesthat
deviatefrom,andareparadoxicalto,classicalprobabilitycalculations.
Examples include when outcomes are dependent on the sequence of
inputs(priorsandparentnodesinaBN);whenhumandecision-making
deviatesfromdominantprobabilityoutcomesinaBDN;whenasystem
can result in>1 dominant probability outcome state; and other si-
tuations. Such outcomes could be modeled in traditional BNs by in-
cluding latent variables but such models quickly become overly com-
plexandserveonlytodescribespecificconditionsandoutcomes,notto
serveaspredictiveandexplanatorymodels.
Generally, in QBNs, classical conditional probability tables using
Bayes calculus are replaced by quantum probability amplitudes (a
complex number function that describes the behavior of a system).
Moreira and Wichert (2018) developed a decision-based QBN with
quantum probability amplitudes to demonstrate how prediction of
some aspects of human decision-making is more efficient than with a
traditionalBNwithlatentvariables.Similarly, Truebloodetal.(2016)
usedaQBNapproachtomodelhowhumanjudgmentcandeviatefrom
classical probability in the face of high uncertainty and imperfect in-
formation about causality of a system. Busemeyer and Trueblood
(2009)explored the use of QBNs in quantum theory to model how
different sequences of measurements can affect the probabilities of
system outcomes. Leifer and Spekkens (2013) developed a QBN fra-
meworkfordepictinghowquantumconditionalstatescanresultfromthe influence of two systems at one time or from one system at two
times. Other formulations and applications of QBNs are found in the
literature,althoughatpresenttheredoesnotseemtobeanygenerally
availablesoftwarebywhichQBNscanbeconstructed.
PowerPCtheoryandcausalBNs. PowerPC(“probabilisticcontrast”)
theory states that a system outcome is the sum effect of the relative
power of observed and unobserved causal relations which can be de-
picted and partitioned mathematically (Cheng, 1997; Norick and
Cheng, 2004). In applying power PC theory, Lu et al. (2008) demon-
stratedhowtherelativeinfluenceofdifferent,independentcausescan
be determined empirically and can be represented in Bayesian causal
networks.
Here, we have covered a range of significant recent advances in
application of BNs. Still other variations and new approaches to BN
modelingcontinuetoappearintheliterature.
2.2. Beyondthenetwork:aneweraofintegration
BNmodelsofvariousformshavebeenincreasinglyusedinavariety
of applications. They are also being specifically integrated with other
modeling constructs, which we refer to here as integrated Bayesian
networks (IBNs; Johnson et al., 2010). IBNs can be defined as BN
structuresthatareexplicitlyembeddedwithintheframeworkofother
modeling constructs, instead of just being applied to some area of in-
quiry as reviewed in the previous section. Examples of IBNs include
assimilating BNs in structured decision-making frameworks, agent-
1https://www.cs.ubc.ca/∼murphyk/Software/bnsoft.html.B.G.Marcot,T.D.Penman Environmental Modelling and Software 111 (2019) 386–393
389