GECCO ’22, July 9–13, 2022, Boston, USA Yujin Tang, Yingtao Tian and David Ha
JAXNeuroevolution AlgorithmEvaluation Process #1PolicyTaskApply actionsFeedback observations & ﬁtness…Conventional Method
EvoJAXNeuroevolution AlgorithmGlobal PolicyVectorized TaskHardware AcceleratorsParameterdisseminationParameterevaluationEvaluation Process #NPolicyTaskApply actionsFeedback observations & ﬁtnessParameterdissemination
Figure 2: Architectural Overview of EvoJAX.
In this paper, we describe the design of EvoJAX and show how
one can use and extend EvoJAX for neuroevolution research. We
showcase several extensible examples of EvoJAX for a wide range
of tasks, including supervised learning (image classification, seq-to-
seq), RL (cart-pole swing-up [ 6], Brax locomotion [ 5], multi-agent
water world), and generative art (image approximation with shapes,
CLIP-guided abstract art [ 30]). We show that EvoJAX can find solu-
tions to most of these tasks within minutes on GPU/TPUs, compared
to hours or days when using CPUs. We believe our toolkit can sig-
nificantly shorten the experimental iteration cycle for researchers
working with evolutionary computation. We have also created sev-
eral tutorials and notebooks as part of this open-source project to
make adapting EvoJAX for novel use cases straightforward.
2 SYSTEM DESIGN
EvoJAX aims to improve the neuroevolution training efficiency by
implementing the entire pipeline in modern ML frameworks that
support hardware acceleration. We choose JAX[ 1] in our current
implementation due to its wide variety of hardware support and
its matured features of auto-vectorization, device-parallelism, just-
in-time compilation, etc. As we will see in Section 4, as long as
the component interfaces are properly implemented, EvoJAX also
allows user extensions with other frameworks.
Figure 2 gives an overview of how EvoJAX works. There are three
major components – the neuroevolution algorithm, the policy and
the task. Although these components are common in conventional
neuroevolution implementations, we highlight the key differences
that make EvoJAX much more efficient:
Modern ML Optimizers Researchers and practitioners in the
field of DL have been focusing on inventing optimization algo-
rithms [ 21] and techniques [ 15,32,34] that are both fast and effec-
tive. Although these techniques were tailored for gradient-based
optimizations, they can be directly applied to gradient estimation-
based evolutionary algorithms [ 17,23] too. By leveraging JAX-based
libraries [ 1,10,11], EvoJAX not only achieves significant speed-up
but also provides the users with the tools and the interfaces to
develop their own implementations in a mature framework.
Global Policy In conventional neuroevolution implementa-
tions, it is a common practice to spawn multiple processes for
parameters evaluation. To achieve hardware acceleration, the im-
plementation adopts one of the DL frameworks and then each
of the evaluation processes maintains a separate computational
graph for the same policy. Unfortunately, most DL frameworksare not designed for multi-process training scenarios and often
cause difficulties. Moreover, when these processes are run on the
same accelerator, maintaining identical copies of the computational
graph is a waste of resource. Conforming to the “Single-Program,
Multiple-Data” (SPMD) model [ 4], EvoJAX solves this by building
a global policy and treat both the task observations and the policy
parameters as data for the computational graph. This global policy
design is easy to implement as it is consistent with DL frameworks,
and in the experiments we observe high data-throughput.
Vectorized Tasks Same as the policies, conventional methods
also create copies of the tasks in the spawned processes for indepen-
dent parameters evaluations. To be compliant with EvoJAX’s global
policy design, we propose to group these tasks in a vectorized form.
In terms of implementation, this can be achieved by either creating
the task in auto-vectorizaton supported frameworks or by creating
a task observations collector on top of all the evaluation processes.
EvoJAX adopts the first method.
Device Parallelism Thanks to the device-parallelism support
in JAX, EvoJAX is capable of scaling its training procedure almost
linearly to the available hardware accelerators. Utilizing EvoJAX’s
training pipeline, this device parallelism is automatically managed
and is transparent to the users. As we will see in Section 3, together
with the previously mentioned features, EvoJAX significantly short-
ens the training time for novel and non-trivial tasks.
EvoJAX defines simple yet functionally complete interfaces for
the three components, any implementations that are compliant
with the interfaces can be seamlessly integrated (see Section 4).
Finally, in addition to the mentioned major components, Evo-
JAX also comes with a trainer and a simulation manager that help
orchestrate and manage the training process. They contain detailed
implementations of task roll-out seeds generation, efficient training
loops, time profiling and logistics operations such as logging, test-
ing and periodic model saving. Convenient as they are, we point
out that EvoJAX is a flexible toolkit, where it is possible to use any
component independently (e.g., using a custom training loop).
3 EVOJAX EXAMPLES
We provide a total of six examples (see Figure 1) to showcase the
capacity, efficiency and the usage of EvoJAX online in the format
of Python scripts and notebooks. The examples are designed to
feature different aspects of EvoJAX and are in three categories:
Supervised Learning Tasks, Control Tasks and Novel Tasks. As
the experimental setups, “Robotic Control” was trained with TPUs,
“Concrete and Abstract Painting” was trained with 8 NVIDIA V100
GPUs, and the rest were trained with 1 NVIDIA V100 GPU.
Supervised Learning Tasks They provide both the data and
the ground-truth labels to train the policy. In EvoJAX, supervised
learning tasks are modelled as single-step tasks, the examples in
this category are thus isolated from other factors to prove the
correctness and efficiency of our algorithms’ implementation.
•MNIST Classification . Here, we train a convolutional neural net-
work (ConvNet) with 10K parameters with EvoJAX. Although
MNIST is a solved problem in DL, it is non-trivial for neuroevolu-
tion in terms of achieving high test accuracy within a short time
(e.g., in minutes). We show that EvoJAX can train the ConvNet
to reach >98% test accuracy within 5 minutes.