EvoJAX: Hardware-Accelerated Neuroevolution GECCO ’22, July 9–13, 2022, Boston, USA
•Seq2Seq Learning . It has recently been shown that genetic al-
gorithms (GA) can train large models [ 20]. Here, we show that
EvoJAX is also capable of training a large network with hundreds
of thousands of parameters. We adopt a seq-to-seq task where the
policy is required to output a sequence after observing a query
sequence. Concretely, the query is a sequence that represents the
addition of two randomly generated integers (e.g., “012+345=”,
we pad the numbers with leading 0’s so that they have equal
lengths) and the result is a sequence representing the answer. Us-
ing an LSTM-based seq2seq [ 26] model, EvoJAX achieves >99%
test accuracy within tens of minutes.
While one would obviously use gradient-descent for such tasks
in practice, the point is to show that neuroevolution can also solve
them to some degree of accuracy within a short amount of time,
which will be useful when these models are adapted within a more
complicated task where gradient-based approaches may not work.
Control Tasks The purpose of including control tasks are two-
fold: 1) Unlike supervised learning tasks, control tasks in EvoJAX
have undetermined number of steps, we thus use these examples
to demonstrate the efficiency of our task roll-out loops. 2) We wish
to show the speed-up benefit of implementing tasks in JAX and
illustrate how to implement one from scratch.
•Robotic Control . Brax [ 5] is a differentiable physics engine im-
plemented in JAX that simulates environments made up of rigid
bodies, joints, and actuators. We show that it is easy to wrap Brax
tasks in EvoJAX, and it takes EvoJAX tens of minutes to solve a
robotic locomotion task on Colab TPUs.
•Cart-Pole Swing Up . Through this classic control task, we illustrate
how a task is implemented from scratch in JAX and integrated
into EvoJAX’s training pipeline. In our implementation, a user
can command the initial states to be randomly sampled from a
narrow (easy version) or a wide (hard version) range of possible
settings, with the latter being much harder to solve. EvoJAX
solves both versions within minutes.
Novel Tasks In this last category, we go beyond simple illustra-
tions and show examples of novel tasks that are more practical and
attractive to researchers in the genetic and evolutionary computa-
tion area, with the goal of helping them try out ideas in EvoJAX.
•WaterWorld . In this task [ 14], an agent tries to get as much food
as possible while avoiding poisons. EvoJAX is able to train the
agent in tens of minutes. Furthermore, we demonstrate that multi-
agents training in EvoJAX is possible. Here, we spawn the entire
population in the same task roll-out and directly measure each
agent’s performance in a multi-agent world. This training scheme
automatically generates task complexity beyond human design,
and is beneficial for learning policies that can deal with interac-
tions between agents and environmental uncertainties.
•Concrete and Abstract Painting . We reproduce the results from a
computational creativity work [ 30]. The original work, whose
implementation requires multiple CPUs and GPUs, could be accel-
erated on a single GPU efficiently using EvoJAX, which was not
possible before. Moreover, with multiple GPUs/TPUs, EvoJAX
can further speed up the mentioned work almost linearly. We also
show that the modular design of EvoJAX allows its components
be used independently – in this case it is possible to use only theTable 1: Time Comparisons. We report the training time for
both methods to achieve widely accepted test scores.
Baseline EvoJAX
MNIST 36 min 3 min
Cart-Pole Swing Up (Hard Version) 37 min 2 min
Locomotion (Ant)1201 min 9 min
neuroevolution algorithms from EvoJAX while leveraging one’s
own training loops and environment implantation.
We summarize EvoJAX’s benefit via these examples. First of all,
EvoJAX brings significant training speed up. In Table 1 we show the
time costs of training some popular tasks with both a conventional
setup and EvoJAX.1On modest hardware accelerators, EvoJAX
trains 10∼20times faster which leads to quicker idea iterations.
Secondly, the capability of training multi-agents in a complex set-
ting that is beyond human design supplies training environmental
richness. And finally, EvoJAX puts the entire pipeline on unified
hardware setups and that allows the practitioners to simplify com-
plex hardware arrangements. As an example, for the substantial
load of computation in our Abstract Painting example, the baseline
needs to use both GPUs and CPUs, while EvoJAX only uses GPUs.
4 EXTENDING EVOJAX
A goal of EvoJAX is to provide researchers with an infrastructure
that allows fast idea iterations. With EvoJAX it is possible to devise
more effective neuroevolution algorithms, to explore novel policy
architectures, and to experiment with new tasks. EvoJAX has care-
fully defined interfaces, as long as these interfaces are properly
implemented, a user extended module can be integrated into the
pipeline seamlessly.
import jax.numpy as jnpclass TaskState: obs: jnp.ndarrayclass PolicyState: keys: jnp.ndarrayclass NEAlgorithm:    def ask(self) -> jnp.ndarray: pass    def tell(self, fitness: jnp.ndarray) -> None: passclass PolicyNetwork:    def reset(self, states: TaskState) -> PolicyState: pass    def get_actions(self, t_states: TaskState, params: jnp.ndarray,                    p_states: PolicyState) \                        -> Tuple[jnp.ndarray, PolicyState]: passclass VectorizedTask:      def reset(self, key: jnp.ndarray) -> TaskState: pass      def step(self, state: TaskState, action: jnp.ndarray) \                   -> Tuple[TaskState, jnp.ndarray, jnp.ndarray]: pass
Figure 3: Major Component Interfaces in EvoJAX.
Devising New Algorithms Users interested in inventing new
neuroevolution algorithms should implement NEAlgorithm in Fig-
ure 3, which serves as the base class for all neuroevolution algo-
rithms in EvoJAX. Being consistent with most conventional im-
plementations, NEAlgorithm adopts the “ask” and “tell” interfaces,
where the former requests the algorithm to generate a population
of parameters and the latter reports the parameters evaluation re-
sults back to the algorithm for internal states update. Taking on the
conventional interfaces for the neuroevolution algorithms not only
brings familiarity to the developers and thus reducing the required
1We use the code from [ 27] as the baseline. For the Locomotion task, we use PyBullet
Ant in the baseline and Brax Ant in EvoJAX. The baseline is trained with 96 CPUs.