EvoJAX: Hardware-Accelerated Neuroevolution
Yujin Tang
yujintang@google.com
Google BrainYingtao Tian
alantian@google.com
Google BrainDavid Ha
hadavid@google.com
Google Brain
ABSTRACT
Evolutionary computation has been shown to be a highly effective
method for training neural networks, particularly when employed
at scale on CPU clusters. Recent work have also showcased their
effectiveness on hardware accelerators, such as GPUs, but so far
such demonstrations are tailored for very specific tasks, limiting ap-
plicability to other domains. We present EvoJAX, a scalable, general
purpose, hardware-accelerated neuroevolution toolkit. Building on
top of the JAX library, our toolkit enables neuroevolution algo-
rithms to work with neural networks running in parallel across
multiple TPU/GPUs. EvoJAX achieves very high performance by
implementing the evolution algorithm, neural network and task all
in NumPy, which is compiled just-in-time to run on accelerators.
We provide extensible examples of EvoJAX for a wide range of
tasks, including supervised learning, reinforcement learning and
generative art. Since EvoJAX can find solutions to most of these
tasks within minutes on a single accelerator, compared to hours or
days when using CPUs, our toolkit can significantly shorten the
iteration cycle of evolutionary computation experiments.
EvoJAX is available at https://github.com/google/evojax
ACM Reference Format:
Yujin Tang, Yingtao Tian, and David Ha. 2022. EvoJAX: Hardware-Accelerated
Neuroevolution. In 2022 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference
(GECCO ’22), July 9–13, 2022, Boston, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3520304.3528770
1 INTRODUCTION
Hardware accelerators have played an important role in advancing
the state-of-the-art for deep learning (DL), enabling rapid training
of neural networks and shorter research iteration cycles for their
development [ 12]. But much of this progress is restricted to systems
that rely on gradient descent, a highly effective optimization method
when we provide it with a well-defined objective function. But
in areas such as artificial life, complex systems, computational
biology, and even classical physics [ 18], much of the interesting
behaviors we observe take place near the chaotic states, where
a system is constantly transitioning between order and disorder.
It can be argued that intelligent life and even civilization are all
complex systems operating at the edge of chaos [3,16]. If we wish
to study these systems, we need efficient methods to simulate and
find solutions in complex systems.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
GECCO ’22, July 9–13, 2022, Boston, USA
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9268-6/22/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3520304.3528770
ConvNetPrediction: “5”
(A)(B)
(C)(D)
(E)(F)
Encoder“012+345”Decoder“=357”Figure 1: EvoJAX Examples. (A) MNIST classification. (B)
Seq2Seq learning. (C) Robotic control. (D) Cart-pole swing
up. (E) Left: WaterWorld wherein the agent (yellow) tries
to get food (green) while avoiding poison (red). Right: A
version of WaterWorld with multiple agents. (F) Abstract
painting with only triangles. Left: Painting a concrete image.
Right: Painting the concept “Walt Disney World”.
Neural networks are a promising approach for modeling complex
systems [ 9,19], and neuroevolution has made great progress in
developing methods for evolving neural networks to solve a wide
range of problems. Evolution-based methods have been shown to
find state-of-the-art solutions for reinforcement learning (RL) [ 8,
13,22,25,29]. A policy with non-differentiable operations can solve
many more tasks than one that is fully differentiable [ 20,27,28,33].
More importantly, the removal of the requirement of a differentiable
policy also liberates the researchers’ mind, enabling higher levels
of creativity for looking at problems and directions differently from
the mainstream. In a sense, enabling researchers to use neural
networks beyond gradient-based methods also enables the broader
machine learning (ML) research community to explore in a way
that is also less “grad student descent” [7]-based.
However, the progress of hardware-accelerated computational
methods for evolution has not kept pace with ML, or even RL.
Much of computational evolution is still conducted using CPU
clusters, largely ignoring the recent breakthroughs in hardware
accelerators such as GPUs/TPUs. Recent work started to demon-
strate effectiveness of GPUs for neuroevolution [ 25], but so far
such demonstrations are tailored for specific tasks [ 24], limiting
their applicability to other domains. To enable greater access to
hardware accelerators for neuroevolution researchers, we devel-
oped EvoJAX, a scalable, general purpose, neuroevolution toolkit.
Building on the JAX library [ 1], our toolkit enables neuroevolution
algorithms to work with neural networks running in parallel across
multiple TPU/GPUs. EvoJAX achieves very high performance by
implementing the evolution algorithm, neural network and task all
in NumPy, which is compiled just-in-time to run on accelerators.arXiv:2202.05008v2  [cs.NE]  5 Apr 2022