2
GAN inversion methods with an emphasis on algorithms
and applications. To the best of our knowledge, this work
is the ﬁrst survey on the rapidly growing GAN inversion
with the following contributions. We provide a comprehen-
sive review of GAN inversion methods and compare their
different properties and performances. We further discuss
the challenges, open issues, and trends for future research.
The rest of this survey paper is organized as follows.
We ﬁrst give a problem formulation of GAN inversion in
Section 2. The obtained latent code for a given image should
have two properties: 1) reconstructing the input image faith-
fully and photorealistically and 2) facilitating downstream
tasks. Achieving these two properties is also the goal of
GAN inversion. Section 3.1 introduces many different pre-
trained GAN models G(z). Subsequent sections introduce
the efforts taken by different GAN inversion methods to
reach the goal. To evaluate the performance of GAN inver-
sion methods, we consider the two important aspects, how
photorealistic (perceptual quality) and faithful (inversion
accuracy) the reconstructed image is, in Section 3.2. The
ﬁrst aspect depends on how the formulation is solved. It
is usually a nonconvex optimization problem due to the
nonconvexity of G(z), for which ﬁnding accurate solutions
is difﬁcult. The second aspect is primarily decided by which
latent space to use. Section 4.1 introduces, analyses, and
compares the characteristics of different latent spaces. In
Sections 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, we introduce how existing meth-
ods have attempted to provide solutions and discuss some
important characteristics of these GAN inversion methods.
Applications and future directions of GAN inversion are
introduced in Sections 5 and 6.
2 P ROBLEM DEFINITION AND OVERVIEW
It is well known that GANs [1], [11], [13] can generate
high-resolution and photorealistic fake images. However,
it remains challenging to apply these unconditional GANs
to the editing of real images due to the lack of inference
capability. Given an image, GAN inversion aims to recover
the latent code in a latent space of a pretrained uncon-
ditional GAN model, and thus enables numerous image
editing applications by manipulating the latent code. In this
case, the pretrained unconditional GAN model can be used
without modifying the architecture. Ideally the found latent
code of the given image should achieve two goals: 1) recon-
structing the input image faithfully and photorealistically
and 2) facilitating downstream tasks.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the problem of GAN inversion under
a uniﬁed mathematical formulation. The generator of an
unconditional GAN learns the mapping G:Z!X . When
z1;z22Z are close inZspace, the corresponding images
x1;x22X are visually similar. GAN inversion maps data
xback to latent representation zor, equivalently, ﬁnds an
imagexthat can be entirely synthesized by the well-trained
generatorGand remain close to the real image x. Formally,
denoting the signal to be inverted as x2Rn, the well-
trained generator as G:Rn0!Rn, and the latent vector
asz2Rn0, we study the following inversion problem:
z= arg min
z`(G(z);x); (1)where`()is a distance metric in the image or feature
space, and Gis assumed to be a feed-forward neural net-
work. Typically, `()can be based on `1,`2, perceptual [26]
or LPIPS [27] metrics. Some other constraints on latent
codes [19] or face identity [28] could also be included in
practice. From the obtained z, we can obtain the original
image; we can vary zto further obtain the manipulated
image.
The second goal as facilitating downstream tasks is pri-
marily decided by which latent space to use (see Section 4.1).
The ﬁrst goal depends on how to solve Equation (1) accu-
rately, which is usually a nonconvex optimization problem
due to the nonconvexity of G(z). Thus it is not easily
amenable to ﬁnd accurate solutions. Many methods [20],
[21], [28] have been developed to solve Equation (1) with
formulation based on learning, optimization, or both. A
learning-based inversion method aims to learn an encoder
network to map an image into the latent space such that the
reconstructed image based on the latent code looks as sim-
ilar to the original one as possible. An optimization-based
inversion approach directly solves the objective function
through back-propagation to ﬁnd a latent code that min-
imizes pixel-wise reconstruction loss. A hybrid approach
ﬁrst uses an encoder to generate initial latent code and
then reﬁnes it with an optimization algorithm. Generally,
learning-based GAN inversion methods cannot faithfully
reconstruct the image content. For example, learning-based
inversion methods have been known to sometimes fail in
preserving identities as well as some other details when
reconstructing face images [19], [28]. While optimization-
based techniques have achieved superior image reconstruc-
tion quality, their inevitable drawback is the signiﬁcantly
higher computational cost [21], [22]. Thus, recent improve-
ments of learning-based GAN inversion methods mainly fo-
cus on how to faithfully reconstruct images, e.g., integrating
an additional facial identity loss during training [28], [29]
or proposing an iterative feedback mechanism [30]. Recent
improvements of optimization-based methods emphasize
on how to ﬁnd the desired latent code more quickly thus
propose several initialization strategies [21], [22] and opti-
mizers [20], [24]. Reconstruction quality and inference time
cannot be simultaneously achieved for existing inversion
approaches, resulting in a “quality-time tradeoff”. Although
some hybrid approaches are additionally proposed to bal-
ance this tradeoff, it remains a challenge to quickly ﬁnd an
accurate latent code.
Similar to GAN inversion, some tasks also aim to learn
the inverse mapping of GAN models. Some methods [31],
[32], [33], [34] use additional encoder networks to learn the
inverse mapping of GANs, but their goals are to jointly train
the encoder with both the generator and the discriminator,
instead of using a trained GAN model . Some other meth-
ods, e.g., PULSE [35], ILO [36], or PICGM [37], also rely
on a pretrained generator to solve inverse problems such
as inpainting, super-resolution, or denoising. They design
different optimization mechanisms to search for latent codes
that satisfy the given degraded observations. Since they aim
to search for accurate and reliable estimation ( e.g., denoised
image) from a degraded observation ( e.g., noisy image)
instead of faithful reconstruction of the given image , we do not
categorize them as GAN inversion methods in this survey