> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 8 
reduction in the inefficiencies, costs, emissions and social 
impacts. To provide an example of the power of virtual (or 
cyber -physical) supply -chain systems, let us consider a food 
truck equipped with temperature, humidity, and locatio n (GPS) 
sensors carrying soft berries (say, strawberries). Through 
virtual supply -chain systems, logistics providers can accurately 
track the location of the food truck at any point in time. Now, 
in the unlikely event of food shortage at a different locati on, the 
nearest truck can be rerouted to the new destination. 
Alternatively, if a temperature fluctuation is noticed, such that 
it may affect the shelf -life of the berries, the truck can be 
diverted to the closest market for immediate sale at discounted 
price. Thus, IoT technology could not only help the growers or 
help to meet the product demand, but also prevent food 
wastage.  
 The destination of the food truck in our example can also 
be decided based on customers identified through social media 
platforms or mobile phone applications. Food Cowboy 
(www.foodcowboy.com ), for example, uses a mobile app to 
allow truckers and food companies to reroute imperfect produce 
to charities, spoiled produce to composting sites, and surplus 
food from local restaurants to food banks and soup kitchens. 
Many other online interactive maps linking places with food 
surplus to charities and people who need it, and apps connecting 
neighbours for food sharing have also evolved. Howe ver, the 
safety of food and legal implications in such peer -to-peer food 
sharing platforms remains unclear.  
 The past decade has seen a significant rise in the use of 
machine (or computer) vision to efficiently and timely execute 
repetitive tasks in supply  chain, including quality control 
inspection. The supply chain industry is increasingly relying on 
automated guided vehicles (AGVs) based on AI, machine 
vision, and navigation technologies (e.g. simultaneous 
localization and mapping, SLAM) for automated ma terial 
handling in manufacturing [57, 58] . Machine vision has helped 
companies in implementing end -to-end automation [59], and 
now the application of AI for its integration with supply -chain 
for individual product tracking is being explored . In recent 
times, grocers are using inventory barcodes and sensor -
collected data to determine the rates of inventory consumption, 
such that stocking levels can be set to meet but not exceed 
demand.  Radiofrequency Identification (RFID) is another 
sensor te chnology that has seen an exponentially rising 
adoption by producers, food processors, agri-food supply chain 
industry, and merchants to establish traceability systems [60]. 
 In a related context, introduction of counterfeit products 
into the market is a big challenge for food and pharmaceutical 
companies. Similarly, ‘product diversion’, i.e. the movement of 
a product consignment to a location not originally intended, 
though uncommon, also occurs sometimes. While technologies 
such as barcodes and holograms have been in use for decades 
heretofore, the minor deviations during the print of barcodes 
has been exploited as a unique fingerprint by the company, 
Systech International ( www.systechone.com ). Their unique 
process uses the microscopic differences (arising from 
production environment variables) in the same barcodes on 
multiple products as a unique fingerprint. Thus, this fingerprint data retrieved in the manufacturing facility using a computer 
vision system can be used to track individual products 
throughout the supply chain, thereby preventing product 
diversion. Furthermore, th is data can also be used for validation 
of the product by retail outlets and consumers using 
applications owned by brand owners, thereby helping to prevent 
counterfeiting.  
 Should IoT integrated with cloud computing take up the 
space of connecting movement  of raw materials and finished 
products to the automated databases, the process of 
documentation and regulatory compliance will become much 
easier and efficient. Next, it will be interesting to note that 
customers are more and more demanding in terms of fo od 
choice – portion size, shape, flavour, colour, price and the level 
of service [61]. IoT, and AI could serve as enablers for ‘end of 
line’ and ‘last minute’ customiz ation technologies for the food 
industry [62]. Thus, in future, an internet -based food purchase 
order received from a customer with several peculiar 
specifications could automatically be redirected to the robots on 
the production line for ‘last minute’ customization. In fact, it 
will not be exagg erating to state that IoT and AI enabled 
customization -oriented production will be one of the significant 
achievements of food industry 4.0.  
Despite the projected potential benefits, the integration of 
IoT with business processes is still at a very early s tage of 
development in food supply chains and food industry, in 
general.  Several challenges with respect to granular data 
alignment exist when creating end -to-end digital thread from 
farm to consumer. It is to be noted that supply -chain systems 
are very cr oss-functional and additionally involve data sharing 
between companies/business entities. As such, cross -entity data 
sharing becomes much more challenging in the agri -food sector 
where data from farms is currently very limited. Even when 
considering large food manufacturers and enterprises, they rely 
on co -packers or outsource to contract processors, meaning a 
third -party holds all the production facility data , that too under 
different naming conventions . Moreover, many raw agricultural 
materials are often sourced by industry in developed world from 
developing or under -developed regions, where there often is a 
lack of data -awareness. The process of including most partners 
into the AI system is crucial to avoid under -performance of the 
algor ithms due to missing data and prevent loss of opportunities 
for optimization. Next, most agricultural products undergo 
dynamic changes in their quality and therefore pricing . This 
additional  layer of high uncertainty adds difficulty  in tracking 
such data i n real -time as compared to other supply -chains . The 
development of appropriate frameworks for reaping the benefits 
of IoT , big data  and AI  needs immediate attention for its 
success.  
V. WEB AND SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYSIS  
The massive rise in the number of computing and mobile 
devices in use has resulted in an exponential growth in data 
volumes over the Internet. It is estimated that every minute of 
internet activity in 2016 resulted in 3.3 million Facebook posts 
and 448,800 tweets, 65,972 pictures and 3.8 million sea rches on 
google [63]. Socia l media data can come from a variety of