> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 7 
developed. Despite the slow progress in developing vision 
system for robotic orchard fruits picking, investment in this 
technology is expected to continue as the  need to replace 
manual harvesting is becoming increasingly urgent in countries 
such as the United States, Japan, and China.  
C. Low altitude spectral imaging  
Healthy agricultural plants normally reject much of the 
infrared spectrum. However, when facing a cri sis 
(diseased/stressed) plants tend to absorb more infrared light. 
This information is useful for identifying plant infestation, 
nutrient or moisture deficiency. Similarly, the greenness of an 
agricultural field (related to the chlorophyll content of the 
crops) usually correlates with the nitrogen supply. Traditionally 
monitoring of field and agricultural conditions (such as crop 
health, and coverage) was carried out using low -resolution 
satellite based remote sensing techniques that measured the 
vegetation  cover over the scales of counties or states. Such 
methods allowed to get country -wide insights about the yield 
were of little use to farmers. To overcome the issues arising 
from low spatial resolution and make spectral imaging 
techniques accessible at ind ividual farm levels, low -altitude 
manned vehicle based spectral imaging was adopted as a 
solution. This approach was somewhat useful considering that 
the spectral cameras operating in the infrared region were bulky 
with a big footprint. With the advancemen ts in spectral imaging 
technologies, the size and weight of spectral cameras has 
drastically decreased, and now these could easily be mounted 
on drones or quadcopters. The most notable advancement with 
respect to spectral cameras is the availability of com pact palm -
sized snapshot hyperspectral imagers. These have a much lower 
footprint and weight compared to push -broom (or line scanning 
hyperspectral imagers) and are also less expensive.  
 Data companies are now gathering aerial images of 
standing crops in f arms using hyperspectral and multi -spectral 
cameras mounted on manned or unmanned aerial vehicles 
(MAV or UAV), e.g. quadcopters, drones. Spectral cameras 
capture image stacks at several wavelengths, with loosely up to 
10 bands referred as “multispectral”,  and over 10 - 
“hyperspectral”. Some imaging service providers couple multi -
spectral cameras in non -visible regions with high resolution R -
G-B (visible) cameras. The images from spectral imaging 
systems are generally taken at sufficiently high resolution (f rom 
metre scale to even centimetre scale), but generally down -
sampled (smoothed) for delivery of practically useful results.  
 Spectral images of vegetation show considerable variation 
due to the heterogeneity of natural conditions of the fields (e.g., 
hydrothermal, soil, geomorphological) and the agricultural 
systems (tillage methods, irrigation, use of fertilizers, 
herbicides, pesticides, etc.) [50]. Using machine learning 
algorithms applied to the imaging datasets and incorporating 
environmental variables, data analysis platforms can generate 
insights about various indices of importance to crop growth and 
quality. Examples of such insights include, vegetation index, 
weed cover, pest infestation, water logging, yield monitoring, 
nutrient deficiencies, and maps for variable rate application. 
Such information is generally gathered by flying the drones and imag ing the fields between 2 to 3 times in a cropping season. 
Eventually, time series analysis of imaging data to assess the 
effectiveness of agricultural practices and self -learning 
techniques for improvement may also be included into the data 
analysis in som e systems. A notable example of the ‘data 
analytics as a service’ business model for the drone -based 
hyperspectral imaging of sugarcane and soybean fields is the 
Swiss start -up, Gamaya ( www.gamaya.com ). Gamaya  employs 
crop, variety, and region -specific analysis of hyperspectral 
imaging data (with 40 bands) using crop models and artificial 
intelligence to produce detailed information on crop phenology 
and physiological traits.  
IV. FOOD SUPPLY -CHAIN MODERNIZATION  
The United Nation  reports that one -third of the world's food 
is thrown away each year, which adds up to $750 billion that is 
completely wasted. That means that about 28% of the world's 
agricultural land is used to produce food that is eventually 
wasted. The s upply chain management in a food business is 
very challenging owing to the need for advanced control 
systems for coping with perishables, fluctuating supply -
demand variations and narrow food safety and sustainability 
goals. Consequently, the use of IoT net works involving 
humidity, temperature, light, microbiological and product 
quality sensors for real -time monitoring of products in transit is 
useful for the food industry in rescheduling, recalling or taking 
appropriate actions. According to a report by Zio n Market 
Research, the global AI application in supply chain market 
stood at US $491 million in 2017 and is projected to reach about 
US $6,548 million by 2024, at a CAGR of around 44.76% 
between 2018 and 2024 [51]. An exhaustive review of the role 
of IoT in supply chain management in general has been made 
by Ben-Daya, et al. [52] , while one specific to agri -food 
industry  is presented by Lezoche, et al. [53] . 
 Considering that food supply chains extend over wide 
geographical areas and are vulnerable to many global risks, IoT 
could hel p in minimizing the risks. Recently, the virtualization 
of the food supply chain through IoT and an information 
systems architecture was successfully demonstrated for a fish 
export business from Norway to the Netherlands [54]. In their 
paper, the team provided ample arguments to show that supply -
chain virtualization through integra tion of real -time product 
observations (via IoT devices), combined with business 
processes provide rich representations of the objects and its 
context. Such virtualization will enable stakeholders to act 
immediately when deviations are observed (e.g. tempe rature 
fluctuations leading to product quality change). The essential 
features of the virtual IoT based supply chain include free 
exchange of logistics information, and functionality for 
intelligent analysis and reporting of exchanged data to enable 
early warning and advanced forecasting [55]. 
 A more generalized approach to v irtualize the supply chain 
stages has been demonstrated by a group from Italy, who 
developed an IoT based tool in LabViewTM to integrate the 
entities involved, the product flows and the food ecosystem 
boundaries [56]. The authors concluded that IoT based 
virtualization of food supply chain w ill allow a dramatic