> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 12 
VII. FOOD SAFETY  
A. Big Data and Foodborne outbreaks  
 Food safety from farm to fork has emerged as an 
international priority for all the stakeholders around the globe. 
The recent foodborne outbreaks of fresh produce in the United 
States, with two large occurrences of Escherichia coli  
contaminated romaine lettuce in 2018, a lot of food (which also 
included large quantities of the safe produce) was dumped  to 
protect public health  [94]. Knowing that the demand for food is 
expected to increase by 50% from 2012 t o 2050  [95], the current 
practices t o defending public health from foodborne outbreaks 
might not be the viable option of the future. Realizing the 
significant economic impact of outbreaks, technological 
advancements and integrated measures from informatics can 
play a crucial role in mitigati on of food safety risks and 
prevention of future outbreaks, saving millions and lives of 
many [96]. 
 A large amount of food safety data is created each day within 
the food industry and identifying means to extract robust 
information from different sources would support microbial 
risk assessment, prevention of outbreaks, identification of 
trends through pathogen surveillance; all that will facilitate 
food safety outcomes and decision maki ng [96, 97] . Real -time 
monitoring of food during storage and transportation, digital 
labeling methods that are easy to synchronize to cloud 
information and enhanc ed traceability through blockchain are 
some of the many advantages that informatics can contribute to 
the future of food safety.  
 The key points in handling an outbreak are primarily focused 
on protecting public health and minimizing the damage. It 
include s identification of hazard, effective containment, and the 
mitigation of the risk in a limited time period. To limit the 
impact on public health, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) has web -based tools, FoodNet, PulseNet, 
and GenomerTrakr t o quickly identify and contain food borne 
illness outbreak. The FoodNet is the Foodborne Diseases 
Active Surveillance Network that tracks trends for infections 
transmitted commonly through food; PulseNet uses DNA 
fingerprinting to identify patients and fin d clusters of disease 
that might represent potential outbreaks; and GenomeTrakr is a 
FDA managed database that contains information of foodborne 
bacterial germs from food products and the environment, with 
27 domestic and 3 international laboratory sites  [98]. The 
pathogen is isolated from the samples collected from sic k 
people and DNA fingerprinting is conducted to get the Whole 
Genome Sequence  of the pathogen. The data collected from 83 
laboratories (PulseNet Network) in the United States is 
analyzed and matches are detected using Foodborne Disease 
Outbreak Surveillanc e System (FDOSS). CDC’s division of 
Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental diseases extracts 
the information from these web tools using the big data 
analytics and identify trends in foodborne illnesses [99]. Also, 
CDC has an internat ional database called PulseNet 
International and partners with Canada, Europe, Asia Pacific, 
Africa, Middle East, Latin America, and the Caribbean, to share 
WGS information through global laboratory networks and 
support foodborne disease surveillance and o utbreak response  
[100] . PulseNet impacts public health by identifying the 
fingerprints of the pathogen (Whole Genome Sequence) from the sick people a nd find clusters of similar information to 
isolate an unrecognized outbreak  [101] . 
 WHO has recently ventured towards big data analytics to 
support decision making in global food safety outbreaks via a 
food safety platform called “FOSCOLLAB” [102] . This 
platform encompasses data (structured and unstructured) 
derived from evaluations of Joint FAO/ WHO Expert 
Committee on Food Additives (JECFA), Joi nt FAO/WHO 
Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), and Global 
Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) databases, among 
others to cover multiple segments viz., animal, agriculture, 
food, public health, and economics which are integrated and 
accessible to all sta keholders.  
B. Whole Genome Sequencing  
 In the recent past, phenomenal advancements have been 
made in the field of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) and has 
gained significant acceptance in food industry in surveillance 
of foodborne outbreaks. It is a genomic tool  to determine the 
genetic makeup of microbes by reading the unique DNA 
sequence of the sample. WGS has replaced use of traditional 
microbial typing techniques including pulsed -field gel 
electrophoresis (PFGE) and multi -locus variable number 
tandem repeat a nalysis (MLVA) with superior sensitivity, 
specificity, and higher resolution to outbreak clustering  [100, 
103-105]. The traditional methods unlike WGS have never been 
used for real -time surveillance of foodborne illnesses [105] . 
The process of characterization of DNA isolates from 
pathogenic organisms is more efficient with WGS, and thus 
supports rapid detection of outbreaks and timely containment 
of illness to protect public health. The microbial DNA 
sequencing can be done using platforms such as Illumina, Ion 
Torrent, PacBio,  and Nano -pore [106] . The three commonly 
used analysis methods used to process WGS data are k -mer, 
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP), and multi -locus 
sequencing typing (MLST) (also called gene -by-gene based 
method), and is used by PulseNet International  [100] .  
 Sharing of WGS data among the leading food regulatory 
agencies of the world will enhance the surveillance and 
prevention of epidemic diseases and outbreak globally. The 
United  States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) has 
pioneered to o ffer WGS data sharing through GenomeTrakr 
with other potential agencies worldwide to accommodate 
regulatory and compliance activities  [107] . The European 
COMPARE project (COllaborative Management Platform for 
detection and Analyses of (Re -) emerging and foodborne 
outbr eaks in Europe) is working on to sharing WGS data and 
analysis, to speed up detection and response to human and 
animal disease outbreaks worldwide ( https://www.compare -
europe.eu/ ) [100] . For the complete implementation of WGS 
based worldwide surveillance of outbreaks, several challenges 
need to be met including technical (WGS sharing, standardized 
subtypin g) and political limitations. The international efforts to 
minimize the effects of foodborne illnesses and prevent 
foodborne outbreaks can enormously benefit from WGS based 
surveillance, thereby supporting the health demands of the 
public.