> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 2 
amounts of data with informatio n of practical use embedded in 
it. 
 The concept and scope of big data, as a matter of fact, lacks 
a formal definition. Big data in the IoT context does not only 
refer to the structured or unstructured data, but also includes the 
aspects of analytics, insig hts, and (automated) decisions, all of 
which typically happen in real -time. In addition to the massive 
data generated from devices/sensors, the social media is an 
important source of user generated big data, which deserves 
special discussion. Though increa singly valuable, one should 
note that the social media data does not (strictly) fall into the 
IoT framework. We will discuss the usefulness of social media 
big data analytics later in this review in a dedicated section. The 
recent developments in machine l earning, artificial intelligence 
and boom in the data science field, coupled with improvements 
in computing power has enabled the automated decision 
support, real -time analytics for insights, and better performance 
of supervised (learning) models. A discus sion of the relevant 
machine learning tools for artificial intelligence is also included 
later in this review.  
 In Fig. 2 , we provide a gr aphical summary of the IoT and big 
data framework in agri -food context to facilitate discussion of 
several concepts within our review. Here we note that the data 
can come from agriculture, food processing/manufacturing, 
supply chain, traceability, or consu mers. While sensors are 
points of data source in case of IoT, data from consumers comes 
in the form opinions shared on social media platforms. The data 
from multiple sensors and sources when appropriately 
combined, it provides information about the primary  production 
or processing or retail activities. Upon suitable analysis of the 
information using computer models, the information is 
transformed into knowledge about the performance of the said 
activities. In modern times, the data processing typically occu rs 
at remote locations using high performance computers; this is 
known as “cloud computing”. The knowledge obtained about 
the system can be leveraged to make decisions for improving 
the performance of the activities or make suitable 
recommendations. When t his entire process from data to 
decision is automated through self -learning methods, it is 
known as artificial intelligence. This trend of high level of 
automation in industry using cyber -physical systems, IoT, 
cloud and cognitive computing put together is  known as 
“Industry 4.0”, literally meaning the fourth industrial revolution 
[2].  
 In this review, we take a holistic appro ach to several frontier 
areas dealing with agri -food-consumer triad, bridging the 
language barrier among the disciplines of agricultural, food, 
electronics, and computer science. The applications we have 
chosen for discussion are based on our experiences a s well as 
those of high significance to global agriculture and food 
industry. The discussions are based around the IoT devices – 
the sources of data, basic data processing, the disruption 
brought about by the technology, the implementation 
challenges, as w ell as research needs. We target this review at 
hard-core electronics, instrumentation and computer engineers, 
as well as, agri -food scientists, to provide an exposition of the 
meaningful impacts created by the new cyber -physical 
technologies. We hope that  a cross -fertilization across the vast 
landscape of topics will motivate further research for building 
agri-food industry 4.0.   
II. FROM DATA TO ACTION  
Sensing is the birthplace of all data in IoT. Agri-food sector 
produces a large number of diverse datasets, both in content, 
structure, and storage format with the use of various IoT devices 
[3]. Common characteristics of big data include heterogeneity, 
variety, unstructured nature, noise, and high redundancy [4]. 
Such huge amounts of data require complex methods for data 
curation and storage, as well as intensive statistica l approaches 
and programming models to extract relevant information. The 
conditioning and pre -processing of primary data results in 
information required to understand the state of the (agri -food) 
system. By applying advanced algorithms and measuring the 
performance of the system with respect to desired outcome, a 
system can be made capable of making independent localized 
decisions and take appropriate actions. This level of 
independence allowing autonomy in sensing, decision making, 
and actuation is what ma kes an IoT system “intelligent”.  
 The field of artificial intelligence (AI) involves the 
development of theory and computer systems capable of 
performing tasks normally requiring human intelligence, such 
as sensorial perception and decision making. Kaplan and 
Haenlein [5]  defined AI as “… a system’s ability to interpret 
external data correctly, to learn from such data, and to use 
those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through 
flexible adaptation ”. Thus, AI 
acts on external information 
sourced from I oT and other big 
data sources, use knowledge -
based rules (provided by 
developers) or identifies the 
underlying rules and patterns 
using machine learning, to 
drive the systems towards set 
objectives. A truly intelligent 
system can learn, generalize (if 
there be such scope), 
accumulate knowledge, set 
objectives and priorities, and 
minimize risks for decision -
 Fig. 2 A pictorial representation of the IoT framework within agri -food industry context.