> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 4 
The end objective of AI or big data workflow is usually some 
kind of process control or automation in the industrial context. 
Nonetheless, the end -application of all Io T, big data analytics 
and AI systems is context dependent, and besides automation, 
could also involve obtaining insights, making predictions, 
providing alerts (fault detection). The final nodes of the 
learning methods in Fig. 3  provide some common examples  of 
end applications for which the insights from data are generated 
using the machine learning tools.   
 
Fig. 4. A simplified workflow from data to action in the IoT ecosystem, 
and the role of artificial intelligence.  
III. BIG DATA AND IOT IN SMART FARMING  
With the planet’s population projected to reach almost 10 
billion by 2050, innovative approaches to food production will 
be required to meet the food demands. However, the current rate 
of agricultural yield increases are way below than those 
predicted to be met for feeding the world in future [14]. 
Therefore, much like in the 1970’s when we had the first 
agricultural re volution, the world needs to see a disruption in 
the agricultural practices. It is imperative that novel and smart 
solutions are developed for global food security, food safety, 
sustainable food -consumption, and health and well -being of 
society. Technologi es that could enable reduced use of 
resources for agriculture, e.g. water, fertilizers and 
agrochemicals, and help to significantly cut -down the carbon 
footprint of farming will be important drivers for global 
agricultural sustainability. Likewise, environ ment friendly 
intervention strategies that protect food crops or food products 
from decay or pests, which lead to reduced losses and/or allow 
extension of shelf -life are important levers to address global 
food security challenges. The application of modern ised 
technologies in agriculture is broadly referred to as “smart 
farming”. Of the many developments, the use of (i) sensors 
deployed to monitoring farm conditions, and (ii) low altitude 
air-borne hyperspectral imaging are topics we consider 
worthwhile dis cussing in this review. A detailed review of the 
role of big data in smart farming is already available [15]; 
hence, our aim is to provide an exposition of the developments 
where many agri -food-automation companies are actively 
contributing or reaping the benefits.  
A. Connected field sensors and machines  
Precision Agriculture (PA) is a management concept which 
recognizes variabilit y within the soil environment and 
maximizes economic agricultural production while minimizing 
environmental impact for a specific location [16]. PA is all 
about applying the right material in the right amount at the right location and right time, which is known as the 4R concept [17, 
18]. Since its introduction in the 1990’s, PA has had high 
expectations to increase efficiency of agricultural operations 
especially in commercial production where the fear of losing 
yield has led to management practices that are based on 
excessive imple mentation of chemicals. Though crop yield 
monitoring has been around for almost two decades, the 
development and implementation of smarter farm machines, 
crop sensors, and the software to analyse data that these devices 
collect has recently become a game -changer in yield results.  
 The technology development over the last few decades has 
enhanced the position of PA as an emerging management 
concept. Digital sensors that monitor real word parameters 
continue to be presented in the market at affordable prices.  For 
instance, digital temperature sensors priced at a few dollars and 
as small as few cubic millimetres are available for placing at 
any place in an agricultural field to obtain accurate temperature 
data, provided they are correctly enclosed and powered [19-21]. 
Also, machine to machine commu nication protocols via 
electronic components have been revolutionized, among which 
the internet stands out as a global communication protocol that 
can pass data and information between a set of remote 
computers anywhere in the globe.  
 The continuous shrink  in size and cost of electronic 
components, such as processing units, modems, and antennas 
enabled the connectivity of mobile devices and sensors to the 
internet as stand -alone objects, which is why the term IoT is 
used [1]. Now, te chnology companies have IoT -based solutions 
for precision agriculture which consist of; sensors being able to 
measure the environmental conditions, for instance, at different 
localized spots within a farm; cloud -based platform to collect 
and integrate data ; artificial intelligence algorithms that extract 
information and predict patterns; communication mechanism 
with farm manager over the internet to notify about conditions, 
instructions, or required actions.  
 Bosch Corporation is a global engineering compan y that has 
adopted Industry 4.0 in its business and has emerged into the 
field of agriculture by providing a number of solutions [22]. 
Industry 4.0 on its own is the digital transformation of industrial 
markets with smart manufacturing currently on the forefront. It 
represents the so -called fourth industrial revolution in discrete 
and process manufacturing, logistics and supply chain. 
Although Industry 4.0 has been  conceived in the context of 
manufacturing, many of the technologies applied and 
converged in Industry 4.0 find their way in agriculture [23]. 
 Bosch’s Deepfield Connect  provides solutions to monitor the 
agricultural fields for different parameters [24]. Each solution 
consists of a set of sensors connected directly to the internet via 
a communication box which sends the data to Cloud, which in 
turn sends information and alerts to the farmer on his/her smart 
phone or computer. Once the set of sensors are installed in one 
location, it will start sending environmental temperature and 
humidity information as well as soil moisture information 
periodically to the farmer so that unnecessary journeys to the 
field to check on frost, heat, or dryness can be avoided. To 
exemplify with asparagus crop, through in -field temperature 
sensors, the fa rmer can know the temperature at different layers