> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 14 
lettuce grow ers). To address this issue, blockchain technology 
can be introduced. Introduction of blockchain will enable rapid 
and accurate traceability, reducing cost from food losses and  
saving precious human lives [114, 115] . 
 
 
Figure 8 The timeline of events that led to recalls following the 
romaine lettuce outbreak of 2018.  
 Blockchain t echnology is a success in the cryptocurrency 
world, since its launch in 2008. Blockchain is known for its 
digital decentralized ledger system that does not require a 
trusted intermediary for transactions  [116] . The blockchain 
technology is essentially a database of records stored in the 
form of ‘blocks’, shared among all members of the group, 
resistant to data modification, and can be accessed at any time 
in the future [117] . Similar approach can be extended to a food 
supply chain where information like production data of food, 
origin, storage and shipping temperatures, expiry date, etc. can 
be digitally stored in a database (see Fig. 9(A)). This will enable 
rapid identification of an outbreak or authenticity of food 
(kosher, organic)  [116] . The numerous actors involved in the 
food supply chain make it challenging to keep records and keep 
track of food items.  
 Blockchain can potentially provide solution to this issue and 
can assist with implementing food safety, food securit y, and 
food integrity measures, while bringing transparency and 
accountability to the supply chain  [118] . A Study conducted by 
Walmart  and IBM to trace sliced mangoes from South and 
Central America to North America exposed the potential 
benefits of blockchain, highlighting the significant gap in the 
current traceability procedures [119, 120] . Two different supply 
chains were studied; pork in china and mangoes in the USA. The traditional method of traceability took 7 days to connect the 
supply chain from consumer to the origin of the mangoes.  
However, when the same data was  fed to blockchain, it 
delivered information within 2.2 seconds [114]  (See Fig. 9 (B)).  
 In agricultural logistics, big data analytics could be used to 
predict the occurrence of food hazards by linking the biotic or 
abiotic information to the growth and probabilistic occurrence 
of pathogens and toxicants. For instance, close monitoring of 
biotic and abiotic conditions in crops field has been reported to 
help identify the areas of increased incidence of aflatoxins 
before the harvested crop could enter the food chain [121] . IoT 
in food logistics, enabled by GPS, RFID, and other sens or-
based tracking and traceability, are key to ensure rapid recalls 
and real -time data collection of food attributes at the site. The 
Cheesecake Factory, a large U.S. restaurant chain, routinely 
gathers and transmit data on transportation temperature, shel f 
life, and food recalls, which is subsequently analysed by IBM’s 
data analytics solutions before significant information can be 
shared across its logistic chain [122] . Walmart uses a 
Sustainable Paperless Auditing and Record Keeping (SPARK) 
system that automatically uploads data pertaining key food 
attributes to an online databas e. This allow s Walmart  to keep a 
check on food product quality, like internal cooking 
temperature of rotisserie chickens , to isolate uncooked product 
for future inspection by health officers and private investigators 
[123] . In an investigation by Van der Fels -Klerx, et al. [124] , 
quantitative mod els and databases were leveraged to forecast 
the mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) contamination of wheat 
in north -western Europe. Likewise, farm -based 
characterization of pathogens combined with environmental 
and meteorological data allowed the presence of Listeria 
monocytogenes  pathogen to be predicted [125] . 
VIII. FUTURE TRENDS , CHALLENGES  AND NEEDS  
 IoT, Big data handling and computation:  The massive 
amount of data generated from IoT devices and social media 
generally demands appropriate infrastructure to store, process 
or analyse, and instruct appropriate automated actions based on 
the insights obtai ned. Because of the cost associated with such 
infrastructure, the ‘platform as a service’ business model is 
Fig. 9 (A) The concept of blockchain technology as applied to food supply chain for traceability and outbreak detection. (B) The traceability 
time in the farm to fork chain will be practically eliminated through the implementation of blockchain ledger.