> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 5 
of the subsoil - an information essential for high yield output. 
The advantages of such connected solution extend to the 
maintenance services that companies provide as they can 
simultaneously monitor the dro p in the performance of an 
equipment or a component (for instance, a battery) and send 
timely replacements.  
 Another organization, Yield Technology Solution, places 
sensor nodes (a group of environmental and soil sensors) at 
different locations in an agric ultural field that communicate 
with one gateway over local communication system [25]. The 
gateway, in turn, connects to the internet to store and process 
data in the Microsoft Azure  cloud. Their system  measures 
microclimate data from around the farm and uses artificial 
intelligence and data science to provide information that helps 
in making decisions – e.g. when to plant, harvest, irrigate, feed 
and protect crops.  The system builds a detail ed picture of the 
farm’s microclimate across a range of conditions and delivers 
these insights to the farmers as current and future predictions.  
 In Japan, Bosch has launched Plantect , a solution targeting 
greenhouses, in which one farmer can connect a set  of sensors 
located in different greenhouses within certain proximity to be 
connected locally to a single gateway which is connected to the 
internet [26]. From the information received about the changes 
in environmental conditions in the greenhouses, Bosch employs 
cloud comput ing and artificial intelligence to predict disease 
breakouts and advice on pest control management for 
individual greenhouses. Such a solution aims ultimately to 
optimize the usage of plant protection products by spraying 
fungicide, for instance, which con tributes to the PA 
management of optimizing spraying. Although the solution is 
available now for tomato greenhouses, it should be 
straightforward to expand this system to other crops via 
development of specific prediction models for each disease 
while usin g the same hardware to collect and visualize data.  
 For greenhouses, fully automated solutions to control the 
internal weather and irrigation schedule are available in the 
market (see Fig. 5 ). Priva provides such systems where a local 
communication system between the sensors and actuators 
within one greenhouse work together to maintain optimum 
growing conditions for the plants [27]. For instance, 
temperature and humidity sensors talk to the motors that open 
and close side windows and ceiling to avoid over heating inside 
the greenhouse during the day. In cold nights, they can turn on 
a heater, if the greenhouse is equipped with one, to maintain a 
minimum temperature to avoid frost. These sensors can also get 
assistance from a rain detection sensor placed on the roof of the 
greenhouse, that can actuate c losing of the ceilings and 
maintain the side windows open on rainy hot days, for instance. 
Also, as the need for irrigation is closely related to light, the 
irrigation pump is controlled by solar radiation sensor that 
requests the pump to irrigate when it detects the accumulation 
of a certain amount of solar energy during the daytime. Lately, 
with the drop of carbon di -oxide (CO 2) sensor prices and the 
increasing evidence of the correlation between higher CO 2 
concentration levels and yield, modern greenhous e control 
systems include CO 2 sensors which control CO 2 generators that 
turn on when the photosynthesis activity is high during daytime. Several other new companies are rapidly emerging with distinct 
solutions to provide greenhouse control and cloud connec tivity. 
Agrinet  is a solution that combines greenhouse machinery 
provided by Nepon Inc. and information and communication 
technology (ICT) provided by NEC Corporation to enable 
monitoring and controlling the equipment in the greenhouse 
remotely [28, 29] . 
 
Fig. 5. IoT based monitoring and control of greenhouse cultivation 
environments. The greenhouse environment is monitored using a 
variety of IoT based sensors, and the automated control is 
implemented through heating, ventilation, or opening of windows 
using actuated motors.  
 
Similarly, E -Kakashi, which was lau nched by Softbank in 
2015 as a sensor box to monitor greenhouses [30], was 
upgraded into a platform after Sof tbank teamed up with CKD 
Corporation and Ericsson [31]. The platfor m not only keeps 
constant watch over fields and greenhouses, but also control the 
environment inside the greenhouse. The sensors monitor 
parameters such as temperature, humidity, and CO 2 and the 
machines in the greenhouse are connected to the cloud via 
Softbank’s NB -IoT cellular network. The PS Solutions’ e -
kakashi platform applies AI to adjust equipment based on 
environmental data and Ericsson IoT Accelerator powers the 
device onboarding and data management. Finally, CKD 
Corporation’s electro -pneumatic dev ices allow machinery to be 
controlled remotely. Accordingly, E -kakashi can make 
appropriate adjustments to machinery such as fertilization, 
irrigation and greenhouse ventilation systems. Whenever and 
wherever he/she wishes, the e -kakashi user can access an d 
interact with the system using a smartphone, tablet or computer. 
The farmer can modify the AI -based standard settings to apply 
their personal know -how.  
 Finally, John Deere, the largest agricultural machinery 
manufacturer in the world is estimated to hav e deployed several 
hundred thousand connected machines in the field since 2012. 
The company estimates that their IoT data collection and 
automation has boosted yield and reduced costs by >10% for 
farmers [32]. The IoT device installations in the agriculture  
world is predicted to increase from 30 million in 2015 to 75 
million in 2020, with a compound annual growth rate of 20% 
[33]. Several large public -private EU consortia are involved in 
assessing the benef its of IoT and big data application in 
agriculture, dairy, poultry, and meat production. An EU 
sponsored project named DataBio ( Data -Driven Bioeconomy ) 
is being carried out to understand the benefits of big data 
technologies in the raw material production from agriculture,