> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 3 
making processes.  
AI can be brought into ind ustry through “expert systems” 
built on rules, and this approach is referred to as “rule -based” 
AI [6]. The collection of all rules governing the behaviour of 
the system are  either based on physical principles or 
experience -based human expert knowledge. In this approach, 
the system or process is constantly 
monitored using IoT devices or 
sensors. The IoT sensors yield data 
about individual system descriptors 
which is analysed using the rules. 
The raw data is occasionally also 
curated and stored into a database to 
depict trends. It is to be noted that 
the complexity in agri -food systems 
is very high due to the involvement 
of many unpredictable variables in 
agriculture, the heter ogeneity of 
food materials, and the food -habits 
of consumers. This makes it almost 
impossible to translate the farmers, 
industry experts, and consumers 
knowledge into clearly expressed, 
well-defined rules (computer 
programs) that can be implemented 
into AI  based expert systems [7]. 
Nevertheless, rule -based based AI 
is suitable in scenarios where real -time decisions and control 
are a necessity and when one cannot afford to frequently train 
the AI system.  
Considering the drawbacks of rule -based AI, machine 
learning based AI has bec ome more popular in recent times [8]. 
In ML based AI, there may be a lag period between data 
collection (sensing) and making predicti ons or decisions, as the 
system is programmed to look for patterns in the data collected 
(e.g. from IoT sensors). At present, ML based AI systems do 
not involve use of human intelligence -based computer rules 
(i.e. compliance with any kind of science or phy sical reality or 
expert experiences); rather, these are purely data driven. ML 
based AI is suitable for systems where frequently training the 
system is not a constraint and higher accuracy is desired, which 
is quite true for agri -food systems.  
 Machine Lea rning (ML) is one of the central topics of AI, 
since a feature usually attached to intelligence is the ability to 
learn from the environment. ML is a technique for developing 
AI which gives computer the ability to learn without being 
explicitly programmed [9]. Simply put, ML algorithms distill 
and coalesce knowledge  from unorganized data in a manner that 
their outputs are computer programs able to accomplish useful 
tasks such as alert a user or actuate critical steps [7]. It explores 
the study and structure of algorithms that can learn from and 
make predictions on data; such algorithms ove rcome strictly 
static programing instructions by making data -driven 
predictions/decisions [10]. ML algorithms can be broadly 
class ified into the following four main categories: (a) 
Supervised learning: These algorithms receive labeled data as 
training sets and make predictions for unseen points. (b) Unsupervised learning: These algorithms receive unlabeled 
data as training sets and m ake predictions for unseen points. (c) 
Reinforcement learning: These algorithms continuously 
interacts with the environment, under certain cases it affects the 
environment, and receives award for each action; the objective 
here is to maximize the reward ov er a course of actions and 
iterations with the environment [11]. (d) Representation 
learning: also known as feature learning , these include a set of 
methods that allow a machine to be fed with raw data and to 
automatically discover the representations needed for detection 
or classification [12]. The widely acclaimed deep learning 
based on neural networks is the best example of representation 
learning. Fig. 3  shows various models under these mentioned 
categories and their technological applications. Detailed 
discussions about ML methods and their agri -food specific 
applications can be found elsewhere [9, 13] . 
Owing to its unprecedented impacts, the area of deep 
learnin g with neural networks deserves a special mention. Deep 
learning methods enable extraction of high levels of 
information from very large volumes of data. Unlike traditional 
machine learning methods, the algorithms in deep learning are 
hierarchically organi zed according to increasing complexity. 
The computational models in deep learning comprise of 
multiple processing layers to learn representations of data with 
multiple levels of abstraction [12]. 
The overall flow of data from source, through the data 
processing or AI platform, until the final action – usually some 
kind of control, is summarized in Fig. 4 . AI techniques are 
advancing rapidly, but most upcoming applications will likely 
involve  a combination of both rule -based analysis (to represent 
first-principles constructs in the data) and new AI methods.  
This is especially the case when daisy -chaining datasets 
through a supply chain.  Further, data and new algorithms are 
expected to be combined with practiced human domain 
expertise, so that people will  understand and trust the process 
by which computer programs came to their conclusions.  
Fig. 3 Machine learning paradigms and their applications in the agri -food space.