> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 10 
opportunities in a timely manner. Companies can then engage 
with the concerned parties - consumers, organizations, suppliers 
or government bodies to harness the opportunit y or resolve the 
challenge.  As an example, a food industry can monitor the 
changes in sentiment scores associated with a reformulated 
product and thus assess the success of the reformulation to 
overcome the negative sentiments.  
C. Personalized nutrition and h ealth advice  
Nutrition can be a highly complex and individualized facet of 
life. What works for one person may not be effective for 
another. The Internet has allowed the proliferation of advice 
relating to nutrition and health. It has been observed that 
between 55% and 67% of American adults search for health and 
wellness information on the internet, and 20 -34% of them use 
social media [70]. In a recent work it was concluded that young 
adults are generally open to receiving healthy eating and recipe 
tips through social media [71]. Thus, it becomes clear that with 
an expanding population getting access to internet, nutritionists, 
health educators, and food companies can take advantage of 
social media campaigning and consented social data collection 
for personalized nutrition and health recommendations.  
Social media is increasingly being exploited as a platform for 
distributing nutrition and wellness campaigns, increase 
exposure to evidence -based health messages and encourage 
users to parti cipate and engage with interventions [71]. In an 
exemplary multichannel social marketing campaign named 
Food H ero, a focused target audience in Oregano, USA were 
provided with nutrition related messages [70]. The audience 
were messaged with evi dence -based research findings to 
promote an increase in the amount and variety of vegetables and 
fruit consumed. The metadata of users and their activity was 
used to understand the audience’s learning behaviour, tuning 
the content for effectiveness and lon g-term planning. While, 
cloud -based frameworks for effectively managing health 
related social big data has recently been proposed and 
demonstrated [72], such frameworks are yet to be reported in 
the nutrition space. It is also to be noted that the effectiveness 
of social media based targeting could become limited when 
users do not wish to share their personal health or nutrition 
related information [71]. 
Freeman, et al. [73]  reported that young adults are being 
bombarded with messages about energy -dense, nutrient -poor 
(EDNP) food and beverages on social media platforms, that are 
sponsored by food industry organizations with commercial 
interests. A strict check on such conflicts between public 
interest and commercial interests through appropriate 
regulations is highly desirable. Unfortunately, governments 
around the world are yet to define and frame proper guidelines 
and regulate the con tent released on social media. It will be 
interesting if the academic world can come together with 
appropriate social media analytics to identify and classify the 
advertisements based on cleverly chosen metrics.  Moreover, the 
fact that few enterprises stor e and use the data of consumers and 
their interactions with products for intensive marketing and 
influencing the decisions, is a matter of concern to many 
consumers. Governments need to regulate the privacy of data 
of its citizens and consumers, taking the  European Union’s 
recently enacted General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
as a good example.  VI. FOOD QUALITY AND AUTH ENTICITY  
In recent times consumer awareness towards food 
composition and quality has surged owing to an increasing 
awareness about healthy lifestyle and technological 
advancements in food science and technology. Moreover, food 
safety regulations demand detailed labelling of product 
composition along with strict quality monitoring [74]. In this 
context, UV -Visible -near infrared spectroscopy (UV -Vis-
NIRS) based IoT sensors and big data are evolving as important 
players in food composition, quality and food safety assessment 
areas.  
A. Spectral fingerprinting of foods  
UV-Visible -near infrared spectroscopy (UV -Vis-NIRS) is an 
extensively researched technology with regard to food 
composition and quality predictions [75-78]. Numerous studies 
have been conducted using UV -Vis-NIRS for evaluating food 
composition and quality with the aid of chemometrics [79-81]. 
The review by Reid, et al. [82]  discusses the successful 
application of spectroscopic techniques such as UV, NIR, MIR, 
visible, and Raman for food authentication. Another review by 
Porep, et al. [83]  emphasizes on the studies dealing with on -line 
application of NIR spectroscopy for industrial processes in the 
food industry. Similarly, the review article by Dixit, et al. [84]  
contributes a detailed discussion on the var ious studies 
regarding applications of NIR spectroscopy for online 
monitoring of meat and meat products. UV -Vis-NIRS is a rapid 
and non -destructive technology which has motivated the food 
industry to use it for quality monitoring purposes. The UV-Vis-
NIR r egion covers the wavelength range from 200–2500 nm.  
UV-Vis spectroscopy typically yields broad, overlapping 
bands; spectroscopic measurements for most liquid and gaseous 
samples rely on the Beer -Lambert Law. Spectra of solid 
samples are usually recorded in  the units of reflectance (R) or 
percent reflectance (%R). Color measurements are conducted 
by utilizing the transmittance and reflectance data for liquid and 
solid samples respectively [85]. NIR spectroscopy is based on 
molecular vibrations produced by functional groups containing 
hydrogen atoms: C -H, N -H and O -H. These molecu lar 
vibrations generate spectral signatures which are specific to a 
compositional attribute, ingredient, adulterant or a contaminant. 
A characteristic UV -Vis-NIRS system consists of a light 
source, spectrophotometer and a computer for data acquisition. 
The light source illuminates the sample, which is then either 
reflected, transmitted or diffusely reflected followed by its 
detection via an interferometric or a dispersive system [86]. 
One of the major issue with NIR spectra is the noise 
generated from non -linearities introduced by light scattering 
phenomenon su ch as Mie scattering and optical scattering [87], 
which necessitates the use of statistical and mathematical 
routines. This branch at the interface of data science and 
chemical physics is widely known as chemometrics. 
Chemometrics plays a significant role in overcoming the 
challenge of non -linearities and thus helps in extracting useful 
information from UV -Vis-NIR spectra. Typi cal processing of 
spectral data involves enhancing the signal -to-noise ratio 
(SNR), (2) pattern recognition/classification/quantitative