> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 1 
  
Abstract — Internet of things (IoT) results in massive amount of 
streaming data, often referred to as “big data”, which brings new 
opportunities to monitor agricultural and food processes. Besides 
sensors, big data from social media  is also becoming important for 
the food industry. In this review we present an overview of IoT, 
big data, and artificial intelligence (AI)  and their disruptive role in 
shaping the future of agri -food systems. Following an introduction 
to the fields of IoT, big data, and AI, we discuss the role of IoT and 
big data analysis in agriculture (incl uding greenhouse monitoring, 
intelligent farm machines, and drone -based crop imaging), supply -
chain modernization, social media (for open innovation and 
sentiment analysis) in food industry, food quality assessment 
(using spectral methods and sensor fusion ), and finally, food safety 
(using  gene sequencing and blockchain based digital traceability). 
A special emphasis is laid on t he commercial status of application s 
and translational research outcomes . 
 
Index Terms — precision agriculture; social media; gene 
sequencing; blockchain; sensors; internet; digital; robotics  
I. INTRODUCTION  
NTERNET  of things (IoT), big data and artificial intelligence 
(AI) are perhaps old buzzwords in the tech -industry, that are 
making an impact only in very recent times. In fact, dat a from 
Google Trends search history for these topics shows that IoT 
and big data have drawn considerable interest of broad -based 
internet users within last five to six years, while AI remains a 
topic of interest for much over a decade (see Fig. 1). In fact, 
with the increase in communication devices the volume of data 
generated is rising and AI is continuing to well -integrate into 
the lives of a big population of the planet in one form or the 
other. Unlike AI, IoT primarily being industrial technology 
remains to be of low interest to the general public. A natural 
topic of interest for agri -food scientists and engineers would be 
to maximize the impacts of these emerging information 
technologies for sustainably feeding the planet. As a first aim 
of this re view, we will begin by briefly introducing these topics  
for those audiences who are coming from a background in 
agriculture and food sciences . 
 
This paragraph of the first footnote will contain the date on which you 
submitted your paper for review.  
N.N. Misra is with Ingenium Naturae Pvt Ltd, Gujarat, 392001, India  
N.N.  Misra, Ahmad Al -Mallahi, and Alex Martynenko are with the 
Department of Engineering at Dalhousie University, NS, B2N 5E6, Canada 
(Corresponding author: e -mail: misra.cftri@gmail.com ). 
Yash Dixit is with AgResea rch Grasslands Research Centre, 11 Dairy Farm 
Rd, Palmerston North  4442 , New Zealand . (Corresponding author: e -mail: 
yash.dixit@agresearch.co.nz ).  
Fig. 1 Relative worldwide search traffic for the terms Internet of 
Things (IoT), Big D ata and Artificial Intelligence on Google over the 
last decade. Data accessed from Google Trends on June 16, 2019. 
Numbers represent search interest relative to the highest point on the 
chart for the given time. A score of zero means that there was not 
enough data for this term.  
 
 First coined by Kevin Ashton, IoT is a technology paradigm 
contemplated as a vast network of digitally connected devices 
and machines [1]. Here, the digital connection of the machines 
or ‘things’ occurs over ‘internet’. IoT is sometimes also referred 
to as the Internet of Everything or the Industrial Internet. The 
influence of IoT arises from its ability to enable robust 
communication between the physical world with that of the 
digital, a concept often referred to as the fourth industrial 
revolution. In fact, the use of IoT in industry is sometimes also 
referred to as ‘Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)’. In the IIoT 
framework, remote sensors gather information generated by 
machines (and increasingly, humans too) to increase ef ficiency, 
promote better decision -making and build competitive 
advantages, regardless of industry or company size. IoT 
platforms serve as the bridge between the devices' sensors and 
the data networks, wherein the connected IoT devices exchange 
information using internet transfer protocols. The sensors of the 
devices within an IoT network yield large volumes of data that 
continuously stream to a “data lake”, which could be a local 
physical server or cloud based storage (i.e. distributed across 
the internet w orldwide) for enabling necessary data processing 
via appropriate algorithms or machine learning techniques to 
generate actionable insights. Thus, we note that IoT is 
essentially the means to generating and transmitting large 
Manreet Singh Bhullar is with the Department of Horticultu re and Natural 
Resources, Kansas State University, Olathe, USA.  
Rohit Upadhyay is with the Nestlé R esearch and Development  Centre, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India 122050 . 
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available  
online at http://ieee xplore.ieee.org.  
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018020406080100Relative Frequency
Time Internet of things
 Big data
 Artificial intelligenceIoT, big data and artificial intelligence in 
agriculture and food industry  
N.N. Misra, Yash Dixit, Ahmad Al -Mallah i, Manreet Singh Bhullar, Rohit Upadhyay, Alex Martynenko  
I