> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 9 
platforms, such as, blogs, discussions or comments on websites 
(e.g. news pages), microblogs (Twitter), collaborative projects 
(e.g. Wikipedia), social networking sites (Facebook, LinkedIn), 
and content communities ( e.g. YouTube and Instagram) [64]. 
Typical examples of metrics that can be drawn from social  
media content created by users include; followers, shares (or 
retweets), likes, comments, mentions, metadata associated with 
the clicks. The metadata associated with users’ activities could 
include information such as the age, nationality, education, 
profession, geolocation, and more, depending on what the user 
had preferred to share.  
 Briefly, social media data refers to the information 
gathered from social networks that reveals how users share, 
view or engage with the content or profiles created by a use r or 
organization. As the most common example, Facebook pages 
of companies “liked” by users results in the user receiving 
brand page updates and contents in their news feed. This way 
brands can interact with those who like or follow their pages 
and vice -versa. Nearly all food companies have a social 
presence with a huge number of people who follow their 
Facebook pages and thus, are part of the social interaction and 
data creation process (see  Fig. 6 ). The aim of a typical social 
big data analysis is to retrieve valuable chunks of knowledge 
from the huge amount of complex user generated content (often 
linguistically or graphically expressed), and help agencies, 
industry, or stakeholders make informed decisions.  
 
Fig. 6. Number of  people liking the Facebook pages of major food 
companies. Note that the bars are a sum of all filtered company pages 
(but not brands) that are verified by Facebook. Data retrieved on 7th 
July 2019. The numbers could include repeated measurements when a 
user has liked more than one page.  
A. Open innovation and renovation via crowdsourcing  
Innovation refers to introducing something as a novelty, which 
could be in terms of product, market, service, or business 
model. The concept of open innovation encourages companies 
to acquire outside sources of innovation to improve product 
lines and short en the time required to bring products to market. 
In addition, it also emphasizes on marketing or releasing 
internally developed innovations which do not fit the company's 
business model but could be effectively used elsewhere [65]. 
Several reviews have dealt with various aspects of open 
innovation within the food industry [66-69]. 
Data min ing via machine learning techniques are increasingly 
being employed to identify the most preferred and disliked 
features of existing products, by analysing thousands of 
consumer comments on websites like Amazon, eBay, 
Facebook, YouTube and other e -commerce  website. Insights generated from natural language processing (NLP) and 
sentiment analysis (see section 5.2 ) of social media and e -
commerce data can guide development of new products or 
technologies as per consumer preferences, helping determine 
important design decisions to meet customer needs more 
accurately. This approach arms an industry with the information 
to make future products highly innovative, consumer friendly, 
resilient and respectful of market requirements. Note that the 
intellectual inputs fo r the new or improved product in such 
cases are fundamentally crowd -sourced through online 
platforms.  
Besides unsolicited user generated content, it is worthwhile 
noting that businesses also adopt web media as channels for 
building and distributing informa tion and values. Social 
platforms are increasingly being leveraged as grounds for 
connecting, interacting and collaborating with consumers. For 
example, in recent years multinational food companies have 
been engaging consumers in co -creation via social med ia 
marketing campaigns for the development of new flavour and 
texture for their products. When users respond with a unique 
hashtag or media -handle to the campaign, all user responses 
with its associated can be gathered to obtain a huge corpus of 
informatio n. Analysis of the textual data collected overlaid with 
user related metadata (such as geolocation, age, profession, 
time of content creation etc.) from social campaigns can be a 
valuable way to both gather insights and to market segmented 
brands.  
Finally,  it is worthwhile mentioning that web -scraping and big 
data analysis is also being employed by many enterprises to 
compare the prices of the products and assess where the sales 
price of your products lie within that product category in the e -
commerce world . In conclusion, enterprises should consider big 
data analytics as one of the tools in their research toolkits and 
learn from the successful programs leading the way. By 
understanding what consumer’s value and engaging in active 
dialogue and interaction, c ompanies can develop superior value 
propositions that are more relevant to their target audience.  
B. Sentiment analysis  
To determine the sentiments that consumers associate with a 
given product, brand or company - be it positive, negative, or 
neutral - big data  analysts perform “Sentiment Analysis” on the 
huge corpus of text data from social websites, merchant sites, 
and blogs. In fact, several companies have either assembled or 
are in the process of assembling “digital acceleration teams”, 
also called “social l istening teams”, to monitor social media 
sentiments at high frequencies (sometimes even at hour 
intervals). For scraping large -scale reviews at regular intervals 
several new start -ups around the concept of “Data -as-a-
Service” provider (DAAS) have mushroome d in recent years. 
DaaS providers have the computational infrastructure for high 
quality data extraction from e -commerce and social media 
websites without interruption.  
The first aim of most sentiment analysis workflows is to 
overcome the information barri er from social slang and lingos, 
non-textual expressions (emojis) and language. This is usually 
followed by matching of user generated words against a pre -
built, pre -classified custom lexicon (dictionary of words). 
Using tools for real -time analysis of str eaming social data, the 
digital teams of companies can detect upcoming challenges and 
Coca-ColaPepsicoNestléUnileverHeinzAnheuser-BuschGeneral MillsTyson FoodsCargill
105106107108 
likes on facebook