> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 15 
becoming increasingly popular. Examples of some of the top 
IoT platforms on the market today include, Amazon Web 
Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, Th ingWorx IoT Platform, 
IBM's Watson, Cisco IoT Cloud Connect, Salesforce IoT 
Cloud, Oracle Integrated Cloud, and GE Predix. With the cost 
of sensors projected to plummet and the need for cloud 
computing expected to rapidly peak, database management, 
cloud c omputing, and analytics as a service are expected to be 
the future business models of choice.  
 Agriculture : The cost of data acquisition in data -driven 
agriculture continues to remain very high, thereby significantly 
decreasing the impact of IoT and artifi cial intelligence in 
increasing agricultural productivity. This situation can only 
improve through innovations leading to inexpensive sensing 
technologies, which does not appear to become a reality in the 
immediate future. As the partnership between the bi g data 
technology industry and the farming community progresses, the 
question of who holds and owns the data will remain a top 
priority for farmers as well the technology companies.  
The use of advanced technologies in agriculture is limited to 
highly devel oped countries, while most farmers across the rest 
of world are struggling to survive. The advanced technologies 
are generally suited to the needs of large factory -farm s, like 
those present in north America or Europe . This implies that 
internet -based techn ologies cannot emerge as influential drivers 
in changing the global agricultural productivity. Therefore, the 
success of these technologies in developing and 
underdeveloped countries can only by improved through strong 
political willpower leading to govern mental support to the 
farmers.  
 Social media : Social media and personal level data is slowly 
becoming the new “most valuable resource” of this era. New 
challenges are emerging such as the concerns over data privacy 
raised by consumers and businesses, cyber -attacks, use of bots 
and fraudulent social media accounts by anti -enterprise bodies 
to negatively affect the reputation of companies and promote 
marketing of counterfeit/fake products on the world -wide web. 
Therefore, digital teams of companies must const antly innovate 
to proactively tackle adverse situations and handle mishaps on 
social platforms.  
 Food supply -chain modernization : Quantitative studies on 
the beneﬁts of IoT in supply -chain are yet to be carried out. IoT 
integration with food business proce sses for control of the 
supply chain is a challenging topic that needs further study on 
a case by case basis. In general, IoT implementation in the food 
supply -chain business is being rapidly improved considering 
that product -level tracking using sensors w as a familiar concept 
to this sector. The decentralized food diversion and 
consignment redirection based on shelf -life prediction are the 
new trends which are expected to grow.  These developments 
will help to significantly reduce the food wastage.  It is li kely 
that end -to-end supply chain traceability in agri -food industry 
will be achieved in future via technology implementations that 
differ slightly from blockchain methodologies due to the 
involvement of several stakeholders and actors, including end -
consu mers.  
 Food quality via spectral data : At present, hyperspectral 
cameras and UV -Vis spectrophotometers are being used more 
commonly in the food industry for quality monitoring purposes 
than ever before. Tech start -ups are producing consumer focussed pocket -size spectral devices considering health 
conscious mindset of millennials. Miniaturized and faster 
hyperspectral cameras are being actively designed and 
developed keeping the needs of the industry in mind. Currently, 
a pocket -size spectral sensor costs as  low as USD 300, but can 
be priced at USD 100,000 for commercial spectrophotometers. 
Cost of hyperspectral cameras is prohibitively high with 
starting prices of approximately USD 20,000 and can reach to 
several million dollars depending on the specificatio ns. Further, 
the databases of spectral features for foods is also evolving and 
far from commercial acceptability. While similar issues are 
being rapidly resolved for field applications in precision 
agriculture, the food industry is significantly lagging. 
Nevertheless, the demand for spectral technologies is envisaged 
to continue to grow for food applications.  
 Food safety : With the recent change in food safety 
regulations, focus has changed from reaction and response to 
prediction and prevention. The curren t food safety challenges 
require comprehensive and organized ways to address future 
foodborne outbreaks with gathering and examining large 
volumes of genetic information for early identification of food 
safety issues. Future food safety challenges insist s takeholders 
to develop better methods of tracing food supply chains 
protecting food and public health. Ensuring the safety of food 
would be key to the future of sustainable agriculture meeting 
high food demands of the world. Science -based decision 
making a nd the use of advanced technologies ( whole genome 
sequencing, blockchain, and digital process data logging ) 
would play a crucial  role in gathering critical information from 
around the world and connecting various disease and outbreak 
databases to enhance t he food safety. The future food safety 
measures demand better digital innovations to make the food 
supply chain safer and secure d, with better traceability and 
accountability.  
 Data Ownership , privacy  and security : The growing 
digital trend in agri-food space in the form of cloud computing, 
IoT and big data also comes with new challenges when it comes 
to cybersecurity. This is because, technologies like data 
platforms, wireless sensor networks, RFID, GPS, business 
management systems can be vulne rable to breakdown, abuse 
and misuse  [126] . A breach of data security could be fatal to 
companies in terms of loss of business or reputation. While 
software companies constantly release updates to thei r 
applications and data platforms, updating is a very difficult task 
in some cases,  for example, process control software.  In 
addition, power failure is a common issue causing  outages in 
farm -based IT systems.   
 While the use of data for AI approaches is s een as highly 
rewarding, there also exist many concerns, issues and 
unaddressed questions around data ownership and privacy to be 
addressed.  Since there is no guarantee that leakage of data upon 
sharing can be overruled, companies are hesitant to participa te 
in AI efforts. Likewise, farmers, consumers, and smaller 
players in business are often left in dilemma with regards to 
their privacy or monetary share,  should  the data be used for 
commercial benefit. With regards to data ownership, 
blockchain being a peer -to-peer network that allows each 
participant to own his data and be involved in trade could 
prevent data monopoly. Efforts are needed to standardize the 
protocols used in blockchain technology for its  mass -adoption,