> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 19 
[119]  F. Yiannas, "A new era of food transparency powered by 
blockchain," Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 
vol. 12, no. 1 -2, pp. 46 -56, 2018.  
[120]  D. Galvin, "IBM and Walmart: Blockchain for Food Safety," vol. 
2019, no. April 16 , Available: https://www -
01.ibm.com/events/wwe/grp/grp308.ns f/vLookupPDFs/6%20Usin
g%20Blockchain%20for%20Food%20Safe%202/$file/6%20Using
%20Blockchain%20for%20Food%20Safe%202.pdf  
[121]  W. J. Armbruster and M. M. MacDonell, "Informatics for 
Environmental Protection, Sustainable Development and Risk 
Management (Enviro Info)," in Proceedings of the 28th Conference 
on Environmental Informatics , 2014, pp. 127 -134. 
[122]  N. Y. Armonk. (2013). The Cheesecake Factory® Tackles Big Data 
with IBM Analytics for an Exceptional Brand Experience . 
Available: https://www -
03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/40436.wss  
[123]  F. Yiannas. (2015, 06 June). How Walmart’s SPARK Keeps Your 
Food Fresh . Available: 
https://blog.walmart.com/sustainability/20150112/how -walmarts -
spark -keeps -your-food-fresh  
[124]  H. Van der Fels -Klerx, J. E. Olesen, M. Madsen, and P. Goedhart, 
"Climate change increases deoxynivalenol contamin ation of wheat 
in north -western Europe," Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 
vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1593 -1604, 2012.  
[125]  L. K. Strawn  et al. , "Landscape and meteorological factors affecting 
prevalence of three food -borne pathogens in fruit and vegetable  
farms," Appl. Environ. Microbiol., vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 588 -600, 2013.  
[126]  C. Consulting and W. UR, "Cybersecurity in the Agrifood sector: 
Securing data as crucial asset for agriculture," Netherlands2016, 
Available: https://www.capgemini.com/consulting -nl/wp -
content/uploads/sites/33/2017/08/02 -
029.16_agrifood_pov_consulting_web.pdf . 
 
N.N. Misra  is the director of Ingeni um Naturae Pvt 
Ltd, Gujarat, India and an adjunct faculty in the 
Department of Engineering, Dalhousie University, 
Canada . He is a food process engineer with a PhD 
from Technological University Dublin (TUD), 
Dublin, Ireland.  In the past, he was employed with 
Iowa State University , Ames, USA  (Postdoctoral 
Fellow, 2018), and General Mills , Mumbai, India  
(Senior  Scientist, 2015 -2017). He is an author or co -
author of over 100 publications in peer -reviewed 
journals, conferences. His research interests  
circumscribe the broad areas of food processing, cold plasma, computational 
modelling, smart equipment design  and open innovation in the food industry.  
His private research interests include algorithm s, scaling of social networks  and 
tacit knowledge.  
 
Yash Dixit  is currently working as a scientist at 
AgResearch Grasslands, New Zealand under Food 
and Bio -based group in Meat Quality team. His work 
involves development of systems for meat quality and 
safety assessment at meat processing plants. His 
research interests and expertise include spectroscopic 
and imaging sensors for food safety and quality, 
chemometrics and image processing.  
Yash earned his Ph.D. in Food engineering from 
Technological University Dublin (TUD), Ireland , 
master’s in food technology  from CSIR -Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (Mysore, India) and bachelor’s  degree in 
Agricultural Engineering from College of Agricultural Engineering, JNKVV  
(Jabalpur, India).  His PhD research focussed on the use of novel spectroscopic 
techniques for meat quality and safety assessment. He has authored several 
peer-reviewed articles in international journals and technical magazines.  
 
Ahmad Al -Mallahi is an Assistant Professor a nd 
Industrial Research Chair in Precision Agriculture. He  
received his PhD degree in Bioproduction 
Engineering (2010) and master’s degree in Crop 
Production Engineering (2007) from Hokkaido 
University, Japan. From 2015 to 2018, he was a 
Product Development  Engineer with Bosch Japan. 
His research aims at developing engineering systems that maintain sustainable agricultural operations and contribute to obtaining 
high quality crop production; focusing on field application -driven research 
while adopting state -of-the-art technologies in the engineering systems. His 
expertise include development of autonomous machinery for robotic tractors; 
machine vision systems; sensor networking systems for horticulture, to which 
he integrates technologies such as sensing (obje ct detection, environment 
monitoring, etc.), digital connectivity (sensor networking, IoT), and machine 
communication (ISO -bus communication, wireless connectivity).  
 
Manreet Singh Bhullar  is Research Assistant 
Professor in the Department of Horticulture and 
Natural Resources, Kansas State University , Olathe, 
USA . He earned his Ph.D. degree in food science and 
technology (2019) from Iowa State University, a 
master’s degree in food and animal sciences (2016) 
from Tennessee State University, and  a bachelor’s 
degree in agricultural sciences (2013) from Punjab 
Agricultural University. His research expertise 
includes non -thermal processing of liquid foods, and 
fresh produce safety with specific focus on agricultural water quality. Manreet’s 
research  lab aims at identifying vulnerabilities to the safety of fresh produce 
from farm to fork continuum and developing antimicrobial interventions to 
minimize the food safety risk and protect public health.  
 
Rohit Upadhyay  is a food technology and flavor 
chemistry professional with extensive  research 
experience uniquely spanning across academics and 
food industry. He holds a PhD in food chemistry from 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur , master’s 
in food technology fr om CSIR -Central Food 
Technological Research Institute, India, bachelor’s 
degree in Biomedical Sciences from University of 
Delhi,  and is currently employed with Nestlé R&D 
Centre , India . His overarching research interest 
priorities are food chemistry, flavo r technology, plant 
bioactives , and adoption of digital technologies in the food industry . Rohit  
specializes in lipid chemistry and ha s been working under the broader theme of 
food ingredient simplicity, novel food protection, and flavor chemistry. Besides  
his industry stint, he has published in scientific journals ( over 25 publications), 
granted two industry trade secrets, and voluntarily served in academics.  
 
Alex Martynenko  is professor in Bioelectronics and 
Bioinstrumentation at Dalhousie University, working 
in the area of industrial automation, robotics, machine 
vision, machine learning and intelligent control 
systems. Using his expertise in electronics, sensor 
fusion, control and optimization, he is developing 
practical applications for a gricultural and food 
processing industries, including controlled 
hydrodynamic cavitation and electrohydrodynamic 
drying. He is author and coauthor of four books and 
11 patents, and an instructor for industry -oriented 
short courses.