> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 6 
forestry and fishery/aquaculture for the bioeconomy industry to 
produce food, energy and biomaterials, responsibly and 
sustainably [34]. Likewise, the project IoF 2020 ( Internet of 
Food and Farm 2020 ) funded by the EU Horizon 2020 and 
coordinated by Wageningen University, dealt with the “Farm of 
the Future”, trying to translate and adapt the “internet  of things” 
technologies to the farm’s environment [35]. 
B. Advances in intelligent farm machinery  
The traditional farming equipment companies are engaged in 
designing of smarter equipment that can integrate with 
computing environments, connect to IoT devices, smart 
tractors, and pumps, capable of sensing their environments and 
responding in real -time to an omalies. In recent years, attempts 
to build agricultural autonomous systems for implementing PA 
techniques have significantly increased and being implemented 
by many start -ups in farms. Cameras have followed the same 
trend of environmental sensors of becom ing smaller and 
cheaper. Their ability of collecting spatial and spectral data 
made them subject of research although the need for high spec 
processing units in comparison to other sensors was one of the 
main initial concerns for its application in real -time conditions. 
However, this has changed in the recent years as powerful 
processing units are widely accessible.  
 The high cost of applying herbicides and the increasing 
awareness about the impacts of excessive usage of chemicals 
on the environment and hum an health, are driving the efforts to 
implement cameras as sensors in the field of agriculture to 
detect weeds. There has been traditionally, two approaches to 
control weeds, which are the chemical and mechanical. In 
principal, mechanical control has the a dvantage of being 
environment -friendly but labour intensive whereas chemical 
control has the opposite features. Recently, some start -ups have 
emerged as providers of intelligent and autonomous weeding 
machines based on cameras for sensing weeds in the fiel ds. We 
will provide a few examples of recent commercial 
developments in this area.  
 Garford Farm Machinery has developed a tractor 
propelled weeding machine (marketed as Robocrop in -row 
weeder ) that consists of machine vision, control system, and 
weeding m echanism [36]. The main feature of this m achine is 
that it mechanically removes weeds which are located within 
the rows. This is achieved using a weeding mechanism that 
rotates around each plant in a spiral trajectory. The plant in turn 
is detected using RGB colour cameras whose data are processe d 
within the machine to determine the centre of the crop around 
which the mechanism will rotate. It was originally developed 
for use on transplanted crops such as lettuce, cabbage, celery, 
etc. but it can be used for most crops that have regular plant and 
row spacing as long as the plant foliage is separated from the 
next plan [36]. It can be used on most crops that are planted 
with regular plant and row spacing where the plant foliage is 
clearly separated from the next plant.  
 Deepfield robotics of Bosch have developed and tested 
autonomous mecha nical weed controller that uses GPS antenna 
to be self -guided within the field and cameras to distinguish 
crops, such as sugar beet, from weed. The robot whose weeding mechanism lies underneath the machine can work also at night 
under artificial lighting c onditions [37]. This autonomous 
vehicle was designed to target weeds in cultivation of sugar 
beets - a crop of high economic value in Germany.  
 Blue River Technology, a start -up recently acquired by 
John Deere, has developed yet another type of weed control 
machine that also uses cameras, computers, and artificial 
intelligence to distinguish crops from weeds [38]. The tractor -
propelled machine currently operating on a limited basis in 
cotton weeding uses chemical metho dology to combat weeds 
by specifically spraying herbicides on spots where weed is 
present. The main advantage of this technology is reducing the 
quantities of chemicals used in agriculture which will bring 
economic and environmental advantages.  
 Besides we eding, there are trials to apply vision 
technology in orchard harvesting operations which are 
characterized by labour intensity and time sensitivity. Typical 
examples of these trials can be found in apple and kiwifruit 
harvesting. The main challenge in aut omating orchard 
harvesting is that the fruits grow in usually an unstructured 
environment. Unlike weed, whose distance from the machine is 
estimated by the approximately constant distance between the 
machine and ground, the location of fruits on tree canno t be 
predicted. Also, the sceneries surrounding fruits contain more 
noise than weeds whose background is limited to other plants 
and soil. This makes developing commercial harvester a real 
challenge despite the need for such machines for labour saving 
and optimizing yield.  
 In academic literature, research tackling apple recognition 
and picking is available since the early 21st century as Bulanon 
[39] developed a machine vision software to detect location of 
apples on trees. Likewise, research of robotic arms and effectors 
started to ta ke place relatively at the same period as Setiawan, 
et al. [40]  developed a gripper that can pick apples without 
harming the skin. Appl e fruit recognition on trees continued to 
develop as Bulanon, et al. [41]  developed a real -time detection 
system, Mao et al [42] developed a stereo vision to detect also 
the distance between the machine and apple to be harvested, and 
Kong et al [43] used least square support vector machine to 
improve accuracy and speed of stereo vision in detecting 
apples. Robotic arm and end effector research continued to 
improve accuracy and spee d of gripping and detaching apples 
from trees [44-46]. Silwal, et al. [47]  reported the design, 
integration, a nd field evaluation of a robotic apple harvester 
able to detect and pick 84% of the apples with an average 
picking time of 6 seconds per fruit.  
 Kiwifruit recognition system based on imaging, for future 
robotic harvester, has some advancements in academic 
research. In order to overcome the problem of noise caused by 
variation of ambient light, Fu, et al. [48]  suggested harvesting 
at night using artificial lighting to minimize the chance of 
kiwifruit misclassification. Unlike a pples, kiwifruits tend to 
cluster in groups which makes ‘visual individualizing’ an 
essential feature of any kiwifruit picking robot; this was tackled 
by Fu, et al. [49] . However, issues such as insufficient success 
rate in detection and slow reco gnition time are two challenges 
that remain to be tackled before a commercial product could be