> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 11 
predictions: pre -processed spectral data are subjected to various 
multivariate statistical methods for building either q ualitative or 
quantitative models [85]. In an IoT context, spectral data 
acquired is typically transferred to a remote server where 
spectral processing is performed while validating the data over 
pre-built calibration models. This approach allows utilizing 
large spectral databases and trained models for near real -time 
assessmen t of various food materials.  
B. Miniature spectrometers as IoT sensors  
Until some years ago, UV -Vis-NIRS systems were bulky, 
immobile and accessible by laboratories only. However, recent 
developments in micro -fabrication and miniaturization of 
optical systems  via holographic optical elements (HOEs) have 
empowered the creation of “palm -sized” spectrophotometers 
which are compact, mobile, pocket -fit and can be connected to 
the internet for real -time data transmission to remote servers. 
Organizations like Hamamat su [88], Texas instruments (Texas 
Instruments Inc., Texas, U SA) and consumer physics [89] have 
develop ed such “palm -sized” spectrophotometers which can be 
used for real -time quality checks, agri -food authentication and 
identification. In fact, Hamamatsu Photonics has developed the 
world’s smallest “fingertip size” micro -spectrophotometer 
which is ultra -compact, lightweight and low -cost device. The 
micro -spectrophotometer offers measurement in the visible 
wavelength range and can be used for applications such as color 
sensing, point -of-care testing connected to smartphones, and 
other types of portable measur ement.  
The large amount of data necessitates remote data analysis 
on powerful computers for receiving real -time insights 
regarding the product on compact UV -Vis-NIRS devices or say, 
mobile phones of a consumer. Thus, such technologies offer an 
opportunity to develop real -time composition and quality 
assessment methods. To exemplify the significance of 
emerging UV -Vis-NIRS IoT platforms, let us consider a typical 
quality monitoring scenario in a flour storage facility. 
Traditionally, to check the authenticit y of wheat flour, a safety 
inspector would perform sampling followed by time -
consuming offline analysis. However, the situation demands for 
a rapid decision at the storage facility. Similar situations could 
arise when real -time decisions are to be sought r egarding 
quality or authenticity of agri -food products. The duo of UV -
Vis-NIRS as IoT sensors and big data methods can provide a 
robust solution to such situations by availing real -time product 
information such as detection of adulteration, allergen 
detect ion, geographic origin and composition.  
Tellspec is a data company which has combined NIR 
spectroscopy, bioinformatics techniques and learning 
algorithms for real -time analysis of consumer foods at the 
molecular level [90]. The system includes Tellspec’s food 
sensor which is based on the technology from Texas 
instruments, a cloud -based patented analysis engin e and a 
mobile app that work together to scan foods, identify 
ingredients and provide details about the food scanned. Tellspec 
has conducted various studies with respect to food quality, 
authentication and characterization. Tellspec evaluated a 
handheld NI R scanner for simultaneous prediction of melamine and urea in wheat gluten samples [91]. In another study, the 
handheld NIR scanner was successfully employed for detection 
of beef aging combined with the differentiation of tenderloin 
and sirloin [92]. 
SCiO is a technology developed by Consumer physics which 
combines two integ rated technological components: the Sensor 
and the Cloud [89]. The SCiO sensor’s optical head is only a 
few millimeters in size; provides high sensitivity and accuracy. 
It has low power consumption and zero warm up time which 
makes it highly responsive and extremely efficient. The SCiO 
cloud provi des the analytical processing power and hosts the 
material databases. The SCiO cloud hosts the chemometric 
models and algorithms that analyze spectra and convert them 
into useful material data. Chemometric models run on a linearly 
scalable architecture, wh ich allows to provide fast response 
times to a practically infinite number of users and devices.  
C. Spectroscopy and sensor fusion  
The intelligent convergence and processing of data from 
multiple sensors for making a process autonomous, is 
commonly referred t o as “sensor fusion”. The results of 
efficient sensor fusion are almost always better than those 
obtained from the interpretation of data from individual sensors.  
In a recent EU -funded project named “MUSE -Tech”, the 
fusion of state -of-the-art sensing techn ologies (photoacoustic 
spectroscopy, quasi imaging UV -Vis spectrometry and 
distributed temperature sensing) was demonstrated to improve 
the handling of raw and in -process materials in food 
manufacturing. The project developed a multisensor device that 
can react in real time to variations in raw material and 
processing conditions to optimise the quality and safety of 
processed foods. For instance, one leg of the project focussed 
on reducing the risk of developing the toxic polar compound(s) 
such as acrylamid e in starchy foods (e.g. potato chips) during 
cooking by specifying the guidelines for frying time and 
temperature. A computer vision system was developed for on -
line inspection of potato chips and frying oil quality with 
industrial settings. The chips wer e classified according to 
colour, oil uptake, polar matter, and acrylamide levels using 
NIR and imaging sensors. The relevant datasets from the 
network of such sensors, the IoT, can be clustered to a cloud 
portal and mined to assist in regulating quality s tandards [93] 
within the industry 4.0 framework.  
The future of agri -food quality and authenticity looks bright 
under the influence of IoT and big data. Advancements in 
micro -fabrication and miniaturization of optical systems has led 
to the development of “palm -sized” or even “fingertip -sized” 
spectroscopic devices. Moreover, constant improvement in 
chemometrics has helped in extracting further relevant 
information from the acquired spectral data. Overall, UV -Vis-
NIRS based IoT, in collaborat ion with big data offers a valuable 
and robust quality and authenticity monitoring tool for the agri -
food sector.