> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 13 
 An example of the synergistic impression of genome 
sequencing and big data analytics on food safety is a 
collaboration between IBM Research and Mars, Inc., that 
focused on sequencing and constructing of a genomic database 
of bacterial species across global  supply chains (see Fig. 7 for 
a graphical summary). The main essence of this project is the 
building of a genetic index of normal bacterial species that are 
natural inhabitants of food ingredients and pairing them with 
genetic fingerprints of food ingredi ents and their environments 
to capture the anomalies. Using big -data methods and bio -
informatics algorithms, researchers constructed and aggregated 
terabytes of genomic data to identify the active genes and 
metabolic processes in the food ingredients. The index 
produced from this study will serve as a benchmark 
representing the normal microbial communities of food 
ingredients with geographical variations. This would facilitate 
the identification of genomic fingerprints of healthy food, equip 
food regulatory  officials with rapid and precise information to 
assess the irregularities in food samples that show the presence 
of spoilage/pathogenic bacteria and design the most appropriate 
tests and standard operating procedures. Presumably, this will 
also deliver cr itical understanding of anticipated causes of food  
spoilage/hazards that can be fixed at the point of incidence and 
allow appropriate strategies to be amended [108] . 
 Next Generation Sequence (NGS) is one of the lates t 
advancement in genome sequencing that is widely accepted in 
food microbiology world for outbreak investigations, food 
authenticity, and antimicrobial resistance  [109] . The new 
technique uses whole genome sequencing, metagenomics, and 
amplicon sequencing (metabarcoding). WGS will answer the 
phenotypic characteristic of growth and inactivat ion of an 
isolate; however, knowing that these phenotypic factors can 
vary at transcriptional and post -transcriptional level, multi -
omics approach may be the need of future to precisely 
characterize the pathogen isolates  [106] . 
 The vital challenge to implementation of WGS data analysis 
and potential opportunities to safeguard the food supply chain 
worldwide is the privacy of data among the leading companies. 
Not enough legal measures are in place to protect the companies 
from regulatory actions, putting reputation and e quity at stake, that ultimately insists companies to limit data sharing. Other 
challenges include correct interpretation of data, legal 
infrastructure, and data ownership  [106] . 
 Beyond genomic information, there are other equally 
important factors that can be used to establish the source of 
contaminati on. The combination of socio -environmental 
information and whole -genome sequencing of prevailing and 
historical isolates were used by Gardy, et al. [110]  to ascertain 
the point of origin of a tuberculosis outbreak. Although the 
collected data were not colossal (36 isolates), the variety of data 
was important which was amplified by social listening and 
networking with patients. Some investigators applied an 
interesting approach of proactive geospatial modelling to food 
logistics to recognize the traders involved in the dispersal of 
contaminated fo od [111] . The model encompassed the 
distribution network of traders, population density, locations, 
and consumer behaviour to predict the 
probability of food safety outbrea ks or 
recall. In another interesting investigation, 
the reviews of online restaurant customers 
[112]  were analysed for key words 
pertaining to ‘food poisoning’. The 
outcome of the study was related to the 
outbreak control database of Center for 
Disease Control and P revention. They 
concluded that this type of assessments 
could complement the traditional 
surveillance systems in providing real time 
outbreak information. The potential of IoT 
to augment food surveillance systems are 
up-lifting and acting synergistically w ith 
big data analytics as a rapid salvage to food 
safety outbreaks [113] . It is anticipated that 
IoT would be advantageous to implement 
a holistic approach in food safety where 
key drivers viz., climate change, economy, 
and human behaviour could be combined to envisage food 
safety risks.  
C. Traceability  
 The inability of the food regulatory agencies to identify the 
origin of contamination in foodborne outbreaks shatters the 
public tru st in the food supply chain significantly. As an 
example  during  the Spinach outbreak of 2006, it took two 
weeks to isolate the contaminant and ample resources were 
expended  [114] . Another recent instance includes the romaine 
lettuce outbreak of 2018 where all the lettuce was pulled off the 
shelves without knowing the origin of contamination. All 
lettuce was discarded due to inefficient back -tracing by the food 
regulatory agencies. The FDA issued a recall a fter 67 days since 
the first person reported sickness due to consumption of 
romaine lettuce [94] (See Fig. 8). The inability to trace products 
comes from inadequate record keeping methods in place such 
as the widely accepted “One Up, One Down – OUOD 
approach”. One can only hold responsible the immediate 
supplier and the immediate buyer up and down the supply 
chain, and in times of outbreak investigations, it takes days to 
connect the records and identify the source of contamination. 
This leads to degradation of consumer trust and results in 
significant setback to produce growers (such as spinach and 
Fig. 7. Process flow to build genetic index of food and its normal microbiome. Adapted from 
Beck, et al. (2019).