mask. In fact, instance segmentation can be viewed as a spe-
cial setting of object detection, where instead of localizing an
object by a bounding box, pixel-level localization is desired. In
this survey, we direct our attention to review the major efforts
in deep learning based object detection. A good detection al-
gorithm should have a strong understanding of semantic cues
as well as the spatial information about the image. In fact,
object detection is the basic step towards many computer vi-
sion applications, such as face recognition [5, 6, 7], pedestrian
detection [8, 9, 10], video analysis [11, 12], and logo detec-
tion [13, 14, 15].
In the early stages, before the deep learning era, the pipeline
of object detection was divided into three steps: i) proposal
generation; ii) feature vector extraction; and iii) region clas-
siﬁcation. During proposal generation, the objective was to
search locations in the image which may contain objects. These
locations are also called regions of interest (roi). An intu-
itive idea is to scan the whole image with sliding windows
[16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. In order to capture information about
multi-scale and different aspect ratios of objects, input images
were resized into different scales and multi-scale windows were
used to slide through these images. During the second step, on
each location of the image, a ﬁxed-length feature vector was
obtained from the sliding window, to capture discriminative se-
mantic information of the region covered. This feature vector
was commonly encoded by low-level visual descriptors such
as SIFT(Scale Invariant Feature Transform) [21], Haar [22],
HOG(Histogram of Gradients) [19] or SURF(Speeded Up Ro-
bust Features) [23], which showed a certain robustness to scale,
illumination and rotation variance. Finally, in the third step,
the region classiﬁers were learned to assign categorical la-
bels to the covered regions. Commonly, support vector ma-
chines(SVM) [24] were used here due to their good perfor-
mance on small scale training data. In addition, some classi-
ﬁcation techniques such as bagging [25], cascade learning [20]
and adaboost [26] were used in region classiﬁcation step, lead-
ing to further improvements in detection accuracy.
Most of the successful traditional methods for object de-tection focused on carefully designing feature descriptors to
obtain embedding for a region of interest. With the help of
good feature representations as well as robust region classi-
ﬁers, impressive results [27, 28] were achieved on Pascal VOC
dataset [29] (a publicly available dataset used for benchmark-
ing object detection). Notably, deformable part based machines
(DPMs) [30], a breakthrough detection algorithm, were 3-time
winners on VOC challenges in 2007, 2008 and 2009. DPMs
learn and integrate multiple part models with a deformable
loss and mine hard negative examples with a latent SVM for
discriminative training. However, during 2008 to 2012, the
progress on Pascal VOC based on these traditional methods had
become incremental, with minor gains from building compli-
cated ensemble systems. This showed the limitations of these
traditional detectors. Most prominently, these limitations in-
cluded: (i) during proposal generation, a huge number of pro-
posals were generated, and many of them were redundant; this
resulted in a large number of false positives during classiﬁca-
tion. Moreover, window scales were designed manually and
heuristically, and could not match the objects well; (ii) fea-
ture descriptors were hand-crafted based on low level visual
cues [31, 32, 23], which made it difﬁcult to capture repre-
sentative semantic information in complex contexts. (iii) each
step of the detection pipeline was designed and optimized sep-
arately, and thus could not obtain a global optimal solution for
the whole system.
After the success of applying deep convolutional neural net-
works(DCNN) for image classiﬁcation [33, 1], object detection
also achieved remarkable progress based on deep learning tech-
niques [34, 2]. The new deep learning based algorithms out-
performed the traditional detection algorithms by huge mar-
gins. Deep convolutional neural network is a biologically-
inspired structure for computing hierarchical features. An
early attempt to build such a hierarchical and spatial-invariant
model for image classiﬁcation was “neocognitron” [35] pro-
posed by Fukushima. However, this early attempt lacked ef-
fective optimization techniques for supervised learning. Based
on this model, Lecun et al. [36] optimized a convolutional neu-
2