3.5.2. Region Feature Encoding
For two-stage detectors, region feature encoding is a critical
step to extract features from proposals into ﬁxed length feature
vectors. In R-CNN, Girshick et al. [2] cropped region proposals
from the whole image and resized the cropped regions into ﬁxed
sized patches( 224224) via bilinear interpolation, followed
by a deep convolution feature extractor. Their method encoded
high resolution region features but the computation was expen-
sive.
Later Girshick et al. [38] and Ren [34] proposed ROI Pooling
layer to encode region features. ROI Pooling divided each re-
gion intonncells (e.g. 77by default) and only the neuron
with the maximum signal would go ahead in the feedforward
stage. This is similar to max-pooling, but across (potentially)
different sized regions. ROI Pooling extracted features from
the down-sampled feature map and as a result struggled to han-
dle small objects. Dai [59] proposed ROI Warping layer which
encoded region features via bilinear interpolation. Due to the
downsampling operation in DCNN, there can be a misalign-
ment of the object position in the original image and the down-
sampled feature maps, which RoI Pooling and RoI Warping lay-
ers are not able to handle. Instead of quantizing grids border as
ROI Warping and ROI Pooling do, He et al. [3] proposed ROI
Align layer which addressed the quantization issue by bilinear
interpolation at fractionally sampled positions within each grid.
Based on ROI Align, Jiang et al. [123] presented Precise ROI
Pooing (PrROI Pooling), which avoided any quantization of co-
ordinates and had a continuous gradient on bounding box coor-
dinates.
In order to enhance spatial information of the downsampled
region features, Dai et al. [52] proposed Position Sensitive ROI
Pooing (PSROI Pooling) which kept relative spatial information
of downsampled features. Each channel of generated region
feature map only corresponded to a subset channels of input re-
gion according to its relative spatial position. Based on PSROI
Pooling, Zhai et al. [124] presented feature selective networks
to learn robust region features by exploiting disparities among
sub-region and aspect ratios. The proposed network encodedsub-region and aspect ratio information which were selectively
pooled to reﬁne initial region features by a light-weight head.
Later, more algorithms were proposed to well encode region
features from different viewpoints. Zhu et al. proposed Cou-
pleNet [125] which extracted region features by combining out-
puts generated from both ROI Pooling layer and PSROI Pool-
ing layer. ROI Pooling layer extracted global region informa-
tion but struggled for objects with high occlusion while PSROI
Pooling layer focused more on local information. CoupleNet
enhanced features generated from ROI Pooling and PSROI
Pooling by element-wise summation and generated more pow-
erful features. Later Dai et al. proposed Deformable ROI Pool-
ing [97] which generalized aligned RoI pooling by learning an
offset for each grid and adding it to the grid center. The sub-grid
start with a regular ROI Pooling layer to extract initial region
features and the extracted features were used to regress offset
by an auxiliary network. Deformable ROI Pooling can auto-
matically model the image content without being constrained
by ﬁxed receptive ﬁelds.
3.5.3. Contextual Reasoning
Contextual information plays an important role in object de-
tection. Objects often tend to appear in speciﬁc environments
and sometimes also coexist with other objects. For each ex-
ample, birds commonly ﬂy in the sky. Effectively using con-
textual information can help improve detection performance,
especially for detecting objects with insufﬁcient cues(small ob-
ject, occlusion etc.) Learning the relationship between objects
with their surrounding context can improve detector’s ability to
understand the scenario. For traditional object detection algo-
rithms, there have been several efforts exploring context [126],
but for object detection based on deep learning, context has not
been extensively explored. This is because convolutional net-
works implicitly already capture contextual information from
hierarchical feature representations. However, some recent ef-
forts [1, 127, 128, 129, 3, 59, 3, 130, 131, 106] still try to
exploit contextual information. Some works [132] have even
shown that in some cases context information may even harm
the detection performance. In this section we review contextual
18