which helps improve learning speed and reduce false positives.
However, R-CNN faces some critical shortcomings: i) the
features of each proposal were extracted by deep convolutional
networks separately (i.e., computation was not shared), which
led to heavily duplicated computations. Thus, R-CNN was ex-
tremely time-consuming for training and testing; ii) the three
steps of R-CNN (proposal generation, feature extraction and
region classiﬁcation) were independent components and the
whole detection framework could not be optimized in an end-
to-end manner, making it difﬁcult to obtain global optimal so-
lution; and iii) Selective Search relied on low-level visual cues
and thus struggled to generate high quality proposals in com-
plex contexts. Moreover, it is unable to enjoy the beneﬁts of
GPU acceleration.
Inspired by the idea of spatial pyramid matching (SPM) [46],
He et al. proposed SPP-net [47] to accelerate R-CNN as well
as learn more discriminative features. Instead of cropping pro-
posal regions and feeding into CNN model separately, SPP-net
computes the feature map from the whole image using a deep
convolutional network and extracts ﬁxed-length feature vectors
on the feature map by a Spatial Pyramid Pooling (SPP) layer.
SPP partitions the feature map into an NNgrid, for multiple
values ofN(thus allowing obtaining information at different
scales), and performs pooling on each cell of the grid, to give a
feature vector. The feature vectors obtained from each NN
grid are concatenated to give the representation for the region.
The extracted features are fed into region SVM classiﬁers and
bounding box regressors. In contrast to RCNN, SPP-layer can
also work on images/regions at various scales and aspect ratios
without resizing them. Thus, it does not suffer from informa-
tion loss and unwanted geometric distortion.
SPP-net achieved better results and had a signiﬁcantly faster
inference speed compared to R-CNN. However, the training of
SPP-net was still multi-stage and thus it could not be optimized
end-to-end (and required extra cache memory to store extracted
features). In addition, SPP layer did not back-propagate gra-
dients to convolutional kernels and thus all the parameters be-
fore the SPP layer were frozen. This signiﬁcantly limited thelearning capability of deep backbone architectures. Girshick et
al. proposed Fast R-CNN [38], a multi-task learning detector
which addressed these two limitations of SPP-net. Fast R-CNN
(like SPP-Net) also computed a feature map for the whole im-
age and extracted ﬁxed-length region features on the feature
map. Different from SPP-net, Fast R-CNN used ROI Pooling
layer to extract region features. ROI pooling layer is a special
case of SPP which only takes a single scale (i.e., only one value
ofNfor theNNgrid) to partition the proposal into ﬁxed
number of divisions, and also backpropagated error signals to
the convolution kernels. After feature extraction, feature vec-
tors were fed into a sequence of fully connected layers before
two sibling output layers: classiﬁcation layer(cls) and regres-
sion layer(reg). Classiﬁcation layer was responsible for gen-
erating softmax probabilities over C+1 classes(C classes plus
one background class), while regression layer encoded 4 real-
valued parameters to reﬁne bounding boxes. In Fast RCNN,
the feature extraction, region classiﬁcation and bounding box
regression steps can all be optimized end-to-end, without extra
cache space to store features (unlike SPP Net). Fast R-CNN
achieved a much better detection accuracy than R-CNN and
SPP-net, and had a better training and inference speed.
Despite the progress in learning detectors, the proposal gen-
eration step still relied on traditional methods such as Selec-
tive Search [45] or Edge Boxes [48], which were based on low-
level visual cues and could not be learned in a data-driven man-
ner. To address this issue, Faster R-CNN [34] was developed
which relied on a novel proposal generator: Region Proposal
Network(RPN). This proposal generator could be learned via
supervised learning methods. RPN is a fully convolutional net-
work which takes an image of arbitrary size and generates a set
of object proposals on each position of the feature map. The
network slid over the feature map using an nnsliding win-
dow, and generated a feature vector for each position. The fea-
ture vector was then fed into two sibling output branches, ob-
ject classiﬁcation layer (which classiﬁed whether the proposal
was an object or not) and bounding box regression layer. These
results were then fed into the ﬁnal layer for the actual object
7