tion we review several works on accelerating detectors. Two-
stage detectors are usually slower than one-stage detectors be-
cause they have two stages - one proposal generation and one
region classiﬁcation, which makes them computationally more
time consuming than one-stage detectors which directly use one
network for both proposal generation and region classiﬁcation.
R-FCN [52] built spatially-sensitive feature maps and extracted
features with position sensitive ROI Pooling to share compu-
tation costs. However, the number of channels of spatially-
sensitive feature maps signiﬁcantly increased with the number
of categories. Li et al. [168] proposed a new framework Light
Head R-CNN which signiﬁcantly reduced the number of chan-
nels in the ﬁnal feature map (from 1024 to 16) instead of shar-
ing all computation. Thus, though computation was not shared
across regions, but the cost could be neglected.
From the aspect of backbone architecture, a major compu-
tation cost in object detection is feature extraction [34]. A
simple idea to accelerate detection speed is to replace the de-
tection backbone with a more efﬁcient backbone, e.g., Mo-
bileNet [74, 169] was an efﬁcient CNN model with depth-wise
convolution layers which was also adopted into many works
such as [170] and [171]. PV ANet [104] was proposed as a
new network structure with CReLu [172] layer to reduce non-
linear computation and accelerated inference speed. Another
approach is to optimize models off-line, such as model com-
pression and quantization [173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179]
on the learned models. Finally, NVIDIA Corporation1released
an acceleration toolkit TensorRT2which optimized the compu-
tation of learned models for deployment and thus signiﬁcantly
sped up the inference.
4.2.3. Others
Other learning strategies in testing stage mainly comprise the
transformation of input image to improve the detection accu-
racy. Image pyramids [1, 92] are a widely used technique to
improve detection results, which build a hierarchical image set
1https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
2https://developer.nvidia.com/tensorrtat different scales and make predictions on all of these images.
The ﬁnal detection results are merged from the predictions of
each image. Zhang et al. [87, 92] used a more extensive im-
age pyramid structure to handle different scale objects. They
resized the testing image to different scales and each scale was
responsible for a certain scale range of objects. Horizontal Flip-
ping [3, 92] was also used in the testing stage and also showed
improvement. These learning strategies largely improved the
the capability of detector to handle different scale objects and
thus were widely used in public detection competitions. How-
ever, they also increase computation cost and thus were not suit-
able for real world applications.
5. Applications
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task and
there are many real world applications based on this task. Dif-
ferent from generic object detection, these real world applica-
tions commonly have their own speciﬁc properties and thus
carefully-designed detection algorithms are required. In this
section, we will introduce several real world applications such
as face detection and pedestrian detection.
5.1. Face Detection
Face detection is a classical computer vision problem to de-
tect human faces in the images, which is often the ﬁrst step
towards many real-world applications with human beings, such
as face veriﬁcation, face alignment and face recognition. There
are some critical differences between face detection and generic
detection: i) the range of scale for objects in face detection is
much larger than objects in generic detection. Moreover occlu-
sion and blurred cases are more common in face detection; ii)
Face objects contain strong structural information, and there is
only one target category in face detection. Considering these
properties of face detection, directly applying generic detection
algorithms is not an optimal solution as there could be some
priors that can exploited to improve face detection.
In early stages of research before the deep learning era,
face detection [20, 180, 181, 182] was mainly based on slid-
25