Recent Advances in Deep Learning for Object Detection
Xiongwei Wua,, Doyen Sahooa, Steven C.H. Hoia,b
aSchool of Information System, Singapore Management University
bSalesforce Research Asia
Abstract
Object detection is a fundamental visual recognition problem in computer vision and has been widely studied in the past decades.
Visual object detection aims to ﬁnd objects of certain target classes with precise localization in a given image and assign each
object instance a corresponding class label. Due to the tremendous successes of deep learning based image classiﬁcation, object
detection techniques using deep learning have been actively studied in recent years. In this paper, we give a comprehensive survey
of recent advances in visual object detection with deep learning. By reviewing a large body of recent related work in literature,
we systematically analyze the existing object detection frameworks and organize the survey into three major parts: (i) detection
components, (ii) learning strategies, and (iii) applications & benchmarks. In the survey, we cover a variety of factors affecting
the detection performance in detail, such as detector architectures, feature learning, proposal generation, sampling strategies, etc.
Finally, we discuss several future directions to facilitate and spur future research for visual object detection with deep learning.
Keywords: Object Detection, Deep Learning, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
1. Introduction
In the ﬁeld of computer vision, there are several fundamen-
tal visual recognition problems: image classiﬁcation [1], object
detection and instance segmentation [2, 3], and semantic seg-
mentation [4] (see Fig. 1). In particular, image classiﬁcation
(Fig 1.1(a)), aims to recognize semantic categories of objects in
a given image. Object detection not only recognizes object cat-
egories, but also predicts the location of each object by a bound-
ing box (Fig. 1(b)). Semantic segmentation (Fig. 1(c)) aims to
predict pixel-wise classiﬁers to assign a speciﬁc category label
to each pixel, thus providing an even richer understanding of an
image. However, in contrast to object detection, semantic seg-
mentation does not distinguish between multiple objects of the
same category. A relatively new setting at the intersection of
object detection and semantic segmentation, named “instance
Corresponding author
Email addresses: xwwu.2015@phdis.smu.edu.sg (Xiongwei Wu),
doyens.smu.edu.sg (Doyen Sahoo), chhoi@smu.edu.sg (Steven
C.H. Hoi)
(a) Image Classiﬁcation
 (b) Object Detection
(c) Semantic Segmentation
 (d) Instance Segmentation
Figure 1: Comparison of different visual recognition tasks in computer vision.
(a) “Image Classiﬁcation” only needs to assign categorical class labels to the
image; (b) “Object detection” not only predict categorical labels but also lo-
calize each object instance via bounding boxes; (c) “Semantic segmentation”
aims to predict categorical labels for each pixel, without differentiating object
instances; (d) “Instance segmentation”, a special setting of object detection,
differentiates different object instances by pixel-level segmentation masks.
segmentation” (Fig. 1(d)), is proposed to identify different ob-
jects and assign each of them a separate categorical pixel-level
Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 13, 2019arXiv:1908.03673v1  [cs.CV]  10 Aug 2019