classiﬁcation and bounding box localization. RPN could be in-
serted into Fast R-CNN and thus the whole framework could be
optimized in an end-to-end manner on training data. This way
RPN enabled proposal generation in a data driven manner, and
was also able to enjoy the discriminative power of deep back-
bone networks. Faster R-CNN was able to make predictions
at 5FPS on GPU and achieved state-of-the-art results on many
public benchmark datasets, such as Pascal VOC 2007, 2012 and
MSCOCO. Currently, there are huge number of detector vari-
ants based on Faster R-CNN for different usage [49, 39, 50, 51].
Faster R-CNN computed feature map of the input image and
extracted region features on the feature map, which shared fea-
ture extraction computation across different regions. However,
the computation was not shared in the region classiﬁcation step,
where each feature vector still needed to go through a sequence
of FC layers separately. Such extra computation could be ex-
tremely large as each image may have hundreds of proposals.
Simply removing the fully connected layers would result in
the drastic decline of detection performance, as the deep net-
work would have reduced the spatial information of propos-
als. Dai et al. [52] proposed Region-based Fully Convolutional
Networks ( R-FCN ) which shared the computation cost in the
region classiﬁcation step. R-FCN generated a Position Sen-
sitive Score Map which encoded relative position information
of different classes, and used a Position Sensitive ROI Pooling
layer (PSROI Pooling) to extract spatial-aware region features
by encoding each relative position of the target regions. The ex-
tracted feature vectors maintained spatial information and thus
the detector achieved competitive results compared to Faster R-
CNN without region-wise fully connected layer operations.
Another issue with Faster R-CNN was that it used a sin-
gle deep layer feature map to make the ﬁnal prediction. This
made it difﬁcult to detect objects at different scales. In partic-
ular, it was difﬁcult to detect small objects. In DCNN feature
representations, deep layer features are semantically-strong but
spatially-weak, while shallow layer features are semantically-
weak but spatially-strong. Lin et al. [39] exploited this property
and proposed Feature Pyramid Networks( FPN ) which com-bined deep layer features with shallow layer features to enable
object detection in feature maps at different scales. The main
idea was to strengthen the spatially strong shallow layer fea-
tures with rich semantic information from the deeper layers.
FPN achieved signiﬁcant progress in detecting multi-scale ob-
jects and has been widely used in many other domains such as
video detection [53, 54] and human pose recognition [55, 56].
Most instance segmentation algorithms are extended from
vanilla object detection algorithms. Early methods [57, 58, 59]
commonly generated segment proposals, followed by Fast
RCNN for segments classiﬁcation. Later, Dai et al. [59] pro-
posed a multi-stage algorithm named “MNC” which divided the
whole detection framework into multiple stages and predicted
segmentation masks from the learned bounding box propos-
als, which were later categorized by region classiﬁers. These
early works performed bbox and mask prediction in multiple
stages. To make the whole process more ﬂexible, He et al. [3]
proposed Mask R-CNN , which predicted bounding boxes and
segmentation masks in parallel based on the proposals and re-
ported state-of-the-art results. Based on Mask R-CNN, Huang
et al. [60] proposed a mask-quality aware framework, named
Mask Scoring R-CNN, which learned the quality of the pre-
dicted masks and calibrated the misalignment between mask
quality and mask conﬁdence score.
Figure 4 gives an overview of the detection frameworks for
several representative two-stage detectors.
3.2.2. One-stage Detectors
Different from two-stage detection algorithms which divide
the detection pipeline into two parts: proposal generation and
region classiﬁcation; one-stage detectors do not have a sepa-
rate stage for proposal generation (or learning a proposal gen-
eration). They typically consider all positions on the image as
potential objects, and try to classify each region of interest as
either background or a target object.
One of the early successful one-stage detectors based on deep
learning was developed by Sermanet et al. [61] named Over-
Feat. OverFeat performed object detection by casting DCNN
8