shown effectiveness in many domains and have also found ap-
plications in object detection. Li et al. [158] proposed a new
framework Perceptual GAN for small object detection. The
learnable generator learned high-resolution feature representa-
tions of small objects via an adversarial scheme. Speciﬁcally,
its generator learned to transfer low-resolution small region fea-
tures into high-resolution features and competed with the dis-
criminator which identiﬁed real high-resolution features. Fi-
nally the generator learned to generate high quality features
for small objects. Wang et al. [159] proposed A-Fast-R-CNN
which was trained by generated adversarial examples. They ar-
gued the difﬁcult samples were on long tail so they introduced
two novel blocks which automatically generated features with
occlusion and deformation. Speciﬁcally, a learned mask was
generated on region features followed by region classiﬁers. In
this case, the detectors could receive more adversarial examples
and thus become more robust.
Training from Scratch. Modern object detectors heavily
rely on pre-trained classiﬁcation models on ImageNet, how-
ever, the bias of loss functions and data distribution between
classiﬁcation and detection can have an adversarial impact on
the performance. Finetuning on detection task can relieve this
issue, but cannot fully get rid of the bias. Besides, transferring
a classiﬁcation model for detection in a new domain can lead
to more challenges (from RGB to MRI data etc.). Due to these
reasons, there is a need to train detectors from scratch, instead
of relying on pretrained models. The main difﬁculty of train-
ing detectors from scratch is the training data of object detec-
tion is often insufﬁcient and may lead to overﬁtting. Different
from image classiﬁcation, object detection requires bounding
box level annotations and thus, annotating a large scale detec-
tion dataset requires much more effort and time(ImageNet has
1000 categories for image classiﬁcation while only 200 of them
have detection annotations).
There are some works [107, 160, 161] exploring training ob-
ject detectors from scratch. Shen et al. [107] ﬁrst proposed
a novel framework DSOD (Deeply Supervised Object Detec-
tors) to train detectors from scratch. They argued deep super-vision with a densely connected network structure could sig-
niﬁcantly reduce optimization difﬁculties. Based on DSOD,
Shen et al. [162] proposed a gated recurrent feature pyramid
which dynamically adjusted supervision intensities of interme-
diate layers for objects with different scales. They deﬁned a
recurrent feature pyramid structure to squeeze both spatial and
semantic information into a single prediction layer, which fur-
ther reduced parameter numbers leading to faster convergence.
In addition, the gate-control structure on feature pyramids adap-
tively adjusted the supervision at different scales based on the
size of objects. Their method was more powerful than original
DSOD. However, later He et al. [160] validated the difﬁculty
of training detectors from scratch on MSCOCO and found that
the vanilla detectors could obtain a competitive performance
with at least 10K annotated images. Their ﬁndings proved no
speciﬁc structure was required for training from scratch which
contradicted the previous work.
Knowledge Distillation. Knowledge distillation is a training
strategy which distills the knowledge in an ensemble of models
into a single model via teacher-student training scheme. This
learning strategy was ﬁrst used in image classiﬁcation [163].
In object detection, some works [164, 132] also investigate
this training scheme to improve detection performance. Li et
al. [164] proposed a light weight detector whose optimization
was carefully guided by a heavy but powerful detector. This
light detector could achieve comparable detection accuracy by
distilling knowledge from the heavy one, meanwhile having
faster inference speed. Cheng et al. [132] proposed a Faster R-
CNN based detector which was optimized via teacher-student
training scheme. An R-CNN model is used as teacher net-
work to guide the training process. Their framework showed
improvement in detection accuracy compared with traditional
single model optimization strategy.
4.2. Testing Stage
Object detection algorithms make a dense set of predictions
and thus these predictions cannot be directly used for evalua-
tion due to heavy duplication. In addition, some other learning
23