plied bootstrapping strategy for mining hard negative samples
and achieved better performance. Also to reduce the impact
of large variance in scales, Li et al. [8] proposed Scale-aware
Fast R-CNN (SAF RCNN) which inserted multiple built-in net-
works into the whole detection framework. The proposed SAF
RCNN detected different scale pedestrian instances using dif-
ferent sub-net. Further, Yang et al. [100] inserted Scale Depen-
dent Pooling (SDP) and Cascaded Rejection Classiﬁers (CRC)
into Fast RCNN to handle pedestrian scale issue. According
to the height of the instances, SDP extracted region features
from suitable scale feature maps, while CRC rejected easy neg-
ative samples in shallower layers. Wang et al. [213] proposed
a novel Repulsion Loss to detect pedestrians in a crowd. They
argued that detecting a pedestrian in a crowd made it very sen-
sitive to the NMS threshold, which led to more false positives
and missing objects. The new proposed repulsion loss pushed
the proposals into their target objects but also pulled them away
from other objects and their target proposals. Based on their
idea, Zhang et al. [214] proposed an Occlusion-aware R-CNN
(OR-CNN) which was optimized by Aggression Loss. The new
loss function encouraged the proposals to be close to the objects
and other proposals with the same targeted proposals. Mao et
al. [215] claimed that properly aggregating extra features into
pedestrian detector can boost detection accuracy. In their pa-
per, they explored different kinds of extra features useful in im-
proving accuracy and proposed a new method to use these fea-
tures. The new proposed component HyperLearner aggregated
extra features into vanilla DCNN detector via jointly optimiza-
tion fashion and no extra input was required in inference stage.
For pedestrian detection, one of the most signiﬁcant chal-
lenges is to handle occlusion [216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221,
222, 223, 224, 225, 214, 226]. A straightforward method is
to use part-based models which learn a series of part detectors
and integrate the results of part detectors to locate and clas-
sify objects. Tian et al. [216] proposed DeepParts which con-
sisted of multiple parts detectors. During training, the impor-
tant body parts were automatically selected from a part pool
covered all scale parts of the body, and for each selected part,a detector was learned to handle occlusions. To avoid integrate
inaccurate scores of part models, Ouyang and Wang [223] pro-
posed a framework which modeled visible parts as hidden vari-
ables in training the models. In their paper, the visible rela-
tionship of overlapping parts were learned by a discriminative
deep models, instead of being manually deﬁned or even being
assumed independent. Later, Ouyang et al. [225] addressed
this issue from another aspect. They proposed a mixture net-
work to capture unique visual information which was formed by
crowded pedestrians. To enhance the ﬁnal predictions of single-
pedestrian detectors, a probabilistic framework was learned to
model the relationship between the conﬁgurations estimated by
single- and multi-pedestrian detectors. Zhang et al. [214] pro-
posed an occlusion-aware ROI Pooling layer which integrated
the prior structure information of pedestrian with visibility pre-
diction into the ﬁnal feature representations. The original re-
gion was divided into ﬁve parts and for each part a sub-network
enhanced the original region feature via a learned visibility
score for better representations. Zhou et al. [222] proposed
Bi-box which simultaneously estimated pedestrian detection as
well as visible parts by regressing two bounding boxes, one for
the full body and the other for visible part. In addition, a new
positive-instance sampling criterion was proposed to bias pos-
itive training examples with large visible area, which showed
effectiveness in training occlusion-aware detectors.
5.3. Others
There are some other real applications with object detection
techniques, such as logo detection and video object detection.
Logo detection is an important research topic in e-commerce
systems. Compared to generic detection, logo instance is much
smaller with strong non-rigid transformation. Further, there are
few logo detection baselines available. To address this issue, Su
et al. [15] adopted the learning principle of webly data learning
which automatically mined information from noisy web images
and learns models with limited annotated data. Su et al. [14]
described an image synthesising method to successfully learn a
detector with limited logo instances. Hoi et al. [13] collected a
28