new constructed features contain rich information and thus can
detect objects at different scales. These combinations are com-
monly achieved by using skip connections [1]. Feature nor-
malization is required as feature norms of different layers have
a high variance. Bell et al. proposed Inside-Outside Network
(ION) [51] which cropped region features from different lay-
ers via ROI Pooling [38], and combined these multi-scale re-
gion features for the ﬁnal prediction. Kong et. al. proposed
HyperNet [50] which adopted a similar idea as IoN. They care-
fully designed high resolution hyper feature maps by integrat-
ing intermediate and shallow layer features to generate pro-
posals and detect objects. Deconvolutional layers were used
to up-sample deep layer feature maps and batch normaliza-
tion layers were used to normalize input blobs in their work.
The constructed hyper feature maps could also implicitly en-
code contextual information from different layers. Inspired
by ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation algorithms which integrate high-
order representation instead of exploiting simple ﬁrst-order rep-
resentations of object proposals, Wang et al. proposed a novel
framework Multi-scale Location-aware Kernel Representation
(MLKP) [103] which captured high-order statistics of proposal
features and generated more discriminative feature representa-
tions efﬁciently. The combined feature representation was more
descriptive and provides both semantic and spatial information
for both classiﬁcation and localization.
Prediction Pyramid : Liu et al.’s SSD [42] combined coarse
and ﬁne features from multiple layers together. In SSD, pre-
dictions were made from multiple layers, where each layer
was responsible for a certain scale of objects. Later, many ef-
forts [106, 107, 108] followed this principle to detect multi-
scale objects. Yang et al. [100] also exploited appropriate fea-
ture maps to generate certain scale of object proposals and these
feature maps were fed into multiple scale-dependent classiﬁers
to predict objects. In their work, cascaded rejection classiﬁers
were learned to reject easy background proposals in early stages
to accelerate detection speed. Multi-scale Deep Convolutional
Neural Network (MSCNN) [106] applied deconvolutional lay-
ers on multiple feature maps to improve their resolutions, andlater these reﬁned feature maps were used to make predic-
tions. Liu et al. proposed a Receptive Field Block Net (RF-
BNet) [108] to enhance the robustness and receptive ﬁelds via
a receptive ﬁeld block (RFB block). RFB block adopted simi-
lar ideas as the inception module [75] which captured features
from multiple scale and receptive ﬁelds via multiple branches
with different convolution kernels and ﬁnally merged them to-
gether.
Feature Pyramid : To combine the advantage of Integrated
Features and Prediction Pyramid, Lin et al. proposed Fea-
ture Pyramid Network(FPN) [39] which integrated different
scale features with lateral connections in a top-down fashion
to build a set of scale invariant feature maps, and multiple
scale-dependent classiﬁers were learned on these feature pyra-
mids. Speciﬁcally, the deep semantic-rich features were used to
strengthen the shallow spatially-rich features. These top-down
and lateral features were combined by element-wise summation
or concatenation, with small convolutions reducing the dimen-
sions. FPN showed signiﬁcant improvement in object detec-
tion, as well as other applications, and achieved state-of-the art
results in learning multi-scale features. Many variants of FPN
were later developed [109, 110, 109, 111, 112, 92, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 119], with modiﬁcations to the feature pyra-
mid block (see Fig. 8). Kong et al. [120] and Zhang et. al. [92]
built scale invariant feature maps with lateral connections. Dif-
ferent from FPN which generated region proposals followed by
categorical classiﬁers, their methods omitted proposal gener-
ation and thus were more efﬁcient than original FPN. Ren et
al. [109] and Jeong et al. [110] developed a novel structure
which gradually and selectively encoded contextual informa-
tion between different layer features. Inspired by super resolu-
tion tasks [121, 122], Zhou et al. [111] developed high resolu-
tion feature maps using a novel transform block which explic-
itly explored the inter-scale consistency nature across multiple
detection scales.
17