ﬁelds. In addition, DetNet detected objects on multi-scale fea-
ture maps, which provided richer information. DetNet was pre-
trained on large scale classiﬁcation dataset while the network
structure was designed for detection.
Hourglass Network [79] is another architecture, which was
not designed speciﬁcally for image classiﬁcation. Hourglass
Network ﬁrst appeared in human pose recognition task [79],
and was a fully convolutional structure with a sequence of hour-
glass modules. Hourglass module ﬁrst downsampled the input
image via a sequence of convolutional layer or pooling layer,
and upsampled the feature map via deconvolutional operation.
To avoid information loss in downsampling stage, skip con-
nection were used between downsampling and upsampling fea-
tures. Hourglass module could capture both local and global
information and thus was very suitable for object detection.
Currently Hourglass Network is widely used in state-of-the-art
detection frameworks [63, 64, 65].
3.4. Proposal Generation
Proposal generation plays a very important role in the object
detection framework. A proposal generator generates a set of
rectangle bounding boxes, which are potentially objects. These
proposals are then used for classiﬁcation and localization re-
ﬁnement. We categorize proposal generation methods into four
categories: traditional computer vision methods, anchor-based
supervised learning methods, keypoint based methods and other
methods. Notably, both one-stage detectors and two-stage de-
tectors generate proposals, the main difference is two-stage de-
tectors generates a sparse set of proposals with only foreground
or background information, while one-stage detectors consider
each region in the image as a potential proposal, and accord-
ingly estimates the class and bounding box coordinates of po-
tential objects at each location.
3.4.1. Traditional Computer Vision Methods
These methods generate proposals in images using tradi-
tional computer vision methods based on low-level cues, such
as edges, corners, color, etc. These techniques can be catego-
rized into three principles: i) computing the ’objectness score’of a candidate box; ii) merging super-pixels from original im-
ages; iii) generating multiple foreground and background seg-
ments;
Objectness Score based methods predict an objectness score
of each candidate box measuring how likely it may contain an
object. Arbelaez et al. [80] assigned objectness score to propos-
als by classiﬁcation based on visual cues such as color contrast,
edge density and saliency. Rahtu et al.[81] revisited the idea of
Arbelaez et al. [80] and introduced a more efﬁcient cascaded
learning method to rank the objectness score of candidate pro-
posals.
Superpixels Merging is based on merging superpixels gen-
erated from segmentation results. Selective Search [45] was a
proposal generation algorithm based on merging super-pixels.
It computed the multiple hierarchical segments generated by
segmentation method [82], which were merged according to
their visual factors(color, areas, etc.), and ﬁnally bounding
boxes were placed on the merged segments. Manen et al. [83]
proposed a similar idea to merge superpixels. The difference
was that the weight of the merging function was learned and the
merging process was randomized. Selective Search is widely
used in many detection frameworks due to its efﬁciency and
high recall compared to other traditional methods.
Seed Segmentation starts with multiple seed regions, and for
each seed, foreground and background segments are generated.
To avoid building up hierarchical segmentation, CPMC [84]
generated a set of overlapping segments initialized with di-
verse seeds. Each proposal segment was the solution of a bi-
nary(foreground or background) segmentation problem. Enreds
and Hoiem [85] combined the idea of Selective Search [45] and
CPMC [84]. It started with super-pixels and merged them with
new designed features. These merged segments were used as
seeds to generate larger segments, which was similar to CPMC.
However, producing high quality segmentation masks is very
time-consuming and it’s not applicable to large scale datasets.
The primary advantage of these traditional computer vision
methods is that they are very simple and can generate propos-
als with high recall (e.g. on medium scale datasets such as
13