strategies are required to further improve the detection accu-
racy. These strategies improve the quality of prediction or ac-
celerate the inference speed. In this section, we introduce these
strategies in testing stage including duplicate removal, model
acceleration and other effective techniques.
4.2.1. Duplicate Removal
Non maximum suppression(NMS) is an integral part of ob-
ject detection to remove duplicate false positive predictions
(See Figure 10). Object detection algorithms make a dense set
of predictions with several duplicate predictions. For one-stage
detection algorithms which generate a dense set of candidate
proposals such as SSD [42] or DSSD (Deconvolutional Single
Shot Detector) [112], the proposals surrounding the same object
may have similar conﬁdence scores, leading to false positives.
For two-stage detection algorithms which generates a sparse set
of proposals, the bounding box regressors will pull these pro-
posals close to the same object and thus lead to the same prob-
lem. The duplicate predictions are regarded as false positives
and will receive penalties in evaluation, so NMS is needed to
remove these duplicate predictions. Speciﬁcally, for each cat-
egory, the prediction boxes are sorted according to the conﬁ-
dence score and the box with highest score is selected. This box
is denoted as M. Then IoU of other boxes with Mis calculated,
and if the IoU value is larger than a predeﬁned threshold 
test,
these boxes will are removed. This process is repeated for all
remaining predictions. More formally, the conﬁdence score of
boxBwhich overlaps with Mlarger than 
testwill be set to
zero:
ScoreB=8
<
:ScoreBIoU(B;M )<
test
0 IoU(B;M )
test(13)
However, if an object just lies within 
testofM, NMS will
result in a missing prediction, and this scenario is very common
in clustered object detection. Navaneeth et al. [165] introduced
a new algorithm Soft-NMS to address this issue. Instead of
directly eliminating the prediction B, Soft-NMS decayed the
conﬁdence score of Bas a continuous function F(Fcan be
NMS
Confidence. Score: 0.5 Confidence. Score: 0.9
Confidence. Score: 0.6 Confidence. Score: 0.7Figure 10: Duplicate predictions are eliminated by NMS operation. The most-
conﬁdent box is kept, and all other boxes surrounding it will be removed.
linear function or guassian function) of its overlaps with M.
This is given by:
ScoreB=8
<
:ScoreB IoU(B;M )<
test
F(IoU(B;M ))IoU(B;M )
test(14)
Soft-NMS avoided eliminating prediction of clustered ob-
jects and showed improvement in many common benchmarks.
Hosong et al.[166] introduced a network architecture designed
to perform NMS based on conﬁdence scores and bounding
boxes, which was optimized separately from detector training
in a supervised way. They argued the reason for duplicate pre-
dictions was that the detector deliberately encouraged multiple
high score detections per object instead of rewarding one high
score. Based on this, they designed the network following two
motivations: (i) a loss penalizing double detections to push de-
tectors to predict exactly one precise detection per object; (ii)
joint processing of detections nearby to give the detector infor-
mation whether an object is detected more than once. The new
proposed model did not discard detections but instead reformu-
lated NMS as a re-scoring task that sought to decrease the score
of detections that cover objects that already have been detected.
4.2.2. Model Acceleration
Application of object detection for real world application re-
quires the algorithms to function in an efﬁcient manner. Thus,
evaluating detectors on efﬁciency metrics is important. Al-
though current state-of-the-art algorithms [167, 1] can achieve
very strong results on public datasets, their inference speeds
make it difﬁcult to apply them into real applications. In this sec-
24