Feature Map For Prediction3x3conv, ReLUFeature Vectorreg layer clslayer2*K scores 4*K offsets
….
K anchors…...
Figure 6: Diagram of RPN [34]. Each position of the feature map connects
with a sliding windows, followed with two sibling branches.
3.4.3. Keypoints-based Methods
Another proposal generation approach is based on keypoint
detection, which can be divided into two families: corner-based
methods and center-based methods. Corner-based methods
predict bounding boxes by merging pairs of corners learned
from the feature map. Denet [94] reformulated the object detec-
tion problem in a probabilistic way. For each point on the fea-
ture map, Denet modeled the distribution of being one of the 4
corner types of objects (top-left, top-right, bottom-left, bottom-
right), and applied a naive bayesian classiﬁers over each cor-
ner of the objects to estimate the conﬁdence score of a bound-
ing box. This corner-based algorithm eliminated the design of
anchors and became a more effective method to produce high
quality proposals. Later based on Denet, Law and Deng pro-
posed CornerNet [63] which directly modeled categorical infor-
mation on corners. CornerNet modeled information of top-left
and bottom-right corners with novel feature embedding meth-
ods and corner pooling layer to correctly match keypoints be-
longing to the same objects, obtaining state-of-the-art results on
public benchmarks. For center-based methods , the probability
of being the center of the objects is predicted on each position
of the feature map, and the height and width are directly re-
gressed without any anchor priors. Zhu et al. [95] presented a
feature-selection-anchor-free (FSAF) framework which could
be plugged into one-stage detectors with FPN structure. In
FSAF, an online feature selection block is applied to train multi-level center-based branches attached in each level of the feature
pyramid. During training, FSAF dynamically assigned each ob-
ject to the most suitable feature level to train the center-based
branch. Similar to FSAF, Zhou et al. proposed a new center-
based framework [64] based on a single Hourglass network [63]
without FPN structure. Furthermore, they applied center-based
method into higher-level problems such as 3D-detection and
human pose recognition, and all achieved state-of-the-art re-
sults. Duan et al. [65] proposed CenterNet, which combined the
idea of center-based methods and corner-based methods. Cen-
terNet ﬁrst predicted bounding boxes by pairs of corners, and
then predicted center probabilities of the initial prediction to
reject easy negatives. CenterNet obtained signiﬁcant improve-
ments compared with baselines. These anchor-free methods
form a promising research direction in the future.
3.4.4. Other Methods
There are some other proposal generation algorithms which
are not based on keypoints or anchors but also offer competi-
tive performances. Lu et al. proposed AZnet [96] which auto-
matically focused on regions of high interest. AZnet adopted a
search strategy that adaptively directed computation resources
to sub-regions which were likely contain objects. For each re-
gion, AZnet predicted two values: zoom indicator and adja-
cency scores. Zoom indicator determined whether to further
divide this region which may contain smaller objects and ad-
jacency scores denoted its objectness. The starting point was
the entire image and each divided sub-region is recursively pro-
cessed in this way until the zoom indicator is too small. AZnet
was better at matching sparse and small objects compared to
RPN’s anchor-object matching approach.
3.5. Feature Representation Learning
Feature Representation Learning is a critical component in
the whole detection framework. Target objects lie in complex
environments and have large variance in scale and aspect ratios.
There is a need to train a robust and discriminative feature em-
bedding of objects to obtain a good detection performance. In
15