ferent region information because not all contextual informa-
tion is helpful for detection.
3.5.4. Deformable Feature Learning
A good detector should be robust to nonrigid deformation of
objects. Before the deep learning era, Deformable Part based
Models(DPMs) [28] had been successfully used for object de-
tection. DPMs represented objects by multiple component parts
using a deformable coding method, making the detector robust
to nonrigid object transformation. In order to enable detec-
tors based on deep learning to model deformations of object
parts, many researchers have developed detection frameworks
to explicitly model object parts [97, 127, 144, 145]. DeepID-
Net [127] developed a deformable-aware pooling layer to en-
code the deformation information across different object cate-
gories. Dai et al. [97] and Zhu et al. [144] designed deformable
convolutional layers which automatically learned the auxiliary
position offsets to augment information sampled in regular sam-
pling locations of the feature map.
4. Learning Strategy
In contrast to image classiﬁcation, object detection requires
optimizing both localization and classiﬁcation tasks, which
makes it more difﬁcult to train robust detectors. In addition,
there are several issues that need to be addressed, such as im-
balance sampling, localization, acceleration etc. Thus there is a
need to develop innovative learning strategies to train effective
and efﬁcient detectors. In this section, we review some of the
learning strategies for object detection.
4.1. Training Stage
In this section, we review the learning strategies for training
object detectors. Speciﬁcally we discuss, data augmentation,
imbalance sampling, cascade learning, localization reﬁnement
and some other learning strategies.
4.1.1. Data Augmentation.
Data augmentation is important for nearly all deep learning
methods as they are often data-hungry and more training dataleads to better results. In object detection, in order to increase
training data as well as generate training patches with multiple
visual properties, Horizontal ﬂips of training images is used in
training Faster R-CNN detector [38]. A more intensive data
augmentation strategy is used in one-stage detectors including
rotation, random crops, expanding and color jittering [42, 106,
146]. This data augmentation strategy has shown signiﬁcant
improvement in detection accuracy.
4.1.2. Imbalance Sampling
In object detection, imbalance of negative and positive sam-
ples is a critical issue. That is, most of the regions of interest
estimated as proposals are in fact just background images. Very
few of them are positive instances (or objects). This results
in problem of imbalance while training detectors. Speciﬁcally,
two issues arise, which need to be addressed: class imbalance
and difﬁculty imbalance. The class imbalance issue is that most
candidate proposals belong to the background and only a few
of proposals contain objects. This results in the background
proposals dominating the gradients during training. The difﬁ-
culty imbalance is closely related to the ﬁrst issue, where due
to the class imbalance, it becomes much easier to classify most
of the background proposals easily, while the objects become
harder to classify. A variety of strategies have been developed
to tackle the class imbalance issue. Two-stage detectors such
as R-CNN and Fast R-CNN will ﬁrst reject majority of nega-
tive samples and keep 2,000 proposals for further classiﬁcation.
In Fast R-CNN [38], negative samples were randomly sampled
from these 2k proposals and the ratio of positive and negative
was ﬁxed as 1:3 in each mini-batch, to further reduce the ad-
verse effects of class imbalance. Random sample can address
class imbalance issue but are not able to fully utilize informa-
tion from negative proposals. Some negative proposals may
contain rich context information about the images, and some
hard proposals can help to improve detection accuracy. To ad-
dress this, Liu et al. [42] proposed hard negative sampling strat-
egy which ﬁxed the foreground and background ratio but sam-
pled most difﬁcult negative proposals for updating the model.
20