AlexNet
(Krizhevsky et al. )OverFeat
(Sermanet et al. )
GoogleNet
(Szegedy et al. )VGGNet
(Simonyan and 
Zisserman )R-CNN
(Girshick et al. )
Fast R -CNN
(Girshick et al. )
ResNet
(He et al. )Faster R -CNN
(Ren et al. )
FPN
(Linet al. )YOLO
(Redmon et al. )
SSD
(Liuet al. )
ResNet v2
(He et al. )R-FCN
(Daiet al. )
ResNeXt
(Lin et al. )
DenseNet
(Huang et al. )DPN
(Chen et al. )YOLO9000
(Redmon and 
Farhadi )
Hourglass
(Newell et al. )
MobileNet
(Howard et al. )DCN
(Dai et al. )
RetinaNet
(Lin et al. )Mask R -CNN
(He et al. )
RefineDet
(Zhang et al. )Cascade RCNN
(Cai et al. )
NASNet
(Zoph et al. )CornerNet
(Law and Deng )FSAF
(Zhu et al. )
SENet
(Huet al. )ExtremeNet
(Zhou et al. )NAS-FPN
(Ghiasi et al. )Detnas
(Chen et al. )
FCOS
(Tian et al. )CenterNet
(Duan et al. )
Efficien tNet
(Tan and Le )Figure 2: Major milestone in object detection research based on deep convolution neural networks since 2012. The trend in the last year has been designing object
detectors based on anchor-free(in red) and AutoML(in green) techniques, which are potentially two important research directions in the future.
ral network by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) via back-
propagation and showed competitive performance on digit
recognition. After that, however, deep convolutional neural net-
works were not heavily explored, with support vector machines
becoming more prominent. This was because deep learning had
some limitations: (i) lack of large scale annotated training data,
which caused overﬁtting; (ii) limited computation resources;
and (iii) weak theoretical support compared to SVMs. In 2009,
Jia et al. [37] collected a large scale annotated image dataset
ImageNet which contained 1.2M high resolution images, mak-
ing it possible to train deep models with large scale training
data. With the development of computing resources on parallel
computing systems(such as GPU clusters), in 2012 Krizhevsky
et al. [33] trained a large deep convolutional model with Im-
ageNet dataset and showed signiﬁcant improvement on Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge(ILSVRC) compared to all
other approaches. After the success of applying DCNN for
classiﬁcation, deep learning techniques were quickly adapted
to other vision tasks and showed promising results compared to
the traditional methods.
In contrast to hand-crafted descriptors used in traditional de-
tectors, deep convolutional neural networks generate hierarchi-
cal feature representations from raw pixels to high level seman-
tic information, which is learned automatically from the train-ing data and shows more discriminative expression capability
in complex contexts. Furthermore, beneﬁting from the pow-
erful learning capacity, a deep convolutional neural network
can obtain a better feature representation with a larger dataset,
while the learning capacity of traditional visual descriptors are
ﬁxed, and can not improve when more data becomes available.
These properties made it possible to design object detection al-
gorithms based on deep convolutional neural networks which
could be optimized in an end-to-end manner, with more power-
ful feature representation capability.
Currently, deep learning based object detection frameworks
can be primarily divided into two families: (i) two-stage detec-
tors, such as Region-based CNN (R-CNN) [2] and its variants
[38, 34, 39] and (ii) one-stage detectors, such as YOLO [40] and
its variants [41, 42]. Two-stage detectors ﬁrst use a proposal
generator to generate a sparse set of proposals and extract fea-
tures from each proposal, followed by region classiﬁers which
predict the category of the proposed region. One-stage detec-
tors directly make categorical prediction of objects on each lo-
cation of the feature maps without the cascaded region classiﬁ-
cation step. Two-stage detectors commonly achieve better de-
tection performance and report state-of-the-art results on public
benchmarks, while one-stage detectors are signiﬁcantly more
time-efﬁcient and have greater applicability to real-time object
3