IoU=0.52Figure 9: Example of failure case of detection in high IoU threshold. Purple box
is ground truth and yellow box is prediction. In low IoU requirement scenario,
this prediction is correct while in high IoU threshold, it’s a false positive due to
insufﬁcient overlap with objects.
a speciﬁc IoU threshold and the ﬁnal prediction results were
merged from these classiﬁers. Tychsen et al. proposed Fitness-
NMS [152] which learned novel ﬁtness score function of IoU
between proposals and objects. They argued that existing detec-
tors aimed to ﬁnd qualiﬁed predictions instead of best predic-
tions and thus highly quality and low quality proposals received
equal importance. Fitness-IoU assigned higher importance to
highly overlapped proposals. They also derived a bounding box
regression loss based on a set of IoU upper bounds to maximum
the IoU of predictions with objects. Inspired by CornerNet [63]
and DeNet [94], Lu et al. [151] proposed a Grid R-CNN which
replaced linear bounding box regressor with the principle of lo-
cating corner keypoints corner-based mechanism.
4.1.4. Cascade Learning
Cascade learning is a coarse-to-ﬁne learning strategy which
collects information from the output of the given classiﬁers to
build stronger classiﬁers in a cascaded manner. Cascade learn-
ing strategy was ﬁrst used by Viola and Jones [17] to train the
robust face detectors. In their models, a lightweight detector
ﬁrst rejects the majority easy negatives and feeds hard propos-
als to train detectors in next stage. For deep learning based
detection algorithms, Yang et al. [153] proposed CRAFT (Cas-
cade Region-proposal-network And FasT-rcnn) which learned
RPN and region classiﬁers with a cascaded learning strategy.
CRAFTS ﬁrst learned a standard RPN followed by a two-class
Fast RCNN which rejected the majority easy negatives. Theremaining samples were used to build the cascade region clas-
siﬁers which consisted of two Fast RCNNs. Yang et al. [100]
introduced layer-wise cascade classiﬁers for different scale ob-
jects in different layers. Multiple classiﬁers were placed on dif-
ferent feature maps and classiﬁers on shallower layers would
reject easy negatives. The remaining samples would be fed into
deeper layers for classiﬁcation. ReﬁneDet [92] and Cascade
R-CNN [49] utilized cascade learning methods in reﬁning ob-
ject locations. They built multi-stage bounding box regressors
and bounding box predictions were reﬁned in each stage trained
with different quality metrics. Cheng et al. [132] observed the
failure cases of Faster RCNN, and noticed that even though the
localization of objects was good, there were several classiﬁca-
tion errors. They attributed this to sub-optimal feature repre-
sentation due to sharing of features and joint multi-task opti-
mization, for classiﬁcation and regression; and they also argued
that the large receptive ﬁeld of Faster RCNN induce too much
noise in the detection process. They found that vanilla RCNN
was robust to these issues. Thus, they built a cascade detection
system based on Faster RCNN and RCNN to complement each
other. Speciﬁcally, A set of initial predictions were obtained
from a well trained Faster RCNN, and these predictions were
used to train RCNN to reﬁne the results.
4.1.5. Others
There are some other learning strategies which offer interest-
ing directions, but have not yet been extensively explored. We
split these approaches into four categories: adversarial learning,
training from scratch and knowledge distillation.
Adversarial Learning. Adversarial learning has shown sig-
niﬁcant advances in generative models. The most famous
work applying adversarial learning is generative adversarial
network(GAN) [154] where a generator is competing with a
discriminator. The generator tries to model data distribution by
generating fake images using a noise vector input and use these
fake images to confuse the discriminator, while the discrimi-
nator competes with the generator to identify the real images
from fake images. GAN and its variants [155, 156, 157] have
22