cies (such as proposal generation and region encoding) of de-
tection task can be explored in the future.
iv) Emerging Benchmarks for Object Detection. Currently
MSCOCO is the most commonly used detection benchmark
testbed. However, MSCOCO has only 80 categories, which is
still too small to understand more complicated scenes in real
world. Recently, a new benchmark dataset LVIS [235] has
been proposed in order to collect richer categorical informa-
tion. LVIS contains 164000 images with 1000+ categories, and
there are total of 2.2 million high-quality instance segmenta-
tion masks. Further, LVIS simulates the real-world low-shot
scenario where a large number of categories are present but
per-category data is sometimes scarce. LVIS will open a new
benchmark for more challenging detection, segmentation and
low-shot learning tasks in near future.
v) Low-shot Object Detection. Training detectors with lim-
ited labeled data is dubbed as Low-shot detection. Deep learn-
ing based detectors often have huge amount of parameters and
thus are data-hungry, which require large amount of labeled
data to achieve satisfactory performance. However, labeling
objects in images with bounding box level annotation is very
time-consuming. Low-shot learning has been actively studied
for classiﬁcation tasks, but only a few studies are focused on
detection tasks. For example, Multi-modal Self-Paced Learn-
ing for Detection (MSPLD) [252] addresses the low-shot de-
tection problem in a semi-supervised learning setting where a
large-scale unlabeled dataset is available. RepMet [253] adopts
a Deep Metric Learning (DML) structure, which jointly learns
feature embedding space and data distribution of training set
categories. However, RepMet was only tested on datasets
with similar concepts (animals). Low-Shot Transfer Detector
(LSTD) [254] addresses low-shot detection based on transfer
learning which transfers the knowledge form large annotated
external datasets to the target set by knowledge regularization.
LSTD still suffers from overﬁtting. There is still a large room
to improve the low-shot detection tasks.
vi) Backbone Architecture for Detection Task. It has be-
come a paradigm to adopt weights of classiﬁcation models pre-trained on large scale dataset into detection problem. However,
there still exist conﬂicts between classiﬁcation and detection
tasks [78], and thus it’s not an optimal solution to do so. From
Table 3, most state-of-the-art detection algorithms are based on
classiﬁcation backbones, and only a few of them try different
selections (such as CornerNet based on Hourglass Net). Thus
how to develop a detection-aware backbone architecture is also
an important research direction in the future.
vii) Other Research Issues. In addition, there are some other
open research issues, such as large batch learning [255] and
incremental learning [256]. Batch size is a key factor in DCNN
training but has not been well studied in detection task. And
for incremental learning, detection algorithms still suffer from
catastrophic forgetting if adapted to a new task without initial
training data. These open and fundamental research issues also
deserve more attention for future work.
In this survey, we give a comprehensive survey of recent ad-
vances in deep learning techniques for object detection tasks.
The main contents of this survey are divided into three ma-
jor categories: object detector components, machine learning
strategies, real-world applications and benchmark evaluations.
We have reviewed a large body of representative articles in re-
cent literature, and presented the contributions on this important
topic in a structured and systematic manner. We hope this sur-
vey can give readers a comprehensive understanding of object
detection with deep learning and potentially spur more research
work on object detection techniques and their applications.
References
References
[1] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition, in: CVPR, 2016.
[2] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Rich feature hierarchies for
accurate object detection and semantic segmentation, in: CVPR, 2014.
[3] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, Mask r-cnn, in: ICCV , 2017.
[4] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, A. L. Yuille, Se-
mantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets and fully con-
nected crfs, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7062, 2014.
34