this section, we introduce feature representation learning strate-
gies for object detection. Speciﬁcally, we identify three cate-
gories: multi-scale feature learning, contextual reasoning, and
deformable feature learning.
3.5.1. Multi-scale Feature Learning
Typical object detection algorithms based on deep convo-
lutional networks such as Fast R-CNN [38] and Faster R-
CNN [34] use only a single layer’s feature map to detect ob-
jects. However, detecting objects across large range of scales
and aspect ratios is quite challenging on a single feature map.
Deep convolutional networks learn hierarchical features in dif-
ferent layers which capture different scale information. Specif-
ically, shallow layer features with spatial-rich information have
higher resolution and smaller receptive ﬁelds and thus are more
suitable for detecting small objects, while semantic-rich fea-
tures in deep layers are more robust to illumination, translation
and have larger receptive ﬁelds (but coarse resolutions), and
are more suitable for detecting large objects. When detecting
small objects, high resolution representations are required and
the representation of these objects may not even be available in
the deep layer features, making small object detection difﬁcult.
Some techniques such as dilated/atrous convolutions [97, 52]
were proposed to avoid downsampling, and used the high reso-
lution information even in the deeper layers. At the same time,
detecting large objects in shallow layers are also non-optimal
without large enough receptive ﬁelds. Thus, handling feature
scale issues has become a fundamental research problem within
object detection. There are four main paradigms addressing
multi-scale feature learning problem: Image Pyramid, Predic-
tion Pyramid, Integrated Features and Feature Pyramid. These
are brieﬂy illustrated in the Fig. 7.
Image Pyramid : An intuitive idea is to resize input images
into a number of different scales (Image Pyramid) and to train
multiple detectors, each of which is responsible for a certain
range of scales [98, 99, 100, 101]. During testing, images are
resized to different scales followed by multiple detectors and
the detection results are merged. This can be computationally
predict
predict
predict
predict
predict Fuse
predict
predict
predict
predict
predict
 predict
 predictFigure 7: Four paradigms for multi-scale feature learning. Top Left: Image
Pyramid , which learns multiple detectors from different scale images; Top
Right: Prediction Pyramid , which predicts on multiple feature maps; Bottom
Left: Integrated Features , which predicts on single feature map generated
from multiple features; Bottom Right: Feature Pyramid which combines the
structure of Prediction Pyramid andIntegrated Features .
2x Up
FuseTop-Down Features
Bottom -Up Features
Figure 8: General framework for feature combination. Top-down features are 2
times up-sampled and fuse with bottom-up features. The fuse methods can be
element-wise sum, multiplication, concatenation and so on. Convolution and
normalization layers can be inserted in to this general framework to enhance
semantic information and reduce memory cost.
expensive. Liu et al. [101] ﬁrst learned a light-weight scale-
aware network to resize images such that all objects were in
a similar scale. This was followed by learning a single scale
detector. Singh et. al. [98] conducted comprehensive exper-
iments on small object detection. They argued that learning a
single scale-robust detector to handle all scale objects was much
more difﬁcult than learning scale-dependent detectors with im-
age pyramids. In their work, they proposed a novel framework
Scale Normalization for Image Pyramids (SNIP) [98] which
trained multiple scale-dependent detectors and each of them
was responsible for a certain scale objects.
Integrated Features : Another approach is to construct a
single feature map by combining features in multiple layers
and making ﬁnal predictions based on the new constructed
map [102, 51, 50, 103, 104, 105]. By fusing spatially rich shal-
low layer features and semantic-rich deep layer features, the
16