by the regressors and was assigned (C+1) categorical probabil-
ities by the classiﬁers. In addition, SSD predicted objects on
multiple feature maps, and each of these feature maps was re-
sponsible for detecting a certain scale of objects according to
its receptive ﬁelds. In order to detect large objects and increase
receptive ﬁelds, several extra convolutional feature maps were
added to the original backbone architecture. The whole net-
work was optimized with a weighted sum of localization loss
and classiﬁcation loss over all prediction maps via an end-to-
end training scheme. The ﬁnal prediction was made by merg-
ing all detection results from different feature maps. In order to
avoid huge number of negative proposals dominating training
gradients, hard negative mining was used to train the detector.
Intensive data augmentation was also applied to improve de-
tection accuracy. SSD achieved comparable detection accuracy
with Faster R-CNN but enjoyed the ability to do real-time in-
ference.
Without proposal generation to ﬁlter easy negative samples,
the class imbalance between foreground and background is a
severe problem in one-stage detector. Lin et al. [43] proposed
a one-stage detector RetinaNet which addressed class imbal-
ance problem in a more ﬂexible manner. RetinaNet used focal
loss which suppressed the gradients of easy negative samples
instead of simply discarding them. Further, they used feature
pyramid networks to detect multi-scale objects at different lev-
els of feature maps. Their proposed focal loss outperformed
naive hard negative mining strategy by large margins.
Redmon et al. proposed an improved YOLO version,
YOLOv2 [41] which signiﬁcantly improved detection perfor-
mance but still maintained real-time inference speed. YOLOv2
adopted a more powerful deep convolutional backbone archi-
tecture which was pre-trained on higher resolution images from
ImageNet(from 224224to448448), and thus the weights
learned were more sensitive to capturing ﬁne-grained informa-
tion. In addition, inspired by the anchor strategy used in SSD,
YOLOv2 deﬁned better anchor priors by k-means clustering
from the training data (instead of setting manually). This helped
in reducing optimizing difﬁculties in localization. Finally inte-grating with Batch Normalization layers [62] and multi-scale
training techniques, YOLOv2 achieved state-of-the-art detec-
tion results at that time.
The previous approaches required designing anchor boxes
manually to train a detector. Later a series of anchor-free object
detectors were developed, where the goal was to predict key-
points of the bounding box, instead of trying to ﬁt an object to
an anchor. Law and Deng proposed a novel anchor-free frame-
work CornerNet [63] which detected objects as a pair of cor-
ners. On each position of the feature map, class heatmaps, pair
embeddings and corner offsets were predicted. Class heatmaps
calculated the probabilities of being corners, and corner offsets
were used to regress the corner location. And the pair embed-
dings served to group a pair of corners which belong to the
same objects. Without relying on manually designed anchors
to match objects, CornerNet obtained signiﬁcant improvement
on MSCOCO datasets. Later there were several other variants
of keypoint detection based one-stage detectors [64, 65].
Figures 5 gives an overview of different detection frame-
works for several representative one-stage detectors.
3.3. Backbone Architecture
R-CNN [2] showed adopting convolutional weights from
models pre-trained on large scale image classiﬁcation problem
could provide richer semantic information to train detectors and
enhanced the detection performance. During the later years,
this approach had become the default strategy for most object
detectors. In this section, we will ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the basic
concept of deep convolutional neural networks and then review
some architectures which are widely used for detection.
3.3.1. Basic Architecture of a CNN
Deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) is a typical deep
neural network and has proven extremely effective in visual
understanding [36, 33]. Deep convolutional neural networks
are commonly composed of a sequence of convolutional layers,
pooling layers, nonlinear activation layers and fully connected
layers (FC layers). Convolutional layer takes an image input
and convolves over it by nnkernels to generate a feature map.
10