2. Problem Settings
In this section, we present the formal problem setting for ob-
ject detection based on deep learning. Object detection involves
both recognition (e.g., “object classiﬁcation”) and localization
(e.g., “location regression”) tasks. An object detector needs to
distinguish objects of certain target classes from backgrounds
in the image with precise localization and correct categorical la-
bel prediction to each object instance. Bounding boxes or pixel
masks are predicted to localize these target object instances.
More formally, assume we are given a collection of Nanno-
tated imagesn
x1;x2;:::;xNo
, and forithimagexi, there are
Miobjects belonging to Ccategories with annotations:
yi=n
(ci
1;bi
1);(ci
2;bi
2);:::;(ci
Mi;bi
Mi)o
(1)
whereci
j(ci
j2C) andbi
j(bounding box or pixel mask of the
object) denote categorical and spatial labels of j-th object in xi
respectively. The detector is fparameterized by . Forxi, the
predictionyi
predshares the same format as yi:
yi
pred=n
(ci
pred1;bi
pred1);(ci
pred2;bi
pred2);:::)o
(2)
Finally a loss function `is set to optimize detector as:
`(x;) =1
NNX
i=1`(yi
pred;xi;yi;) +
2kk2
2(3)
where the second term is a regularizer, with trade-off parameter
. Different loss functions such as softmax loss [38] and focal
loss [43] impact the ﬁnal detection performance, and we will
discuss these functions in Section 4.
At the time of evaluation, a metric called intersection-over-
union (IoU) between objects and predictions is used to evaluate
the quality of localization(we omit index ihere):
IoU(bpred;bgt) =Area(bpredTbgt)
Area(bpredSbgt)(4)
Here,bgtrefers to the ground truth bbox or mask. An IoU
threshold 
is set to determine whether a prediction tightly cov-ers the object or not(i.e. IoU 
; commonly researchers set

 = 0:5). For object detection, a prediction with correct cate-
gorical label as well as successful localization prediction (meet-
ing the IoU criteria) is considered as positive, otherwise it’s a
negative prediction:
Prediction =8
<
:Positivecpred=cgtand IoU (bpred;bgt)>
Negative otherwise
(5)
For generic object detection problem evaluation, mean average
precision(mAP) over Cclasses is used for evaluation, and in
real world scenarios such as pedestrian detection, different eval-
uation metrics are used which will be discussed in Section 5. In
addition to detection accuracy, inference speed is also an im-
portant metric to evaluate object detection algorithms. Specif-
ically, if we wish to detect objects in a video stream (real-time
detection), it is imperative to have a detector that can process
this information quickly. Thus, the detector efﬁciency is also
evaluated on Frame per second (FPS), i.e., how many images it
can process per second. Commonly a detector that can achieve
an inference speed of 20 FPS, is considered to be a real-time
detector.
3. Detection Components
In this section, we introduce different components of ob-
ject detection. The ﬁrst is about the choice of object detection
paradigm. We ﬁrst introduce the concepts of two detection set-
tings: bbox-level and mask-level algorithms. Then, We intro-
duce two major object detection paradigms: two-stage detectors
and one-stage detectors. Under these paradigms, detectors can
use a variety of deep learning backbone architectures, proposal
generators, and feature representation modules.
3.1. Detection Settings
There are two settings in object detection: i) vanilla object
detection (bbox-level localization) and ii) instance segmenta-
tion (pixel-level or mask-level localization). Vanilla object de-
tection has been more extensively studied and is considered as
5