the traditional detection setting, where the goal is to localize ob-
jects by rectangle bounding boxes. In vanilla object detection
algorithms, only bbox annotations are required, and in evalua-
tion, the IoU between predicted bounding box with the ground
truth is calculated to measure the performance. Instance seg-
mentation is a relatively new setting and is based on traditional
detection setting. Instance segmentation requires to segment
each object by a pixel-wise mask instead of a rough rectangle
bounding box. Due to more precise pixel-level prediction, in-
stance segmentation is more sensitive to spatial misalignment,
and thus has higher requirement to process the spatial informa-
tion. The evaluation metric of instance segmentation is almost
identical to the bbox-level detection, except that the IoU com-
putation is performed on mask predictions. Though the two
detection settings are slightly different, the main components
introduced later can mostly be shared by the two settings.
3.2. Detection Paradigms
Current state-of-the-art object detectors with deep learning
can be mainly divided into two major categories: two-stage de-
tectors and one-stage detectors. For a two-stage detector, in the
ﬁrst stage, a sparse set of proposals is generated; and in the
second stage, the feature vectors of generated proposals are en-
coded by deep convolutional neural networks followed by mak-
ing the object class predictions. An one-stage detector does
not have a separate stage for proposal generation (or learning a
proposal generation). They typically consider all positions on
the image as potential objects, and try to classify each region
of interest as either background or a target object. Two-stage
detectors often reported state-of-the-art results on many public
benchmark datasets. However, they generally fall short in terms
of lower inference speeds. One-stage detectors are much faster
and more desired for real-time object detection applications, but
have a relatively poor performance compared to the two-stage
detectors.
3.2.1. Two-stage Detectors
Two-stage detectors split the detection task into two stages:
(i) proposal generation; and (ii) making predictions for theseproposals. During the proposal generation phase, the detector
will try to identify regions in the image which may potentially
be objects. The idea is to propose regions with a high recall,
such that all objects in the image belong to at least one of these
proposed region. In the second stage, a deep-learning based
model is used to classify these proposals with the right categor-
ical labels. The region may either be a background, or an object
from one of the predeﬁned class labels . Additionally, the model
may reﬁne the original localization suggested by the proposal
generator. Next, we review some of the most inﬂuential efforts
among two-stage detectors.
R-CNN [2] is a pioneering two-stage object detector pro-
posed by Girshick et al. in 2014. Compared to the previous
state-of-the-art methods based on a traditional detection frame-
work SegDPM [44] with 40.4% mAP on Pascal VOC2010, R-
CNN signiﬁcantly improved the detection performance and ob-
tained 53.7% mAP. The pipeline of R-CNN can be divided into
three components: i) proposal generation, ii) feature extraction
and iii) region classiﬁcation. For each image, R-CNN generates
a sparse set of proposals (around 2,000 proposals) via Selective
Search [45], which is designed to reject regions that can eas-
ily be identiﬁed as background regions. Then, each proposal is
cropped and resized into a ﬁxed-size region and is encoded into
a (e.g. 4,096 dimensional) feature vector by a deep convolu-
tional neural network, followed by a one-vs-all SVM classiﬁer.
Finally the bounding box regressors are learned using the ex-
tracted features as input in order to make the original proposals
tightly bound the objects. Compared to traditional hand-crafted
feature descriptors, deep neural networks generate hierarchical
features and capture different scale information in different lay-
ers, and ﬁnally produce robust and discriminative features for
classiﬁcation. utilize the power of transfer learning, R-CNN
adopts weights of convolutional networks pre-trained on Ima-
geNet. The last fully connected layer (FC layer) is re-initialized
for the detection task. The whole detector is then ﬁnetuned on
the pre-trained model. This transfer of knowledge from the Im-
agenet dataset offers signiﬁcant performance gains. In addition,
R-CNN rejects huge number of easy negatives before training,
6