reasoning for object detection from two aspects: global context
andregion context .
Global context reasoning refers to learning from the context
in the whole image. Unlike traditional detectors which attempt
to classify speciﬁc regions in the image as objects, the idea here
is to use the contextual information (i.e., information from the
rest of the image) to classify a particular region of interest. For
example, detecting a baseball ball from an image can be chal-
lenging for a traditional detector (as it may be confused with
balls from other sports); but if the contextual information from
the rest of the image is used (e.g. baseball ﬁeld, players, bat), it
becomes easier to identify the baseball ball object.
Some representative efforts include ION [51], DeepId [127]
and improved version of Faster R-CNN [1]. In ION, Bell et
al. used recurrent neural network to encode contextual infor-
mation across the whole image from four directions. Ouyang
et al. [127] learned a categorical score for each image which
is used as contextual features concatenated with the object de-
tection results. He et al. [1] extracted feature embedding of
the entire image and concatenate it with region features to im-
prove detection results. In addition, some methods [129, 3, 59,
133, 134, 135, 136] exploit global contextual information via
semantic segmentation. Due to precise pixel-level annotation,
segmentation feature maps capture strong spatial information.
He et al. [3] and Dai et al. [59] learn uniﬁed instance seg-
mentation framework and optimize the detector with pixel-level
supervision. They jointly optimized detection and segmenta-
tion objectives as a multi-task optimization. Though segmenta-
tion can signiﬁcantly improve detection performance, obtaining
the pixel-level annotation is very expensive. Zhao et al. [133]
optimized detectors with pseudo segmentation annotation and
showed promising results. Zhang et al.’s work Detection with
Enriched Semantics (DES) [134], introduced contextual infor-
mation by learning a segmentation mask without segemtation
annotations. It also jointly optimized object detection and seg-
mentation objectives and enriched original feature map with a
more discriminative feature map.
Region Context Reasoning encodes contextual informationsurrounding regions and learns interactions between the objects
with their surrounding area. Directly modeling different lo-
cations and categories objects relations with the contextual is
very challenging. Chen et al. proposed Spatial Memory Net-
work (SMN) [130] which introduced a spatial memory based
module. The spatial memory module captured instance-level
contexts by assembling object instances back into a pseudo
”image” representations which were later used for object re-
lations reasoning. Liu et al. proposed Structure Inference Net
(SIN) [137] which formulated object detection as a graph in-
ference problem by considering scene contextual information
and object relationships. In SIN, each object was treated as a
graph node and the relationship between different objects were
regarded as graph edges. Hu et al. [138] proposed a lightweight
framework relation network which formulated the interaction
between different objects between their appearance and image
locations. The new proposed framework did not need addi-
tional annotation and showed improvements in object detection
performance. Based on Hu et al., Gu et al. [139] proposed a
fully learnable object detector which proposed a general view-
point that uniﬁed existing region feature extraction methods.
Their proposed method removed heuristic choices in ROI pool-
ing methods and automatically select the most signiﬁcant parts,
including contexts beyond proposals. Another method to en-
code contextual information is to implicitly encode region fea-
tures by adding image features surrounding region proposals
and a large number of approaches have been proposed based
on this idea [131, 106, 140, 141, 142, 143]. In addition to en-
code features from region proposals, Gidaris et al. [131] ex-
tracted features from a number of different sub-regions of the
original object proposals(border regions, central regions, con-
textual regions etc.) and concatenated these features with the
original region features. Similar to their method, [106] ex-
tracted local contexts by enlarging the proposal window size
and concatenating these features with the original ones. Zeng et
al. [142] proposed Gated Bi-Directional CNN (GBDNet) which
extracted features from multi-scale subregions. Notably, GBD-
Net learned a gated function to control the transmission of dif-
19