ing windows, and dense image grids were encoded by hand-
crafted features followed by training classiﬁers to ﬁnd and lo-
cate objects. Notably, Viola and Jones [20] proposed a pi-
oneering cascaded classiﬁers using AdaBoost with Haar fea-
tures for face detection and obtained excellent performance
with high real time prediction speed. After the progresses of
deep learning in image classiﬁcation, face detectors based on
deep learning signiﬁcantly outperformed traditional face detec-
tors [183, 184, 185, 186, 187].
Current face detection algorithms based on deep learning are
mainly extended from generic detection frameworks such as
Fast R-CNN and SSD. These algorithms focus more on learning
robust feature representations. In order to handle extreme scale
variance, multi-scale feature learning methods discussed before
have been widely used in face detection. Sun et al. [183] pro-
posed a Fast R-CNN based framework which integrated multi-
scale features for prediction and converted the resulting detec-
tion bounding boxes into ellipses as the regions of human faces
are more elliptical than rectangular. Zhang et al. [87] proposed
one-stage S3FD which found faces on different feature maps to
detect faces at a large range of scales. They made predictions
on larger feature maps to capture small-scale face information.
Notably, a set of anchors were carefully designed according to
empirical receptive ﬁelds and thus provided a better match to
the faces. Based on S3FD, Zhang et al. [188] proposed a novel
network structure to capture multi-scale features in different
stages. The new proposed feature agglomerate structure inte-
grated features at different scales in a hierarchical way. More-
over, a hierarchical loss was proposed to reduce the training dif-
ﬁculties. Single Stage Headless Face Detector (SSH) [189] was
another one-stage face detector which combined different scale
features for prediction. Hu et al. [99] gave a detailed analysis of
small face detection and proposed a light weight face detector
consisting of multiple RPNs, each of which was responsible for
a certain range of scales. Their method could effectively handle
face scale variance but it was slow for real world usage. Unlike
this method, Hao et al. [190] proposed a Scale Aware Face net-
work which addresses scale issues without incurring signiﬁcantcomputation costs. They learned a scale aware network which
modeled the scale distribution of faces in a given image and
guided zoom-in or zoom-out operations to make sure that the
faces were in desirable scale. The resized image was fed into
a single scale light weight face detector. Wang et al. [191] fol-
lowed RetinaNet [43] and utilized more dense anchors to han-
dle faces in a large range of scales. Moreover, they proposed
an attention function to account for context information, and to
highlight the discriminative features. Zhang et al. [192] pro-
posed a deep cascaded multi-task face detector with cascaded
structure (MTCNN). MTCNN had three stages of carefully de-
signed CNN models to predict faces in a coarse-to-ﬁne style.
Further, they also proposed a new online hard negative mining
strategy to improve the result. Samangouei et al. [193] pro-
posed a Face MegNet which allowed information ﬂow of small
faces without any skip connections by placing a set of decon-
volution layers before RPN and ROI Pooling to build up ﬁner
face representations.
In addition to multi-scale feature learning, some frameworks
were focused on contextual information. Face objects have
strong physical relationships with the surrounding contexts
(commonly appearing with human bodies) and thus encoding
contextual information became an effective way to improve de-
tection accuracy. Zhang et al. [194] proposed FDNet based on
ResNet with larger deformable convolutional kernels to cap-
ture image context. Zhu et al. [195] proposed a Contextual
Multi-Scale Region-based Convolution Neural Network (CMS-
RCNN) in which multi-scale information was grouped both in
region proposal and ROI detection to deal with faces at vari-
ous range of scale. In addition, contextual information around
faces is also considered in training detectors. Notably, Tang et
al. [185] proposed a state-of-the-art context assisted single shot
face detector, named PyramidBox to handle the hard face detec-
tion problem. Observing the importance of the context, they im-
proved the utilization of contextual information in the follow-
ing three aspects: i) ﬁrst, a novel context anchor was designed
to supervise high-level contextual feature learning by a semi-
supervised method, dubbed as PyramidAnchors; ii) the Low-
26