level Feature Pyramid Network was developed to combine ade-
quate high-level context semantic features and low-level facial
features together, which also allowed the PyramidBox to pre-
dict faces at all scales in a single shot; and iii) they introduced a
context sensitive structure to increase the capacity of prediction
network to improve the ﬁnal accuracy of output. In addition,
they used the method of data-anchor-sampling to augment the
training samples across different scales, which increased the di-
versity of training data for smaller faces. Yu et al.[196] intro-
duced a context pyramid maxout mechanism to explore image
contexts and devised an efﬁcient anchor based cascade frame-
work for face detection which optimized anchor-based detector
in cascaded manner. Zhang et al. [197] proposed a two-stream
contextual CNN to adaptively capture body part information.
In addition, they proposed to ﬁlter easy non-face regions in the
shallow layers and leave difﬁcult samples to deeper layers.
Beyond efforts on designing scale-robust or context-assistant
detectors, Wang et al. [191] developed a framework from the
perspective of loss function design. Based on vanilla Faster
R-CNN framework, they replaced original softmax loss with
a center loss which encouraged detectors to reduce the large
intra-class variance in face detection. They explored multiple
technologies in improving Faster R-CNN such as ﬁxed-ratio
online hard negative mining, multi-scale training and multi-
scale testing, which made vanilla Faster R-CNN adaptable to
face detection. Later, Wang et al. [198] proposed Face R-FCN
which was based on vanilla R-FCN. Face R-FCN distinguished
the contribution of different facial parts and introduced a novel
position-sensitive average pooling to re-weight the response on
ﬁnal score maps. This method achieved state-of-the-art results
on many public benchmarks such as FDDB [199] and WIDER
FACE[200].
5.2. Pedestrian Detection
Pedestrian detection is an essential and signiﬁcant task in any
intelligent video surveillance system. Different from generic
object detection, there are some properties of pedestrian de-
tection different from generic object detection: i) Pedestrianobjects are well structured objects with nearly ﬁxed aspect ra-
tios (about 1.5), but they also lie at a large range of scales; ii)
Pedestrian detection is a real world application, and hence the
challenges such as crowding, occlusion and blurring are com-
monly exhibited. For example, in the CityPersons dataset, there
are a total of 3157 pedestrian annotations in the validation sub-
set, among which 48.8% overlap with another annotated pedes-
trian with Intersection over Union (IoU) above 0.1. Moreover,
26.4% of all pedestrians have considerable overlap with another
annotated pedestrian with IoU above 0.3. The highly frequent
crowd occlusion harms the performance of pedestrian detec-
tors; iii) There are more hard negative samples (such as trafﬁc
light, Mailbox etc.) in pedestrian detection due to complicated
contexts.
Before the deep learning era, pedestrian detection algorithms
[19, 201, 202, 203, 204] were mainly extended from Viola
Jones frameworks [20] by exploiting Integral Channel Features
with a sliding window strategy to locate objects, followed by re-
gion classiﬁers such as SVMs. The early works were mainly fo-
cused on designing robust feature descriptors for classiﬁcation.
For example, Dalal and Triggs [19] proposed the histograms of
oriented gradient (HOG) descriptors, while Paisitkriangkrai et
al. [204] designed a feature descriptor based on low-level visual
cues and spatial pooling features. These methods show promis-
ing results on pedestrian detection benchmarks but were mainly
based on hand-crafted features.
Deep learning based methods for pedestrian detection [8, 9,
10, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211] showed excellent per-
formance and achieved state-of-the-art results on public bench-
marks. Angelova et al [10] proposed a real-time pedestrian de-
tection framework using a cascade of deep convolutional net-
works. In their work, a large number of easy negatives were
rejected by a tiny model and the remaining hard proposals were
then classiﬁed by a large deep networks. Zhang et al. [212]
proposed decision tree based framework. In their method, mul-
tiscale feature maps were used to extract pedestrian features,
which were later fed into boosted decision trees for classiﬁ-
cation. Compared with FC layers, boosted decision trees ap-
27