A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Taylor, 2017). AutoAugment extends the cutout policy by augmentation sub-policies found
during the search. We extend this setup further by considering mixup (Zhang et al., 2018a)
as another augmentation technique in order to see whether the AutoAugment policy can
improve over standard state-of-the-art augmentation techniques. As we see in Table 4, the
combination of cutout with mixup in many cases is better than using just one of them.
Since AutoAugment is cutout plus other augmentation techniques, perhaps it is not sur-
prising to notice a signicant lift over cutout. We consider the combination of cutout and
mixup as a useful baseline which it is not able to outperform. However, adding mixup to
AutoAugment does not hurt the performance in most cases as expected. In cases where
the combination of cutout and mixup performed better than AutoAugment, this addition
provides a signicant improvement resulting in the best scores. We are able to achieve an
error of 1.33% on the CIFAR-10 object recognition task. To the best of our knowledge,
the only work claiming a lower error on this task is the work by Huang et al. (2018b)
which claims 1% error. However, they use a pretrained model on ImageNet which has 557
million parameters, while the PyramidNet used in our experiments has \only" 26.2 million
parameters and can be trained on a single GPU. More importantly, we do not use any
pretrained weights and train the model from scratch. Finally, we select eight augmentation
policies at random and compare them to the discovered AutoAugment policies. The results
on Wide-ResNet yield a mean error of 2.81 and ranges from 2.67 to 2.97. Thus, the mean
error across eight random policies is worse than AutoAugment, however, some of them are
better. We observe a similar behavior for Shake-Shake (26 2x32d) and (26 2x96d) where
we obtain a mean error of 2.70 and 2.24, respectively. The errors range from 2.46 to 2.85
and 2.02 to 2.40. Two of the eight policies sampled at random yield better results than
AutoAugment for every architecture, yet again, shows the importance to consider random
as a baseline. The search space for augmentation policies seems to be dened in such a way
that any augmentation policy will perform better than cutout. Only for Wide-ResNet the
worst random policy considered by us is marginally worse.
8. Outlook and Future Applications of Neural Architecture Search
Methods
In the broader context of automated deep learning, neural architecture search only tackles
one component of the pipeline. Moreover, most of the current approaches in neural ar-
chitecture search only focus on CNNs for solving the task of object recognition and RNN
cells for language modeling. However, other interesting areas have already surfaced some
of which have been discussed in sections 5 to 7. For example, many recent works address
the idea of using knowledge across dierent datasets to speed up the optimization processes
(Section 5). Similarly, the search for architectures under constraints, with multiple objec-
tives, and the automation of model compression has garnered signicant attention in the
past year (Section 6). The alignment of architecture search algorithms with other graph
structures such as parameter optimization algorithms and activation functions or the search
for data augmentation are exciting developments (Section 7). Recently there have also been
promising developments along other dimensions that address more complex tasks with im-
age data such as object detection and segmentation (Zoph et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019a; Weng et al., 2019), as well as works that address safety-critical issues
39