Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
convcell
(n1)avg pool
(stride=2)cell
(n2)avg pool
(stride=2)cell
(n3)global
pool x ^y
Figure 7: Mobile search spaces as used by Dong et al. (2018). The entire network including
the cells are densely connected.
operations. A meta-operation is the connection of few operations to a larger segment
(Figure 6). The second level represents the cell by connections between the meta-operations.
The cell-based design paradigm has also been used for dening search spaces that are
suitable for mobile devices. Dong et al. (2018) propose a search space specically aimed at
meeting such requirements which include objectives like fewer parameters and fast inference
time. Architectures in this search space comprise of cells without branches and a xed inter-
nal structure that alternates two normalization (e.g. batch normalization) and convolution
layers. All operations are densely connected (Huang et al., 2017) as shown in Figure 7 which
also applies for those in the cell. The number of choices is signicantly smaller than the
previously discussed cell-based search spaces, making this a less challenging optimization
task.
2.3 Global vs. Cell-Based Search Space
So far, there has been no detailed comparative study of the dierent search spaces proposed
in the vast literature of neural architecture search. However, cell-based search spaces,
in particular the NASNet search space, are the most popular choices for developing new
methods. Most works that examine both search spaces, the global and the cell-based space,
support this choice by providing empirical evidence that well-performing can be obtained
in the cell-based search space (Pham et al., 2018). Regardless, cell-based search spaces
benet from the advantage that discovered architectures can be easily transferred across
datasets. Moreover, the complexity of the architectures can be varied almost arbitrarily
by changing the number of lters and cells. In general, the architectures belonging to
the global search space do not exhibit all these properties, but specic cases may benet
from some of them. For instance, architectures can be naturally modied by varying the
number of lters, but transferring a discovered architecture to a new datasets with dierent
input shapes or deepening the architecture is not trivial. Interestingly, Tan et al. (2018)
endorse the use of the global search space when searching for mobile architectures. They
base this argument on a hypothesis that diversity of layers is critical for achieving both
high accuracy and low latency for deployment in mobile devices and that these cannot be
provided by conventional cell-based search spaces. Interestingly, Hu et al. (2018) remark
10