Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
whereis a penalization constant in the range of 0 to 1 and use a similar approach to Cai
et al. (2018a) to nd the nal architecture. Specically, a policy is learned that decides
whether to add, remove or keep a layer as well as whether to alter its number of lters. Hsu
et al. (2018) use a harder penalty function which returns 0 when the constraint is violated
and 1 otherwise. They use a reinforcement learning optimizer similar to the one proposed by
Zoph and Le (2017) which predicts the hyperparameters of dierent layers. Thus, the reward
received by the controller is the accuracy for cases which do not violate any constraint and is
0 otherwise. The authors evaluate their optimizer to select the layer-wise hyperparameters
(number of lters, kernel size) of an AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and the cell-wise
hyperparameters (stage, growth rate) of a CondenseNet (Huang et al., 2018a). We refer to
Section 3.1 for more details on the optimization methods.
6.2 Multi-Objective Optimization
Another approach to handle multiple fronts lies in the formalism of multi-objective opti-
mization problem (Hwang and Masud, 2012) dened as
max
2Af1();f2();:::;fn(): (23)
However, often there is no single optimal solution that simultaneously minimizes all these
functions. As some of the objectives can be con
icting, an optimal solution with respect
to one objective may not be optimal with respect to another. Therefore, in such scenarios,
the task boils down to nding a set of solutions which are Pareto optimal . A solution is
Pareto optimal if none of the objectives can be improved without worsening at least one
other objective. This means that for a Pareto optimal solution , no other solution 02A
exists such that fi()fi(0) withfj()> fj(0) for some j. Otherwise, we say 0
dominates,0. Finally, it is up to the user to select a model from the set of Pareto
optimal solutions, the Pareto front, maybe depending on dierent deployment scenarios.
Decomposition Methods One way to solve this problem is the decomposition approach.
A parameterized aggregation function his used to transform the multi-objective optimiza-
tion problem into a single-objective optimization problem
max
2Ah((f1();f2();:::;fn());w): (24)
Examples for hare the weighted sum, weighted exponential sum, weighted min-max or
weighted product (Santiago Pineda et al., 2014). However, solving this problem for a xed
setting of the weights wwill in most cases not nd all Pareto optimal solutions. Therefore,
the problem is solved for dierent w. In neural architecture search this requires multiple
optimization runs for several dierent weight vectors which is prohibitive. Therefore, a
common approach is to select an aggregation function and x the weight vector according to
domain knowledge and the desired trade-o between objectives. Consequently, the multi-
objective becomes a single-objective optimization problem which can be solved by any
method discussed in Section 3. Hsu et al. (2018) propose to use the weighted sum as the
aggregation function and use a reinforcement learning approach (Zoph and Le, 2017) to
solve this problem. Unfortunately, not every objective function is dierentiable which is a
requirement for some of the optimization methods discussed in Section 3.4. Cai et al. (2019)
34