A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Baker et al. (2018) All previously discussed learning curve predictors are based only on
the premature learning curve as well as machine learning models specically designed for
learning curve prediction. Baker et al. (2018) approach this problem dierently. First, they
enrich the representation and include additional features like the rst and second derivative
of the premature learning curve, properties of the architecture (number of parameters and
layers) and chosen hyperparameters (e.g. initial learning rate and weight decay). Second,
they study a set of traditional regression models to solve the prediction task. Empirically,
they nd that the -Support Vector Regression (Sch olkopf et al., 2000) performs best among
other alternatives such as random forest or Bayesian linear regression. Furthermore, they
report that the premature performance can be a strong competitor method which in most
cases outperforms the work by Domhan et al. (2015) and Klein et al. (2017). While Domhan
et al. (2015) did not compare against the premature performance, Klein et al. (2017) only
report results with respect to the mean squared error. However, the squared error is no
relevant measure for this task and it is by no means surprising that the premature perfor-
mance has a high squared error. Instead, the ranking of learning curves is more important
and thus a measure like R2(as used by Baker et al. (2018)) is more appropriate. Finally,
Baker et al. (2018) are also the rst and only to use a more sophisticated learning curve
prediction method in combination with a neural architecture search method. They build
upon their previous work (Baker et al., 2017), report a speed up by a factor of 3.8, and nd
equally good neural architectures.
5. Transfer Learning
Transfer learning refers to the idea of reusing knowledge gained when solving one task in
order to solve a dierent but related task more eciently.
In the context of neural architechtures search, many simple techniques have proven to
be eective. Some works (Baker et al., 2017) demonstrate that an architecture discovered
for one dataset can be easily applied (without introducing signicant changes) to a dataset
with the same image dimensions. Zoph et al. (2018) demonstrate easy transferability of ar-
chitectures discovered on datasets with few data points and a small resolution (CIFAR-10)
to datasets with signicantly more data and a higher resolution (ImageNet). Furthermore,
architectures which perform well across a diverse set of tasks provide a competitive solu-
tion (Wistuba and Pedapati, 2019). Other similar paradigms include searching on a subset
of the data (Sabharwal et al., 2016) and searching on a down-scaled version of the data (Hinz
et al., 2018). It is also a common practice to search for networks with few cell repetitions
and for cells that use only few lters. Then, the nal model is obtained by increasing the
number of lters and number of cell repetitions signicantly to build larger models with
better performance.
Transferring knowledge across tasks provides another alternative avenue that can be
leveraged to improve the performance of neural architecture search methods. Most search
algorithms train multiple sample architectures during the search process. In the same spirit
as the use of surrogate models, training of these sampled architectures can be made more
ecient with the use of additional information gained from training architectures on other
datasets of tasks. In order to learn dataset-specic properties, features which describe
31