Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Policy Gradient Methods An alternative approach in RL consists in policy gradient
methods which do not appeal to value functions and instead directly learn policies as de-
ned by a collection of parameters, (ajs). These methods select actions without explicitly
consulting a value function. The parameters of the policy are adjusted so as to move in
the direction of the agent's performance measure via classical gradient ascent updates. The
required gradient is often not directly available as the performance depends both on the
actions selected and the distribution of states under which the actions is taken. Hence
an empirical estimate of the gradient is used to perform the necessary update. REIN-
FORCE (Williams, 1992) is a classical algorithm that estimates this gradient as,
E"TX
t=0rln(a(t)js(t))G(t)#
: (11)
whereG(t)is the return from step t,PT
t
r(t)
. However these empirical gradient estimates
are often noisy and additional tricks like inclusion of a baseline are incorporated for useful
learning. Moreover, alternative formulations of this gradient as derived through objective
functions of importance sampling have led to other approximations. These approaches
include Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015) and Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). It is worth noting that these methods
are on-policy methods as the agents follow the policy they seek to learn.
Optimization with Q-Learning Baker et al. (2017) were one of the rst to propose
the use of RL-based algorithms for neural architecture search. They use a combination of
Q-learning, -greedy, and experience replay in the design of their algorithm. The actions
in their approach are the choice of dierent layers to add to an architecture as well as the
option to terminate building the architecture and declare it as nished (we discussed this
search space in Section 2.1). Subsequently, the states are the premature architectures. The
trajectories sampled from this state space correspond to models which are subsequently
trained to compute the validation accuracy. The Qfunction is appropriately updated with
experience replay. In order to trade o between exploration and exploitation, they incor-
porate an-greedy strategy where random trajectories are sampled with a probability of .
This is an o-policy method where the agent does not use the optimal policy during the
episodes. Additionally, the action-value function utilized in this case is deterministic. The
algorithm works as follows: after initializing the action-value function, the agent samples
a trajectory which comprises of multiple decision steps, eventually leading to a terminal
state. The algorithm then trains the model corresponding to the trajectory and updates
the action-value function as dened in the Q-learning algorithm. Zhong et al. (2018) also use
a Q-learning-based algorithm to search for network architectures. However, they perform
the search in a cell-based search space which we discussed in Section 2.2.
Optimization with Policy Gradient Methods Alternate approaches based on policy
gradient method have also been used for neural architecture search. The work by Zoph
and Le (2017) was the rst to consider this modeling approach. In their approach they
directly model a controller whose predictions can be considered as actions that are used
to construct a neural architecture. The controller parameterized by denes the stochas-
tic policy(ajs). They incorporate an autoregressive controller which predicts the action
14