A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Hidden
State
EmbeddingSoftmaxFilter
HeightFilter
WidthStride
HeightStride
WidthNumber of
Filters
Figure 10: The controller used by Zoph and Le (2017) (predictions for skip connections are
not shown) to predict conguration of one layer.
based on previous actions, and model it with a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). During
an episode, every action is sampled from the probability distribution implied by a softmax
operation and then fed into the next time step as input (Figure 10). The RNN-controller
in their approach samples layers which are sequentially appended to construct the nal
network. The nal network is trained to obtain the validation accuracy and the param-
eters of the controller are updated as per the REINFORCE update rule (Equation (11))
which involves scaling the gradient with the obtained validation accuracy. As discussed
in Section 2.1, they consider a space of chain-structured networks parameterized by only
convolutional layers with dierent lter width, lter height, stride parameters, and num-
ber of lters. Additionally, they include anchor points in their encoding to allow for skip
connections.
Policy gradient approaches have also been explored to learn controllers for cell-based
search spaces. Zoph et al. (2018) dene an RNN-controller that outputs actions which
sequentially determines the inputs and operations for a prespecied number of blocks within
a NASNet search space cell as dened in Section 2.2. The sampled architectures are trained
and the parameters of the controller are updated according to the PPO update rule.
Cai et al. (2018a) also model a controller to parameterized the policy and train it with
REINFORCE. However the action space of the controller diers and it requires an initial
architecture to start with. There are two types of actions, widening a layer or inserting
a new layer to deepen the network. Both actions are performed by means of function-
preserving transformations (Chen et al., 2016). This means that although the structure of
the architecture changes, the function that it models remains unchanged. Thus, the accu-
racy of this network does not change at rst. This is ensured by initializing the additionally
added parameters in a special way. In the example of adding a layer, it is initialized to
correspond to the identity function. At every step and every layer, the controller predicts
whether it wants to change it by means of widening or deepening it. As this involves
predicting transformation decisions for a variable length sequence, they incorporate a bidi-
rectional recurrent network (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997) with an embedding layer to learn
a low-dimensional representation of the network which is subsequently fed into actors that
compute the transformation decisions. For the predicted actions the function-preserving
transformations are computed which enable ecient reuse of weights for training the newly
sampled architecture which reduces the overall search duration.
15