Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
is then conditioned on the states of the graph neural network to infer the weights of the
architecture.
Discussion All of the one-shot approaches share the weights across dierent sampled ar-
chitectures, and rely on the hypothesis that the trained over-parameterized network can
be used to rank architectures for quality. This belief is supported by Bender et al. (2018)
who show a correlation between the validation error obtained for a sample of the over-
parameterized network and the one obtained after training the corresponding architecture
from scratch. However, they acknowledge that training the over-parameterized network
is not trivial and that the practical approaches of batch normalization, dropout rate and
regularization play an important role. Zhang et al. (2019) conduct a similar experiment
using a separate implementation and conrm the correlation between the two variables.
The correlation for the hypernetwork-based optimizers has been independently conrmed
by Brock et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2019). Thus, we have sucient empirical evidence
that weight sharing is indeed a useful tool for the search of CNN architectures. As a result,
the search only takes up insignicantly additional time than training a single candidate
in the search space and is consequently incredibly ecient compared to other optimiza-
tion methods. Sciuto et al. (2019) challenge this widespread belief for its applicability for
searching recurrent cells. They show that the ranking of architectures implied by the vari-
ous methods (Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Luo et al., 2018) does not correlate with
the true ranking. The reason that the search methods still deliver good results is solely due
to the very limited search space. They provide empirical evidence that a random search
outperforms many of the previously described methods in the search for an RNN cell.
3.5 Conclusions
In this section, we reviewed various optimization algorithms based on methods such as
reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, surrogate model-based optimization, and
one-shot models. Naturally, the imminent question is - which method should be prescribed?
In order to answer that we need to inspect if the results can be fairly compared. In our
opinion, this is not the case. The dierent experiments dier drastically in terms of search
space, search duration and data augmentation. However, we can safely conclude that the
NASNet search space is the most commonly used search space, presumably because the
imposed restrictions in its denition favor the discovery of well-performing architectures.
Similarly, strategies that reuse parameters (through function-preserving transformations or
weight sharing) are eective in reducing the search duration. However, we would like to
re-emphasize the questionable benets of weight sharing for RNNs as noted in our previous
discussion.
At this point we need to criticize the lack of fair baselines. Although architecture search
can be considered as a special way of optimizing hyperparameters, most of the related work
is disregarded. In particular, random search which has proven to be an extremely strong
baseline. In fact, Sciuto et al. (2019) show that random search nds better RNN cells than
any other optimizer. Li and Talwalkar (2019) also conrm this result and additionally show
that random search nds architectures that perform at least as well as the ones obtained
from established optimizers for CNNs. It is worth noting that these random optimizers work
on a search space that is known to sample well-performing architectures. Xie et al. (2019a)
26