Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
The work by Cai et al. (2018b) builds upon these transformations and proposes new
transformations to include branches in the network architectures. A convolutional layer
or an identity map is rst converted to its equivalent multi-branch motif such that the
functionality is preserved. This is achieved by splitting or replicating the input to a convo-
lutional or identity map into multiple branches, applying the corresponding transformation
(convolutional or identity) to each branch, and respectively concatenating or adding the
outputs of each branch. The function-preserving transformations are subsequently applied
on branches to explore more complex architectures. Similar to the work by Cai et al.
(2018a), the meta-controller in their approach also uses an encoder network to learn a
low-dimensional representation of the architecture and provide a distribution over transfor-
mation actions. They propose to learn the meta-controller with REINFORCE.
Monte Carlo Tree Search An alternative way of solving the reinforcement learning
problem lies in the use of Monte Carlo methods which are based on averaging sample
returns (Sutton and Barto, 1998). A popular algorithm in this domain is the UCT algo-
rithm (Kocsis and Szepesv ari, 2006) which has been adopted in dierent ways for neural
architecture search. This algorithm is designed for a tree-structured state-action space which
is incrementally explored and expanded. A policy based on upper condence bound (Auer,
2002) is utilized to explore this tree. The work of Negrinho and Gordon (2017) adopts
the vanilla UCT algorithm with bisection for neural architecture search. Wistuba (2018b)
builds on this work and employs function-preserving operations to speed up the training
process and uses surrogate models to predict the reward for unexplored states. Similarly,
Wang et al. (2019) make use of a surrogate model to predict the state reward and search
on the NASNet search space and use the weight sharing paradigm (Section 3.4).
3.2 Evolutionary Algorithms
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) are population-based global optimizer for black-box functions
which consist of following essential components: initialization, parent selection, recombina-
tion and mutation, survivor selection (Jong, 2006). The initialization denes how the rst
generation of the population is generated. After the initialization the optimizer repeats the
following steps until termination (see Figure 11):
1. Select parents from the population for reproduction.
2. Apply recombination and mutation operations to create new individuals.
3. Evaluate the tness of the new individuals.
4. Select the survivors of the population.
In this broad class of algorithms, the choices for mutation and recombination operators
along with the choice of tness and parent selection functions guide the overall search
process. The choice of operators used for recombination and mutation is motivated to
trade o diversity and similarity in the population, akin to the exploration and exploitation
trade-o in reinforcement learning-based search algorithms. Similarly, the choice of tness
functions re
ects the optimization objective and the choice of survivor selection enables
competition between the individuals of the population.
16