Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
properties of the dataset, also called meta-features (Reif et al., 2014), are considered. We
discuss some of these approches in this section.
Wong et al. (2018) Wong et al. (2018) use transfer learing to automate the ne-tuning
of architectures across tasks. They extend the controller of Zoph and Le (2017) to include
task-specic embeddings as input to the controller to account for the dierent tasks in the
policy. The controller generates a sequence of discrete actions that specify design choices for
ne-tuning a network architecture. This includes choosing the embeddings, the structure of
the classier and various hyperparameters. The parameters of the controller are updated
with REINFORCE. In their work they explore transfer learning for both image classication
and natural language processing tasks.
Istrate et al. (2019) The approach by Istrate et al. (2019) is based on a surrogate
model which predicts the performance of neural architectures for a new dataset based on
performance observations of neural architectures on other datasets. They use as land-
marker (Pfahringer et al., 2000), the accuracy of one computationally inexpensive a CNN
model on new dataset, which is their only meta-feature. This meta-feature is used to deter-
mine the most similar datasets. It is also used together with the architecture encoding as
input for the surrogate model. The observations on datasets with similar validation accu-
racy are used to train the surrogate model. An evolutionary algorithm with a setup similar
to Real et al. (2017) is used to obtain the the architecture that maximizes the surrogate
model's prediction. This architecture is the outcome of the search process and is trained
from scratch.
Kokiopoulou et al. (2019) Kokiopoulou et al. (2019) propose to automate ne-tuning
for transferring models across dierent text classication tasks by using a surrogate model.
This model is trained to predict the validation accuracy for a given set of meta-features and
architecture design choice. Contrary to other works, they propose to learn the meta-features
from the raw data rather than relying on manually engineered meta-features or embeddings.
The surrogate model consists of two components. While the rst component learns to
compute predictive meta-features given a small amount of data, the second component
predicts the validation accuracy for an architecture based on the architecture description
and the meta-features. These components are trained across multiple datasets and then
used for a new dataset. Instead of just predicting the accuracy of several architectures,
the authors propose to search it by means of gradient ascent. For this purpose they use a
continuous parametrization for the neural architectures.
Xue et al. (2019) Xue et al. (2019) assume a lifelong neural architecture search setting
with an incoming stream of datasets. For each new dataset, a set of landmarkers is trained
to establish a dataset representation. Based on this representation, it is decided whether
the dataset resembles a previously handled one, or whether it is a fundamentally dierent
one. For the former case, they avoid a search and reuse the solution for the previously
handled dataset. Otherwise, a new search with any arbitrary optimizer is initiated for the
dataset.
32