A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
 ^ Encoder Architecture CodeAccuracy Predictor^f()
Decoder
Figure 16: Luo et al. (2018) propose to combine an autoencoder with the surrogate model.
This model is jointly learned to achieve ^andf()^f().
Luo et al. (2018) In an interesting approach, Luo et al. (2018) jointly learn an autoen-
coder for the architecture representation with the surrogate model which uses the continuous
encoding provided by the autoencoder, the architecture code, as its input (Figure 16). A
key dierence lies in their search algorithm which uses the surrogate model to sample new
architectures by taking gradient steps with respect to the architecture code. The architec-
ture code is changed by moving in the direction which yields better accuracy according to
the surrogate model. The new architecture is obtained by mapping the potentially better
architecture code back using the decoder learned as part of the autoencoder. At every
step, these samples are trained, the meta-dataset is expanded, and the surrogate model and
autoencoder are updated accordingly. The encoder, decoder and the surrogate model are
jointly trained to minimize a weighted sum of the reconstruction loss and the performance
prediction loss.
3.4 One-Shot Architecture Search
We dene an architecture search method as one-shot if it trains a single neural network dur-
ing the search process.1This neural network is then used to derive architectures throughout
the search space as candidate solutions to the optimization problem. Most of these one-shot
architectures are based on an over-parameterized network (Saxena and Verbeek, 2016; Pham
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Xie et al., 2019b; Casale et al., 2019). The advantage of this
family of methods is the relatively low search eort which is only slightly greater than the
training costs of one architecture in the search space. As we describe later, this method-
ology can be conveniently combined with many of the previously discussed optimization
methods.
Weight Sharing Pham et al. (2018) search in a subspace of the NASNet search space
(see Section 2.2) and operate on an over-parameterized network that covers the entire search
space. They use reinforcement learning to learn a controller to sample architectures (which
are only subgraphs of the complete architecture) from the search space (see Figure 17).
The weights of the controller and a part of the over-parameterized network are alternately
updated by gradient descent. During the network parameter update step, a batch is se-
lected and an architecture is sampled from the search space. Only the parameters of this
1. Not to be confused with the one-shot learning paradigm which refers to algorithms that seek to learn
from one instance.
23