A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Hidden
State
EmbeddingSoftmax Operand 1 Operand 2Unary
Operation 1Unary
Operation 2Binary
Operation
g ^vid log=
Figure 19: Controller output for one group. Each group consists of two operands and the
unary operations applied to it as well as the binary operation which combines the outcome
of the unary operations.
7. Other Related Methods
Methodologies originally developed for architecture search have been extended to automate
other aspects of deep learning. For instance, Bello et al. (2017) encode a parameter opti-
mization method used in training of a deep learning model by means of a graph structure
that denes the update rules akin to classical gradient-based optimization. An update is
dened by several blocks as shown in Figure 19. A block consists of two operands, one
unary function for each of the operands and a binary function. The unary functions are
applied on the operands and the binary function is applied to combine the respective out-
comes. The output of this block becomes a possible operand itself and can be used by
other blocks. This structure is stacked up to a depth of three. Possible operands include
dierent orders of the gradient ( g;g2;g3), its bias-corrected running estimates, dierently
scaled versions of the parameter, random noise, constants, and the sign of the gradient.
Additionally the classical updates of Adam and RMSProp optimizer are also encapsulated
as operands. Examples for unary functions are the identity function, clipping functions, the
sign function, functions that modify the gradient to zero with a certain probability, as well
as logarithmic and exponential function. Binary functions include addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. A reinforcement controller, similar to the one proposed by
Zoph and Le (2017) (see Section 3.1), is applied to search for an optimal structure. The
main dierence in the work of Bello et al. (2017) is that they use Trust Region Policy
Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015) instead of REINFORCE for updating the controller
parameters. A deep-learning optimizer sampled from the controller is used to train a simple
two-layer convolutional neural network for only ve epochs and the validation accuracy is
used as the reward.
Ramachandran et al. (2018) uses the aforementioned setup and search space structure
to search for activation functions. They learn the controller with Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (Schulman et al., 2017). As they seek to search for activation functions, there setup
comprises of only one operand which is the input of the activation function and a dierent
set of unary and binary operations. Examples for unary operations are powers of dierent
degree, various sigmoid functions and the sine function. The set of possible binary functions
on the input ( x1;x2) is extended with additional functions like x1(x2), maximum and
minimum, and a weighted average. The reward is estimated by training a ResNet-20 with
37