Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
such as the discovery of architectures that are robust against adversarial attacks (Cubuk
et al., 2018b; Sinn et al., 2019). Furthermore, the existing techniques are extended to apply
the architecture search for other types of networks. For instance, there are rst attempts
to automatically optimize the architecture of autoencoders (Suganuma et al., 2018), trans-
formers (So et al., 2019) and graph CNNs (Gao et al., 2019). In general, these techniques
are increasingly being used to automate all components of the data science work
ow. The
big remaining challenge is the joint optimization of all conguration parameters of the deep
learning work
ow. So far, the individual components have been treated independently with
some components still relying on manual conguration. However, for true automation, it
is inevitable that all sensitive parameters must be learned or searched for. This includes
data augmentation, the various search space hyperparameters, the choice of optimizer, the
actual architecture choice and possibly even the nal model compression. Moreover, further
development of any of these search methods needs to incorporate sample eciency in its
design, an aspect that is currently not handled by neural architecture search.
Given the large amounts of resources dedicated to the research in neural architecture
search, it is imperative to question its meaningfulness and usefulness to research. Although,
one might hope to get insights into the understanding of the space of deep learning models
or perhaps even the interpretability of deep learning in general, so far there have not been
any dedicated eorts channelled into this direction. Another important question, which
we believe is often overlooked, pertains to the credibility of neural architecture search as
a practically useful eld of research. It is crucial to emphasize the role of search space
designs in the performance of obtained architectures, some of which are heavily inspired by
the design of existing architectures. Many architectures originate from the NASNet search
space, which were found by various search algorithms. Therefore, a legitimate question is to
ask whether the search algorithms have really discovered new or innovative architectures,
or whether they owe their success to the design and properties of the NASNet search space.
Li and Talwalkar (2019) as well as the inventors of the NASNet search space, partially
answer this question by showing that even a random search yields good, if not better,
results. Furthermore, these architectures ultimately do not seem to be signicantly better
than those developed by humans. The human innovations that contribute to the invention
of new architectures are dicult to discover given the restrictions of search spaces. This
brings us to the question of what to expect from the future developments of architecture
search algorithms. If we really seek to nd new architectures with innovative elements that
advance research in general, then perhaps we have to let go of the restrictive search spaces.
While a general automation of deep learning might answer most of these concerns, perhaps
for now we need to ask ourselves why an architecture discovered by a search algorithm
is better than the choice of an existing architecture in combination with hyperparameter
optimization. In terms of usefulness, the answer can not be that each dataset needs its own
architecture. Many architecture search papers show that found architectures can be easily
transferred to other datasets, even other tasks, which is a well known property of deep
learning architectures. So why then should a practitioner commit to the use of a search
algorithm for nding a new architecture, in particular since it does not free her from the
optimization of the search space hyperparameters?
40