Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
of a genotype, for instance unused inputs for certain operations or disconnected blocks. The
inactive parts do not materialize in the phenotype (for an example see Figure 13). They
propose to use the (1+ )-evolutionary strategy ( = 2) (Beyer and Schwefel, 2002) approach
to guide the evolution where mutation and selection operators are applied in a loop until
termination. Beginning with a genotype that corresponds to the parent individual (random
for the rst iteration), ospring are generated by forcefully modifying the active parts of
the genotype. A mutation is also applied to the parent on one of the inactive parts of its
genotype. However this does not result in any change of the phenotype and hence does not
add to the overall training cost. This action ensures progress of the search even in cases
where the parent of this generation will become the parent of the next generations again.
The ospring networks are trained to obtain validation accuracies and the parent for the
next iteration is selected using elitist selection strategy.
Liu et al. (2018b) Liu et al. (2018b) propose another evolutionary algorithm which uses
the hierarchically organized search space as described in Section 2.2. At every step a muta-
tion selects the hierarchy level to modify along with the modication to the representations
at that level. The population is initialized with 200 trivial genotypes which are diversied
by applying 1000 random mutations. Furthermore, parents are selected using tournament
selection (5% of the population) and no individuals are removed during the evolutionary
process. In their setting, mutations can add, alter and remove operations from the genotype.
Real et al. (2019) The follow-up work by Real et al. (2019) is one of the most signicant
works in the direction of using evolutionary algorithms for architecture search. It is pri-
marily known for nding the architectures AmoebaNet-B and AmoebaNet-C which set new
records for the task of image classication on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet dataset. However,
their search process used a total of 3,150 GPU hours. Their evolutionary search algorithm
operates on the NASNet search space (details in Section 2.2) with tournament selection
used to select parents at each iteration. The selected individuals are mutated with a ran-
dom change in an operation or a connection in either a normal or a reduction cell and are
trained for 25 epochs. As opposed to previous works, their algorithm does not solely rely on
validation accuracy and incorporates age in the selection of survivors. This is motivated to
restrain repeated selection of well-performing models for mutation and introduce diversity
to the population. This basically adds a regularization term to the objective function which
makes sure that we are searching for architectures which are not only capable of reaching
high validation accuracy once but every time.
The previously discussed evolutionary algorithms are mostly concerned about nding a
good performing architecture ignoring GPU budget limitations. The shortest search time
used among those methods is still seventeen GPU days. The two works discussed in the
following are more concerned about eciency and report comparable results within a day.
The method to accomplish this is a combination of mutations which are function-preserving
transformations (see Section 3.1) and a more aggressive, greedy evolution.
Elsken et al. (2018) Elsken et al. (2018) propose a simple yet ecient evolutionary
algorithm inspired by the function-preserving transformations. Similar to Suganuma et al.
(2017) they follow the (1+ ) evolutionary strategy. A parent is selected with elitist selection
20