A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
max 00Node 1
conv 01Node 2
conv 12Node 3
sum 21Node 4
output 43Node 5
Genotype
softmax
+
max
pool
convmax
poolNode 4Phenotype
Figure 13: The genetic encoding used by Suganuma et al. (2017). Gray shaded parts of
the genotype are inactive. Inactive parts such as Node 3 are not present in the phenotype.
The additional max pooling layer introduced by Node 4 is an example how not explicitly
encoded operations in the genotype can appear in the phenotype.
segments, each consisting of multiple convolution layers (see Section 2.1 for more details).
Each segment is described by an adjacency matrix which denes a directed acyclic graph
over the layers within the segment. The genotype of the entire network is obtained as a xed
length binary string of the adjacency matrices of the three segments. The algorithm begins
with a population of 20 random samples from the search space. In the parent selection
step, all pairs ( i;i+1); imod 2 = 1 are considered for a cross-over operation. With a
probability p, the cross-over operation swaps segments between the two selected networks.
As the next step, all individuals which have undergone no modications in the previous
step are considered for mutation. In their algorithm, mutations are dened as random

ip operations on the adjacency matrices that dene the segments. Finally, the obtained
ospring is trained from scratch and its tness is evaluated. The tness of an individual is
dened as the dierence between its validation accuracy and the minimum accuracy among
all individuals of the population. As tness proportionate selection is used in their approach,
this modication ensures that the weakest individual survives with a probability of zero. It
is worth remarking that this is one of the rst works to demonstrate a successful transfer of
an architecture automatically discovered on a smaller dataset to a larger one, namely from
CIFAR-10 to ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015).
Suganuma et al. (2017) Suganuma et al. (2017) present another optimizer based on
genetic algorithms but consider a wider set of operations in their search space, which includes
convolutions and pooling along with concatenation and summation of vectors. In their
approach, they encode the entire network as a sequence of blocks represented by a triple
that denes the operation and inputs of the block. The string obtained by concatenating the
block encoding constitutes the genotype. Inactive parts are admissible in such a denition
19