Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Surrogate
ModelResponse
FunctionCandidates
HistorySelect Candidates Evaluate Candidates
Update History Update SurrogateApproximates
Figure 15: A general framework for surrogate model-based optimization.
to surrogate model-based optimization that have been used with an intent to improve the
eciency of neural architecture search.
Kandasamy et al. (2018) Kandasamy et al. (2018) cast this as a black-box optimiza-
tion problem and tackle it with Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012). Bayesian opti-
mization methods use a combination of a probabilistic surrogate model and an acquisition
function to obtain suitable candidates. The acquisition function measures the utility by
accounting for both, the predicted response and the uncertainty in the prediction. In their
approach they model the surrogate with a Gaussian process (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006)
and use expected improvement as the acquisition function (Mockus et al., 1978) for the op-
timization. The architecture with the highest expected utility is selected for evaluation
and the consequent meta-instances are added to H. The surrogate model is updated and
the previous steps are repeated. The authors render two changes to the standard Bayesian
optimization algorithm. First, a novel kernel function to compute similarity between two
network architectures is proposed and second, an evolutionary algorithm is used to max-
imize the acquisition function. The kernel value computation in this work is modeled as
an optimal transport program (Villani, 2008). In essence, the graph topology, the location
and frequency of operations as well as the number of feature maps are used to compute the
similarity between two architectures.
Liu et al. (2018a) Liu et al. (2018a) also incorporate a surrogate model and search for
architectures in the NASNet search space (Section 2.2). They explore this search space by
progressively increasing the number of blocks in a cell, which, as previously discussed, is a
hyperparameter and xed in the template. While searching for models with an additional
block, they simultaneously train a surrogate model which can predict the validation accuracy
of the architecture given the encoding of the cell. The overall search process is designed as
a beam search where at every step, a new set of candidates is generated by expanding the
current pool of cells with an additional block and the top kof those are trained as per the
predictions of the surrogate model. Further, in each step the surrogate model is updated
by considering the newly obtained karchitectures in the meta-dataset. Given the design of
their setup, the surrogate model is required to handle variable sized inputs. In addition to
an RNN and an Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)
which are natural choices for this modeling, they also investigate a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) for this model.
22