Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Table 1: High-level details of various evolutionary algorithms for neural architecture search.
Method Search Space Init Parent Sel. Survivor Sel.
Real et al. (2017) global simple tournament tournament
Xie and Yuille (2017) global random all tness prop.
Suganuma et al. (2017) global random n/a elitist
Liu et al. (2018b) cell-based random tournament all
Real et al. (2019) cell-based random tournament youngest
Elsken et al. (2018) global simple n/a elitist
Wistuba (2018a) cell-based simple tournament all
conv convbatch
normReLUbatch
normReLUglobal
poolsoftmaxx ^y(x)
Figure 12: A possible architecture discovered by the algorithm described by Real et al.
(2017). Noticeable are the redundant operations such as two convolutions in a row without
an activation.
with the choices of mutation operators and selection functions. In the context of this work
we describe six notable works in EA-based neural architecture search. A broad overview of
these approaches is provided in Table 1.
Real et al. (2017) Real et al. (2017) were one of the rst to propose an evolutionary algo-
rithm to nd competitive convolutional neural network architectures for image classication.
Their approach begins with one thousand copies of the simplest possible architecture, i.e.
a global pooling layer followed by the output layer. In the parent selection step of their
approach they propose to sample a pair of architectures for further processing. While the
better of the two architectures is copied (along with the weights), mutated, trained for
25,600 steps with a batch size 50, and added to the population, the other one is removed
from the population. This is equivalent to using tournament selection with k= 2 and
p= 1. The set of mutations consists of simple operations such as adding convolutions (pos-
sibly with batch normalization or ReLU activation) at arbitrary locations before the global
pooling layer, along with mutations that alter kernel size, number of channels, stride and
learning rate, add or remove skip connections, remove convolutions, reset weights, and a
mutation that corresponds to no change. Since no further domain constraints are enforced,
architectures with redundant components can be potentially sampled in this approach (see
Figure 12).
Xie and Yuille (2017) Xie and Yuille (2017) made their work available only one day
later. In contrast to Real et al. (2017), their work develops a genetic algorithm over a more
structured search space which comprises of a sequence of segments with possibly parallel
convolution operations. In their approach they consider networks to be composed of three
18