A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Parents
OspringPopulationParent Selection
Fitness EvaluationRecombination & MutationInitializationSurvivor
Selection
Figure 11: A general framework for evolutionary algorithms.
In the context of neural architecture search, the population consists of a pool of network
architectures. A parent architecture or a pair of architectures is selected in step 1 for
mutation or recombination, respectively. The steps of mutation and recombination refer to
operations that lead to novel architectures in the search space which are evaluated for tness
in step 3 and the process is repeated till termination. Often only mutation operators are used
in the domain of neural architecture search. There is no indication that a recombination
operation applied to two individuals with high tness would result into an ospring with
similar or better tness. On the contrary, oftentimes the tness of the resultant ospring
is much lower. For this reason and other reasons of simplicity, this part is often omitted.
The most common parent selection method in neural architecture search is tournament
selection (Goldberg and Deb, 1990). This method selects the individuals for further evo-
lution in two steps. First, it selects kindividuals from the population at random. Then
it iterates over them in the descending order of their tness while selecting individuals for
further steps with some (prespecied) high probability p. An alternative to tournament
selection is tness proportionate selection . In this approach an individual is selected pro-
portional to its tness. Thus, in a population f1;:::;Ng, thei-th individual is selected
with probabilityf(i)PN
j=1f(j), wheref(i) is the tness of the individual i.
After the recombination and mutation step, the population has grown. The intent of the
survivor selection component is to reduce the population size and enable competition within
the individuals. Several dierent policies are used to achieve this, ranging from selecting only
the best ( elitist selection ) to selecting all individuals. One class of evolutionary algorithm
that has been widely adopted for neural architecture search is genetic algorithms. These
approaches bear their name from the representation of individuals in their methodology
which is done by means of a xed-length encoding, called the genotype . Mutation and
recombination operations are performed directly on this representation. Further, a genotype
is used to create the physical appearance of the individual, which in the case of neural
architecture search is the architecture. This materialization is called the phenotype . It is
important to note that parts of the genotype can be conditionally active or inactive. The
information of the genotype is referred to as active if its modication results in a change in
the phenotype (given all other information remains the same). For an example see Figure
13.
In the remaining section we discuss the popular choices for search space, mutation
operators and selection functions that have been utilized for neural architecture search.
We note that EA-based neural architecture search methods include a set of highly diverse
approaches which have beneted from the varied choices of encoding the search space along
17