A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Martin Wistuba martin.wistuba@ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM Technology Campus, Damastown Ind. Park
Dublin, D15HN66, Ireland
Ambrish Rawat ambrish.rawat@ie.ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM Technology Campus, Damastown Ind. Park
Dublin, D15HN66, Ireland
Tejaswini Pedapati tejaswinip@us.ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
Abstract
The growing interest in both the automation of machine learning and deep learning has
inevitably led to the development of a wide variety of automated methods for neural ar-
chitecture search. The choice of the network architecture has proven to be critical, and
many advances in deep learning spring from its immediate improvements. However, deep
learning techniques are computationally intensive and their application requires a high level
of domain knowledge. Therefore, even partial automation of this process helps to make
deep learning more accessible to both researchers and practitioners. With this survey, we
provide a formalism which unies and categorizes the landscape of existing methods along
with a detailed analysis that compares and contrasts the dierent approaches. We achieve
this via a comprehensive discussion of the commonly adopted architecture search spaces
and architecture optimization algorithms based on principles of reinforcement learning and
evolutionary algorithms along with approaches that incorporate surrogate and one-shot
models. Additionally, we address the new research directions which include constrained
and multi-objective architecture search as well as automated data augmentation, optimizer
and activation function search.
Keywords: Neural Architecture Search, Automation of Machine Learning, Deep Learn-
ing, Reinforcement Learning, Evolutionary Algorithms, Constrained Optimization, Multi-
Objective Optimization
1. Introduction
Deep learning methods are very successful in solving tasks in machine translation, image
and speech recognition. This success is often attributed to their ability to automatically
extract features from unstructured data such as audio, image and text. We are currently
witnessing this paradigm shift from the laborious job of manual feature engineering for
unstructured data to engineering network components and architectures for deep learning
methods. While architecture modications do result in signicant gains in the performance
of deep learning methods, the search for suitable architectures is in itself a time-consuming,
arduous and error-prone task. Within the last two years there has been an insurgence
c
2019 Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati.arXiv:1905.01392v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jun 2019