Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
curve prediction methods are automated methods that try to estimate this probability.
The previously discussed surrogate models (Section 3.3) are related to these methods. The
main dierence is that learning curve prediction methods require additional training of a
candidate and take the learning curve into account.
Many approaches in neural architecture search do not train models to completion. In-
stead, the validation accuracy of this premature model is used as an approximation for the
nal performance. One popular hyperparameter optimization which relies on this prema-
ture performance is Hyperband (Li et al., 2017). In this work, a random set of candidate
models is trained in parallel and after every few iterations (the considered number of iter-
ations is increased exponentially), training of a large fraction of candidates is terminated
based on the premature performance. In this way the number of candidates reduces expo-
nentially, while at the same time the training time per candidate is also increased at an
exponential rate. Eventually only one candidate remains which serves as the output of the
search algorithm.
In the following we discuss more sophisticated approaches which try to predict the nal
performance based on architecture and data information as well as the premature learning
curve. All these methods use a model to predict the nal performance of a training job.
This model provides the probability that a premature learning curve will exceed a particular
accuracy. This is used to determine the likelihood that the current training job will provide
a network with higher accuracy than the current best one. If this likelihood does not exceed
a predetermined threshold, training is terminated.
Domhan et al. (2015) Typically learning curves are increasing and saturating functions.
Domhan et al. (2015) build on this observation and select a set of eleven dierent increasing
and saturating function families and combine them by a weighted sum to probabilistically
model a learning curve. However, since it does not learn across learning curves, it requires
a relatively long premature learning curve in order to yield accurate predictions.
Klein et al. (2017) Klein et al. (2017) extend the work by Domhan et al. (2015) to learn
the learning curve prediction model across dierent learning curves. For this purpose, the
function families are combined with a Bayesian neural network which infers the parameters
of the functions and their weights conditioned on the premature learning curve. Parameters
of the Bayesian neural network are learned on a set of mature learning curves.
Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) The two previously discussed works make strong
assumptions regarding the learning curves by using a set of function families which might
not apply generally. Moreover, noisy optimization or learning rate schedules may violate the
assumption made about the learning curve behavior. For instance, a step-wise decay of the
learning rate violates the assumption that the learning curve is a quickly saturating function
and a cyclic learning rate schedule violates the assumption that the learning curve is an
increasing function. Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) overcome this problem by using
mature learning curves observed during training rather than a predened set of functions.
An ane transformation is used to reduce the squared error between all mature learning
curves and a premature learning curve. The prediction model is formed as an average of
the best ts of mature learning curves.
30