Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
in research eorts by the machine learning community that seeks to automate this search
process. On a high level, this automation is cast as a search problem over a set of decisions
that dene the dierent components of a neural network. The set of feasible solutions to
these decisions implicitly denes the search space and the search algorithm is dened by
the optimizer. Arguably, the works by Zoph and Le (2017) and Baker et al. (2017) mark
the beginning of these eorts where their works demonstrated that good architectures can
be discovered with the use of reinforcement learning algorithms. Shortly thereafter, Real
et al. (2017) showed that similar results could also be achieved by the hitherto well studied
approaches in neuroevolution (Floreano et al., 2008). However, both these search approaches
consumed hundreds of GPU hours in their respective computations. Consequently, many
of the subsequent works focused on methods that reduce this computational burden. The
successful algorithms along this line of research leverage from the principle of reusing the
learned model parameters, with the works of Cai et al. (2018a) and Pham et al. (2018)
being the notable mentions.
The design of the search space forms a key component of neural architecture search. In
addition to speeding up the search process, this in
uences the duration of the search and the
quality of the solution. In the earlier works on neural architecture search, the spaces were
designed to primarily search for chain-structured architectures. However, with branched
handcrafted architectures surpassing the classical networks in terms of performance, appro-
priate search spaces were proposed shortly after the initial publications (Zoph et al., 2018)
and these have since become a norm in this eld.
In parallel to these developments, researchers have broadened the horizons of neural
architecture search to incorporate objectives that go beyond reducing the search time and
generalization error of the found architectures. Methods that simultaneously handle multi-
ple objective functions have become relevant. Notable works include methods that attempt
to limit the number of model parameters or the like, for ecient deployment on mobile
devices (Tan et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2017). Furthermore, the developed techniques for ar-
chitecture search have been extended for advanced automation of other related components
of deep learning. For instance, the search for activation functions (Ramachandran et al.,
2018) or suitable data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2018a).
Currently, the automation of deep learning in the form of neural architecture search
is one of the fastest developing areas of machine learning. With new papers emerging on
arXiv.org each week and major conferences publishing a handful of interesting work, it is
easy to lose track. With this survey, we provide a formalism which unies the landscape of
existing methods. This formalism allows us to critically examine the dierent approaches
and understand the benets of dierent components that contribute to the design and suc-
cess of neural architecture search. Along the way, we also highlight some popular miscon-
ceptions pitfalls in the current trends of architecture search. We supplement our criticism
with suitable experiments.
Our review is divided into several sections. In Section 2, we discuss various architecture
search spaces that have been proposed over time. We use Section 3 to formally dene the
problem of architecture search. Then we identify four typical types of optimization meth-
ods: reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, surrogate model-based optimization,
and one-shot architecture search. We dene these optimization procedures and associate
them to existing work and discuss it. Section 6 highlights the architecture search, consider-
2