A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
IterationsValidation Accuracy
Final Performance

Premature Performance
Figure 18: Learning curve prediction tries to predict from the premature learning curve
(solid line) the nal performance. This can signicantly reduce the number of required
training iterations.
go one step further and use a graph generator to generate random graph structures that no
longer adhere to the rules of established search spaces. Although these graph generators do
not have any deep learning specic prior, the generated architectures perform better than
those found by complex architecture optimizers. Architectures designed by humans often
serve as a motivation to justify the search for neural architectures. However, state-of-the-art
architectures are often not considered for comparison or not trained under equivalent exper-
imental conditions. Thus, the eect of learning rate decay strategies, augmenting techniques
(cutout (DeVries and Taylor, 2017)), regularization tricks (ScheduledDropPath (Zoph et al.,
2018)), and other nuanced strategies that eect training dynamics gets overshadowed. We
include the results for the state-of-the-art architectures for CIFAR-10 in Table 2 and re-
port additional results for models trained with the popular data-augmentation technique of
cutout in Table 4. Results for ImageNet are reported in Table 3. We note that the perfor-
mance gap between human-designed and discovered architectures is smaller than what is
often claimed or reported, in particular for CIFAR-10.
We recognize that in recent years many interesting and creative architecture search
methods have been developed, but we argue that the source of performance gains still
remains unclear. This remains a highly relevant and unanswered question for this research
area.
4. Early Termination of Training Processes
Although expensive, training is an inevitable step to obtain the validation accuracy on a
dataset. For neural architecture search, however, it is not necessary to know the validation
accuracy, it is sucient to know whether an architecture candidate is better or worse than
the current best solution. Human experts estimate the likelihood if the current candidate
can surpass the current best solution by analyzing the behavior of its learning curve. We
refer to the function that maps the number of iterations used for training a model to
its validation accuracy at that time as its learning curve (Figure 18). If there is a high
probability that a current training process does not lead to an improved solution, the process
is terminated. The time thus saved can now be used for other training processes. Learning
29