A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
ing constraints, multiple objective functions and model compression techniques. Alternate
approaches that are motivated from the use of transfer learning are discussed in Section
5. Similarly, the class of methods that use early termination to fasten the search process
are detailed in Section 4. Finally, the in
uence of search procedures on related areas is dis-
cussed in Section 7. The discussion is supported with extensive illustrations to elucidate the
dierent methods under a common formalism and relevant experimentation that examines
the dierent aspects of neural architecture search methods.
2. Neural Architecture Search Space
From a computational standpoint, neural networks represent a function that transforms in-
put variables xto output variables ^ythrough a series of operations. This can be formalized
in the language of computational graphs (Bauer, 1974) where neural networks are repre-
sented as directed acyclic graphs with a set of nodes Z. Each nodez(k)represents a tensor
and is associated with an operation o(k)2Oon its set of parent nodes I(k)(Goodfellow
et al., 2016). The only exception is the input node xwhich has neither a set of parent
nodes nor an operation associated to it and is only considered as an input to other nodes.
The computation at a node kamounts to
z(k)=o(k)(I(k)): (1)
The set of operations includes unary operations such as convolutions, pooling, activation
functions or multivariate operations such as concatenation or addition. For notational
convenience, we adopt a convention wherein we x the unary operations to use concatenation
as an implicit merge operation when acting on a set of multiple inputs and often omit it
in the representation. Note that for a neural network, any representation that species
the set of parents and the operation for each node completely denes the architecture of
the network. We refer to such a representation as and use this to unify and outline the
dierent neural architecture search methods under the same framework.
Aneural architecture search space is a subspace of this general denition of neural ar-
chitectures. Its space of operations can be limited and certain constraints may be imposed
on the architectures. In the rest of this survey, we use search space to refer to the set of
feasible solutions of a neural architecture search method. Most works on neural architec-
ture search address the automated search of architectures for the task of image recognition
and are consequently concerned with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al.,
1998). The corresponding search spaces in these works can be broadly classied into two
categories. The rst category of search spaces is dened for the graphs that represent an
entire neural architecture which we refer to as the global search space and discuss in Sec-
tion 2.1. We discuss the second category in Section 2.2 which assumes that an architecture
is a combination of few cells which are repeated to build the complete network. Although
in principle the global search space encompasses the cell-based search space, we make this
distinction to highlight some of the nuanced aspects of both these spaces. An objective
comparison of these search spaces is provided in Section 2.3. Another common task tackled
with neural architecture search is language modeling where search methods seek to nd the
architecture for recurrent neural networks (RNNs). We discuss the commonly used search
space in this context in Section 2.4.
3