takes a query as input, and outputs for each input
position a new token, which is its rewrite. This new
query is fed into a different BERT predictor from
which the answer is extracted. Importantly, the
downstream predictor BERT is a ﬁxed pre-trained
model, and thus the goal is to train the rewriter to
produce queries for which the predictor outputs the
correct answer.
A technical challenge is that outputting discrete
tokens leads to a non-differentiable model, which
we tackle by adding a loss term that encourages
the rewriter’s output to be similar to BERT token
embeddings. Moreover, we must guarantee that the
BERTese query contains the [MASK] token from
which the answer will be read. To achieve this, we
ﬁrst add an auxiliary loss term that encourages the
model to output precisely one masked token in the
query rewrite. We then add a layer that ﬁnds the
token index that most closely resembles [MASK] ,
and this is where we expect the correct answer to
be completed. Training of this selection process is
done using the straight-through estimator (Hinton,
2012; Bengio et al., 2013).
We evaluate our approach on the LAMA dataset
(Petroni et al., 2019), and show that our model
signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of knowledge
extraction. Furthermore, many of the rewrites cor-
respond to consistent changes in query wording
(e.g., changing tense), and thus provide informa-
tion on the types of changes that are useful for
extracting knowledge from BERT. While we exper-
iment on BERT, our method is generic and can be
applied to any MLM.
Taken together, our results demonstrate the
potential of rewriting inputs to language mod-
els for both obtaining better predictions, and
for potentially gaining insights into how knowl-
edge is represented in these models. Our code
can be downloaded from https://github.com/
adihaviv/bertese .
2 Related Work
Choosing the right language for extracting world
knowledge from LMs has attracted much interest
recently. First, Petroni et al. (2019) observed that
MLMs can complete simple queries with correct
factual information. Jiang et al. (2020) and Heinz-
erling and Inui (2020) then showed that in the zero-
shot setting, small variations to such queries can
lead to a drop in fact recall. Orthogonally, another
line of research focused on query reformulationfor standard Question Answering (QA) tasks. Gan
and Ng (2019) demonstrated that even minor query
modiﬁcations can lead to a signiﬁcant decrease in
performance for multiple QA models and tasks.
Buck et al. (2017) showed that it is possible to
train a neural network to reformulate a question
using Reinforcement Learning (RL), optimizing
the accuracy of a black-box QA system. Similarly,
Nogueira and Cho (2017) used RL to create a query
reformulation system that maximizes the recall of
a black-box information retrieval engine.
Jiang et al. (2020) proposed an ensemble method
for query reformulation from LMs, that includes:
(1) mining new queries, (2) using an off-the-shelf
pre-trained translation model to collect additional
paraphrased queries with back-translation, and (3)
using a re-ranker to select one or more of the new
queries. They then feed those queries to BERT to
get the masked token prediction.
In this work, we take the idea of Jiang et al.
(2020) a step forward and train a model in an end-
to-end fashion to generate rephrased queries which
are optimized to maximize knowledge extraction
from the MLM.1Independent of this work, Shin
et al. (2020) recently proposed to automatically
generate prompts for extracting knowledge from a
pre-trained language model using a gradient-based
search method, illustrating gains on multiple tasks.
3 The BERTese Model
Recall that our goal is to build a model that takes as
input a query in natural language, and re-writes it
into a query that will be fed as input to an existing
BERT model.
We refer to the above re-writing model as the
rewriter and the existing BERT model as the pre-
dictor . We note that both input and output queries
should include the token [MASK]. For example
the input could be “Obama was born in [MASK]”
and the output “Obama was born in the state of
[MASK]” .
We ﬁrst describe the behaviour of our model at
inference time (see Figure 1). Given a query, which
is a sequence of tokens, S= (s1;:::;sn), we map
Sinto a sequence of vectors Q(S)2Rdnus-
ing BERT’s embeddings of dimensionality d. This
input is fed into a (BERT-based) stack of trans-
1Although knowledge retrieval has been investigated in
autoregressive models as well, similar to Jiang et al. (2020),
in this work we focus on MLMs only, as AR-LM only predict
an answer if the masked token is at the end of the query.