BERTese: Learning to Speak to BERT
Adi Haviv1Jonathan Berant1;2Amir Globerson1
1School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2Allen Institute for AI
fadi.haviv,joberant g@cs.tau.ac.il, gamir@post.tau.ac.il
Abstract
Large pre-trained language models have been
shown to encode large amounts of world and
commonsense knowledge in their parameters,
leading to substantial interest in methods for
extracting that knowledge. In past work,
knowledge was extracted by taking manually-
authored queries and gathering paraphrases
for them using a separate pipeline. In this
work, we propose a method for automati-
cally rewriting queries into “BERTese”, a para-
phrase query that is directly optimized towards
better knowledge extraction. To encourage
meaningful rewrites, we add auxiliary loss
functions that encourage the query to corre-
spond to actual language tokens. We empiri-
cally show our approach outperforms compet-
ing baselines, obviating the need for complex
pipelines. Moreover, BERTese provides some
insight into the type of language that helps lan-
guage models perform knowledge extraction.
1 Introduction
Recent work has shown that large pre-trained lan-
guage models (LM), trained with a masked lan-
guage modeling (MLM) objective (Devlin et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2019; Sanh et al.,
2019; Conneau et al., 2020), encode substantial
amounts of world knowledge in their parameters.
This has led to ample research on developing meth-
ods for extracting that knowledge (Petroni et al.,
2019, 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Bouraoui et al.,
2020). The most straightforward approach is to
present the model with a manually-crafted query
such as “Dante was born in [MASK]” and check
if the model predicts “Florence” in the [MASK]
position. However, when this fails, it is difﬁcult to
determine if the knowledge is absent from the LM
or if the model failed to understand the query itself.
For example, the model might return the correct
answer if the query is “Dante was born in the city
of [MASK]” .
Rewriter
(Identity Pretrained BER T)Predictor
(Off-The-Shelf  Pretrained BER T)
BERT 
Embeddings
Vocabulary 
 
Q: will & grace was originally aired on [MASK].Nearest Neighbors Q: will & grace is originally aired on [MASK].A: nbcFigure 1: The BERTese Model. The model takes an
input query, rewrites it, and feeds the output to a pre-
trained BERT model. The untrained components are
marked in green, and the blue component is trained.
Motivated by the above observation, we ask: can
we automatically ﬁnd the best way to “ask” an LM
about its knowledge? We refer to this challenge as
speaking “BERTese”. In particular, we ask how to
rewrite a knowledge-seeking query into one that
MLMs understand better, where understanding is
manifested by providing a correct answer to the
query.
Prior work (Jiang et al., 2020) tackled this prob-
lem using a 2-step pipeline, where ﬁrst a small list
of paraphrase templates is collected using external
resources, and then a model learns to extract knowl-
edge by aggregating information from paraphrases
of the input query. In this work, we propose a
more general approach, where the model learns to
rewrite queries, directly driven by the objective of
knowledge-extraction.
Figure 1 provides an overview of our approach.
Our model contains a BERT-based rewriter , whicharXiv:2103.05327v2  [cs.CL]  11 Mar 2021