to output the exact word embeddings it received
as input (i.e., ﬁne-tuned to the identity mapping).
Thus, when training for knowledge extraction, the
rewriter is initialized to output exactly the query it
received as input.
4 Experiments
Experimental setup We conduct our experi-
ments on the LAMA dataset (Petroni et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2020), a recently introduced unsu-
pervised knowledge-extraction benchmark for pre-
trained LMs. LAMA is composed of a collection of
cloze-style queries about relational facts with a sin-
gle token answer. As in Jiang et al. (2020), we limit
our main experiment to the T-REx (Elsahar et al.,
2018) subset. The T-REx dataset is constructed out
of 41 relations, each associated with at most 1000
queries, all extracted from Wikidata.
For training our model, we use a separate train-
ing set, created by Jiang et al. (2020), called T-REx-
train. This dataset is constructed from Wikidata and
has no overlap with the original T-REx dataset. We
evaluate our model on the complete T-REx dataset.
Implementation Details Both the rewriter and
the predictor are based on BERT basewith the de-
fault settings from the Huggingface (Wolf et al.,
2020) platform. We optimize BERTese using
AdamW with an initial learning rate of 1e-5. We
train the model on a single 32GB NVIDIA V100
for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64. For the loss
coefﬁcients (see Eq. (5)) we set1= 0:3and
2= 0:5.
Baselines We compare our method to three base-
lines: (a) BERT - A BERT basemodel without
any ﬁne-tuning, as evaluated in Petroni et al.
(2019). (b) LPAQA - The model proposed by
Jiang et al. (2020), based on mining additional
paraphrase queries. We report results on a sin-
gle paraphrase.2(c) FT-BERT: An end-to-end dif-
ferentiable BERT basemodel, explicitly ﬁne-tuned
on T-REx-train to output the correct answer. This
model, like ours, is trained for knowledge extrac-
tion, but does this internally, without exposing an
interpretable intermediate textual rewrite.
Results We use the same evaluation metrics as
Petroni et al. (2019) and report precision at one
(P@1) macro-averaged over relations (we ﬁrst av-
erage within relations and then across relations).
2It is possible to improve results by aggregating over mul-
tiple rewrites, but our focus is on a single rewrite.As shown in Table 1, BERTese outperforms all
three baselines. Compared to the zero-shot set-
ting, where BERT is untrained on any additional
data, we improve performance from 31:1!38:3.
Our model also outperforms a BERT model ﬁne-
tuned for knowledge extraction on the same data
as our model ( 36!38:3). Last, we outperform
the BERT baseversion of LPAQA by more than 4
points.
Table 2 presents example rewrites that are out-
put by our model. It can be seen that rewrites
are usually semantically plausible, and make small
changes that are not meaningful to humans, but
seem to help extract information from BERT, such
aswas!isanda!the. In some cases, rewrites
can be interpreted, for example, replacing the word
airﬁeld with the more frequent word airport .
Ablation Study In Table 3 we present P@1 re-
sults on the T-REx test set after ablating different
parts of the loss function. We keep the same la-
bel loss, same rewriter pretraining scheme, hyper-
parameters, and inference process. We show that
removing all auxiliary losses hurts performance sig-
niﬁcantly on the T-REx dataset. Next, we evaluate
the impact of removing the “Single [MASK] Loss”,
and report a drop from 38:3to37:3. In addition,
when further observing the rewrites the model pro-
duces, we ﬁnd that those will have in some cases
more than one [MASK] token. Overall, the results
show that having just one of the loss terms sub-
stantially improves the performance (either “Valid
Token Loss” or “Single [MASK] Loss”), but using
both losses further improves accuracy.
Ablation P@1
No auxilary losses 25.3
SML 36.6
VTL 37.5
SML + VTL (BERTese) 38.3
Table 3: Ablation experiments on T-REx. We abbrevi-
ate the ”Single [MASK] token” as SML and the ”Valid
Token Loss” as VTL.
Part Of Speech Analysis To better understand
what types of changes our rewriter performs, Table
4 shows the distribution over part-of-speech-tags re-
placed by the rewriter. We show all part-of-speech
tags for which the frequency is higher than 1%.
More than 70% of the replacements are nouns and
verbs, which carry substantial semantic content.