demonstrate that exposing the LSTM internal state directly and without a proper protec-
tion yields unstable training dynamics that compromise the ﬁnal performance. Finally,
we show the e ectiveness of the proposed solution in a variety of tasks, ranging from toy
problems with very long-term dependencies (adding problem, copy task, and sequential
MNIST) to language modeling and image captioning.
2. Related Work
Long Short-Term Memory networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) aim to
mitigate the exploding and vanishing gradient problem (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al.,
1994) with the use of gating mechanisms. Since its introduction, LSTM has gained
a lot of attention for its ﬂexibility and e cacy in many di erent tasks. To simplify
the LSTM structure, Liu et al. (2020) propose to exploit the content of the long-term
memory cell in a recurrent block with only two gates. However, this model neglects
the importance of the LSTM output. While this might be useful for simple tasks, it is
unlikely to generalize to more complex settings. Arpit et al. (2019) propose to modify
the path of the gradients in order to stabilize training with a stochastic algorithm speciﬁc
to LSTM optimization. This direction of work is not in contrast with our goal, and
could possibly be integrated with our proposal since our connection does not require a
speciﬁc setup to be optimized. Among the LSTM variants, the Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) (Cho et al., 2014b,a) is the most popular and common architecture (Chung et al.,
2014), and features a coupling mechanism between input and forget gates (Gre et al.,
2017). A recent line of research aims to tailor the LSTM structure for speciﬁc tasks.
For instance, Baraldi et al. (2017) propose a hierarchical model for video captioning,
while other works incorporate convolutional models into the LSTM structure (Xiao
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2018). While these works propose a modiﬁcation of the LSTM
towards a speciﬁc goal, we propose a general and powerful idea that adapts to a large
set of di erent tasks.
Recently, models based on self-attention, such as Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al., 2017) and its variants, are achieving state-of-art performances on many di erent
tasks, and also for sequence modeling. For instance, language representations based on
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) can be ﬁnetuned with an additional output layer to obtain
state-of-art results on many language-based tasks. However, RNNs require much fewer
parameters and operations to run than Transformer-based architectures and are still
widely adopted. Moreover, LSTMs still have a large market in embedded systems and
edge devices for their low computational and memory requirements.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we present a complete overview of Working Memory Connections.
First, we recall the LSTM equations. Second, we explain the modiﬁcations introduced
in our design. Finally, we motivate the choices behind WMCs w.r.t. other approaches.
Speciﬁcally, we identify key problems in previous cell-to-gate connections that hinder
the learning process, and we show that the proposed solution does not su er from these
weaknesses.
3