gating mechanisms (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Jing et al., 2019). For instance,
Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) use
gates to control the information ﬂow towards and from the memory cell and to regulate
the forgetting process (Gers et al., 2000). LSTMs are adopted in a wide number of
tasks, such as neural machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Sutskever et al., 2014),
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), and also vision-and-language applications like
image and video captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015; Baraldi et al., 2017).
In this paper, we propose a novel cell-to-gate connection that modiﬁes the classic
LSTM block. Our formulation is general and improves LSTM overall performance
and training stability without any particular assumption on the underlying task. In the
vanilla LSTM formulation, the gates are controlled by the current input of the block
and its previous output, which acts as the hidden state for the network. The long-term
memory cell, instead, is employed to store information during the forward pass and
provides a safe path for back-propagating the error signal. We argue that the content
stored in the memory cell could be useful to regulate the gating mechanisms, too. The
key element of our design is a connection between the memory cell and the gates with
a protection mechanism that prevents the cell state from being exposed directly. We
draw inspiration from the gated read operation employed to reveal the cell content at the
block output, and enrich it with a learnable projection. In this way, the LSTM block can
use the knowledge in the cell (acting as a long-term memory) to control the evolution of
the whole network in the short-term.
A similar concept in cognitive psychology and neuroscience is the so-called working
memory (Ericsson and Kintsch, 1995), a type of memory employed, for instance, to
retain the partial results while solving an arithmetic problem without paper, or to
combine the premises in a lengthy rhetorical argument (Hernandez, 2018). Although
deﬁnitions are not unanimous, working memory is said to be a cognitive system acting
as a third type of memory between long-term and short-term memory. Our connections
share this characteristic with working memory. For this reason, we call them Working
Memory Connections (WMCs).
A ﬁrst attempt to fuse the information of the cell in the gates was made with the
design of peepholes (Gers and Schmidhuber, 2000): direct multiplicative connections
between the memory cell and the gates. This approach has not been largely adopted in
literature, as recent studies report mixed results (Gre et al., 2017) and discourage their
use. Since our idea recalls the rationale of peephole connections, we provide a large
comparison with this previous work. By doing so, we point out the major issues in the
peephole formulation that hinder e ective learning and attest that WMCs do not su er
from the same problems. In our experiments, we show that an LSTM equipped with
Working Memory Connections achieves better results than comparable architectures,
thus reﬂecting the theoretical advantages of their design. In particular, WMCs surpass
vanilla LSTM and peephole LSTM in terms of ﬁnal performances, stability during
training, and convergence time. All these aspects testify the advantage in letting the cell
state participate in the gating dynamics. In order to support our conclusions, we conduct
a thorough experimental analysis covering a wide area of current research topics.
To sum up, our contribution is mainly three-fold. First, we present a modiﬁcation
of LSTM in which traditional gates are enriched with Working Memory Connections,
linking the memory cell with the gates through a protection mechanism. Then, we
2