state of that same cell in the traditional LSTM formulation. The presence of the
cell state in the multiplicative gates motivates the improvements of LSTM-WM
w.r.t. vanilla LSTM.
2.Increased stability during training compared to peephole connections. Exposing
dierent projections of the cell state without squashing its content seems to be a
critical point for the LSTM-PH. This element of novelty in our design explains
why WMCs provide a boost in performance even when peepholes fail.
As a consequence of these two improvements, WMCs incorporate the theoretical beneﬁts
of peephole connections, originally described by Gers and Schmidhuber (2000), with
the training stability and versatility of vanilla LSTM.
It is worth noting that, for tasks that do not require to access the content of the
memory cell, Working Memory Connections would not probably bring any beneﬁt in
the LSTM formulation, while peepholes might still hinder the whole learning process
because of unstable updates.
At the same time, when training stacked LSTMs, the beneﬁts given by WMCs may
become less signiﬁcant. We suppose that this is due to the increased complexity in the
network structure, where multiple LSTM blocks can interact through the various layers.
Similarly, many architectures employ LSTMs as building blocks together with di erent
components, and the inﬂuence of WMCs in these compound deep networks cannot be
easily determined. Experiments on image captioning, proposed in this paper, partially
answer this question and prove that WMCs a ord a small yet existing improvement
even in this scenario. However, there are many other complex tasks involving vision,
language, and other modalities, that are worth investigating.
6. Conclusion
A current limitation of Long Short-Term Memory Networks consists in not letting
the cell state inﬂuence the gate dynamics directly. In this paper, we propose Working
Memory Connections (WMCs) for LSTM, which provide an e cient way of using
intra-cell knowledge inside the network. The proposed design performs noticeably
better than the vanilla LSTM and overcomes important issues in previous formulations.
We formally motivate this improvement as a consequence of more stable training
dynamics. Experimental results reﬂect the theoretical beneﬁts of the proposed approach
and motivate further study in this direction. One future direction might consist in testing
the ecacy of Working Memory Connections for an even wider set of tasks.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by “Fondazione di Modena” under the project “AI
for Digital Humanities” and by the national project “IDEHA: Innovation for Data
Elaboration in Heritage Areas” (PON ARS01 00421), cofunded by the Italian Ministry
of University and Research.
13