Working Memory Connections for LSTM
Federico Landia,, Lorenzo Baraldia, Marcella Corniaa, Rita Cucchiaraa
aDepartment of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy
Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) make use of gating
mechanisms to mitigate exploding and vanishing gradients when learning long-term
dependencies. For this reason, LSTMs and other gated RNNs are widely adopted,
being the standard de facto for many sequence modeling tasks. Although the memory
cell inside the LSTM contains essential information, it is not allowed to inﬂuence the
gating mechanism directly. In this work, we improve the gate potential by including
information coming from the internal cell state. The proposed modiﬁcation, named
Working Memory Connection, consists in adding a learnable nonlinear projection of the
cell content into the network gates. This modiﬁcation can ﬁt into the classical LSTM
gates without any assumption on the underlying task, being particularly e ective when
dealing with longer sequences. Previous research e ort in this direction, which goes
back to the early 2000s, could not bring a consistent improvement over vanilla LSTM.
As part of this paper, we identify a key issue tied to previous connections that heavily
limits their e ectiveness, hence preventing a successful integration of the knowledge
coming from the internal cell state. We show through extensive experimental evaluation
that Working Memory Connections constantly improve the performance of LSTMs on a
variety of tasks. Numerical results suggest that the cell state contains useful information
that is worth including in the gate structure.
Keywords: Long Short-Term Memory Networks, Cell-to-Gate Connections, Gated
RNNs, Language Modeling, Image Captioning
1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Elman, 1990; Rumelhart et al., 1986) are
a family of architectures that process sequential data by means of internal hidden
states. The set of parameters of the network is shared across time steps, allowing
the RNN to process inputs of variable length. As RNNs su er from the so-called
exploding and vanishing gradient problem (EVGP) (Bengio et al., 1993; Hochreiter,
1991), which hinders the learning of long-term dependencies (Bengio et al., 1994;
Pascanu et al., 2013), previous works have proposed to enrich the recurrent cell with
Corresponding author:
Email address: federico.landi@unimore.it (Federico Landi)
This is the authors version of an article accepted for publication in Neural NetworksarXiv:2109.00020v1  [cs.LG]  31 Aug 2021