Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 25
In line with the general categorization of hallucination in Section 2.1, we give two concrete
hallucination examples in GQA in Table 1. The sources of both questions are Wikipedia web pages.
For the first question, “ dow jones industrial average please? ”, the generated answer “ index of 30
major U.S. stock indexes ” conflicts with the statement “ of 30 prominent companies listed on stock
exchanges in the United States ” from Wikipedia. So we categorize it as an intrinsic hallucination. For
the second example, the sentences “ The definition of a Sadducee is a person who acts in a deceitful or
duplicitous manner. An example of a Sadduceee is a politician who acts deceitfully in order to gain
political power ” in the generated answer can not be verified from the source documents; thus, we
categorize it as an extrinsic hallucination.
9.2 Hallucination-related Metrics in GQA
Currently, there is no automatic metric to evaluate hallucination in QGA specifically. While most
works on GQA use automatic evaluation metrics such as ROUGE score and F1 to measure the
quality of the answer, these N-gram overlap-based metrics are not a meaningful way to evaluate
hallucination due to their poor correlation with human judgments, as indicated by Krishna et al .
[125] . On the other hand, almost all the GQA-related work involves a human evaluation process as
a complement to the automatic evaluation. Normally, human annotators will be asked to assign a
score indicating the faithfulness of the answer, which can also be viewed as a measurement of the
answer hallucination. However, the metrics obtained via human evaluation come normally from a
small sample of the data.
Metrics such as semantic overlap [229], a learned evaluation metric based on BERT that models
human judgments, could be considered a better measurement of hallucination for GQA. Other
metrics such as the factual correctness can also be considered as a way to measure hallucination in
GQA. Zhang et al . [317] propose to explicitly measure the factual correctness of a generated text
against the reference by first extracting facts via an information extraction (IE) module. Then they
define and measure the factual accuracy score to be the ratio of facts in the generation text equal to
the corresponding facts in the reference.
Factual consistency , which measures the faithfulness of the generated answer given its source
documents, can be employed as another way to measure hallucination in GQA. Durmus et al .
[54], Wang et al . [264] propose an automatic QA-based metric to measure faithfulness in summary,
leveraging the recent advances in machine reading comprehension. They first use a question
generation model to construct question-answer pairs from the summary, and then a QA model
is applied to extract short answer spans from the given source document for the question. The
extracted answers that do not match the provided answers indicate unfaithful information in the
summary. While these metrics were first proposed in summarization works, they can be easily
adopted in generative QA to measure hallucinations in the generated long-form answer.
The most recent work on GQA by Su et al . [237] proposed to estimate the faithfulness of the
generated long-form answer via zero-shot short answer recall on extractive QA datasets. They
first generate long-form answers for questions from two extractive QA datasets Natural Ques-
tions(NQ) [ 130] and HotpotQA [ 295], both of which contains large-scale question-answer pairs,
then they measure the ratio of golden short answer span contained in the generated long answer as
an estimation of faithfulness of the generated long-answer. While the idea is similar to the factual
consistency metric in summarization work [ 54], and also matches with our intuition to some extent,
its correlation with human evaluation on faithfulness has not been verified.
9.3 Hallucination Mitigation in GQA
Unlike conditional text generation tasks such as summarization, or data-to-text generation, in which
the source documents are provided and normally related to the target generation, the hallucination
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.