22 Ziwei Ji, et al.
In addition to PersonaChat-related research, the knowledge-grounded dialogue (KGD) task
in the open-domain requires the model to generate informative responses with the help of an
external knowledge graph (KG) or knowledge corpus [ 48,326]. Hallucination in conversations,
which is also considered as a factual consistency problem, has raised much research interest
recently [ 60,214,226,233]. Here, we continue to split the hallucination problem in the KGD
task into intrinsic hallucination and extrinsic hallucination. Most of the KGD works tackle the
hallucination problem when responses contain information that contradicts (intrinsic) or cannot
be found in the provided knowledge input (extrinsic). Since world knowledge is enormous and
ever-changing, the extrinsic hallucination may be factual but hard to verify. Dziri et al . [60] further
adopt the same definition of hallucination as mentioned above to the knowledge graph-grounded
dialogue task, where intrinsic hallucination indicates the case of misusing either the subject or
object of the knowledge triple; and extrinsic hallucination indicates that there is no corresponding
valid knowledge triple in the gold reference knowledge. Recently, there have been some attempts to
generate informative responses without explicit knowledge inputs, but with the help of the implicit
knowledge inside large pre-trained language models instead [ 292,327] during the inference time.
Under this setting, the study of extrinsic hallucination is of great value but still poorly investigated.
8.2.3 Hallucination Metrics. For generation-based dialogue systems, especially open-domain chat-
bots, the hallucination evaluation method remains an open problem [ 223]. As of now, there is
no standard metric. Therefore, chatbots are usually evaluated by humans on factual consistency
or factual correctness [ 226,285]. We also introduce some automatic statistical and model-based
metrics as a reference, which will be described in more detail below.
Variants of F1 Metrics. Knowledge F1 (KF1) measures the overlap between the generated
responses and the gold knowledge sentences to which the human referred for conversation during
dataset collection [ 233]. KF1 attempts to capture whether a model can generate knowledgable
responses by correctly utilizing the relevant knowledge. KF1 is only available for datasets with
labeled ground-truth knowledge. Shuster et al . [233] further propose Rare F1 (RF1) , which only
considers the infrequent words in the dataset when calculating F1 to avoid influence from the
common uni-grams. The authors define an infrequent word as being in the lower half of the
cumulative frequency distribution of the reference corpus.
Model-based Metric. Natural language has its natural on the flexibility of the surface forms
with the same semantics, so overlap-based metrics cannot provide the comprehensive evaluation.
Recently, several works have proposed evaluation metrics for measuring consistency, such as
using natural language inference (NLI) [ 58,278], training learnable evaluation metrics [ 309], or
releasing an additional test set for coherence [ 14]. These methods are more flexible and supports
the generated responses with different surface forms. For the KGD task, Dziri et al . [61] propose the
BEGIN benchmark, which consists of samples taken from Dinan et al . [48] with additional human
annotation and a new classification task extending the NLI paradigm. Honovich et al . [101] present
a trainable metric for the KGD task, which also applies NLI. It is also noteworthy that Gupta et al .
[94] propose datasets that can benefit fact-checking systems specialized for dialogue systems. The
Conv-FEVER corpus [ 226] is a factual consistency detection dataset, which was created by adapting
the Wizard-of-Wikipedia dataset [ 48]. It consists of both factually consistent and inconsistent
responses and can be used to train a classifier to detect factually inconsistent responses with respect
to the knowledge provided.
8.2.4 Mitigation Methods. The hallucination issue can be mitigated by data pre-processing, which
includes introducing extra information into the data. Shen et al . [230] propose a measurement based
on seven attributes of the dialogue quality, including self-consistency. Based on this measurement,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.