10 Ziwei Ji, et al.
Although simple and effective, one potential limitation of lexical matching is that it can only
handle lexical information. Thus, it fails to deal with syntactic or semantic variations [229].
4.2 Model-based Metric
Model-based metrics leverage neural models to measure the hallucination degree in the generated
text. They are proposed to handle more complex syntactic and even semantic variations. The
model-based metrics comprehend the source and generated texts and detect the knowledge/content
mismatches. However, the neural models can be subject to errors that can propagate and adversely
affect the accurate quantification of hallucination.
4.2.1 Information Extraction (IE)-based. It is not always easy to determine which part of the
generated text contains the knowledge that requires verification. IE-based metrics use IE models to
represent the knowledge in a simpler relational tuple format (e.g., subject, relation, object ), then
verify against relation tuples extracted from the source/reference. Here, the IE model is identifying
and extracting the “facts" that require verification. In this way, words containing no verifiable
information (e.g., stopwords, conjunctions, etc) are not included in the verification step.
For example, ground-truth reference text “Brad Pitt was born in 1963” and generated
text“Brad Pitt was born in 1961” will be mapped to the relation triples (Brad Pitt,
born-in, 1963) and(Brad Pitt, born-in, 1961) respectively4. The mismatch between the
dates (1963 ≠1961) indicates that there is hallucination. One limitation associated with this approach
is the potential error propagation from the IE model.
4.2.2 QA-based. This approach implicitly measures the knowledge overlap or consistency between
the generation and the source reference. This is based on the intuition that similar answers will be
generated from a same question if the generation is factually consistent with the source reference. It
is already put in use to evaluate hallucinations in many tasks, such as summarization [ 54,227,264],
dialogue [101], and data2text generation [217].
QA-based metric that measures the faithfulness of the generated text is consisted of three parts:
First, given a generated text, a question generation (QG) model generates a set of question-answer
pairs. Second, a question answering (QA) model answers the generated questions given a ground-
truth source text as the reference (containing knowledge). Lastly, the hallucination score is computed
based on the similarity of the corresponding answers.
Similar to the IE-based metrics, the limitation of this approach is the potential error that might
arise and propagated from either the QG model or the QA model.
4.2.3 Natural Language Inference (NLI) Metrics. There are not many labelled datasets for hallu-
cination detection tasks, especially at the early stage when the hallucination problem starts to
gain attention. As an alternative, many works leverage the NLI dataset to tackle hallucinations.
Note that NLI is a task that determines whether a “hypothesis” is true (entailment), false (contra-
diction), or undetermined (neutral) given a “premise”. These metrics are based on the idea that
only the source knowledge reference should entail the entirety of the information in faithful and
hallucination-free generation [ 57,61,66,101,104,126,131,185,282]. More specifically, NLI-based
metrics define the hallucination/faithfulness score to be the entailment probability between the
source and its generated text, also known as the percentage of times generated text entails, neutral
to, and contradicts the source.
According to Honovich et al . [101] , NLI-based approaches are more robust to lexical variability
than token matching approaches such as IE-based and QA-based metrics. Nevertheless, as illustrated
by Falke et al . [66] , off-the-shelf NLI models tend to transfer poorly to the abstractive summarization
4This is an example from [87]
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.