Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 9
models prioritize parametric knowledge over the provided input. In other words, models that favor
generating output with their parametric knowledge instead of the information from the input
source can result in the hallucination of excess information in the output. On the other hand, current
research works [ 21,113,174,212,298] highlight a discrepancy between surface realization and
inherent knowledge of the model in NLG tasks. Models can realize they are generating something
hallucinated in some way.
4 METRICS MEASURING HALLUCINATION
Recently, various studies have illustrated that most conventional metrics used to measure the
quality of writing are not adequate for quantifying the level of hallucination [ 218]. It has been
shown that state-of-the-art abstractive summarization systems, evaluated with metrics such as
ROUGE, BLEU, and METEOR, have hallucinated content in 25% of their generated summaries [ 66].
A similar phenomenon has been shown in other NLG tasks, where it has been discovered that
traditional metrics have a poor correlation with human judgment in terms of the hallucination
problem [ 45,54,101,125]. Therefore, there are active research efforts to define effective metrics for
quantifying hallucination. FRANK [ 197] surveys the faithfulness metrics for summarization and
compares these metrics’ correlations with human judgments. To assess the example-level accuracy
of metrics in diverse tasks, TRUE [ 100] reports their Area Under the ROC Curve (ROC AUC) in
regard to hallucinated example detection.
4.1 Statistical Metric
One of the simplest approaches is to leverage lexical features (n-grams) to calculate the information
overlap and contradictions between the generated and the reference texts – the higher the mismatch
counts, the lower the faithfulness and thus the higher the hallucination score.
Given that many traditional metrics leverage the target text as the ground-truth reference (e.g.,
ROUGE, BLEU, etc.), Dhingra et al . [45] build upon this idea and propose PARENT (Precision And
Recall of Entailed n-grams from the Table)3, a metric which can also measure hallucinations using
both the source and target text as references. Particularly, PARENT n-gram lexical entailment
matches generated text with both the source table and target text. The F1-score that combines the
precision and recall of the entailment reflects the accuracy of the table-to-text task. The source text
is additionally used because it is not guaranteed that the output target text contains the complete
set of information available in the input source text.
It is common for NLG tasks to have multiple plausible outputs from the same input, which is
known as one-to-many mapping [ 91,238]. In practice, however, covering all the possible outputs
is too expensive and almost impossible. Thus, many works simplify the hallucination evaluation
setup by relying on the source text as the sole reference. Their metrics just focus on the information
referred by input sources to measure hallucinations, especially intrinsic hallucinations. For instance,
Wang et al . [274] propose PARENT-T, which simplifies PARENT by only using table content as
the reference. Similarly, Knowledge F1 [ 233] – a variant of unigram F1 – has been proposed for
knowledge-grounded dialogue tasks to measure the overlap between the model’s generation and
the knowledge used to ground the dialogue during dataset collection.
Furthermore, Martindale et al . [175] proposed a bag-of-vectors sentence similarity (BVSS) metric
for measuring sentence adequacy in machine translation, that only refers to the target text. This
statistical metric helps to determine whether the MT output has a different amount of information
than the translation reference.
3Note that PARENT is a general metric like ROUGE and BLEU, not only constrained to hallucination
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.