18 Ziwei Ji, et al.
extrinsic hallucinations together in one metric because it is difficult to automatically distinguish
between them.
7.2.1 Unsupervised Metrics. Given that hallucination is a newly emerging problem, there are only
a few hallucination-related datasets. Therefore, researchers have proposed to adopt other datasets
to build unsupervised hallucination metrics. There are three types of such unsupervised metrics:
(1) information extraction (IE)-based metrics, (2) natural language inferencing (NLI)-based metrics,
(3) question answering (QA)-based metrics.
IE-based Metrics. As mentioned in Section 4, IE-based metrics leverage IE models to extract
knowledge as relation tuples ( subject, relation, object ) from both the generation and knowledge
source to analyze the factual accuracy of the generation [ 87]. However, IE models are not 100%
reliable yet (making errors in the identification of the relation tuples). Therefore, Nan et al . [190]
propose an entity-based metric relying on the Named-Entity Recognition model, which is relatively
more robust. Their metric builds on the assumption that there will be a different set of named
entities in the gold and generated summary if there exists hallucination.
NLI-based Metrics. As mentioned in Section 4, the NLI-model (textual entailment model) can
be utilized to measure hallucination based on the assumption that a faithful summary will be
entailed by the gold source. However, Falke et al . [66] discover that models trained on NLI datasets
can not transfer well to abstractive summarization tasks, degrading the reliability of NLI-based
hallucination metrics. To improve NLI models for hallucination evaluation, they release collected
annotations as additional test data. Other efforts have also been made to further improve NLI
models. Mishra et al . [185] find that the low performance of NLI-based metrics is mainly caused by
the length of the premises in NLI datasets being shorter than the source documents in abstractive
summarization. Thus, the authors propose to convert multiple-choice reading comprehension
datasets into long premise NLI datasets automatically. The results indicate that long-premise NLI
datasets help the model achieve a higher performance than the original NLI datasets. In addition,
Laban et al . [131] introduce a simple but efficient method called SUMMAC 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣 by applying NLI
models to sentence units that are segmented from documents. The performance of their model is
better than applying NLI models to the whole document.
QA-based Metrics. QA-based metrics measure the knowledge overlap or consistency between
summaries and the source documents based on the intuition that QA models will achieve similar
answers if the summaries are factually consistent with the source documents. QA-based metrics
such as FEQA [ 54], QAGS [ 264], and QuestEval [ 227] follow three steps to obtain a final score:
(1) a QG model generates questions from the summaries, (2) a QA model obtains answers from
the source documents, and (3) calculate the score by comparing the set of answers from source
documents and the set of answers from summaries. The results show that these reference-free
metrics have substantially higher correlations with human judgments of faithfulness than the
baseline metrics. Gabriel et al . [75] further analyze the FEQA and find that the effectiveness of
QA-based metrics depends on the question. They also provide a meta-evaluation framework that
includes QA metrics.
7.2.2 Semi-Supervised Metrics. Semi-supervised metrics are trained on the synthetic data generated
from summarization datasets. Trained on these task-specific corpora, models can judge whether the
generated summaries are hallucinatory. Kryscinski et al . [126] propose a weakly supervised model
named FactCC for evaluating factual consistency. The model is trained jointly for three tasks: (1)
checking whether the synthetic sentences remain factually consistent, (2) extracting supporting
spans in the source documents, and (3) extracting inconsistent spans in the summaries, if any exist.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.