Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 41
challenging to guarantee robustness and generalization. Large-scale self-supervision may be the
path forward, as supervised learning has proven to be insufficient for both the CV and NLP in the
past decade.
13.4.2 Hallucination in Long-tail and Low-resource Domains. Hallucinations in LLMs in long-tail
and low-resource domains still remain a significant challenge. This has become a new research focus
– for example, many recent hallucination benchmarks are proposed to measure LLM hallucination
in various long-tail and low-resource domains (see Section 13.2.1). However, our scope should
not be confined to only narrow professional areas ( e.g.,medical, legal, finance), but should also
consider broader scenarios that are also long-tailed and low-resource. For example, hallucination
in low-resource languages is a less explored area, as hallucination mitigation methods applied
to rich-resource languages do not necessarily generalize to low-resource ones. Similarly, the
temporal axis also impacts the frequency of world knowledge appearance, where more recent
data could also be considered as long-tailed and low-resource. Furthermore, beyond textual data,
multi-modal scenarios are inherently low-resource for text-only pretrained LLMs. In light of the
above, instead of developing domain-specific methods for hallucination mitigation, we need to
design a unified framework and generalizable strategies for addressing hallucination in various
imbalanced scenarios.
13.4.3 Estimating the Knowledge Boundary and Expressing the Uncertainty. Despite the vast size
and continuous scaling of pretraining datasets for LLMs, it is impossible for them to encompass all
the world’s knowledge. Consequently, teaching models to express their inability to answer specific
questions and honestly admit “I don’t know” is crucial, and it requires LLMs to accurately model
their knowledge boundaries. Notably, this task lies in a different dimension from other objectives
that we expect LLMs to achieve ( e.g.,improving QA task accuracy) since it is not explicitly included
in the pretraining corpora, making it more challenging. Furthermore, the diverse sources and
complex distributions of LLM pretraining data, along with varying training corpora for different
LLMs, exacerbate the difficulty of this task. Related research is still in its early stages, with existing
methods including calibration-based uncertainty estimation [ 113] and posterior approaches based
on QA testing results [ 294], but none of them can satisfactorily solve this issue. For instances near
the knowledge boundary, the situation is no longer a binary opposition between knowing and not
knowing. In these cases, accurately expressing the model’s uncertainty level with fine granularity
becomes a critical research question that warrants further exploration.
13.4.4 Minimizing the Alignment Tax During Hallucination Mitigation. Several studies have con-
firmed that the performance of ChatGPT and GPT-4 degrades over time due to continuous safety
fine-tuning. This phenomenon is a typical example of an alignment tax. Similarly, when addressing
hallucination problems in low-resource languages, the rate of hallucination in the original lan-
guages may increase. In the process of enhancing the faithfulness of LLMs’ multi-modal perception
through visual instruction tuning on VQA datasets, the “politeness” of LLM responses may decrease
due to the overly succinct nature of VQA answer annotations [ 28]. Furthermore, the alignment
tax problem is not confined to fine-tuning-based methods but also extends to prompting-based
methods such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). These methods may also compromise the
quality of responses when the quality of retrieved evidence is sub-optimal. In light of these findings,
it is clear that we must explore strategies to minimize the cost during hallucination mitigation
and prevent LLMs from becoming overly conservative, losing their creativity, or suffering from
catastrophic forgetting in task performance.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.