Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 31
are, nevertheless, several notable efforts to automatize and quantify the search for hallucinations
using statistical methods.
11.2.1 Statistical Metrics. Martindale et al . [175] propose identifying sentence adequacy using the
bag-of-vectors sentence similarity (BVSS) metric. This metric indicates that the information is lost
because the reference contains more information than the MT output, or the MT output contains
more information than the reference.
11.2.2 Model-Based Metrics.
Auxiliary Decoder. “Faithfulness” refers to the amount of source meaning that is faithfully
expressed in the translation, and it is used interchangeably with the term “adequacy” [ 71,256]. Feng
et al. [71] propose adding another “evaluation decoder” apart from the standard translation decoder.
In their work, faithfulness is based on word-by-word translation probabilities, and is calculated in
the evaluation module along with translation fluency. The loss returned by the evaluation module
helps to adjust the probability returned by the translation module.
Entropy Measure. In scenarios where the ground truth of a translation is not available, an entropy
measure of the average attention distribution can be used to detect hallucinations. Tu et al . [257] and
Garg et al . [80] show that hallucinations are visible in attention matrices. When the model outputs
correct translation, the attention mechanism attends to the entire input sequence throughout
decoding. However, it tends to concentrate on one point when the model outputs hallucinatory
content. The entropy is calculated on the average attention weights when the model does or does
not produce hallucinations during testing. For comparison, a clean test set is used along with the
purposefully perturbed one, which is created to incite hallucinations (test sets featuring multiple
repetitions). The mean entropy returned by hallucinatory models diverges from the mean of the
models that do not produce hallucinations spontaneously [133].
Token Level Hallucination Detection. Zhou et al . [325] propose a method for detecting hallucinated
tokens within a sentence, making the search more fine-grained. They use a synthetic dataset that
is created by adding noise to the source data, more specifically it is generated by a language
model with certain tokens of correct translations masked. Tokens in synthetic data are labeled as
hallucinated (1) or not (0). Then the authors compute the hallucination prediction loss between
binary labels and the tokens from the hallucinated sentence. This work further employs a word
alignment-based method and overlap-based method as baselines for hallucination.
Similarity-based Mathods. Zhou et al . [325] use an unsupervised model that extracts alignments
from similarity matrices of word embeddings [ 225], and then predicts the target token as halluci-
nated if it is not aligned to the source. Parthasarathi et al . [199] propose calculating faithfulness by
computing similarity scores between perturbed source sentence and target sentence after applying
the same perturbation.
Overlap-based Mathods. Zhou et al . [325] predict that the target token is hallucinated if it does
not appear in the source. Since the target and source are two different languages, the authors use
the density matching method for bilingual synonyms from Zhou et al . [324] . Kong et al . [124]
suggest the Coverage Difference Ratio (CDR) as the metric to evaluate adequacy, which is especially
successful in finding cases of under-translation. It is estimated by comparing source words covered
by generated translation with human translations.
The overlap-based methods for detecting hallucinations are heuristics based on the assumption
that all translated words should appear in the source. However, this is not always the case, e.g.,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.