Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 33
Zhou et al . [325] propose a method of improving self-training of NMT based on hallucination
detection. They create hallucination labels (see Section 11.2.2), and then discard losses of tokens
predicted as hallucinations, which is known as token loss truncation. This is similar to the method
proposed by Kang and Hashimoto [116] , the latter for full sentences in the summarization task.
Furthermore, instead of adjusting losses, Zhou et al . [325] mask the hidden states of the discarded
losses in the decoder in a procedure called decoder HS masking. Experimental results show both a
translation quality improvement in terms of BLEU and also a large reduction in hallucination. The
token loss truncation method shows good results in the low-resource languages scenario.
Another method to mitigate the impact of noisy datasets is tilted empirical risk minimization
(TERM), a training objective proposed by Li et al . [149] . [133] mentions that techniques such as
dropout, L2E regularization, and clipping tend to decrease the number of hallucinations. Lastly,
several authors propose methods of improving phrase alignment that are helpful both in increasing
translation accuracy and identifying content that did not appear in the source translation [ 80,281,
311].
11.4 Future Directions in NMT
The future work on hallucinations in NMT is to define hallucinations in a quantifiable manner;
i.e., to specify a cut-off value between translation error and hallucinated content using a particular
metric. Martindale et al . [175] propose a threshold between fluency and adequacy which is the
closest to this ideal. They, however, do not concentrate on hallucinated content as such, and thus
fluent but inadequate sentences may not always indicate hallucinations but also other types of
translation errors. Balakrishnan et al. [10] mention constrained decoding as a method to mitigate
hallucinations in dialogue systems, but it could also be applied in NMT. [ 49,98,206,236,243,289]
and [ 288] use constrained decoding to incorporate specific terminology into MT, but the above
methods can be repurposed to mitigate hallucinations.
Another direction for future work on hallucinations is improving existing methods of searching
for hallucinatory content, such as the algorithms proposed by Feng et al . [71] , Lee et al . [133] and
Raunak et al . [215] , that are computationally expensive [ 215] or require the creation of an additional
perturbed test-set [ 133]. Similarly, for mitigation of lack of faithfulness and fluency, the method
proposed by Feng et al . [71] requires the creation of a one-to-many architecture (one encoder and
two decoders), which is also computationally expensive. Future directions would therefore include
simplification of existing hallucination evaluation methods, applying them to different architectures
like CNNs and transformers, and possibly conducting research on finding simpler hallucination
search methods.
12 HALLUCINATION IN VISION-LANGUAGE GENERATION
With the vast advancement of the Transformer architecture [ 51,262] in both CV and NLP, there
is a trend to pre-train large-scale unified vision-language (VL) models [ 3,41,145,270,271,275]
to perform vision grounded text generation tasks, such as image captioning and visual question
answering (VQA). Generally, there are two common schemas for vision-language pre-training: 1)
pre-train from scratch with a massive amount of image-text pairs as well as optionally a large
text-only corpus; or 2) initialize model parameters from a large pre-trained LM and then adapt
it to the VL domain with adequate image-text pairs. Either way, the learned vision and language
representations are aligned in the same multimodal space and the resulting model can be seen as a
LM that understands visual information. Therefore, the hallucination problem is also observed in
VL models due to similar reasons as found in NLG.
In the VL domain, the research on hallucination is still in its very early stage and how to measure
and mitigate hallucination is an open question. In this section, we first review the hallucination in
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.