24 Ziwei Ji, et al.
model could generate a response such as “the hotel named raffles hotel is located in central area,7”
which cannot be verified from the knowledge base of the system.
8.4 Future Directions in Dialogue Generation
Self-Contradiction in Dialogue Systems. One of the possible reasons for self-contradiction is that
current dialogue systems tend to have a short memory of dialogue history [ 223]. Firstly, common
dialogue datasets provide several turns of conversation, yet these are not long enough to assess a
model’s ability to deal with a long context. To overcome this, Xu et al . [287] introduce a new dataset
that consists of, on average, over 40 utterances per episode. Secondly, we often truncate dialogue
history into fewer turns to fit into models such as Transformer-based architectures, which makes it
difficult for a model to memorize the past. In addition to the works on dialogue summarization,
e.g., Gliwa et al . [85] , it would be beneficial to apply other works which are aiming to grasp the
longer context but do not focus on dialogue generation [12, 306, 319].
Fact-checking in dialogue systems. In addition to the factual consistency in responses from
knowledge grounded dialogue systems, fact-checking is a future direction in dealing with the
hallucination problem in dialogue systems [ 94]. Dialogue fact-checking involves verifiable claim
detection, which is an important line in distinguishing hallucination-prone dialogue, and evidence
retrieval from an external source. This fact-checking in the dialogue system could be utilized not
only as an evaluation metric for facilitating factual consistency but also to model such a system.
9 HALLUCINATION IN GENERATIVE QUESTION ANSWERING
Generative question answering (GQA) aims to generate an abstractive answer rather than extract
an answer to a given question from provided passages [ 68,141]. It is an important task since many
of the everyday questions that humans deal with and pose to search engines require in-depth
explanations [ 120] (e.g., why/how..? ), and the answers are normally long and cannot be directly
extracted from existing phrase spans. A GQA system can be integrated with a search engine [ 182]
to empower more intelligent search or combined with a virtual conversation agent to enhance user
experience.
Normally, a GQA system involves searching an external knowledge source for information
relevant to the question. Then it generates the answer based on the retrieved information [ 125]. In
most cases, no single source (document) contains the answer, and multiple retrieved documents will
be considered for answer generation. Those documents may contain redundant, complementary, or
contradictory information. Thus, hallucination is common in the generated answers.
The hallucination problem is one of the most important challenges in GQA. Since an essential
goal of a GQA system is to provide factualy-correct answers given the question, hallucination in
the answer will mislead the user and damage the system performance dramatically.
9.1 Hallucination Definition in GQA
As a challenging yet under-explored task, there is no standard definition of hallucination in GQA.
However, almost all the works on GQA [ 68,125,189,237] involve a human evaluation process, in
which the factual correctness measuring the faithfulness of the generated answer can be seen as a
measurement of the hallucination; i.e., the more faithful the answer is, the less hallucinated content
it contains. The most recent such work [ 141] uses the term semantic drift , which indicates how the
answer drifts away from a correct one during generation, and this can also be seen as a specific
definition of hallucination in GQA.
7Raffles Hotel is a hotel located in Downtown Core, Singapore.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.