Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 29
to encourage faithfulness. The hallucination degree can also be treated as a controllable factor in
generating texts. In Filippova [72], the hallucination degree of each training sample is estimated
and converted into a categorical value which is a part of the inputs as a controlled setting. This
approach does not require the dismissal of any input or modification of the model structure.
To mitigate hallucinations at the inference step, Rebuffel et al . [216] propose a Multi-Branch
Decoder that leverages word-level alignment labels between the input table and paired text to learn
the relevant parts of the training instance. These word-level labels are gained through dependency
parsing during the pre-processing step. The branches separately integrate three co-dependent
control factors: content, hallucination, and fluency. Uncertainty-aware beam search (UABS) [ 286] is
an extension to beam search to reduce hallucination. Considering that the hallucination probability
is positively correlated with predictive uncertainty, this work adds a weighted penalty term in the
beam search which is able to balance the predictive probability and uncertainty. This approach is
task-agnostic and can also be applied to other tasks, such as image captioning.
These various types of methods do not necessarily conflict and can collaborate to solve the
hallucination problem in data-to-text generation.
10.4 Future Directions in Data-to-Text Generation
Given the challenges brought by the discrepancy between structure data and natural text, and the
low fault tolerance in the Data-to-Text Generation task, there are several potential directions worth
exploring in terms of hallucination.
Firstly, numbers contain information about scales and are common and crucial in the Data-to-
Text task [ 240,315]. It is frequent to have errors in numbers, which results in hallucinations and
infidelity. This is a serious problem for Data-to-Text generation, yet models rarely give special
consideration to the numbers found in the table or text [ 246]. The current automatic metrics of
hallucinations also do not specifically treat numbers. This indiscriminate treatment contradicts
findings in cognitive neuroscience, where numbers are known to be represented differently from
lexical words in a different part of the brain [ 86]. Thus, considering or highlighting numbers when
mitigating and assessing hallucinations is worth exploring. This requires the generative model
to learn a better numerical presentation and capture scales, which will reduce the hallucinations
caused by the misunderstanding of numbers.
Moreover, for the logical data-to-text generation task, rather than surface-level generation, logical
inference, calculation, and comparison are required, which is challenging and causes hallucinations
more easily. Thus, reasoning (including numerical reasoning), which is usually combined with
graph structures [ 34] is another direction to improve the accuracy of entity relationships and
alleviate hallucinations.
11 HALLUCINATIONS IN NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is the task of generating translation of the source language into
the target language via inference, given parallel data samples for training. Compared to statistical
machine translation (SMT) the output of NMT is usually quite fluent and of human-level quality,
which creates the danger of misinforming users when there are hallucinations [175].
11.1 Hallucinations Definition and Categories in NMT
The problem of hallucination was identified with the deployment of the first NMT models. Early
work comparing SMT and NMT systems [ 122], without explicitly using the term “hallucination”,
mentioned that NMT models tend to “sacrifice adequacy for the sake of fluency” especially when
evaluated with out-of-domain test sets. Following further development of NMT, most of the relevant
research papers agree that translated text is considered a hallucination when it is completely
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.