Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 3
1 INTRODUCTION
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is one of the crucial yet challenging sub-fields of Natural
Language Processing (NLP). NLG techniques are used in many downstream tasks such as sum-
marization, dialogue generation, generative question answering (GQA), data-to-text generation,
and machine translation. Recently, the rapid development of NLG has captured the imagination of
many thanks to the advances in deep learning technologies, especially Transformer [ 262]-based
models like BERT [ 44], BART [ 139], GPT-2 [ 209], and GPT-3 [ 20]. The conspicuous development of
NLG tasks attracted the attention of many researchers, leading to an increased effort in the field.
Alongside the advancement of NLG models, attention towards their limitations and potential
risks has also increased. Some early works [ 99,277] focus on the potential pitfalls of utilizing the
standard likelihood maximization-based objective in training and decoding of NLG models. They
discovered that such likelihood maximization approaches could result in degeneration , which refers
generated output that is bland, incoherent, or gets stuck in repetitive loops. Concurrently, it is
discovered that NLG models often generate text that is nonsensical, or unfaithful to the provided
source input [ 121,215,222,263]. Researchers started referring to such undesirable generation as
hallucination [177]2.
Hallucination in NLG is concerning because it hinders performance and raises safety concerns for
real-world applications. For instance, in medical applications, a hallucinatory summary generated
from a patient information form could pose a risk to the patient. It may provoke a life-threatening
incident for a patient if the instructions of a medicine generated by machine translation are halluci-
natory. Hallucination can also lead to potential privacy violations. Carlini et al . [26] demonstrate
that language models can be prompted to recover and generate sensitive personal information from
the training corpus (e.g., email address, phone/fax number, and physical address). Such memoriza-
tion and recovery of the training corpus is considered a form of hallucination because the model is
generating text that is not “faithful” to the source input content (i.e., such private information does
not exist in the source input).
Currently, there are many active efforts to address hallucination for various NLG tasks. Analyzing
hallucinatory content in different NLG tasks and investigating their relationship would strengthen
our understanding of this phenomenon and encourage the unification of efforts from different NLG
fields. However, to date, little has been done to understand hallucinations from a broader perspective
that encompasses all major NLG tasks. To the best of our knowledge, existing surveys have only
focused specific tasks like abstractive summarization [ 104,177] and translation [ 133]. Thus, in this
paper, we present a survey of the research progress and challenges in the hallucination problem in
NLG. And offer a comprehensive analysis of existing research on the phenomenon of hallucination
in different NLG tasks, namely abstractive summarization, dialogue generation, generative question
answering, data-to-text generation, and machine translation. We mainly discussed hallucination
of the unimodal NLG tasks that have textual input sources upon which the generated text can
be assessed. We also briefly summarize hallucinations in multi-modal settings such as visual-
language tasks [ 3,17]. This survey can provide researchers with a high-level insight derived from
the similarities and differences of different approaches. Furthermore, given the various stages of
development in studying hallucination from different tasks, the survey can assist researchers in
drawing inspiration on concepts, metrics, and mitigation methods.
2The term “hallucination” first appeared in Computer Vision (CV) in Baker and Kanade [9]and carried more positive
meanings, such as superresolution [ 9,159], image inpainting [ 69], and image synthesizing [ 310]. Such hallucination is
something we take advantage of rather than avoid in CV. Nevertheless, recent works have started to refer to a specific type
of error as "hallucination" in image captioning [ 17,222] and object detection [ 8,119], which denotes non-existing objects
detected or localized incorrectly at their expected position. The latter conception is similar to “hallucination” in NLG.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.