4 Ziwei Ji, et al.
Organization of this Survey .The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 ∼
Section 6 provide an overview of the hallucination problem in NLG by discussing the definition
and categorization, contributors, metrics, and mitigation methods of hallucinations, respectively.
The second part of our survey discusses the hallucination problem associated with specific NLG
tasks: abstractive summarization in Section 7, dialogue generation in Section 8, GQA in Section 9,
data-to-text generation in Section 10, machine translation in Section 11, and VL generation in
Section 12. The third part discusses this phenomenon in LLMs in Section 13. Finally, we conclude
the whole survey in Section 14.
2 DEFINITIONS
In the general context outside of NLP, hallucination is a psychological term referring to a particular
type of perception [ 73,166]. Blom [18] define hallucination as “a percept, experienced by a wak-
ing individual, in the absence of an appropriate stimulus from the extracorporeal world” .
Simply put, a hallucination is an unreal perception that feels real. The undesired phenomenon of
“NLG models generating unfaithful or nonsensical text” shares similar characteristics with
such psychological hallucinations – explaining the choice of terminology. Hallucinated text gives
the impression of being fluent and natural despite being unfaithful and nonsensical. It appears
to be grounded in the real context provided, although it is actually hard to specify or verify the
existence of such contexts. Similar to psychological hallucination, which is hard to tell apart from
other “real” perceptions, hallucinated text is also hard to capture at first glance.
Within the context of NLP, the above definition of hallucination, the generated content that is
nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided source content [72,177,198,325], is the most inclusive and
standard. However, there do exist variations in definition across NLG tasks, which will be further
described in the later task-specific sections.
2.1 Categorization
Following the categorization from previous works [ 60,104,177], there are two main types of
hallucinations, namely intrinsic hallucination and extrinsic hallucination. To explain the definition
and categorization more intuitively, we give examples of each category of hallucinations for each
NLG downstream task in Table 1.
(1)Intrinsic Hallucinations : The generated output that contradicts the source content. For
instance, in the abstractive summarization task from Table 1, the generated summary “ The
first Ebola vaccine was approved in 2021” contradicts the source content “ The first vaccine for
Ebola was approved by the FDA in 2019 .”.
(2)Extrinsic Hallucinations : The generated output that cannot be verified from the source
content (i.e., output that can neither be supported nor contradicted by the source). For
example, in the abstractive summarization task from Table 1, the information “ China has
already started clinical trials of the COVID-19 vaccine. ” is not mentioned in source. We can
neither find evidence for the generated output from the source nor assert that it is wrong.
Notably, the extrinsic hallucination is not always erroneous because it could be from factually
correct external information [ 177,247]. Such factual hallucination can be helpful because it
recalls additional background knowledge to improve the informativeness of the generated
text. However, in most of the literature, extrinsic hallucination is still treated with caution
because its unverifiable aspect of this additional information increases the risk from a factual
safety perspective.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.