Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 21
been “ in the top ten singles players of the world ”. However, we do not have enough information to
check the truth of these statements.
In the following sections, the hallucination problem in open-domain and task-oriented dialogue
generation tasks will be separately discussed according to the their natures.
8.2 Open-domain Dialogue Generation
While the term “hallucination” seems to have newly emerged in the NLP field, a related behavior,
“inconsistency”, of neural models has been widely discussed. This behavior has been pointed
out as a shortcoming of generation-based approaches for open-domain chatbots [ 103,165,223].
Two possible types of inconsistency occur in open-domain dialogue generation: (1) inconsistency
among the system utterances, such as when the system contradicts its previous utterance; (2)
inconsistency with an external source, such as factually incorrect utterances. Whereas the first
type is described using the term "inconsistency" [ 148,278,309] or "incoherence" [ 14,58], some
have recently started to call the second type "hallucination" [ 183,224]. Self-inconsistency can be
considered as an intrinsic hallucination problem, while the external inconsistency involves both
intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations, depending on the reference source.
As mentioned earlier, a certain level of hallucination may be acceptable in open-domain chit-chat
as long as it does not involve severe factual issues. Moreoever, it is almost impossible to verify factual
correctness since the system usually lacks a connection to external resources. With the introduction
of knowledge-grounded dialogue tasks [ 48,326], which provide an external reference, however,
there has been more active discussion of hallucination in open-domain dialogue generation.
8.2.1 Self-Consistency. In end-to-end generative open-domain dialogue systems, the inconsistency
among system utterances has been pointed out as the bottleneck to human-level performance [ 263].
We often observe an inconsistency in the answers to semantically similar yet not identical questions.
For example, a system may answer the questions of “What is your name?” and “May I ask your
name?" with different responses. Persona consistency has been the center of attention [ 144,312]
and it is one of the most obvious cases of self-contradiction regarding the character of the dialogue
system. "Persona" is defined as the character that a dialogue system plays during a conversation,
and can be composed of identity, language behavior, and an interaction style [ 144]. While some
works has set their objective as teaching models to utilize speaker-level embeddings [ 144,168],
others condition generation with a set of descriptions about a persona, which we will discuss in
detail in the next section.
8.2.2 External Consistency. Besides self-consistency, an open-domain dialogue system should also
generate persona-consistent and informative responses corresponding so as to user utterances to
further engage with the user during conversation. In this process, an external resource containing
explicit persona information or world knowledge is introduced into the system to assist the model
generation process.
The PersonaChat datasets [ 47,312] have accelerated research into persona consistency [ 96,128,
178,284,296,307,318]. In PersonaChat datasets, each conversation has persona descriptions such
as “I like to ski” or “I am a high school teacher” attached. By conditioning the response generation
on the persona description, a chit-chat model is expected to acquire an ability to generate a more
persona-consistent response. Lately, the application of NLI methods [ 148,234] or reinforcement
learning frameworks [ 181] have been investigated. Although these methods conditioned on the
PersonaChat datasets have been successful, further investigation of approaches that do not rely on
a given set of persona descriptions is necessary because such descriptions are not always available,
and covering every aspect of a persona with them is impossible.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.