28 Ziwei Ji, et al.
semantic accuracy in two directions: check omissions by inferring whether the input fact is entailed
by the generated text and check hallucinations by inferring the generated text from the input.
LM-based. Filippova [72], Tian et al . [251] are based on the intuition that when an unconditional
LM, only trained on the targets, gets a smaller loss than a conditional 𝐿𝑀𝑥, trained on both sources
and targets, the token is predicted unfaithfully. Thus, they calculate the ratio of hallucinated tokens
to the total target length to measure the hallucination level.
10.3 Hallucination Mitigation in Data-to-Text Generation
Data-Related Methods. Several clean and faithful corpora are collected to tackle the challenges
from data infidelity. TOTTO [ 198] is an open-domain faithful table-to-text dataset, where each
sample includes a Wikipedia table with several highlighted cells and a description. To ensure
that targets exclude hallucinations, the annotators revise existing Wikipedia candidate sentences
and clear the parts unsupported by the table. Moreover, RotoWire-FG (Fact-Grounding) [268] is a
purified and enlarged and enriched version of RotoWire [ 283] generating NBA game summaries
from score tables. Annotators trim the hallucination part in target texts and extract the mapped
table records as content plans to better align input tables and output summaries.
For data processing, OpAtt [ 192] designs a gating mechanism and a quantization module for
the symbolic operation to augment the record table with pre-calculated results. Nie et al . [193]
utilize a language understanding module to improve the equivalence between the input MR and the
reference utterance in the dataset. They train an NLU model with an iterative relabeling procedure:
First, they train the model on original data; parse the MR by model inference; train the model
on new paired data with high confidence; and then repeat the above processes. Liu et al . [162]
select training instances based on faithfulness ranking. Finer-grained than the above instance-level
method, Rebuffel et al . [216] label tokens according to co-occurrence analysis and sentence structure
through dependency parsing in the pre-processing step to explicate the correspondence between
the input table and the text. Generally, the data-related methods are appropriate when the training
dataset is noisy.
Modeling and Inference Methods. Planning and skeleton generation are common methods to
improve the faithfulness to the input in data-to-text tasks. Liu et al . [162] propose a two-step
generator with a separate text planner augmented by auxiliary entity information. The planner
predicts the plausible content plan based on the input data. Then, given the above input data and
the content plan, the sequence generator generates the text. Similarly, Plan-then-Generate [ 239]
also consists of a content planner and a sequence generator. In addition, this work adopts a
structure-aware RL training to generate output text following the generated content plan faithfully.
Puduppully and Lapata [208] first induce a macro plan consisting of multiple sequences of entities
and events from the input table and its corresponding multi-paragraph long document. The predicted
macro plan then serves as the input to an encoder-decoder model for surface realization. SANA [ 269]
is a skeleton-based two-stage model that includes skeleton generation to select key tokens from
the source table and edit-based generation to produce texts via iterative insertion and deletion
operations. In contrast to the above two-step model using planning or skeleton, AGGGEN [ 291] is
an end-to-end model that jointly learns to plan and generate at the same time. This architecture
with a Hidden Markov Model and Transformer encoder-decoder reintroduces explicit sentence
planning stages into neural systems by aligning facts in the target text to input representations.
Other modeling methods have also been proposed to mitigate the hallucination problem. Conjec-
turing that hallucinations can be caused by inattention to the source, Tian et al . [251] propose a
confidence score and a variational Bayes training framework to learn the score from data. Wang
et al. [274] introduce a table-text optimal-transport matching loss and an embedding similarity loss
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.