26 Ziwei Ji, et al.
problem in GQA is more complicated. Generally speaking, it might come from two sources: 1)
the incompetency of the retriever, which retrieves documents irrelevant to the answer, and 2) the
intrinsic andextrinsic hallucination in the conditional generation model itself. Normally these two
parts are interconnected and cause hallucinations in the answer.
Early works on GQA mostly tried to improve the faithfulness of the answer by investigating
reliable external knowledge sources or incorporating multiple information sources. Yin et al . [297]
propose Neural Generative Question Answering (GENQA), an end-to-end model that generates
answers to simple factoid questions based on the knowledge base, while Bi et al . [15] propose the
Knowledge-Enriched Answer Generator (KEAG) to generate a natural answer by integrating facts
from four different information sources, namely, questions, passages, vocabulary, and knowledge.
Nevertheless, these methods rely on the existence of high-quality, relevant resources which are not
easily available.
Recent works focus more on the conditional generation model. Fan et al . [67] construct a local
knowledge graph for each question to compress the information and reduce redundancy from the
retrieved documents, which can be viewed as an early trial to mitigate hallucination. Li et al . [141]
propose Rationale-Enriched Answer Generator (REAG), in which they add an extraction task to
obtain the rationale for an answer at the encoding stage, and the decoder is expected to generate
the answer based on both the extracted rationale and original input. The recent work [ 125] employs
a Routing Transformer (RT), a sparse attention-based Transformer-based model that employs local
attention and mini-batch k-means clustering for long-range dependence, as the answer generator in
the hope of modeling more retrieved documents to mitigate the hallucination in the answer. Su et al .
[237] propose a framework named RBG ( readbefore generate), to jointly models answer generation
with machine reading. They augment the generation model with fine-grained, answer-related
salient information predicted by the MRC module, to enhance answer faithfulness. Such methods
can exploit and utilize the information in the original input better, while they require the extra
effort of building models to extract that information.
Most recently, Lin et al . [155] propose a benchmark, which comprises 817 questions that span 38
categories, to measure the truthfulness of a language model in the QA task. This work investigates
the performances of GPT-3 [ 20], GPT-Neo/J [ 266], GPT-2 [ 209] and a T5-based model [ 210]. The
results suggest that simply scaling up the model is less promising than fine-tuning it in terms of
improving truthfulness since larger models are better at learning the training distribution from
web data and thus tend to produce more imitative falsehoods. In another recent work, Nakano et al .
[189] fine-tune GPT-3 to answer long-form questions with a web-browsing environment, which
allows the model to navigate the web as well as use human feedback to optimize answer quality
directly using imitation learning [ 107]. While this method seems promising, it also hinges on how
that feedback is processed.
9.4 Future Directions in GQA
While GQA is challenging yet under-explored, many possible directions could be explored to
improve the answer quality and mitigate hallucination. First, better automatic evaluation metrics are
needed to measure hallucination. The previously mentioned metrics, such as the semantic overlap
between the generated answer and the ground-truth answer, the faithfulness of the generated
answer, and factual consistency between the answer and the source documents, only consider one
aspect of hallucination. Metrics that can consider all the factors related to hallucination (such as
semantic overlap, faithfulness, or factual consistency) could be designed. Second, datasets with
hallucination annotations should be proposed since none of the current GQA datasets have that
information. Another possible direction to mitigate hallucination in the answer is improving the
performance of the models. We need better retrieval models that retrieve relevant information
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.