16 Ziwei Ji, et al.
designed. In order to address this issue, new metrics should be designed from the human cognitive
perspective. The human ability to recognize salient information and filter the rest is evident in
scenarios where the most important facts need to be determined and assessed. For instance, when
signing an agreement, a prospective employee naturally skims the document to look at the entries
with numbers first. In this way, humans classify what they believe is crucial.
Automatic check-worthy detection has the potential to be applied to improve the correlation
with human judgement. Implementing the automatic human-like judgment mentioned above can
further mitigate hallucination and improve NLG systems.
6.2 Future Directions in Mitigation Methods
General and robust data pre-processing approaches. Since the data format varies between down-
stream tasks, there is still a gap for data processing methods between tasks, and currently, no
universal method is effective for all NLG tasks [ 140]. Data pre-processing might result in gram-
matical errors or semantic transformation between the original and processed data, which can
negatively affect the performance of generation. Therefore, we believe that general and robust data
pre-processing methods can help mitigate the hallucinations in NLG.
Hallucinations in numerals. Most existing mitigation methods do not focus on the hallucination
of numerals. However, the correctness of numerals in generated text, such as date, quantities and
scalars are important for readers [ 246,315,321]. For example, given the source document “ The
optimal oxygen saturation ( 𝑆𝑝𝑂 2) in adults with COVID-19 who are receiving supplemental oxygen is
unknown. However, a target 𝑆𝑝𝑂 2of 92% to 96% seems logical, considering that indirect evidence from
patients without COVID-19 suggests that an 𝑆𝑝𝑂 2of <92% or >96% may be harmful.6”, the summary
“The target oxygen saturation range for patients with COVID-19 is 82–86%. ” includes wrong numbers,
which could be fatal. Currently, some works [ 193,246,315] point out that using commonsense
knowledge can help to gain better numeral representation. And Zhao et al . [321] alleviate numeral
hallucinations by re-ranking candidate-generated summaries based on the verification score of
quantity entities. Therefore, we believe that explicitly modeling numerals to mitigate hallucinations
is a potential direction.
Extrinsic Hallucination Mitigation. Though many works on mitigating hallucinations have been
published, most do not distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic hallucination. Moreover, the
main research focus has been on dealing with intrinsic hallucination, while extrinsic hallucination
has been somewhat overlooked as it is more challenging to reduce [ 104]. Therefore, we believe
it is worth exploring different mitigation methods for intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations, and
relevant methods in fact-checking can be potentially used for this purpose.
Hallucination in long text. Many tasks in NLG require the model to process long input texts, such
as multi-document summarization and generative question answering. We think adopting existing
approaches to a Longformer [ 12]-based model could help encode long inputs. Meanwhile, part of
dialogue systems need to generate long output text, in which the latter part may contradict history
generation. Therefore, reducing self-contradiction is also an important future direction.
Reasoning. Misunderstanding facts in the source context will lead to intrinsic hallucination and
errors. To help models understand the facts correctly requires reasoning over the input table or
text. Moreover, if the generated text can be reasoned backwards to the source, we can assume it is
faithful. There are some reasoning works in the area of dialogue [ 39,83,272], but few in reducing
hallucinations. Moreover, tasks with quantities, such as logical table-to-text generation, require
6https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/management/critical-care/oxygenation-and-ventilation/
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.