32 Ziwei Ji, et al.
when paraphrasing or using synonyms. Using word embeddings as similarity-based methods helps
avoid such simplifications and allows more diverse, synonymous translations.
Approximate Natural Hallucination Detection. Raunak et al . [215] propose Approximate Natural
Hallucination (ANH) detection based on the fact that hallucinations often occur as oscillations
(repeating n-grams) and the lower unique bigram count indicates a higher appearance of oscillatory
hallucinations. Furthermore, the ANH detection method searches for repeated targets in the
translation output. Their method finds translation above a certain n-gram threshold and searches
for repeated targets in the output translation, following the assumption that if hallucinations are
often incited by aligning unique sources to the same target, then repeating targets will also appear
during the inference [257].
11.3 Hallucination Mitigation Methods in NMT
Hallucinations in MT are hard to discover for a person who is not fluent in the target language,
and thus they can lead to many possible errors, or even dangers. Out of all the natural language
generation tasks, NMT engines such as Google in the English-speaking internet and Baidu in the
Sinosphere are probably the most widely accessible to netizens. Consequently, there is a big interest
in improving NMT ´s performance, also by mitigating hallucinations. This subsection compiles
methods of mitigating hallucinations in NMT.
11.3.1 Data-Related. Data augmentation appears to be one of the most common methods for
removing hallucination. Lee et al . [133] and Raunak et al . [215] suggest addition of perturbed
sentences. Furthermore, perturbation, where the insertions of most common tokens are placed
at the beginning of the sentence, seems to be the most successful in hallucination mitigation. A
disadvantage of this method is the need to understand different types of hallucinations produced
by the model in order to apply a correct augmentation method. Corpus filtering is a method
of mitigating hallucinations caused by the noise in the dataset by removing the repetitive and
mismatching source and target sequences [ 215]. Junczys-Dowmunt [111] implements a cross-
entropy data filtering method for bilingual data, which uses cross-entropy scores calculated for
noisy pairs according to two translation models trained on the clean data. The scores that suggest
dissagreament between sentence pairs from two models are subsequently penalized.
While [ 133,215] and [ 111] define noise as mismatched source and target sentences, [ 19] analyzes
the influence of fine-grained semantic divergences on NMT outputs. The authors consequently
propose a mitigation method for fine-grained divergences based on semantic factors. The tags are
applied to each source and target sentence to inform about the position of divergent tokens. Factor-
izing divergence not only helps to mitigate hallucinations, but improves the overall performance of
the NMT. This shows that tagging small semantic divergences can provide useful information for
the network during training.
11.3.2 Modeling and Inference. Overexposure bias is a common problem in NMT, amplified by the
teacher-forcing technique used in sequence-to-sequence models. The models are trained on the
ground truth, but during inference, they attend to the past predictions, which can be incorrect [ 124,
213]. To mitigate this problem, Wang and Sennrich [267] propose substituting MLE as a training
objective with minimum risk training (MRT) [ 194]. Scheduled sampling is a classic method of
mitigating overexposure bias first proposed by [ 13]. Based on that method, [ 89] create a differentiable
approximation to greedy decoding that shows a good performance in the NMT task. [ 290] propose
further improvement of the scheduled sampling algorithm for NMT by optimizing the probability
of source and target word alignments. This improvement helps to address the issue flexibility in
word order between a source and target language when performing scheduled sampling.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.