36 Ziwei Ji, et al.
Human Feedback (RLHF) [ 276,320]. However, they still exhibit the hallucination problem. Even
worse, since LLMs generate highly fluent and convincing responses, their hallucinations become
more difficult to identify, and more likely to have harmful consequences. The launch of ChatGPT as
an LLM with a conversational user interface led to the popularity of LLMs and their wide range of
real-world applications. The research on the identification and mitigation of hallucination in LLMs
has intensified. LLMs are usually open-ended general-purpose systems, which differ much from
task-specific models, and their architectural designs, data coverage, training methodologies, and
model behaviors are also different from PLMs mentioned in previous sections. Therefore, in the
following sections, we specifically discuss the hallucination problem in LLMs, by covering more
recent works, introducing novel strategies for measuring and mitigating hallucination, as well as
listing unsolved questions and future directions.8
13.1 Hallucination Definition in LLMs
In the realm of LLMs, hallucination takes on a broader definition than before because of the vastness
of training data, the breadth of knowledge base, and multitasking capability. Unlike earlier NLG
models that depend heavily on the input source, LLMs leverage their vast internal parametric
knowledge. Consequently, hallucination in LLMs not only signifies deviations from the source input
but also extends to deviations from training data, marking it more oriented towards the Extrinsic
type. In other words, the reference discussed in Section 2.3 includes both the input source and the
training data.
Existing works often assume that training data is consistently factual and treat it as a stand-in for
“fact” or “truth”. This assumption allows for a practical simplification, with the degree of hallucina-
tion reflecting the model’s ability to accurately and faithfully comprehend and represent the world.
However, this assumption is not always valid, given that training datasets may contain non-factual
and contradictory information. Thus, the concept of hallucination should be distinguished from
that of factuality.
13.2 Hallucination Metrics for LLMs
Hallucination metrics for LLMs are designed to either measure the level of hallucination in LLM-
generated content, or quantify the hallucination risk of individual LLMs. Most of the related
work focuses on measuring extrinsic hallucinations in the open domain. Depending on whether
a metric requires golden references to identify hallucinations, we divide existing hallucination
metrics for LLMs into reference-dependent and reference-free ones. In reference-dependent metrics,
generations of LLM are analyzed based on references sourced from verified knowledge bases such as
Wikipedia, news articles, books, and knowledge graphs. For reference-free metrics, hallucinations
are identified by token probability-based uncertainty measures or self-consistency checks.
13.2.1 Reference-dependent Metrics. Reference-dependent metrics are often formatted as “hal-
lucination benchmarks” that measure the hallucination level not risks of different LLMs. Most
benchmarks utilize multiple choice QA or fill-in-the-blank QA to assess model hallucination, while
some efforts further consider the ratio of partially incorrect answers [ 241] or instances where the
model admits that it cannot answer [ 156]. Some benchmarks adopt the open domain and open-ended
QA setting, where exact-match-based evaluations generally fail to recognize semantically equivalent
answers [ 114]. Free-form responses from LLMs can be analyzed based on atomized decomposition
(FactualityPrompt [ 136] and FActScore [ 184]), LLM-based evaluation (self-judgment [ 220] or GPT-
4-based judgment [ 2]), or by measuring the discrepancy of the vanilla response and the response
giving the knowledge for reference [106, 202, 301].
8This section was updated in Jan 2024.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.