12 Ziwei Ji, et al.
5.1 Data-Related Methods
5.1.1 Building a Faithful Dataset. Considering that noisy data encourage hallucinations, construct-
ing faithful datasets manually is an intuitive method, and there are various ways to build such
datasets: One way is employing annotators to write clean and faithful targets from scratch given
the source [ 79,280], which may lack diversity [ 95,198,203]. Another way is employing annotators
to rewrite real sentences on the web [ 198], or targets in the existing dataset [ 268]. Basically, the
revision strategy consists of three stages: (1) phrase trimming: removing phrases unsupported by
the source in the exemplar sentence; (2) decontextualization: resolving co-references and deleting
phrases dependent on context; (3) syntax modification: making the purified sentences flow smoothly.
Meanwhile, other works [ 75,101] leverage the model to generate data and instruct annotators to
label whether these outputs contain hallucinations or not. While this approach is typically used to
build diagnostic evaluation datasets, it has the potential to build faithful datasets.
5.1.2 Cleaning Data Automatically. In order to alleviate semantic noise issues, another approach is
to find information that is irrelevant or contradictory to the input from the existing parallel corpus
and then filter or correct the data. This approach is suitable for the case where there is a low or
moderate level of noise in the original data [72, 193].
Some works [ 162,215,230] have dealt with the hallucination issue at the instance level by using a
score for each source-reference pair and filtering out hallucinated ones. This corpus filtering method
consists of several steps: (1) measuring the quality of the training samples in terms of hallucination
utilizing the metrics described above; (2) ranking these hallucination scores in descending order;
(3) selecting and filtering out the untrustworthy samples at the bottom. Instance-level scores can
lead to a signal loss because divergences occur at the word level; i.e., parts of the target sentence
are loyal to the source input, while others diverge [216].
Considering this issue, other works [ 55,193] correct paired training samples, specifically the
input data, according to the references. This method is mainly applied in the data-to-text task
because structured data are easier to correcte than utterances. This method consists of two steps:
(1) utilizing a model to parse the meaning representation (MR), such as attribute-value pairs, from
original human textual references; (2) using the MR extracted from the reference to correct the
input MR through slot matching. This method will enhance the semantic consistency between
input and output without abandoning a part of the dataset.
5.1.3 Information Augmentation. It is intuitive that augmenting the inputs with external infor-
mation will obtain a better representation of the source. Because the external knowledge, explicit
alignment, extra training data, etc., can improve the correlation between the source and target and
help the model learn better task-related features. Consequently, a better semantic understanding
helps alleviate the divergence from the source issue. Examples of the augmented information
include entity information [ 162], extracted relation triples from source document [ 25,102] obtained
by Fact Description Extraction, pre-executed operation results [ 192], synthetic data generated
through replacement or perturbation [ 32,133], retrieved external knowledge [ 15,67,92,233,328],
and retrieved similar training samples [16].
These methods enforce a stronger alignment between inputs and outputs. However, they will
bring challenges due to the gap between the original source and augmented information, such as
the semantic gap between an ambiguous utterance and a distinct MR of structured data, and the
format discrepancy between the structured knowledge graph and natural language.
5.2 Modeling and Inference Methods
5.2.1 Architecture.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.