Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 5
2.2 Task Comparison
The previous subsection is about the definition and categorization of hallucination commonly
shared by many NLG tasks. Yet, there are some task-specific differences.
For the abstractive summarization, data-to-text, and dialogue tasks, the main difference is in what
serves as the “source” and the level of tolerance towards hallucinations. The source in abstractive
summarization is the input source text that is being summarized [ 228], while the source in data-to-
text is non-linguistic data [ 81,219], and the source(s) in the dialogue system is dialogue history
and/or the external knowledge sentences. Tolerance towards hallucinations is very low in both the
summarization [ 197] and data-to-text tasks [ 198,269,274] because it is essential to provide faithful
generation. In contrast, the tolerance is relatively higher in dialogue systems because the desired
characteristics are not only faithfulness but also user engagement, especially in open-domain
dialogue systems [103, 109].
For the generative question answering (GQA) task, the exploration of hallucination is at its early
stage, so there is no standard definition or categorization of hallucination yet. However, we can see
that the GQA literature mainly focuses on “intrinsic hallucination” where the source is the world
knowledge [ 141]. Lastly, unlike the aforementioned tasks, the categorizations of hallucinations in
machine translation vary within the task. Most relevant literature agrees that translated text is
considered a hallucination when the source text is completely disconnected from the translated
target [133, 187, 215]. For further details, please refer to Section 11.
2.3 Terminology Clarification
Multiple terminologies are associated with the concept of hallucination. We provide clarification
of the commonly used terminologies hallucination ,faithfulness , and factuality to resolve any
confusion. Faithfulness is defined as staying consistent and truthful to the provided source – an
antonym to "hallucination. " Any work that tries to maximize faithfulness thus focuses on minimizing
hallucination. For this reason, our survey includes all those works that address the faithfulness
of machine-generated outputs. Factuality refers to the quality of being actual or based on fact.
Depending on what serves as the “fact”, "factuality" and "faithfulness" may or may not be the same.
Maynez et al . [177] differentiate "factuality" from "faithfulness" by defining the “fact” to be the
world knowledge. In contrast, Dong et al . [50] use the source input as the “fact” to determine the
factual correctness, making "factuality" indistinguishable from "faithfulness". In this paper, we
adopt the definition from Maynez et al . [177] because we believe having such a distinction between
source knowledge and world knowledge provides a more clear understanding.
Note that the judging criteria for what is considered faithful or hallucinated (i.e., the definition
of hallucination) can differ across tasks. For more details of these variation definitions, you can
find in the later task-specific sections.
3 CONTRIBUTORS TO HALLUCINATION IN NLG
3.1 Hallucination from Data
The main cause of hallucination from data is source-reference divergence. This divergence happens
1) as an artifact of heuristic data collection or 2) due to the nature of some NLG tasks that inevitably
contain such divergence. When a model is trained on data with source-reference(target) divergence,
the model can be encouraged to generate text that is not necessarily grounded and not faithful to
the provided source.
Heuristic data collection. When collecting large-scale datasets, some works heuristically select
and pair real sentences or tables as the source and target [ 132,283]. As a result, the target reference
may contain information that cannot be supported by the source [ 198,268]. For instance, when
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.