Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 19
They transfer this model to check whether the summaries generated from summarization models
are factually consistent. Results show that the performance of their FactCC model surpasses the
classifiers trained on the MNLI or FEVER datasets. Zhou et al . [325] introduce a method to fine-tune
a pre-trained language model on synthetic data with automatically inserted hallucinations in order
to detect the hallucinatory content in summaries. The model can classify whether spans in the
machine-generated summaries are faithful to the article. This method shows higher correlations
with human factual consistency evaluation than the baselines.
7.3 Hallucination Mitigation in Abstractive Summarization
Recently, many approaches have been proposed to reduce the hallucination phenomenon in ab-
stractive summarization.
7.3.1 Architecture Method. Seq-to-seq [ 244] models are widely used and achieve state-of-the-art
performance in abstractive summarization. Researchers have made modifications to the architecture
design of the seq-to-seq models to reduce hallucinated content in the summaries. We describe
various efforts made to improve the encoder, decoder, or both the encoder and decoder of the
seq-to-seq models.
Encoder. Zhu et al . [328] propose to use an explicit graph neural network (GNN) to encode the
fact tuples extracted from source documents. In addition to an explicit graph encoder, Huang
et al. [102] further design a multiple-choice cloze test reward to encourage the model to better
understand entity interactions. Moreover, Gunel et al . [92] use external knowledge from Wikipedia
to make knowledge embeddings, which the results show improve factual consistency.
Decoder. Song et al . [235] present the incorporation of a sequential decoder with a tree-based
decoder to generate a summary sentence and its syntactic parse. This joint generation is performed
improve faithfulness. Aralikatte et al . [6] introduce the Focus Attention Mechanism, which encour-
ages decoders to generate tokens similar or topical to the source documents. The results on the BBC
extreme summarization task show that models augmented with the Focus Attention Mechanism
generate more faithful summaries.
Encoder-decoder. Cao et al . [25] extract fact descriptions from the source text and apply a dual-
attention seq-to-seq framework to force the summaries to be conditioned on both source documents
and the extracted fact descriptions. Li et al . [142] propose an entailment-aware encoder and
decoder with multi-task learning which incorporates the entailment knowledge into abstractive
summarization models.
7.3.2 Training Method. Aside from architecture modification, some works improved the training
approach to reduce hallucination. Cao and Wang [23] introduce a contrastive learning method
to train summarization models. The positive training data are reference summaries, while the
negative training data are automatically generated hallucinatory summaries, and the contrastive
learning system is trained to distinguish between them. In the dialogue summarization field, Tang
et al. [245] propose another contrastive fine-tuning strategy, named CONFIT, that can improve the
factual consistency and overall quality of summaries.
7.3.3 Post-Processing Method. Some works carry out post-editing to reduce the hallucination of
the model-generated summaries, which are viewed as draft summaries. Dong et al . [50] propose
SpanFact, a pair of factual correction models that use knowledge learned from QA models to
correct the spans in the generated summaries. Similar to SpanFact, Cao et al . [22] introduce a
post-editing corrector module to identify and correct hallucinatory content in generated summaries.
The corrector module is trained on synthetic data which are created by adding a series of heuristic
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.