14 Ziwei Ji, et al.
purpose of RL is for the agent to learn an optimal policy that maximizes the reward that accumulates
from the environment [ 258].The reward function is critical to RL and, if properly designed, it can
provide training signals that help the model accomplish its goal of hallucination reduction. For
example, Li et al . [152] propose a slot consistency reward which is the cardinality of the difference
between generated template and the slot-value pairs extracted from input dialogue act. Improving
the slot consistency can help reduce the hallucination phenomenon of missing or misplacing slot
values in generated templates. Mesgar et al . [181] attain persona consistency sub-reward via an
NLI model to reduce the hallucinations in personal facts. Huang et al . [102] use a combination of
ROUGE and the multiple-choice cloze score as the reward function to improve the faithfulness of
summarization outputs. The cloze score is similar to the QA-based metric, measuring how well
a QA model can address the questions by reading the generated summary (as context), where
the questions are automatically constructed from the reference summary. As the above examples
show, some RL reward functions for mitigating hallucination are inspired by existing automatic
evaluation metrics. Although RL is challenging to learn and converge due to the extremely large
search space, this method has the potential to obtain the best policy for the task without an oracle.
Multi-task Learning. Multi-task learning is also utilized for handling hallucinations in different
NLG tasks. In this training paradigm, a shared model is trained on multiple tasks simultaneously to
learn the commonalities of the tasks. The hallucination problem may be derived from the reliance
of the training process on a single dataset, leading to the fact that the model fails to learn the actual
task features. By adding proper additional tasks along with the target task during training, the model
can suffer less from the hallucination problem. For example, Weng et al . [281] and Garg et al . [80]
incorporate a word alignment task into the translation model to improve the alignment accuracy
between the input and output, and thus faithfulness. Li et al . [142] combine an entailment task with
abstractive summarization to encourage models to generate summaries entailed by and faithful
to the source. Li et al . [141] incorporate rationale extraction and the answer generation, which
allows more confident and correct answers and reduces the hallucination problem. The Multi-task
approach has several advantages, such as data efficiency improvement, overfitting reduction, and
fast learning. It is crucial to choose which tasks should be learned jointly, and learning multiple
tasks simultaneously presents new challenges of design and optimization [38].
Controllable Generation. Current works treat the hallucination level as a controllable attribute
in order to remain the hallucination in outputs at a low level. Controllable generation techniques
such as controlled re-sampling [ 214], control codes that can be provided manually [ 72,214,285],
or predicted automatically [ 285] are leveraged to improve faithfulness. This method may require
some annotated datasets for training. Considering that hallucination is not necessarily harmful
and may bring some benefits, controllable methods can be further adapted to change the degree of
hallucination to meet the demands of different real-world applications.
Other general training methods such as regularization [ 117,133,187] and loss reconstruction [ 149,
267, 274] have also been proposed to tackle the hallucination problem.
5.2.3 Post-Processing. Post-processing methods can correct hallucinations in the output, and this
standalone task requires less training data. Especially for noisy datasets where a large proportion of
the ground truth references suffer from hallucinations, modeling correction is a competitive choice
to handle the hallucination problem [ 32]. Cao et al . [22] , Chen et al . [32] , Dong et al . [50] , and Dziri
et al. [60] follow a generate-then-refine strategy. While the post-processing correction step tends
to result in ungrammatical texts, this method allows researchers to utilise SOTA models which
perform best in respect of other attributes, such as fluency, and then correct the results specifically
for faithfulness by using small amounts of automatically generated training data.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.