Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 39
data. Alongside, the authors of InstructMining [ 24], proposed linear rules for selecting high-quality
instruction fine-tuning data and avoided the need for human or machine annotations.
Data for Reward Model Training. Training reliable reward models such that desirable and unde-
sirable outputs are distinguished is an effective method for mitigating hallucination. These models
can subsequently be incorporated into reinforcement learning pipelines. Since the effectiveness of
the system is constrained by the performance of the reward model itself, emphasis has been placed
on determining the most effective training methods [ 153]. Thus, OpenAI released a dataset, namely,
PRM800K, which resulted in a SOTA reward model [ 153]. In the development of GPT-4 [ 195], two
different approaches were implemented. Firstly, in tackling open-domain hallucinations, OpenAI
collected real-world ChatGPT data that were flagged as non-factual by users and used it together
with additional labeled comparison data to train their reward models. Secondly, for closed-domain
hallucinations, OpenAI utilized GPT-4 itself to generate and subsequently utilize synthetic data for
reward model training.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG is a technique that leverages external sources
to enhance the reliability of generative models [ 176,313], which is a popular method used to
mitigate hallucination [ 64]. For example, Gemini incorporates the search engine to provide external
references during generation. However, RAG faces several challenges [ 30]: In the retrieval stage,
the model is required to discern the noise, irrelevant or fake information. In the augmentation stage,
integrating heterogeneous, independent, and even conflicting information presents challenges.
Additionally, the model needs to reject generation when insufficient information is given. Recent
works make efforts to address these challenges. For example, MixAlign Zhang et al . [313] enhances
the alignment between user questions and stored knowledge to improve retrieval and reduce
hallucination.
13.3.2 Modelling and Inference Methods.
Safety Fine-Tuning and Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF). Safety fine-tuning
is a prevalent method to mitigate risks associated with LLMs, such as hallucinations. A prominent
technique in this domain is Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF). The application
of RLHF in the fine-tuning process of GPT-3 leads to the development of InstructGPT, which
significantly reduces the hallucination rate from 41% to 21% in closed domain tasks [ 196]. Similarly,
Llama2 [ 254] demonstrates that post-RLHF, the model consistently generated factual responses
to prompts on factual information. The study also highlighted the use of RLHF in enhancing the
overall safety of LLMs, including a reduction in hallucinations [ 254]. Despite the advantages, Safety
Fine-Tuning and RLHF can incur ‘alignment tax’ and ‘catastrophic forgetting’ where the models
lose diverse previously acquired abilities after alignment [ 158]. To counterbalance these issues, Lin
et al. [158] proposes Adaptive Model Averaging (AMA) optimizing the averaging ratios of different
model layers to maximize alignment reward.
Model Editing. Editing Models such as parameter adapting can also serve to reduce hallucination.
Given that some parameters are more responsible for causing hallucinations, EWR (Elastic Weight
Removal) [ 40] weighs their individual importance via Fisher Information matrix and performs
parameter interpolation to remove the undesired behaviors.
Decoding Methods. Without editing architecture or additional fine-tuning, novel decoding strate-
gies are proposed to reduce hallucinations. Inspired by the finding that factual knowledge is
localized to particular layers, DoLa (Decoding by Contrasting Layers) [ 37] utilizes the difference
in logits from the later layers versus earlier layers to amplify the factual knowledge probability.
Similarly, CAD (Context-Aware Decoding) [ 231] exploits the difference in logits with and without
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.