Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 15
6 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Many studies have been conducted to tackle the hallucination problem in NLG and its downstream
tasks. As mentioned above, we have discussed common metrics and mitigation methods to advance
research in these fields. From a broader perspective, we wish to point out open challenges and
potential directions in regard to metric andmitigation method .
6.1 Future Directions in Metrics Design
Fine-grained Metrics. Most of the existing hallucination metrics measure intrinsic and extrinsic
hallucinations together as a unified metric. However, it is common for a single generation to have
both types and a number of hallucinatory sub-strings. Fine-grained metrics that can distinguish
between the two types of hallucinations will provide richer insight to researchers.
In order to implement a fine-graded metric, the first step would be to identify the exact location
of the hallucinatory sub-strings correctly. However, some metrics such as those that are QA-based
cannot identify the individual hallucinatory sub-strings. Improvements in this aspect would help
improve the quality and explainability of the metrics. The next step would be to categorize the
detected hallucinatory sub-strings. The hallucinatory sub-string will be intrinsic if it is wrong or
nonsensical, and extrinsic if it is non-existing in the source context. Future work that explores an
automatic method of categorization would be beneficial.
Fact-Checking. The factual verification of extrinsic hallucinations requires fact-checking against
world knowledge, which can be time consuming and laborious. Leveraging an automatic fact-
checking system for extrinsic hallucination verification is, thus, other future work that requires
attention. Fact-checking consists of the knowledge evidence selection and claim verification sub-
tasks, and the following are the remaining challenges associated with each sub-task.
The main research problem associated with the evidence selection sub-task is how to retrieve
evidence from the world knowledge. Most of the literature leverages Wikipedia as the knowledge
source [ 135,249,300], which is only a small part of world knowledge. Other literature attempts to use
the whole web as the knowledge source [ 65,171]. However, this method leads to another research
problem – “how to ensure the trustworthiness of the information we use from the web” [ 84]. Source-
level methods that leverages the meta-information of the web source (e.g., web traffic, PageRank or
URL structure) have been proposed to deal with this trustworthiness issue [ 11,204,205]. Addressing
the aforementioned issues to allow evidence selection against world knowledge will be an important
future research direction.
For the verification subtask, verification models perform relatively well if given correct evi-
dence [ 137]. However, it has been shown that verification models are prone to adversarial attacks
and are not robust to negation, numerical or comparative words [ 250]. Improving this weakness of
verification models would also be crucial because the factuality of a sentence can easily be changed
by small word changes (i.e., changes in negations, numbers, and entities).
Generalization. Although we can see that the source and output text of different tasks are in
various forms, investigating their relationship and common ground and proposing general metrics
to evaluate hallucinations are worth exploring. Task-agnostic metrics with cross-domain robustness
could help the research community to build a unified benchmark. It is also important and meaningful
to build open-source platforms to collaborate and standardize the evaluation metrics for NLG tasks.
Incorporation of Human Cognitive Perspective. A good automatic metric should correlate with
human evaluation. Humans are sensitive to different types of information. For instance, proper
nouns are usually more important than pronouns in the generated text. Mistakes concerning named
entities are striking to human users, but automatic metrics treat them equally if not properly
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.