30 Ziwei Ji, et al.
Category Source Correct Translation Hallucinatory Translation
Intrinsic 迈克周四去书店。Mike goes to the bookstore on Thurs-
day.Jerry doesn’t go to the bookstore on
Thursday.
Extrinsic 迈克周四去书店。Mike goes to the bookstore on Thurs-
day.Mike happily goes to the bookstore
on Thursday with his friend.
DetachedDas kann man nur feststellen, wenn
die kontrollen mit einer großen inten-
sität durchgeführt werden.This can only be detected if controls
undertaken are more rigorous.Blood alone moves the wheel of his-
tory, i say to you and you will under-
stand, it is a privilege to fight.
Oscillatory1995 das produktionsvolumen von 30
millionen pizzen wird erreicht.1995 the production
reached 30 million pizzas.The US, for example, has been in the
past two decades, but has been in the
same position as the US, and has been
in the United States.
Table 3. Categories and examples of hallucinations in MT by Zhou et al. [325] and Raunak et al. [215]
disconnected from the source [ 133,187]. The categorization of hallucination in NMT is unlike that
in any other NLG tasks, and uses various terms that are often overlapping. In order to maintain
consistency with other NLG tasks, in this section we use the intrinsic and extrinsic hallucination
categories applied to the NMT task by [ 325]. After a formal definition, we will describe other
identified types of hallucinations and hallucination categories mentioned in the relevant literature.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Hallucinations. Following the idea that hallucinations are outputs that are
disconnected from the source, [ 325] suggest categorizing the hallucinatory content based on the
way the output is disconnected:
•Intrinsic Hallucination: translations contain incorrect information compared to information
present in the source. In Table 3, the example of such hallucination is “Jerry doesn’t go”, since
the original name in the source is “Mike” and the verb “to go” is not negated.
•Extrinsic Hallucination: translations produce additional content without any regard to the
source. In Table 3, “happily” and “with his friend” are the two examples of the hallucinatory
content since they are added without any apparent connection to the input.
Other Categories and Types of Hallucinations. Raunak et al. [215] propose an alternative catego-
rization of hallucinations. They divide hallucinations into hallucinations under perturbations and
natural hallucinations. Hallucinations under perturbation are those that can be observed if a model
tested on the perturbed and unperturbed test set returns drastically different content. Their work
on hallucinations under perturbation strictly follows the algorithm proposed by Lee et al . [133] ; see
Section 11.2.2 on the entropy measure. The second category, natural hallucinations, are created with
a connection to the noise in the dataset and can be further divided into detached and oscillatory,
where detached hallucinations mean that a target translation is semantically disconnected from
a source input, and oscillatory hallucinations mean those that are decoupled from the source by
manifesting a repeating n-gram. Tu et al . [257] and Kong et al . [124] analyze this phenomenon
under the name “over-translation”, that is, a repetitive appearance of words that were not in the
source text. Conversely, under-translation is skipping the words that need to be translated [ 257].
Finally, abrupt jumps to the end of the sequence and outputs that remain mostly in the source
language are also examples of hallucinatory content [133].
11.2 Hallucination Metrics in NMT
The definition of hallucinations in machine translation (MT) tends to be qualitative and subjective,
and thus researchers often identify hallucinated content manually. Most detrimentally, the appear-
ance of hallucinations is found not to affect the BLEU score of the translated text [ 251,325]. There
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.