Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 27
according to queries and generation models that can synthesize more accurate answers from
multi-source documents.
10 HALLUCINATION IN DATA-TO-TEXT GENERATION
Data-to-Text Generation is the task of generating natural language descriptions conditioned on struc-
tured data [ 127,179], such as tables [ 198,283], database records [ 36], and knowledge graphs [ 79].
Although this field has been recently boosted by neural text generation models, it is well known
that these models are prone to hallucinations [ 283] because of the gap between structured data
and text, which may cause semantic misunderstanding and erroneous correlation. Moreover, the
tolerance of hallucination is very low when this task is applied to the real world, such as in the
case of patient information table description [ 247], and analysis of experimental results tables in
a scientific report. Recent years have seen a growth of interest in hallucinations in Data-to-Text
Generation, and researchers have proposed works from the aspect of evaluation and mitigation.
10.1 Hallucination Definition in Data-to-Text Generation
The definition and categories of hallucination in Data-to-Text Generation follow the descriptions
in Section 2. We follow the general hallucination definition in this task: (1) Intrinsic Hallucinations:
the generated text contains information that is contradicted by the input data [ 193]. For example, in
Table 1, “ The Houston Rockets (18-4) ” uses the information “ [TEAM: Rockets, CITY:Houston, WIN:18,
LOSS: 5] ” in the source table. However, “ (18-4) ” is contradicted by “ [LOSS: 5] ” and it should be
“(18-5) ”. (2) Extrinsic Hallucinations: the generated text contains extra information irrelevant to the
input [ 45,193]. For example, in Table 1, “ Houston has won two straight games and six of their last
seven. ” is not mentioned in the source table [268].
10.2 Hallucination Metrics in Data-to-Text Generation
Statistical. PARENT [ 45] measures the accuracy of table-to-text generation by aligning n-grams
from the reference description 𝑅and generated texts 𝐺to the table𝑇. And it is the average F-score
by combining the entailment precision and recall. Wang et al . [274] modify PARENT and denote
this table-focused version as PARENT-T. Different from PARENT, which evaluates i-th instance
(𝑇𝑖,𝑅𝑖,𝐺𝑖), PARENT-T ignores the reference description R and evaluates each instance (𝑇𝑖,𝐺𝑖).
IE-based. Liu et al . [162] estimate hallucination with two entity-centric metrics: table record
coverage (the ratio of covered records in a table) and hallucinated ratio (the ratio of hallucinated
entities in text). This metric firstly uses entity recognition to extract the entities of input and
generated output, then aligns these entities by heuristic matching strategies, and finally calculates
the ratios of faithful and hallucinated entities separately. Moreover, there are some general post-
hoc IE-based metrics that could be applied to hallucination evaluation, such as Slot Error Rate
(SER) [ 291], Content Selection (CS), Relation Generation (RG), and Content Ordering (CO) [ 268,283].
QA-based. Data-QuestEval [ 217] adapt QuestEval [ 227] from summarization into data-to-text
generation. First, a textual QG model is trained on a textual QA dataset. For each sample (structured
data, textual descriptions), the textual QG model generates synthetic problems based on the de-
scriptions. The structured data, textual descriptions (answers), and synthetic questions make up a
synthetic QG/QA dataset to train synthetic QA/QG models . Then, the synthetic QG model generates
questions based on the textual description to be evaluated. The synthetic QA model then generates
answers based on a synthetic question and the structured input data. Finally, BERTScore [ 314]
measures the similarity between the generated answer and description, indicating faithfulness.
NLI-based. Dušek and Kasner [57] recognize the textual entailment between the input data and
the output text for both omissions and hallucinations with an NLI model. This work measures the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.