20 Ziwei Ji, et al.
transformations to reference summaries. Zhao et al . [321] present HERMAN, a system that learns
to recognize quantities (dates, amounts of money, etc.) in the generated summary and verify their
factual consistency with the source text. According to the quantity hallucination score, the system
chooses the most faithful summary where the source text supports its quantity terms from the
candidate-generated summaries. Chen et al . [32] introduce a contrast candidate generation and
selection system to do post-processing. The contrast candidate generation model replaces the
named entities in the generated summaries with ones present in the source documents, and the
contrast candidate selection model will select the best candidate as the final output summary.
7.4 Future Directions in Abstractive Summarization
Factual Hallucination Evaluation. Factual hallucinations contain information not found in source
content, though it is factually correct. In the summarization task, this kind of hallucination could
lead to better summaries. However, there is little work focused on evaluating factual hallucination
explicitly. Fact-checking approaches could be potentially used in this regard.
Extrinsic Hallucination Mitigation. There has been little research on extrinsic hallucinations as
it is more challenging to detect and mitigate content based on world knowledge. We believe it is
worth exploring extrinsic hallucination in terms of evaluation metrics and mitigation methods.
Hallucination in Dialogue Summarization. In conversational data, the discourse relations between
utterances and co-references between speakers are more complicated than from, say, news arti-
cles. For example, Zhong et al . [322] show that 74% of samples in the QMSum dataset consist of
inconsistent facts. We believe exploring the hallucination issue in dialogue summarization is an
important and special component of research into hallucination in abstractive summarization.
8 HALLUCINATION IN DIALOGUE GENERATION
Dialogue generation is an NLG task that automatically generates responses according to user
utterances. The generated responses are required to be fluent, coherent, and consistent with the
dialogue history. The dialogue generation task can be divided into two sub-tasks: (1) task-oriented
dialogue generation; (2) open-domain dialogue generation. A task-oriented dialogue system aims to
complete a certain task according to a user query in a specific domain, such as restaurant booking,
hotel recommendation, and calendar checking. Meanwhile, an open-domain dialogue system aims
to establish a multi-turn, long-term conversation with users while providing the users with an
engaging experience.
8.1 Hallucination Definition in Dialogue Generation
The hallucination problem also exists in the dialogue generation task. It is important to note that a
dialogue system is expected either to provide the user with the required information or to provide
an engaging response without repeating utterances from the dialogue history. Thus, the tolerance
for producing proper “hallucination” from the dialogue history is relatively higher.
The definition of hallucination in this task can be adopted from the general definition as follows:
(1)Intrinsic hallucination : the generated response is contradictory to the dialogue history or
the external knowledge sentences. In the examples of intrinsic hallucination shown in Table 1, we
can verify that the output contradicts the inputs: In one example, the input is a “ moderate ” price
range, but the model mistakenly generates a sentence with a “ high” price range. In another case, the
confusion of the names “ Roger Federer ” and “ Rafael Nadal ” causes the output generation of “ Roger
Nadal ”. (2) Extrinsic hallucination : the generated response is hard to verify with the dialogue
history or the external knowledge sentences. Responses with extrinsic hallucination are impossible
to verify with the given inputs. “ Pickwick hotel ” might be “ in san diego ”, and Djokovic may have
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.