Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 23
the untrustworthy samples which get lower scores are filtered out from the training set to improve
the model performance in terms of self-consistency (i.e., intrinsic hallucination). Shuster et al . [233]
conduct a comprehensive investigation on a retrieval-augmented KGD task where a retriever is
introduced to the system for knowledge selection. The authors study several key problems, such
as whether retrieval helps reduce hallucinations and how the generation should be augmented
with the retrieved knowledge. The experimental results show that retrieval helps substantially in
improving performance on KGD tasks and in reducing the hallucination in conversations without
sacrificing conversational ability.
Rashkin et al . [214] introduce a set of control codes and concatenate them with dialogue inputs
to reduce the hallucination by forcing the model to be more aware of how the response relies on
the knowledge evidence in the response generation. Some researchers have also tried to reduce
hallucinated responses during generation by improving dialogue modeling. Wu et al . [285] apply
inductive attention into transformer-based dialogue models, and potentially uninformative atten-
tion links are removed with respect to a piece of pre-established structural information between
the dialogue context and the provided knowledge. Instead of improving the dialogue response
generation model itself, Dziri et al . [60] present a response refinement strategy with a token-level
hallucination critic and entity-mention retriever, so that the original dialogue model is left without
retraining. The former module is designed to label the hallucinated entity mentioned in the gener-
ated responses, while the retriever is trained to retrieve more faithful entities from the provided
knowledge graph. RHO [ 108] is a framework that uses three mechanisms to tackle hallucinations,
namely, local knowledge grounding, global knowledge grounding, and response re-ranking to
tackle hallucinations in open-domain dialogues, and has been empirically shown to perform this.
8.3 Task-oriented Dialogue Generation
A task-oriented dialogue system is often composed of several modules: a natural language un-
derstanding (NLU) module, a dialogue manager (DM), and a natural language generation (NLG)
module [ 77,112]. Intrinsic hallucination can occur between the DM and NLG, where a dialogue
act such as recommend(NAME= peninsula hotel , AREA= tsim sha tsui )is transformed into a natural
language representation “the hotel named peninsula hotel is located in tsim sha tsui area.” [ 10,152].
8.3.1 Hallucination Metrics. To evaluate hallucination, Li et al. [152] and Balakrishnan et al. [10]
combine traditional metrics such as the BLEU score and human evaluation as well as hallucination-
specific automatic metrics. Following previous works such as [ 56,279], and [ 255], Li et al . [152]
use the slot error rate, which is computed by (𝑝+𝑞)/𝑁, where𝑁represents the total number of
slots extracted by another model in the dialogue act. Here, 𝑝stands for the missing slots in the
generated template, and 𝑞is the number of redundant slots. On the other hand, Balakrishnan et al .
[10] introduce a novel metric called the tree accuracy, which determines whether the prediction’s
tree structure is identical to that of the input meaning representations.
8.3.2 Mitigation Methods. While Balakrishnan et al . [10] propose to adopt tree-structured semantic
representations and add constraints on decoding, Li et al . [152] frame a reinforcement learning
problem to which they apply a bootstrapping algorithm to sample training instances and then
leverage a reward related to slot consistency. Recently, there has emerged another line of research in
task-oriented dialogue, which is to build a single end-to-end system rather than connecting several
modules (e.g., Eric and Manning [63], Madotto et al . [167 ,170?]). As discussed in previous sections
of this paper, there is potential for such end-to-end systems to produce extrinsic hallucinations, yet
this remains less explored. For example, a model might generate a response with an entity that
appears out of nowhere. In the example of hotel recommendation in Hong Kong given above, a
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.