8 Ziwei Ji, et al.
Another problematic scenario is when duplicates from the dataset are not properly filtered out.
It is almost impossible to check hundreds of gigabytes of text corpora manually. Lee et al . [134]
show that duplicated examples from the pretraining corpus bias the model to favor generating
repeats of the memorized phrases from the duplicated examples.
Innate divergence. Some NLG tasks by nature do not always have factual knowledge alignment
between the source input text and the target reference, especially those that value diversity in
generated output. For instance, it is acceptable for open-domain dialogue systems to respond in
chit-chat style, subjective style [ 214], or with a relevant fact that is not necessarily present in the
user input, history or provided knowledge source – this improves the engagingness and diversity
of the dialogue generation. However, researchers have discovered that such dataset characteristic
leads to inevitable extrinsic hallucinations.
3.2 Hallucination from Training and Inference
As discussed in the previous subsection, source-reference divergence existing in dataset is one of
the contributors of hallucination. However, Parikh et al . [198] show that hallucination problem
still occurs even when there is very little divergence in dataset. This is because there is another
contributor of hallucinations – training and modeling choices of neural models [ 121,215,222,263].
Imperfect representation learning. The encoder has the role of comprehending and encoding
input text into meaningful representations. An encoder with a defective comprehension ability
could influence the degree of hallucination [ 198]. When encoders learn wrong correlations between
different parts of the training data, it could result in erroneous generation that diverges from the
input [6, 71, 142, 251].
Erroneous decoding. The decoder takes the encoded input from the encoder and generates the
final target sequence. Two aspects of decoding contribute to hallucinations. First, decoders can
attend to the wrong part of the encoded input source, leading to erroneous generation [ 251]. Such
wrong association results in generation with facts mixed up between two similar entities [ 60,233].
Second, the design of the decoding strategy itself can contribute to hallucinations. Dziri et al .
[60] illustrate that a decoding strategy that improves the generation diversity, such as top-k
sampling, is positively correlated with increased hallucination. We conjecture that deliberately
added “randomness” by sampling from the top-k samples instead of choosing the most probable
token increase the unexpected nature of the generation, leading to a higher chance of containing
hallucinated content.
Exposure Bias. Regardless of decoding strategy choices, the exposure bias problem [ 13,213],
defined as the discrepancy in decoding between training and inference time, can be another con-
tributor to hallucination. It is common practice to train the decoder with teacher-forced maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) training, where the decoder is encouraged to predict the next token
conditioned on the ground-truth prefix sequences. However, during the inference generation, the
model generates the next token conditioned on the historical sequences previously generated by
itself [ 97]. Such a discrepancy can lead to increasingly erroneous generation, especially when the
target sequence gets longer.
Parametric knowledge bias. Pre-training of models on a large corpus is known to result in the
model memorizing knowledge in its parameters [ 169,201,221]. This so-called parametric knowledge
helps improve the performance of downstream tasks but also serves as another contributor to
hallucinatory generation. Large pre-trained models used for downstream NLG tasks are powerful
in providing generalizability and coverage, but Longpre et al . [163] have discovered that such
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.