Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 17
numerical reasoning. Therefore, adding reasoning ability to the hallucination mitigation methods
is also an interesting future direction.
Controllability. Controllability means the ability of models to control the level of hallucination
and strike a balance between faithfulness and diversity [ 60,222]. As mentioned in Section 3, it is
acceptable for chit-chat models to generate a certain level of hallucinatory content as long as it is
factual. Meanwhile, for the abstractive summarization task, there is no agreement in the research
community about whether factual hallucinations are desirable or not [ 177]. Therefore, we believe
controllability merits attention when exploring hallucination mitigation methods.
7 HALLUCINATION IN ABSTRACTIVE SUMMARIZATION
Abstractive summarization aims to extract essential information from source documents and to
generate short, concise, and readable summaries [ 302]. Neural networks have achieved remarkable
results on abstractive summarization. However, Maynez et al . [177] observe that neural abstractive
summarization models are likely to generate hallucinatory content that is unfaithful to the source
document. Falke et al . [66] analyze three recent abstractive summarization systems and show that
25% of the summaries generated from state-of-the-art models have hallucinated content. In addition,
Zhou et al . [325] mention that even if a summary contains a large amount of hallucinatory content,
it can achieve a high ROUGE [ 154] score. This has encouraged researchers to actively devise ways to
improve the evaluation of abstractive summarization, especially from the hallucination perspective.
In this section, we review the current progress in automatic evaluation and the mitigation of
hallucination, and list the remaining challenges for future work. In addition, it is worth mentioning
that researchers have used various terms to describe the hallucination phenomenon, such as
faithfulness, factual errors, and factual consistency, and we will use the original terms from their
papers in the remainder of this section.
7.1 Hallucination Definition in Abstractive Summarization
The definition of hallucination in abstractive summarization follows that in Section 2. Specifically,
we adopt the definition from [ 177]: given a document and its abstractive summary, a summary
is hallucinated if it has any spans not supported by the input document. Once again, intrinsic
hallucination refers to output content that contradicts the source, while extrinsic hallucination
refers to output content that the source cannot verify. For instance, in Table 1, given the input
article shown in the caption, an example of intrinsic hallucination is “ The Ebola vaccine was rejected
by the FDA in 2019, ” because this statement contradicts the given content “ The first vaccine for Ebola
was approved by the FDA in 2019 in the US ”. And an example of extrinsic hallucination is “ China
has already started clinical trials of the COVID-19 vaccine, ” because this statement is not mentioned
in the given content. We can neither find evidence of it from the input article nor assert that it is
wrong.
Pagnoni et al . [197] define fine-grained types of factual errors in summaries. As mentioned in
2.3, since the “fact” here refers to source knowledge, “factual error” can be treated as hallucination,
and we can adopt this classification as a sub-type of hallucination. They establish three categories
as semantic frame error, discourse error, and content verifiability error.
7.2 Hallucination Metrics in Abstractive Summarization
Existing metrics for hallucination in abstractive summarization are mainly model-based. Follow-
ing [ 104], we divide the hallucination metrics into two categories: (1) unsupervised metrics and
(2) semi-supervised metrics. Note that existing hallucination metrics evaluate both intrinsic and
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.