Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation 35
search method for decoding and exhibit that reducing uncertainty can lead to less hallucination.
Specifically, a weighted penalty term is added to the beam search objective to balance between log
probability and predictive uncertainty of the selected word candidates. More recently, Dai et al .
[42] analyze object hallucination in VL pre-training and propose a novel pre-training objective
named object masked language modeling to alleviate this problem.
12.2 Hallucination in Other VL Tasks
In addition to image captioning, hallucination has also been observed in other VL tasks and raised
as an open research question. For example, in open-ended visual question answering, Figure 3 (left
and right) shows that the model could generate seem likely answers when we only see the text,
however wrong when given the image. Moreover, Figure 3 (middle) indicates that hallucination can
also be triggered by adversarially prompting an unanswerable question. The model will imagine an
unsupported answer that commonly matches the given visual scene.
Question: What is on the
phone screen? Answer: A text
message from a friend.  Question: What can you see
out the window? Answer: A
parking lot.  Question: Whom is the person
texting? Answer: The driver . 
Fig. 3. Examples of hallucination in visual question answering (taken from [ 3]). The bold text is the output
generated by the model and the part before it is the input prompt.
12.3 Future Directions in VL
For future research on the hallucination problem in VL, we summarize three promising directions.
Firstly, hallucination detection and mitigation in VL is still in the early stage. There is a lack of
empirical and theoretical analyses in many tasks, such as visual storytelling, visual commonsense
reasoning, video captioning, etc. Secondly, more effective evaluation metrics are needed. For
example, although CHAIR can automatically evaluate the degree of object hallucination in image
captioning, it requires a pre-defined list of object categories, which does not generalize well.
Furthermore, currently there is no automatic metric for the hallucination types discussed in
Section 12.2. Therefore, we cannot perform quantitative evaluations for them. Thirdly, we believe
how to perform controlled generation [ 42,216] with visual grounding is a promising direction to
mitigate hallucination in VL.
13 HALLUCINATION IN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Scaling up models and data sizes for language models has shown great empirical success. The
resulting Large Language Models (LLMs) not only have achieved significant performance improve-
ments upon previous PLMs across a diverse array of NLP tasks, but have also demonstrated many
emerging abilities and strong steerability after instruction tuning and Reinforcement Learning from
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.