40 Ziwei Ji, et al.
context. In addition, Li et al . [146] observe the gap between surface generation and internal knowl-
edge and propose ITI (Inference-Time Intervention) to reduce this gap. It first identifies attention
heads with high linear probing accuracy for truthfulness and then shifts activations along these
truth-correlated directions during inference.
Chain-of-Thought and Variants. Chain-of-Thought and its variants encourage LLMs to reason
prior to arriving at a final reply, which improves performance and reduces hallucinations by
leveraging the model’s internal knowledge [ 46,110,123,138,232,273]. For example, Chain-of-
Verification (COVE) [ 46] consists of four steps where an LLM first drafts an initial response, plans
verification questions to fact check it, answers the questions independently to ensure the answers
are not biased by other responses, and finally generates the verified response. Chain of Natural
Language Inference (CoNLI) [ 138] detect hallucinations in the initial response by prompting
the LLM to conduct sentence/entity-level NLI, and then refine the response according to the
detection result. Ji et al . [110] propose iterative self-reflection loops that involve generating relevant
background knowledge for a given question followed by a factuality evaluation and self-correction.
During answering, a similar generation-score-refine strategy is used for its entailment with the
question. Solo Performance Prompting (SPP) [ 273] prompts a single LLM to engage in multi-turn
self-collaboration with multiple personas, such that their individual strengths and knowledge are
combined to boost the problem-solving and performance in tasks.
Post-processing. Petite Unsupervised Research and Revision (PURR) [ 27] fine-tune an editor to
denoise the corruptions and use the editor to correct the hallucinations in the initial outputs. Other
works like REFEED [ 304] leverage retrieved documents for post-correction. Similarly, CRITIC [ 88]
uses external tools such as search engines and code interpreters to verify and post-correct the
initial output.
Ensemble. Ensembling multiple models to mitigate hallucination is another way. For example,
in [53], multiple LLMs individually produce responses and then jointly debate their responses and
reasoning, ultimately reaching a single common answer. This approach has been demonstrated to
improve the factuality of generated content.
13.4 Future Directions of Hallucination Mitigation in LLMs
13.4.1 Hallucination in Large Multimodal Models. Large multimodal models (LMMs) such as GPT-
4V can generate rich and detailed responses for visual inputs, therefore being inherently riskier
compared to previous VLMs for single-sentence captioning and short-answer VQA. Furthermore,
images convey different levels of information encompassing object existence, attributes (color, shape,
etc), spatial relationships, and sometimes high-level emotional responses they elicit (peaceful, beau-
tiful, etc.), which makes mitigating hallucination in LMM even more challenging. The exploration
of this area is still in its early stage, with a primary focus on object existence hallucination [ 151].
However, it is imperative for LMMs to analyze images well beyond that surface level, otherwise,
the use of LMM would be redundant and a simple object detector would suffice. The most crucial
factor in this problem is the availability and quality of data and supervision. Language-supervised
representations ( e.g.,CLIP) have demonstrated inherent shortcomings in recognizing certain types
of visual patterns, such as object orientation, quantity, and viewpoint [ 252]. Even with perfect
representation, imperfect vision-language alignment can result in a significant gap between the
visual recognition abilities of the LMM and its visual backbone [ 308]. The cost of annotation during
the mitigation of multimodal hallucination should also be considered. While there are works on
the visual extension of faithfulness-oriented RLHF [ 303], these essentially involve labeling more
data, which is expensive and difficult to scale. The versatility of the visual domains also makes it
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.