42 Ziwei Ji, et al.
13.4.5 Understanding Hallucination in LLMs. Although the research community has put extensive
efforts into developing empirical methods for measuring and mitigating hallucinations, our under-
standing of LLM hallucination still remains limited. The absence of reliable theoretical frameworks
and rigorous mathematical formulations hinders our ability to answer fundamental questions and
make further advancements. For instance, how does hallucination correlate with model and data size
(e.g., scaling laws)? What is the relationship between hallucination and auto-regressive generation?
Do SFT and RLHF employ different mechanisms to mitigate hallucinations? What is the lower
bound of hallucination across different tasks and domains? These questions are also intrinsically
linked to a broader question – although now there are a lot of effort on empirically investigating
what LLM can and cannot do from different dimensions, we still don’t understand why and how it
works. There has been some attempts from various perspectives, such as knowledge encoding [ 82],
compression [ 43], model selection [ 293], compositionality [ 59], computational perspective [ 70], but
we are still a long way from truly understanding the mechanism behind various LLM behaviors.
14 CONCLUSION
In this survey, we provide the first comprehensive overview of the hallucination problem in NLG,
summarizing existing evaluation metrics, mitigation methods, and the remaining challenges for
future research. Hallucination is an artifact of neural-based NLG and is of concern because they
appear fluent and can therefore be misleading to users. In some scenarios and tasks, hallucination
can cause harm. We survey various contributors to hallucination, ranging from noisy data, erroneous
parametric knowledge, incorrect attention mechanism, inappropriate training strategy, to inference
exposure bias, etc. We show that there are two categories of hallucinations, namely intrinsic
hallucination and extrinsic hallucination, and they need to be treated differently with diverse
mitigation strategies. Hallucination is relatively easy to detect in abstractive summarization and in
NMT against the evidence in the source. For dialogue systems, it is important to balance diversity
vs consistency in dialogue responses. Hallucination in GQA and VL tasks is detrimental to the
performance, but research on mitigation methods is still very preliminary in these areas. For data-
to-text generation, hallucination arises from the discrepancy between the input and output format.
Most methods to mitigate hallucinations in NMT either aim to reduce dataset noise or alleviate
exposure bias. In the VL domain, models also generate unfaithful output given the visual scene,
and recent works have mainly focused on the object hallucination problem. There remain many
challenges ahead in identifying and mitigating hallucinations in NLG, and we hope research in this
area can benefit from this survey.
REFERENCES
[1]Moloud Abdar, Farhad Pourpanah, Sadiq Hussain, Dana Rezazadegan, Li Liu, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Paul W.
Fieguth, Xiaochun Cao, Abbas Khosravi, U. Rajendra Acharya, Vladimir Makarenkov, and Saeid Nahavandi. 2020. A Re-
view of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning: Techniques, Applications and Challenges. CoRR abs/2011.06225
(2020). arXiv:2011.06225 https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.06225
[2]Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. 2023. Evaluating
Correctness and Faithfulness of Instruction-Following Models for Question Answering. CoRR abs/2307.16877 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.16877 arXiv:2307.16877
[3]Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch,
Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Saman-
gooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh,
Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. 2022. Flamingo: a
Visual Language Model for Few-Shot Learning. ArXiv abs/2204.14198 (2022).
[4]Joshua Albrecht and Rebecca Hwa. 2007. A Re-examination of Machine Learning Approaches for Sentence-Level MT
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics . Association for
Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic, 880–887. https://aclanthology.org/P07-1111
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.