CAPSULE-FORENSICS: USING CAPSULE NETWORKS TO DETECT FORGED IMAGES
AND VIDEOS
Huy H. Nguyen?, Junichi Yamagishi?yz, and Isao Echizen?y
?SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Kanagawa, Japan
yNational Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
zThe University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Email: fnhhuy, jyamagishi, iechizen g@nii.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
Recent advances in media generation techniques have made it
easier for attackers to create forged images and videos. State-
of-the-art methods enable the real-time creation of a forged
version of a single video obtained from a social network. Al-
though numerous methods have been developed for detecting
forged images and videos, they are generally targeted at cer-
tain domains and quickly become obsolete as new kinds of
attacks appear. The method introduced in this paper uses a
capsule network to detect various kinds of spoofs, from replay
attacks using printed images or recorded videos to computer-
generated videos using deep convolutional neural networks.
It extends the application of capsule networks beyond their
original intention to the solving of inverse graphics problems.
Index Terms —computer-generated video, replay attack,
forgery detection, capsule network
1. INTRODUCTION
Forged images and videos can be used to bypass facial au-
thentication and to create fake news media. The quality of
manipulated images and videos has seen signiﬁcant improve-
ment with the development of advanced network architectures
and the use of large amounts of training data. This has dra-
matically simpliﬁed the creation of facial forgeries. Nowa-
days, the only thing needed to create a forged facial image
is simply a short video of the target person [1, 2] or an ID
photo [3, 4]. The techniques developed by Chung et al. [4]
and Suwajanakorn et al. [5] can improve the ability of attack-
ers to learn the mapping between speech and lip motion, en-
abling the creation of fully synthesized audio-video data for
any person. In this age of social networks serving as major
sources of information, fake news with manipulated multime-
dia can quickly spread and have signiﬁcant effects. The deep-
fake phenomenon [6] is a good example of this threat—any
person with a personal computer can create videos incorporat-
ing the facial image of any celebrity by using a human image
synthesis technique based on artiﬁcial intelligence.Several countermeasures have been proposed to deal with
manipulated images and videos. However, most of them
are aimed at particular types of attacks. For example, lo-
cal binary pattern (LBP)-based methods [7, 8] are effective
against replay attacks in which the attacker places a printed
photo or displays a video on a screen in front of the cam-
era. However, the eyes-focused method designed to detect a
deepfake forgery [9] can fail with the replay attack when the
video displayed is of the actual target person. Other meth-
ods have more generalized ability; for instance, Fridrich and
Kodovsky’s method [10] can be applied for both steganal-
ysis and detecting facial reenactment videos. However, its
performance on secondary tasks is limited in comparison
with task-speciﬁc methods like that of Rossler et al. [11].
Moreover, while some methods can detect a single forged
image [11, 12, 13], others require video input [9].
This paper presents a method that uses a capsule net-
work to detect forged images and videos in a wide range
of forgery scenarios, including replay attack detection and
(both fully and partially) computer-generated image/video
detection. This is pioneering work in the use of capsule net-
works [14, 15, 16], which were originally designed for com-
puter vision problems, to solve digital forensics problems. A
comprehensive survey of state-of-the-art related work and in-
tensive comparisons using four major datasets demonstrated
the superior performance of the proposed method.
2. RELATED WORK
In this section, we group forgery detection approaches into
replay attack detection and computer-generated image/video
detection on the basis of the features used and their target.
Note that some approaches are two-fold while others are ap-
plicable only to certain types of attacks. We also provide
some basic information about capsule networks and the dy-
namic routing algorithm that made this kind of network prac-
tical.arXiv:1810.11215v1  [cs.CV]  26 Oct 2018