12
classiﬁcation of a practical BCI application both online and
ofﬂine.
5.1.5 Emotion-related EEG
Since it is believed that EEG contains comparatively com-
prehensive emotional information and better accessibility
for affective research, while CNN holds the capacity to take
spatial information into account with two-dimensional ﬁl-
ters, CNN-based deep learning algorithm has been applied
to EEG signals for emotion recognition and classiﬁcation in
numerous recent studies [111] [112] [113] [114]. Six basic
emotional states that could be recognized and classiﬁed
by using EEG signals [115] [116], including joy, sadness,
surprise, anger, fear, and disgust, while the emotions could
also be simply categorized in binary classiﬁcation as positive
or negative [117]. To apply EEG signals to CNN-based
modules, EEG signals could be directly introduced to the
modules, or to extract diverse entropy and power spectral
density (PSD) features as the input of the models. Three
connectivity features extracted from EEG signals, phase-
locking value (PLV), Pearson correlation coefﬁcient (PCC)
and phase lag index (PLI), were examined in [117] to
the proposed three different CNN structures. A popular
EEG-based emotion classiﬁcation database DEAP [118] was
applied to the framework, and the PSD features perfor-
mance was enhanced by the connectivity features, with
PLV matrices obtaining 99.72% accuracy utilizing CNN-5.
Further, on this, dynamical graph CNN (DGCNN) has also
been proposed for multichannel EEG emotion recognition.
In the study of Song et al. [119], the presented DGCNN
method uses a graph to model EEG features by learning
intrinsic correlations between each EEG channel to produce
an adjacency matrix, which is then applied to learn more
discriminative features. The experiments conducted in the
SJTU emotion EEG dataset (SEED) [120] and the DREAMER
dataset [121] achieved recognition accuracy rate at 90.4%
and 86.23% respectively.
5.2 Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
5.2.1 GAN for data augmentation
In classiﬁcation tasks, a substantial amount of real-world
data is required for training machine learning and deep
learning modules, and in some cases, there are limitations
of acquiring enough amount of real data or simply the
investment of time and human resources could be too
overwhelming. Proposed in 2014 and becoming more active
in recent years, GAN is mainly used data augmentation to
address the question of how to generate artiﬁcial natural
looking samples to mimic real-world data via implying
generative models, so that unrevealed training data sample
number could be increased [122].
GAN includes two synchronously trained neural net-
works, generator networks and discriminator networks as
shown in Fig. 7. The generator networks can capture the in-
put data distribution and aim to generate fake sample data,
and the discriminator networks can distinguish whether the
sample comes from the true training data. These two neural
networks aim to generate an aggregation of samples from
the pre-trained generator and to employ the samples for
additional functions such as classiﬁcation.5.2.2 EEG data augmentation
The signiﬁcance of applying GAN for EEG is that it could
address the major practical issue of insufﬁcient training
data. Abdelfattah, Abdelrahman and Wang [123] proposed
a novel GAN model that learns statistical characteristics
of the EEG and increases datasets to improve classiﬁcation
performance. Their study showed that the method outper-
forms other generative models dramatically. The Wasser-
stein GAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) proposed
by Panwar et al. [124] incorporates a BCI classiﬁer into
the framework to synthesize EEG data and simulate time-
series EEG data. WGAN-GP was applied to event-related
classiﬁcation and perform task classiﬁcation with the Class-
Conditioned WGAN-CP . GAN has also been used in EEG
data augmentation for improving recognition performance,
such as emotion recognition. The framework presented in
[125] was built upon a conventional GAN, named Condi-
tional Wasserstein GAN (CWGAN), to enhance EEG-based
emotion recognition. The high-dimensional EEG data gen-
erated by the proposed GAN framework was evaluated
by three indicators to ensure high-quality synthetic data
are appended to manifold supplement. The positive ex-
periment results on SEED and DEAP emotion recognition
datasets proved the effectiveness of the CWGAN model.
A conditional Boundary Equilibrium GAN based EEG data
augmentation method [126] for artiﬁcial differential entropy
features generation was also proven to be effective in im-
proving multimodal emotion recognition performance.
As a branch of deep learning, GAN has been em-
ployed to generate super-resolution image copies from
low-resolution images. A GAN-based deep EEG super-
resolution method proposed by Corley and Huang [127] is a
novel approach to generate high spatial resolution EEG data
from low-resolution EEG samples via producing unsampled
data from different channels. This framework could address
the limitation of insufﬁcient data collected from low-density
EEG devices by interpolating multiple missing channels
effectively.
To the best of our knowledge, in contrast with CNN,
GAN was comparatively less studied in BCIs. One major
reason is that the feasibility of using GAN for generating
time sequence data is yet to be fully evaluated [128]. In the
investigation of GAN performance in producing synthetic
EEG signals, Fahimi et al. used real EEG signals as random
input to train a CNN-based GAN to produce synthetic EEG
data and then evaluate the similarities in the frequency
and time domains. Their result indicates that the generated
EEG data from GAN resemble the spatial, spectral, and
temporal characteristics of real EEG signals. This initiates
novel perspectives for future research of GAN in EEG-based
BCIs.
5.3 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM)
The traditional neural networks usually are not capable of
reasoning from the previous information, but RNN, inspired
by humans memory, can address this issue by adding a
loop that allows information to be passed from one step
of the network to the next. As shown in Fig. 8, the recurrent
procedure of RNN describes a speciﬁc node Ain the time