2
research directions of BCIs. Here, we address the best-
known application areas that BCIs have been widely ex-
plored and applied: (1) BCI is recognised with the potential
to be an approach that uses intuitive and natural human
mechanisms of processing thinking to facilitate interactions
[7]. Since the common methods of traditional HCI are
mostly restricted to manual interfaces and the majority
of other designs are not being extensively adopted [8],
BCIs change how the HCI could be used in complex and
demanding operational environments and could become
a revolution and mainstream of HCIs for different areas
such as computer-aided design (CAD) [9]. Using BCIs to
monitor user states for intelligent assistive systems is also
substantially conducted in entertainment and health areas
[10]. (2) Another area where BCI applications are broadly
used is as game controllers for entertainment. Some BCI
devices are inexpensive, easily portable and easy to equip,
which making them feasible to be used broadly in entertain-
ment communities. The compact and wireless BCI headsets
developed for the gaming market are ﬂexible and mobile,
and require little effort to set up. Though their accuracy is
not as precise as other BCI devices used in medical areas,
they are still practical for game developers and success-
fully commercialised for the entertainment market. Some
speciﬁc models [11] are combined with sensors to detect
more signals such as facial expressions that could upgrade
the usability for entertainment applications. (3) BCIs have
also been playing a signiﬁcant role in neurocomputing for
pattern recognition and machine learning on brain signals,
and the analysis of computational expert knowledge. Re-
cently, researches have shown [12] [13] [14] that network
neuroscience approaches have been used to quantify brain
network reorganisation from different varieties of human
learning. The results of these studies indicate the optimi-
sation of adaptive BCI architectures and the prospective to
reveal the neural basis and future performance of BCI learn-
ing. (4) For the healthcare ﬁeld, brainwave headset, which
could collect expressive information with the software de-
velopment kit provided by the manufacturer, has also been
utilised to facilitate severely disabled people to effectively
control a robot by subtle movements such as moving neck
and blinking [15]. BCI has also been used in assisting people
who lost the muscular capacity to restore communication
and control over devices. A broadly investigated clinical
area is to implement BCI spelling devices, one well-known
application of which is a P300-based speller. Building upon
the P300-based speller, [16] using a BCI2000 platform [17]
to develop the BCI speller has a positive result on non-
experienced users to use this brain-controlled spelling tool.
Overall, BCIs have contributed to various ﬁelds of research.
As briefed in Fig. 2, they are involved in the entertainment
of game interaction, robot control, emotion recognition, fa-
tigue detection, sleep quality assessment, and clinical ﬁelds,
such as abnormal brain disease detection and prediction
including seizure, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease,
Schizophrenia.
1.1.3 Brain imaging techniques
Brain-sensing devices for BCI can be categorised into three
groups: invasive, partially invasive, and non-invasive [18].
In terms of invasive and partially invasive devices, brain
Fig. 2. BCI contributes to various ﬁelds of research
signals are collected from intracortical and electrocorticog-
raphy (ECoG) electrodes with sensors tapping directly into
the brain’s cortex. Due to the invasive devices inserting elec-
trodes into brain cortex, each electrode of the intracortical
collection technique could provide spiking to produce the
population’s time developing output pattern, which causes
only a slight sample of the complete set of neurons in
bonded regions presented, because microelectrodes could
only detect spiking when they are in the proximity of a neu-
ron. In this case, ECoG, as an extracortical invasive electro-
physiological monitoring method, uses electrodes attached
under the skull. With lower surgical risk, a rather high
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), and a higher spatial resolution,
compared with intracortical signals of invasive devices,
ECoG has a better prospect in the medical area. In speciﬁc,
ECoG has a wider bandwidth to gather signiﬁcant informa-
tion from functional brain areas to train a high-frequency
BCI system, and high SNR signals that are less prone to
artefacts arising from, for instance, muscle movement and
eye blink.
Even though reliable information of cortical and neu-
ronal dynamics could be provided by invasive or partially
invasive BCIs, when considering everyday applications, the
potential beneﬁt of increased signal quality is neutralised
by the surgery risks and long-term implantation of in-
vasive devices [19]. Recent studies started to investigate
the non-invasive technology that uses external neuroimag-
ing devices to record brain activity, including Functional
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS), Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI), and Electroencephalography
(EEG). To be speciﬁc, fNIRS uses near-infrared (NIR) light
to assess the aggregation level of oxygenated hemoglobin
and deoxygenated-hemoglobin. fNIRS depends on hemody-
namic response or blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
response to formulate functional neuroimages [20]. Because
of the power limits of the light and spatial resolution, fNIRS
cannot be employed to measure cortical activity presented
under 4cm in the brain. Also, due to the fact that blood
ﬂow changes slower than electrical or magnetic signals, Hb