6
3.1.2 Muscle artefacts
Contamination of EEG data by muscle activity is a well-
recognized tough problem. These artefacts can be generated
by any muscle contraction and stretch in proximity to the
recording sites, such as the subject talks, sniffs, swallows,
etc. The degree of muscle contraction and stretch will affect
the amplitude and waveform of artefacts in EEG signals. In
general, the common techniques that have been used to re-
move muscle artefacts include regression methods, Canon-
ical Correlation Analysis (CCA), Empirical Mode Decom-
position (EMD), Blind Source Separation (BSS), and EMD-
BSS [42]. A combination of the ensemble EMD (EEMD) and
CCA, named EEMD-CCA, is proposed to remove muscle
artefacts by [47]. By testing on real-life, semi-simulated, and
simulated datasets under single-channel, few-channel and
multichannel settings, the study result indicates that the
EEMD-CCA method can effectively and accurately remove
muscle artefacts, and it is an efﬁcient signal processing
and enhancement tool in healthcare EEG sensor networks.
There are other approaches combining typical methods,
such as using BSS-CCA followed by spectral-slope rejection
to reduce high-frequency muscle contamination [48], and
independent vector analysis (IVA) that takes advantage of
both ICA and CCA by exploiting higher-order statistics
(HOS) and second-order statistics (SOS) simultaneously to
achieve high performance in removing muscle artefacts [49].
A more extensive survey on muscle artefacts removal from
EEG could be found in [42].
3.1.3 Introducing toolbox of signal enhancement
As one of the most widely used Matlab toolbox for EEG and
other electrophysiological data processing, EEGLAB is de-
veloped by Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience,
in which provides an interactive graphic user interface for
users to apply ICA, time/frequency analysis (TFA) and
standard averaging methods to the recorded brain signals.
EEGLAB extensions, previously called EEGLAB plugins, are
the toolboxes that provide data processing and visualization
functions for the EEGLAB users to process the EEG data. At
the time of writing, there are 106 extensions available on the
EEGLAB website, with a broad functional range including
importing data, artefact removal, feature detection algo-
rithms, etc. For example, many extensions are developed
for artefact removal. Automatic artefact Removal (AAR)
toolbox is for automatic EEG ocular and muscular artefact
removal; Cochlear implant artefact correction (CIAC), as
its name, is an ICA-based tool particularly for correcting
electrical artefacts arising from cochlear implants; Multiple
Artefact Rejection Algorithm (MARA) toolbox uses EEG
features in the temporal, spectral and spatial domains to
optimize a linear classiﬁer to solve the component-reject
vs. -accept problem and to remove loss electrodes; ica-
blinkmetrics toolbox aims at selecting and removing ICA
components associated with eyeblink artefacts using time-
domain methods. Some of the toolboxes have more than
one major function, such as artefact rejection and pre-
processing: clean rawdata is a suite of pre-processing meth-
ods including ASR for correcting and cleaning continuous
data; ARﬁtStudio could be applied to quickly and intuitively
correct event-related spiky artefacts as the ﬁrst step of datapre-processing using ARﬁt. ADJUST identiﬁes and removes
artefact independent components automatically without af-
fecting neural sources or data. A more comprehensive list of
toolbox functions can be found on the EEGLAB website.
3.2 EEG Online Processing
For neuronal information processing and BCI, the ability to
monitor and analyze cortico-cortical interactions in real time
is one of the trends in BCI research, along with the devel-
opment of wearable BCI devices and effective approaches
to remove artefacts. It is challenging to provide a reliable
real-time system that could collect, extract and pre-process
dynamic data with artefact rejection and rapid computation.
In the model proposed by [50], EEG data collected from a
wearable, high-density (64-channel), and dry EEG device
is ﬁrstly reconstructed by 3751-vertex mesh, anatomically
constrained low resolution electrical tomographic analysis
(LORETA), singular value decomposition (SVD) based refor-
mulation and Automated Anatomical Labelling (AAL) be-
fore forwarded to Source Information Flow Toolbox (SIFT)
and vector autoregressive (VAR) model. By applying a reg-
ularized logistic regression and testing on both simulation
and real data, their proposed system is capable of real-time
EEG data analysis. Later, [36] expanded their prior study
by incorporating ASR for artefact removal, implementing
anatomically constrained LORETA to localize sources, and
adding an Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
and cognitive-state classiﬁcation. The evaluation results of
the proposed framework on simulated and real EEG data
demonstrate the feasibility of the real-time neuronal system
for cognitive state classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation. A subse-
quent study [51] aimed to present data in instantaneous in-
cremental convergence. Online recursive least squares (RLS)
whitening and optimized online recursive ICA algorithm
(ORICA) are validated for separating the blind sources from
high-density EEG data. The experimental results prove the
proposed algorithm’s capability to detect nonstationary in
high-density EEG data and to extract artefact and principal
brain sources quickly. Open-source Real-time EEG Source-
mapping Toolbox (REST) to provide support for online arte-
fact rejection and feature extraction are available to inspire
more real-time BCI research in different domain areas.
4 M ACHINE LEARNING AND FUZZY MODELS IN
BCI A PPLICATIONS
4.1 An overview of machine learning
Machine learning, a subset of computational intelligence,
relies on patterns and reasonings by computer systems to
explore a speciﬁc task without using explicit instructions.
Machine learning tasks are generally classiﬁed into sev-
eral models, such as supervised learning and unsupervised
learning [52]. In terms of supervised learning, it is usually
dividing the data into two subsets: training set (a dataset
to train a model) and test set (a dataset to test the trained
model) during the learning process. Supervised learning can
be used for classiﬁcation and regression tasks, by applying
what has been learned in the training stage using labeled
examples, to test the new data (testing data) for classifying
types of events or predicting future events. In contrast,