4
include the recently released BCI studies in 2019. The main
contributions of this study could be summarised as follow:
Advances in sensors and sensing technologies.
Characteristics of signal enhancement and online pro-
cessing.
Recent machine learning algorithms and the inter-
pretable fuzzy models for BCI applications.
Recent deep learning algorithms and combined ap-
proaches for BCI applications.
Evolution of healthcare systems and applications in
BCIs.
2 A DVANCES IN SENSING TECHNOLOGIES
2.1 An overview of EEG sensors/devices
The advanced sensor technology has enabled the devel-
opment of smaller and smarter wearable EEG devices for
lifestyle and related medical applications. In particular, re-
cent advances in EEG monitoring technologies pave the
way for wearable, wireless EEG monitoring devices with
dry sensors. In this section, we summarise the advances of
EEG devices with wet or dry sensors. We also compare the
commercially available EEG devices in terms of the number
of channels, sampling rate, a stationary or portable device,
and covers many companies that are able to cater to the
speciﬁc needs of EEG users.
2.1.1 Wet sensor technology
For non-invasive EEG measurements, wet electrode caps are
normally attached to users’ scalp with gels as the interface
between sensors and the scalp. The wet sensors relying on
electrolytic gels provide a clean conductive path. The appli-
cation of the gel interface is to decrease the skin-electrode
contact interface impedance, which could be uncomfortable
and inconvenient for users and can be too time-consuming
and laborious for everyday use [35]. However, without
the conductive gel, the electrode-skin impedance cannot be
measured, and the quality of measured EEG signals could
be compromised.
2.1.2 Dry sensor technology
Because of the fact that using wet electrodes for collecting
EEG data requires attaching sensors over the experimenter’s
skin, which is not desirable in the real-world application, the
development of dry sensors of EEG devices has enhanced
dramatically over the past several years [36]. One of the
major advantages for dry sensors, compared with wet coun-
terparts, is that it substantially enhances system usability
[37], and the headset is very easy to wear and remove,
which even allows skilled users to wear it by themselves in a
short time. For example, Siddharth et al. [38] designed bio-
sensors to measure physiological activities to refrain from
the limitations of wet-electrode EEG equipment. These bio-
sensors are dry-electrode based, and the signal quality is
comparable to that obtained with wet-electrode systems but
without the need for skin abrasion or preparation or the use
of gels. In a follow-up study [38], novel dry EEG sensors that
could actively ﬁlter the EEG signal from ambient electro-
static noise are designed and evaluated with ultra-low-noise
and high-sampling analog to digital converter module. The
study compared the proposed sensors with commerciallyavailable EEG sensors (Cognionics Inc.) in a steady-state vi-
sually evoked potentials (SSVEP) BCI task, and the SSVEP-
detection accuracy was comparable between two sensors,
with 74.23% averaged accuracy across all subjects.
Further, on the trend of wearable biosensing devices, Chi
et al. [39] [40] reviewed and designed wireless devices with
dry and noncontact EEG electrode sensors. Chi et al. [40]
developed a new integrated sensor controlling the sensitive
input node to attain prominent input impedance, with a
complete shield of the input node from the active transis-
tor, bond-pads, to the specially built chip package. Their
experiment results, using data collected from a noncontact
electrode on the top of the hair demonstrate a maximum
information transfer rate at 100% accuracy, show the promis-
ing future for dry and noncontact electrodes as viable tools
for EEG applications and mobile BCIs.
Augmented BCIs (ABCIs) concept is proposed in [37] for
everyday environments, with which signals are recorded via
biosensors and processed in real-time to monitor human
behaviour. An ABCI comprises non-intrusive and quick-
setup EEG solutions, which requires minimal or no training,
to accurately collect long-term data with the beneﬁts of
comfort, stability, robustness, and longevity. In their study of
a broad range of approaches to ABCIs, developing portable
EEG devices using dry electrode sensors is a signiﬁcant
target for mobile human brain imaging, and future ABCI ap-
plications are based on biosensing technology and devices.
2.2 Commercialised EEG devices
Table I lists 21 products of 17 brands with eight attributes
providing a basic overview of EEG headsets. The attribute
’Wearable’ shows if the monitored human subjects could
wear the devices and move around without movement con-
strains, which partially depends on the transmission types
whether the headset devices are connected to software via
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or other wireless techniques, or tethered
connections. The numbers of channels of each EEG device
could be categorised into three groups: a low-resolution
group with 1 to 32 numbers; a medium-resolution group
with 33 to 128 channels, and a high-resolution group with
more than 128 channels. Most brands offer more than one
device, therefore the numbers of channels in Table I have
a wide range. The low-resolution devices mainly cover the
frontal and temporal locations, some of which also deploy
sensors to collect EEG signals from ﬁve locations, while the
medium and high-resolution groups could cover locations
of scalp more comprehensively. The numbers of channels
also affect the EEG signal sampling rate of each device, with
low and medium-resolution groups having a general sam-
pling rate of 500 Hz and a high-resolution group obtaining a
sampling rate of higher than 1,000 Hz. Additionally, Figure
3 presents all listed commercialised EEG devices listed in
Table I.
3 S IGNAL ENHANCEMENT AND ONLINE PRO-
CESSING
3.1 Artefact handling
Based on a broad category of unsupervised learning al-
gorithms for signal enhancement, Blind Source Separation