9
only needs as few as one labelled sample from each class
of the target subject, which label alignment can be used
as a preprocessing step before different feature extraction
and classiﬁcation algorithms, and can be integrated with
other domain adaptation approaches to achieve even better
performance. For applying transferring learning in BCIs, es-
pecially EEG-based BCIs, subject-to-subject transfer among
the same tasks are more frequently investigated.
For subject-to-subject transfer in single-trial event-
related potential (ERP) classiﬁcation, Wu [69] proposed
both online and ofﬂine weighted adaptation regularization
(wAR) algorithms to reduce the calibration effort. Experi-
ments on a visually-evoked potential oddball task and three
different EEG headsets demonstrated that both online and
ofﬂine wAR algorithms are effective. Wu also proposed a
source domain selection approach, which selects the most
beneﬁcial source subjects for transfer. It can reduce the com-
putational cost of wAR by about 50%, without sacriﬁcing the
classiﬁcation performance, thus making wAR more suitable
for real-time applications.
Very recently, Cui et al. [70] proposed a novel approach,
feature weighted episodic training (FWET), to completely
eliminate the calibration requirement in subject-to-subject
transfer in EEG-based driver drowsiness estimation. It inte-
grates feature weighting to learn the importance of different
features, and episodic training for domain generalization.
FWET does not need any labelled or unlabelled calibration
data from the new subject, and hence could be very useful
in plug-and-play BCIs.
4.2.3.3 Transfer from sessions to sessions: The as-
sumption of the session-to-session transfer learning in BCI
is that features extracted by the training module and algo-
rithms could be applied to a different session of a subject in
the same task. It is important to evaluate what is in common
among training sections for optimizing the decision distri-
bution among different sessions.
Alamgir et al. [71] reviewed several transfer learning
methodologies in BCIs that explore and utilise common
training data structures of several sessions to reduce train-
ing time and enhance performance. Building on the compar-
ison and analysis of other methods in the literature, Alamgir
et al. proposed a general framework for transfer learning
in BCIs, which is in contrast to a general transfer learning
study that focuses on domain adaptation where individual
sessions feature attributes are transferred. Their framework
regards decision boundaries as random variables, so the dis-
tribution of decision boundaries could be conducted from
previous sessions. With an altered regression method and
the consideration for feature decomposition, their experi-
ments on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients using an MI
BCI revealed its effectiveness in learning structure. There are
also some problematic conditions of the proposed transfer
learning method, including the difﬁculty in balancing the
initialization of spatial weights, and the necessity of adding
an extra loop in the algorithm for determining the spectral
and spatial combination.
In one of the latest paradigms studying imagined speech,
in which a human subject imagines uttering a word with-
out physical sound or movement, Garca-Salinas et al. [72]
proposed a method to extract codewords related to the
EEG signals. After a new imagined word being representedby the EEGs characteristic codewords, the new word was
merged with the prior class’s histograms and a classiﬁer
for transfer learning. This study implies a general trend
of applying session-based transfer learning to an imagined
speech domain in EEG-based BCIs.
4.2.3.4 Transfer from headset to headset: Apart
from the above cases of transfer learning in BCIs, ideally,
a BCI system should be completely independent of any
speciﬁc EEG headset, such that the user can replace or
upgrade his/her headset freely, without re-calibration. This
should greatly facilitate real-world applications of BCIs.
However, this goal is very challenging to achieve. One step
towards it is to use historical data from the same user to
reduce the calibration effort on the new EEG headset.
Wu et al. [73] proposed active weighted adaptation
regularization (AwAR) for headset-to-headset transfer. It
integrates wAR, which uses labelled data from the previous
headset and handles class-imbalance, and active learning,
which selects the most informative samples from the new
headset to label. Experiments on single-trial ERP classiﬁ-
cation showed that AwAR could signiﬁcantly reduce the
calibration data requirement for the new headset.
4.3 Interpretable Fuzzy Models
Currently, machine learning methods behave like black
boxes because they cannot be explained. Exploring in-
terpretable models may be useful for understanding and
improving BCI learned automatically from EEG signals,
or possibly gaining new insights in BCI. Here, we collect
some interpretable models from fuzzy sets and systems to
estimate interpretable BCI applications.
4.3.1 Fuzzy models for interpretability
Zadeh suggests that all classes cannot be of clear value in
the real world, so that it is very difﬁcult to deﬁne true or
false or real numbers [74]. He introduced the concept of
fuzzy sets with the deﬁnition ”A fuzzy set is a set with
no boundaries, and the transition from boundary to the
boundary is characterized by a member function [75]. Using
fuzzy sets allows us to provide the advantage of ﬂexible
boundary conditions, and the advances of this have applied
in BCI applications, as shown in Fig. 6.
Furthermore, a Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) also used
in BCI applications to automatically extract fuzzy ”If-Then”
rules from the data that describe which input feature values
correspond to which output category [76]. Such fuzzy rules
enable us to classify EEG patterns and interpret what the
FIS has learned, as shown in Fig. 6. What is more, the fuzzy
measure theory, such as fuzzy integral, as shown in Fig. 6,
is suitable to apply where data fusion requires to consider
possible data interactions [77], such as the fuzzy fusion of
multiple information sources.
Another category for interpretability is a hybrid model
integrating fuzzy models to machine learning. For example,
fuzzy neural networks (FNN) combine the advantages of
neural networks and FIS. Its architecture is similar to the
neural networks, and the input (or weight) is fuzziﬁed
[78]. The FNN recognizes the fuzzy rules and adjusts the
membership function by tuning the connection weights.
Especially, a Self-Organizing Neural Fuzzy Inference Net-
work (SONFIN) is proposed by [79] using a dynamic FNN