14
the general applicational purposes for instance image clas-
siﬁcation [147] and object recognition [148]. In this section,
we focus on transfer learning using deep neural network
and its EEG-based BCI applications.
MI EEG signal classiﬁcation is one of the major areas
where deep transfer learning is applied. Sakhavi and Guan
[149] used a CNN model to transfer knowledge from sub-
jects to subjects to decrease calibration time for recording
data and training the model. The EEG data pipeline of deep
CNN, transferring model parameters and ﬁne-tuning on
new data and using labels to regularize ﬁne-tuning/training
process, is a novel method for subjects to subjects and
session to session deep transfer learning. Xu et al. [150] pro-
posed a deep transfer CNN framework comprising a pre-
trained VGG-16 CNN model and a target CNN model, be-
tween which the parameters are directly transferred, frozen
and ﬁne-tuned in the target model and MI dataset. The
performance of their framework in terms of efﬁciency and
accuracy exceed many traditional methods such as standard
CNN and SVM. Dose et al. [151] applied a Deep Learning
approach to an EEG-based MI BCI system in healthcare,
aiming to enhance the present stroke rehabilitation process.
The uniﬁed model they build includes CNN layers that
learn generalized features and reduce dimension, and a con-
ventional fully connected layer for classiﬁcation. By using
transfer learning in this approach for adapting global clas-
siﬁers to single individuals and applying raw EEG signals
to this model, the results of their study reached a mean ac-
curacy of 86.49%, 79.25%, and 68.51% for datasets with two,
three and four classes, respectively. For the effectiveness of
alleviating training burden with transfer learning, a recent
research [152] encoded EEG features extracted from the
traditional CSP by a separated channel convolutional neural
network. The encoded features were then used to train
a recognition network for MI classiﬁcation. The accuracy
of the proposed method outperformed multiple traditional
machine learning algorithms.
Generally, the purpose of proposing a DTL framework
as a classiﬁcation strategy is to avoid time-consuming re-
training and improve accuracy compared with solitary CNN
and transfer learning. A deep CNN with an inter-subject
transfer learning method was applied to detect attention
information from the EEG time series [153]. DTL has also
been applied to classify EEG data in imagined vowel pro-
nunciation [154].
As introduced in the previous section, GAN, combined
with transfer learning, could be rewarding in restraining
domain divergence to improve domain adaptation [155]
[156]. Hu et al. [157] proposed DupGAN, a GAN frame-
work with one encoder, one generator and two adversarial
discriminators, to attain domain transformation for classi-
ﬁcation. In other streams of deep transfer learning, RNN
is also applied in many EEG-based BCI studies. For EEG
classiﬁcation with attention-based transfer learning, [158]
proposed a framework of a cross-domain TL encoder and
an attention-based TL decoder with RNN for improvement
in EEG classiﬁcation and brain functional areas detection
under different tasks.5.5 Adversarial Attacks to Deep Learning Models in
BCI
Albeit their outstanding performance, deep learning models
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where deliberately
designed small perturbations, which may be hard to be
detected by human eyes or computer programs, are added
to benign examples to mislead the deep learning model and
cause dramatic performance degradation. This phenomena
was ﬁrst discovered in 2014 in computer vision [159] and
soon received great attention [160] [161] [162].
Adversarial attacks to EEG-based BCIs could also cause
great damage. For example, EEG-based BCIs can be used
to control wheelchairs or exoskeleton for the disabled [163],
where adversarial attacks could cause malfunction. In the
worst case, adversarial attacks can hurt the user by driving
him/her into danger on purpose. In clinical applications of
BCIs in awareness/consciousness evaluation [163], adver-
sarial attacks could lead to serious misdiagnosis.
Zhang and Wu [164] were the ﬁrst to study adversarial
attacks in EEG-based BCIs. They considered three different
attack scenarios: 1) White-box attacks, where the attacker
has access to all information of the target model, including
its architecture and parameters; 2) Black-box attacks, where
the attacker can observe the target model’s responses to
inputs; 3) Gray-box attacks, where the attacker knows some
but not all information about the target model, e.g., the
training data that the target model is tuned on, instead
of its architecture and parameters. They showed that three
popular CNN models in EEG-based BCIs, i.e., EEGNet [165],
DeepCNN and ShallowCNN [166], can all be effectively
attacked in all three scenarios.
Recently, Jiang et al. [167] showed that query synthesis
based active learning could help reduce the number of
required training EEG trials in black-box adversarial at-
tacks to the above three CNN classiﬁers, and Meng et al.
[168] studied white-box target attacks for EEG-Based BCI
regression problems, i.e., by adding a tiny perturbation, they
can change the estimated driver drowsiness level or user
reaction time by at least a ﬁxed amount. Liu et al. [169]
proposes a novel total loss minimization approach to gen-
erate universal adversarial perturbations for EEG classiﬁers.
Their approach resolved two limitations of Zhang and Wu’s
approaches (the attacker needs to know the complete EEG
trial in advance to compute the adversarial perturbation,
and the perturbation needs to be computed speciﬁcally for
each input EEG trial), and hence made adversarial attacks
more practical.
6 BCI- BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS
With the enhancement in the affordability and quality of
EEG headsets, EEG-based BCI researches for classifying
and predicting cognitive states have increased dramatically,
such as tracking operators inappropriate states for tasks
and monitoring mental health and productivity [170]. EEG
and other brain signals such as MEG contain substantial
information related to the health and disease conditions
of the human brain, for instance, extracting the slowing
down features of EEG signals could be used to categorise
neurodegenerative diseases [171].