11
Fig. 7. CNN and GAN for BCI applications
incidents when the subjects are conducting activities that re-
quire high and sustained attention, such as driving vehicles.
Driving fatigue detection research has been attracting con-
siderable attention in the BCI community, [94] [95] especially
in recent years with the signiﬁcant advancement of CNN
in classiﬁcation [96] [97]. An EEG-based spatial-temporal
convolutional neural network (ESTCNN) was proposed by
Gao et al. [98] for driver fatigue detection. This structure was
applied to eight human subjects in an experiment in which
multichannel EEG signals were collected. The framework
comprises a core block that extracts temporal dependencies
and combines with dense layers for spatial-temporal EEG
information process and classiﬁcation. It is illustrated that
this method could consistently decrease the data dimension
in the inference process and increase reference response
with computational efﬁciency. The results of the experi-
ments with ESTCNN reached an accuracy rate of 97.37%
in fatigue EEG signal classiﬁcation. CNN has also been
used in other EEG-based fatigue recognition and evaluation
applications. Yue and Wang [99] applied various fatigue
levels’ EEG signals to their multi-scale CNN architecture
named MorletInceptionNet for visual fatigue evaluation.
This framework uses a space-time-frequency combined fea-
tures extraction strategy to extract raw features, after which
multi-scale temporal features are extracted by an inception
architecture. The features are then provided to the CNN
layers to classify visual fatigue evaluation. Their structure
has a better performance in classiﬁcation accuracy than the
other ﬁve state-of-the-art methodologies, which is proof
of the effectiveness of CNN in fatigue-related EEG signal
processing and classiﬁcation.
5.1.2 Stress-related EEG
Since stress is one of the leading causes of hazardous human
behaviour and human errors that could cause dreadful
industrial accidents, stress detection and recognition using
EEG signals have become an important research area [100].
A recent study [101] proposed a new BCI framework with
the CNN model and collected EEG signals from 10 con-
struction workers whose cortisol levels, hormone-related
human stress, were measured to label tasks’ stress level. The
result of the proposed conﬁguration obtained the maximum
accuracy rate of 86.62%. This study proved that the BCIframework with a CNN algorithm might be the ultimate
classiﬁer for EEG-based stress recognition.
5.1.3 Sleep-related EEG
Sleep quality is crucial for human health in which the
sleep stage classiﬁcation, also called sleep scoring, has been
investigated to understand, diagnose and treat sleep dis-
orders [102]. Because of the lightness and portability of
EEG devices, EEG is particularly suitable to recognize sleep
scores. CNN has been applied to sleep stage classiﬁcation
by numerous studies, while the approaches of CNN using
single-channel EEG are the mainstream of research inves-
tigation [103] [104] mainly due to the simplicity [105]. A
single-channel EEG-based method using CNN for 5-class
sleep stage conjecture in [102] shows competitive perfor-
mance in sensible pattern detection and visualization. The
signiﬁcance of this research for single-channel sleep EEG
processing is that it does not require feature extraction
from expert knowledge or signal to learn the most suitable
features to task classiﬁcation end-to-end. Mousavi et al.
[103] use a data-augmentation preprocessing method and
apply raw EEG signals directly to nine convolutional layers
and two fully connected layers without implicating feature
extraction or feature selection. The simulation results of the
study indicate the accuracy of over 93% for the classiﬁca-
tion of 2 to 6 sleep stages classes. Furthermore, a CNN-
based combined classiﬁcation and prediction framework,
called multitask neural networks, has also been considered
for automatic sleep classifying in a recent study [105]. It
is stated that this framework has the ability to generate
multiple decisions, the reliability to form a ﬁnal decision by
aggregation, and the capability to avoid the disadvantages
of the conventional many-to-one approach.
5.1.4 MI-related EEG
MI indicates imaging executing movement of a body part
rather than conducting actual body movement in BCI sys-
tems [106]. MI is based on the fact that brain activation will
change and activate correlated brain path when actually
moving a body part. The common spatial pattern (CSP)
algorithm [107] is an effective spatial ﬁlter that searches for a
discriminative subspace to maximize one class variance and
minimize the other simultaneously to classify the movement
actions. CNN has also been employed to MI EEG data
processing for stimulating classiﬁcation performance, and
there is a stream of recent research trends of combining
CNN with CSP together, improving the methodology, and
enhance MI classiﬁcation performance [108]. The MI clas-
siﬁcation framework proposed by Sakhavi, Guan and Yan
[109] presents a new data temporal representation generated
from the ﬁlter-bank CSP algorithm, with CNN classiﬁcation
architecture. Their accuracy on the 4-class MI BCI dataset
approves the usability and effectiveness of the proposed
application. Olivas-Padilla and Chacon-Murguia [110] pre-
sented two multiple MI classiﬁcation methodologies that
used a variation of Discriminative Filter Bank Common
Spatial Pattern (DFBCSP) to extract features, after which the
outcome samples have proceeded to a matrix with one or
multiple pre-optimized CNN. It is stated that this proposed
method could be an applicable alternative for multiple MI