15
One excessive and abnormal brain disorder is epilepsy
that patients suffer from recurring unprovoked seizures,
which is a cause and symptom of abrupt upsurge. Clinically,
EEG signals are one of the leading indicators that could be
monitored and studied for seizure brain electrical activity,
while EEG-based BCI researches contribute to the prediction
of epilepsy. In the medical area, EEG recordings are used for
screening seizures of epilepsy patients with an automated
seizure detection system. The Gated Recurrent Unit RNN
framework developed by [172] showed approximate 98%
accuracy in epileptic seizure detection. Tsiouris et al. [173]
introduced a two-layer LSTM network to assess seizure pre-
diction performance by exploiting a broad scope of features
before classiﬁcation between EEG channels. The empirical
results showed that the LSTM-based methodology outper-
forms traditional machine learning and CNN in seizure
prediction performance. A novel method of EEG based auto-
matic seizure detection was proposed by [174] with a multi-
rate ﬁlter bank structure and statistic model to optimise
signal attributes for better seizer classiﬁcation accuracy. For
seizure detection, one of the main confusing elements is
an artefact, which appears on several EEG channels that
could be misinterpreted with wave and spike discharges
similar to the occurrence of seizure. To optimise channel
selection and accuracy for seizure detection with minimal
false alarms, [175] proposed a CNN-LSTM algorithm to
reject artefacts and optimise the frameworks performance
on seizure detection. It is believed that the implementation
of BCI and real-time EEG signal processing are suitable
for the standard clinical application and caring for epilepsy
patients [176].
Parkinsons disease (PD) is a progressive degradation
illness classiﬁed by brain motor function, which, as an
abnormal brain disease, is usually diagnosed with EEG sig-
nals. Oh et al. [177] proposed an EEG-based deep learning
approach with CNN architecture as a computer-aided di-
agnosis system for PD detection. The positive performance
result of the proposed model demonstrates its possibility in
clinical usage. A speciﬁc class of RNN framework, called
Echo State Networks (ESNs), was proposed by [178] to clas-
sify EEG signals collected from random eye movement sleep
(REM) Behavioural Disorder (RBD) patients and healthy
controls subjects, while RBD is a major risk feature for
neurodegenerative diseases such as PD. ESNs possess RNNs
competence of temporal pattern classiﬁcation and could
expedite training, and the test set performance accuracy of
the proposed ESN by [178] reached 85% as an approve of
effectiveness.
As one of the most mysterious pathology, the cause of
Alzheimers disease (AD) is still deﬁciently understood, and
intelligent assistive technologies are believed to have the po-
tential in supporting dementia care [10]. BCI with machine
learning and deep learning models is also utilised in novel
researches of classifying and detecting AD, while moni-
toring disease effect is increasingly signiﬁcant for clinical
intervention. For supporting the clinical investigation, EEG
signals screening of people who are vulnerable to AD could
be utilised to spot the origination of AD development. With
the potentiality of classiﬁcation in CNN, a deep learning
model with multiple convolutional-subsampling layers is
proposed in [179] and attained an averaged 80% accuracyin categorising sets of EEG from two different classiﬁcations
of subjects, one is from mild cognitive impairment subjects,
a prodromal version of AD, and the other is from same age
healthy control group. Simpraga et al. [180] used machine
learning with multiple EEG biomarkers to enhance AD
classiﬁcation performance and demonstrated the effective-
ness of their research in improving disease identiﬁcation
accuracy and supports in clinical trials.
Comparable to using deep learning models with multi-
ple EEG biomarkers for AD classiﬁcation, machine learning
techniques have also been applied to EEG biomarkers for
diagnosing schizophrenia. Shim et al. [181] used sensor and
source level EEG features to classify schizophrenia patients
and healthy controls. The result of their research indicates
that the proposed tool could be promising in supporting
schizophrenia diagnosis. In [182], a modiﬁed deep learning
architecture with a voting layer was proposed for individ-
ual schizophrenia classiﬁcation of EEG streams. The high
classiﬁcation accuracy result indicates the frameworks fea-
sibility in categorising ﬁrst-episode schizophrenia patients
and healthy controls.
As non-conventional neurorehabilitation methodology,
BCI has been investigated for assisting and aiding motor
impairment rehabilitation, such as for patients who suffered
and survived the stroke, which is a frequent high disease
and generally declines patients mobility afterwards [183].
Non-invasive BCI, for instance, EEG-based technology, sup-
ports volitional transmission of brain signals to aid hand
movement. BCI has great potentials in facilitating motor
impairment rehabilitation via the utilisation of assistive
sensation by rewarding cortical action related to sensory-
motor features [184]. Frolov et al. [185] investigated the
effectiveness of rehabilitation for stroke survivors with BCI
training session and the research results of the participated
patients indicates that combining BCI to physical therapy
could enhance the results of post-stroke motor impairment
rehabilitation. Other researchers also found that using BCI
for motor impairment rehabilitation for post-stroke patients
could help them regain body function and improve life
quality [186] [187] [188].
BCIs have also been employed in other healthcare areas
such as investigation of migraine, pain and depressive disor-
ders [189] [190] [191] [192] [193]. Patil et al. [194] proposed
an artiﬁcial neural network with supervised classiﬁers for
EEG classiﬁcation to detect migraine subjects. They believed
that the positive results conﬁrm that EEG-based neural net-
work classiﬁcation framework could be used for migraine
detection and as a substitution for migraine diagnosis. Cao
et al. [195] [84] presented a multi-scale relative inherent
fuzzy entropy application for SSVEPs-EEG signals of two
migraine phases, the pre-ictal phase before migraine attacks
and the inter-ictal phase which is the baseline. The study
found that for migraine patients compared with healthy
controls, there are changes in EEG complexity in a repetitive
SSVEP environment. Their study proved that inherent fuzzy
entropy could be used in visual stimulus environments
for migraine studies and has the potential in pre-ictal mi-
graine prediction. EEG signals have also been monitored
and analysed to prove the correlation between cerebral
cortex spectral patterns and chronic pain intensity [196]. BCI
based signal processing approaches could also be used in