3
and deoxy-Hb have a slow and steady variation, so the
temporal resolution of fNIRS is comparatively lower than
electrical or magnetic signals. fMRI monitors brain activities
by assessing changes related to blood ﬂow in brain areas,
and it relies on the magnetic BOLD response, which enables
fMRI to have a higher spatial resolution and collect brain
information from deeper areas than fNIRS, since magnetic
ﬁelds have better penetration than the NIR light. However,
similar to fNIRS, the drawback of fMRI with low temporal
resolutions is obvious because of the blood ﬂow speed con-
straint. With the merits of relying on the magnetic response,
fMRI technique also has another ﬂaw since the magnetic
ﬁelds are more prone to be distorted by deoxy-Hb than Hb
molecule. The most signiﬁcant disadvantage for fMRI being
used in different scenarios is that it requires an expensive
and heavy scanner to generate magnetic ﬁelds and the scan-
ner is not portable and requires a lot of effort to be moved.
Considering the relative rises in signal quality, reliability
and mobility compared with other imaging approaches,
non-invasive EEG-based devices have been used as the most
popular modality for real-world BCIs and clinical use [21].
EEG signals, featuring direct measures of cortical elec-
trical activity and high temporal resolutions, have been
pursued extensively by many recent BCI studies [22] [23]
[24]. As the most generally used non-invasive technique,
EEG electrodes could be installed in a headset that is more
accessible and portable for diverse occasions. EEG headsets
can collect signals in several non-overlapping frequency
bands (e.g. Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma). This is
based on the powerful intra-band connection with distinct
behavioural states [25], and the different frequency bands
can present diverse corresponding characteristics and pat-
terns. Furthermore, the temporal resolution is exceedingly
high on milliseconds level, and the risk on subjects is very
low, compared to invasive and other non-invasive tech-
niques that require high-intensive magnetic ﬁeld exposure.
In this survey, we discussed different high portability and
comparatively low-price EEG devices. A drawback of the
EEG technique is that because of the limited number of
electrodes, the signals have a low spatial resolution, but
the temporal resolution is considerably high. When using
EEG signals for BCI systems, the inferior SNR needs to be
considered because objective factors such as environmental
noises, and subjective factors such as fatigue status might
contaminate the EEG signals. The recent research conducted
to cope with this disadvantage of EEG technology is dis-
cussed in our survey as well.
By recording small potential changes in EEG signals im-
mediately after visual or audial stimuli appear, it is possible
to observe a speciﬁc brain’s response to speciﬁc stimuli
events. This phenomenon is formally called Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs), deﬁned as slight voltages originated in
the brain as responses to speciﬁc stimuli or events [26],
which are separated into Visual Evoked Potential (VEP)
and Auditory Evoked Potential (AEP). For EEG-based BCI
studies, P300 wave is a representative potential response
of ERP elicited in the brain cortex of a monitored subject,
presenting as a positive deﬂection in voltage with a latency
of roughly 250 to 500 ms. [27]. In speciﬁc to VEP tasks,
Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP), the process of
continuously presented multiple images per second at highdisplaying rates, is considered to have potential in enhanc-
ing human-machine symbiosis [28], and Steady-State vi-
sual evoked potentials (SSVEP) is a resonance phenomenon
originating mainly in the visual cortex when a person is
focusing the visual attention on a light source ﬂickering with
a frequency above 4 Hz [29]. In addition, the psychomotor
vigilance task (PVT) is a sustained-attention, reaction-timed
task, measuring the speed with which subjects respond to a
visual stimulus, correlates with the assessment of alertness,
fatigue, or psychomotor skills [30].
1.2 Our Contributions
Recent (2015-2019) EEG survey articles more focused on
separately summarising statistical features or patterns, col-
lecting classiﬁcation algorithms, or introducing deep learn-
ing models. For example, a recent survey [31] provided
a comprehensive outline regarding the latest classiﬁcation
algorithms utilised in EEG-based BCIs, which comprised
adaptive classiﬁers, transfer and deep learning, matrix and
tensor classiﬁers, and several other miscellaneous classiﬁers.
Although [31] believes that deep learning methods have not
demonstrated convincing enhancement over some state-of-
the-art BCI methods, the results reviewed recently in [32]
illustrated that some deep learning methods, for instance,
convolutional neural networks (CNN), generative adversar-
ial network (GAN), and deep belief networks (DBN) have
outstanding performance in classiﬁcation accuracy. The later
review [32] synthesised performance results and the several
general task groups in using deep learning for EEG classiﬁ-
cation, including sleep classifying, motor imagery, emotion
recognition, seizure detection, mental workload, and event-
related potential detection. In general, this review demon-
strated that several deep learning methods outperformed
other neural networks. However, there is no comparison
between deep learning neural networks with traditional
machine learning methods to prove the improvement of
modern neural network algorithms in EEG-based BCIs. An-
other recent survey [33] systematically reviewed articles that
applied deep learning to EEG in diverse domains by extract-
ing and analysing various datasets to identify the research
trend(s). It provides a comprehensive statistic evaluation
for articles published between 2010 to 2018, but it does
not comprise information about EEG sensors or hardware
devices that collect EEG signals. Additionally, an up-to-date
survey article released in early 2019 [34] comprehensively
reviewed brain signal categories for BCI and deep learning
techniques for BCI applications, with a discussion of ap-
plied areas for deep learning-based BCI. While this survey
provides a systematic summary over relevant publications
between 2015-2019, it does not investigate thoroughly about
combined machine learning, from which deep learning is
originated and evolved, deep transfer learning, or the inter-
pretable fuzzy models that are used for the non-stationary
and non-linear signal processing.
In short, the recent review articles lack a comprehen-
sive survey in recent EEG sensing technologies, signal
enhancement, relevant machine learning algorithms with
interpretable fuzzy models, and deep learning methods for
speciﬁc BCI applications, in addition to healthcare systems.
In our survey, we aim to address the above limitations and