1
EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs): A
Survey of Recent Studies on Signal Sensing
Technologies and Computational Intelligence
Approaches and Their Applications
Xiaotong Gu, Zehong Cao*, Member, IEEE, Alireza Jolfaei, Member, IEEE, Peng Xu, Member, IEEE,
Dongrui Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Fellow, IEEE, and Chin-Teng Lin, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a powerful communication tool between users and systems, which enhances the
capability of the human brain in communicating and interacting with the environment directly. Advances in neuroscience and computer
science in the past decades have led to exciting developments in BCI, thereby making BCI a top interdisciplinary research area in
computational neuroscience and intelligence. Recent technological advances such as wearable sensing devices, real-time data
streaming, machine learning, and deep learning approaches have increased interest in electroencephalographic (EEG) based BCI for
translational and healthcare applications. Many people beneﬁt from EEG-based BCIs, which facilitate continuous monitoring of
ﬂuctuations in cognitive states under monotonous tasks in the workplace or at home. In this study, we survey the recent literature of
EEG signal sensing technologies and computational intelligence approaches in BCI applications, compensated for the gaps in the
systematic summary of the past ﬁve years (2015-2019). In speciﬁc, we ﬁrst review the current status of BCI and its signiﬁcant
obstacles. Then, we present advanced signal sensing and enhancement technologies to collect and clean EEG signals, respectively.
Furthermore, we demonstrate state-of-art computational intelligence techniques, including interpretable fuzzy models, transfer
learning, deep learning, and combinations, to monitor, maintain, or track human cognitive states and operating performance in
prevalent applications. Finally, we deliver a couple of innovative BCI-inspired healthcare applications and discuss some future research
directions in EEG-based BCIs.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
1.1 An overview of brain-computer interface (BCI)
1.1.1 What is BCI
The research of brain-computer interface (BCI) was ﬁrst
released in the 1970s, addressing an alternative transmission
channel without depending on the normal peripheral nerve
and muscle output paths of the brain [1]. An early concept
of BCI proposed measuring and decoding brainwave signals
to control prosthetic arm and carry out a desired action [2].
Then a formal deﬁnition of the term ’BCI’ is interpreted as
a direct communication pathway between the human brain
and an external device [3]. In the past decade, human BCIs
have attracted a lot of attention.
The corresponding human BCI systems aim to translate
human cognition patterns using brain activities. It uses
recorded brain activity to communicate the computer for
controlling external devices or environments in a manner
that is compatible with the intentions of humans [4], such
as controlling a wheelchair or robot as shown in Fig. 1.
There are two primary types of BCIs. The ﬁrst type is active
X. Gu and Z. Cao are with the University of Tasmania, Australia.
A. Jolfaei is with the Macquarie University, Australia.
P . Xu is with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, China.
D. Wu is with the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China.
T.P Jung is with the University of California, San Diego, USA.
C.T. Lin is with the University of Technology Sydney, Australia.
Corresponding to Email: Zehong.cao@utas.edu.au
Fig. 1. The framework of brain-computer interface (BCI)
and reactive BCI. The active BCI derives pattern from brain
activity, which is directly and consciously controlled by the
user, independently from external events, for controlling a
device [5]. The reactive BCI extracted outputs from brain
activities in reaction to external stimulation, which is indi-
rectly modulated by the user for controlling an application.
The second type is passive BCI, which explores the user’s
perception, awareness, and cognition without the purpose
of voluntary control, for enriching a human-computer inter-
action (HCI) with implicit information [6].
1.1.2 Application areas
The promising future of BCIs has encouraged the research
community to interpret brain activities to establish variousarXiv:2001.11337v1  [eess.SP]  28 Jan 2020