16
training for phantom limb pain controls by helping patients
to reorganise sensorimotor cortex with the practice of hand
control [197]. The potential of BCI in healthcare for the
general public could attract more novel researches being
conducted in the near future.
Machine learning and deep learning neural networks
have been productively applied to EEG signals for various
neurological disorders screening, recognition and diagnos-
ing, and the recent researches revealed some important
ﬁndings for depression detection with BCI [198] [199]. The
EEG based CAD system with CNN architecture and trans-
fer learning method proposed by [199] indicates that the
spectral information of EEG signals is critical for depres-
sion recognition while the temporal information of EEG
could signiﬁcantly improve accuracy for the framework.
Liao et al. citeliao2017major proved in their research that
the 8 electrodes of EEG devices from the temporal areas
could provide higher accuracies in major depression de-
tection compared with other scalp areas, which could be
efﬁcient implications for future EEG-based BCI system for
depression screening. The CNN approach proposed by [198]
for EEG-Based depression screening experiments on EEG
signals of depressive and normal subjects and obtain an
accuracy rate of 93.5% and 96.0% of left and right hemi-
sphere EEG signals respectively. Their study also conﬁrmed
the ﬁndings of a theory that depression is linked to a
hyperactive right hemisphere that could inspire more novel
researches for depression detection and diagnosis.
7 D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this review, we highlighted the recent studies in the
ﬁeld of EEG-based by analysing over 150 studies published
between 2015 and 2019 developing signal sensing technolo-
gies and applying computational intelligence approaches to
EEG data. Although the advances of the dry sensor, wear-
able devices, the toolbox for signal enhancement, transfer
learning, deep learning, or interpretable fuzzy models have
lifted the performance of EEG-based BCI systems, the real-
world usability challenges remain, such as the prediction
or classiﬁcation capability and stability in complex BCI
scenarios.
By mapping out the trend of BCI study in the past
ﬁve years, we would also like to share the tendency of
future directions of BCI researches. The cost-effectiveness
and availability of EEG devices are attributed to the evolu-
tion of dry sensors, which in turn stimulate more research
in developing enhanced sensors. The current tendency of
sensor techniques focuses on augmenting signal quality
with the improvement of sensor materials and emphasising
user experience when collecting signals via BCI devices with
comfortable sensor attachments. Fiedler et al. presented
the basis for improved EEG cap designs of dry multipin
electrodes in their research of polymer-based multichannel
EEG electrodes system [200]. Their study was focused on
the correlation of EEG recording quality with applied force
and resulting contact pressure. Considering the comfort of
wearing an EEG device for subjects, Lin et al. [201] devel-
oped a soft, pliable pad for an augmented wire-embedded
silicon-based dry-contact sensors (WSBDSs). Their studyintroduced copper wires in the acicular WSBDSs to en-
sure scalp contact on hair-covered sites and shows good
performance and feasibility for applications. Chen et al.
[47] proposed ﬂexible material-based wearable sensors for
EEG and other bio-signals monitoring for the tendency of
smart personal devices and e-health. A closed-loop (CL)
BCI method that uses biosignal simulation instant resolution
could be beneﬁcial for healthcare therapy [202]. As an exam-
ple, reinforcement learning (RL) could also support improv-
ing training model accuracy in BCI applications [203]. Based
on the illustration of TL and DTL, the beneﬁts of transferring
extracted features and training models among subjects or
tasks are apparent, such as improving training efﬁciency
and enhancing classiﬁcation accuracy. Therefore it would
be encouraging to pursue experiments with adaptive EEG-
based BCI training. One of the signiﬁcant challenges for
EEG-based technology is artefacts removal, while despite
the multiple novels approaches discussed in the previous
section, integrating BCI with other technical or physiological
signals, which is hybrid BCI system, would be a future
focus of research for improving classiﬁcation accuracy and
general outcomes [204] [205]. The scientiﬁc community is
also investigating enhanced conjunction of technology and
interface for HCI that is the combination of Augmented
Reality (AR) and EEG-based BCI [206]. Previous researches
have been inducing one popular protocol used in exogenous
BCIs, SSVEPs, with visual stimulus from AR glasses such
as smart glasses used in [207], and capturing the SSVEP
response by measuring EEG signals to perform tasks [208]
[209]. With the accessibility of AR and commercialised non-
invasive BCI devices, using AR and EEG devices, augmenta-
tion becomes feasible and also effective in outcomes. Finally,
recent research has shown that deep learning (and even
traditional machine learning) models in EEG-based BCIs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, and there is an urgent
need to develop strategies to defend such attacks.
In this paper, we systematically survey the recent ad-
vances in advances of the dry sensor, wearable devices,
signal enhancement, transfer learning, deep learning, and
interpretable fuzzy models for EEG-based BCIs. The var-
ious computational intelligence approaches enable us to
learn reliable brain cortex features and understand human
knowledge from EEG signals. In a word, we summarise the
recent EEG signal sensing and interpretable fuzzy models,
followed by discussing dominant transfer and deep learn-
ing for BCI applications. Finally, we overview healthcare
applications and point out the open challenges and future
directions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Credit authors for icons made from www.ﬂaticon.com.
REFERENCES
[1] J. J. Vidal, “Toward direct brain-computer communication,” An-
nual review of Biophysics and Bioengineering , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 157–
180, 1973.
[2] C. Guger, W. Harkam, C. Hertnaes, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Pros-
thetic control by an eeg-based brain-computer interface (bci),” in
Proc. aaate 5th european conference for the advancement of assistive
technology . Citeseer, 1999, pp. 3–6.