8
sub-categorized into two cases based on whether the feature
spaces between the source domain and target domain are
the same. If yes, then the sample selection bias/covariance
shift method should be applied. Otherwise, a domain adap-
tation technique should be deployed. Unsupervised transfer
learning applied if available data in neither source nor target
domain, while the target and source tasks are relevant but
different. The target of unsupervised transfer learning is to
resolve clustering, density estimation and dimensionality
reduction tasks in the target domain [58].
4.2.3 Where to transfer in BCIs?
In BCIs, discriminative and stationary information could be
transferred across different domains. The selection of which
types of information to transfer is based on the similarity
between the target and source domains. If the domains are
very similar and the data sample is small, the discrimina-
tive information should be transferred; if the domains are
different while there could be common information across
target and source domains, stationary information should
be transferred to establish more invariable systems [59] [60].
Domain adaption, a representative of transductive trans-
fer learning, attempts to ﬁnd a strategy for transforming
the data space in which the decision rules will classify all
datasets. Covariate shifting is a very related technique to
domain adaptation, which is the most frequent situation
encountered in BCIs. In covariate shifting, the input dis-
tributions in the training and test samples are different,
while output values conditional distributions are the same
[61]. There exists an essential assumption - the marginal
distribution of data changes from subjects (or sessions)
to subjects (or sessions), and the decision rules for this
marginal distribution remain unchanged. This assumption
allows us to re-weight the training data from other subjects
(or previous sessions) for correcting the difference in the
marginal distributions in the different subjects (or sessions).
Naturally, the effectiveness of transfer learning strongly
depends on how well the two circumstances are related.
The transfer learning in BCI applications can be used to
transfer information (a) from tasks to tasks, (b) from subjects
to subjects, and (c) from sessions to sessions. As shown in
Fig. 5, given a set of the training dataset (e.g., source task,
subject, or session), we attempt to ﬁnd a transformation
space in which a training model will be beneﬁcial to classify
or predict the samples in the new dataset (e.g., target task,
subject, or session).
4.2.3.1 Transfer from tasks to tasks: In the domain
of BCI where EEG signals are collected for subjects analysis,
in some situations, the mental tasks and the operational
tasks could be different but dependent. For instance, in a
laboratory environment, a mental task is to assess the device
action, such as mental subtraction and motor imagery, while
the operational task is the device action itself and the per-
formance of a device from event-related potentials. Transfer-
ring decision rules between different tasks would introduce
novel signal variations and affect error-related potential that
represents as a response as an error was recognized by users
[62]. The study of [63] showed that the signal variations
originated from task-to-tasks transfer which substantially
inﬂuenced classiﬁcation feature distribution and the clas-
siﬁers’ performance. Other results of their study are that the
Fig. 5. Transfer learning in BCI
accuracy based on the baseline descended when operational
tasks and subtasks were generalised, while the differences
of features were larger compared with non-error responses.
4.2.3.2 Transfer from subjects to subjects: For EEG-
based BCIs, before applying features learned by the conven-
tional approaches to different subjects, it requires a training
period of pilot data on each new subject due to inter-subject
variability [64]. In the driving drowsiness detection study of
Wei et al. [65], inter- and intra-subject variability were evalu-
ated as well as transferring models’ feasibility was validated
by implementing hierarchical clustering in a large-scale EEG
dataset collected from many subjects. The proposed subject-
to-subject transferring framework comprises a large-scale
model pool, which assures sufﬁcient data are available for
positive model transferring to obtain prominent decoding
performance and a small-scale baseline calibration data
from the target subject as a selector of decoding models
in the model pool. Without jeopardizing performance, their
results in driving drowsiness detection demonstrated 90%
calibration time reduction.
In BCIs, cross-subject transfer learning could be used to
decrease training data collecting time, as the least-squares
transformation (LST) method proposed by Chiang et al.
[66]. The experiments conducted to validate the LST method
performance of cross-subject SSVEP data showed the capa-
bility of reducing the number of training templates for an
SSVEP BCI. Inter- and intra-subject transfer learning is also
applied to unsupervised conditions when no labelled data is
available. He and Wu [67] presented a method to align EEG
trails directly in the Euclidean space across different subjects
to increase the similarity. Their empirical results showed
the potential of transfer learning from subjects to subjects
in an unsupervised EEG-based BCI. In [68], He and Wu
proposed a novel different set domain adaptation approach
for task-to-task and also subject-to-subject transfer, which
considers a very challenging case that the source subject
and the target subject have partially or completely different
tasks. For example, the source subject may perform left-
hand and right-hand motor imageries, whereas the target
subject may perform feet and tongue motor imageries. They
introduced a practical setting of different label sets for BCIs,
and proposed a novel label alignment (LA) approach to
align the source label space with the target label space. LA