7
unsupervised machine learning is used when the data used
to train is neither classiﬁed nor labelled. It contains only
input data and refers to a probability function to describe a
hidden structure, like grouping or clustering of data points.
Performing machine learning requires to create a model
for training purpose. In EEG-based BCI applications, var-
ious types of models have been used and developed for
machine learning. In the last ten years, the leading families
of models used in BCIs include linear classiﬁers, neural
networks, non-linear Bayesian classiﬁers, nearest neighbour
classiﬁers and classiﬁer combinations [53]. The linear clas-
siﬁers, such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Regu-
larized LDA, and Support Vector Machine (SVM), classify
discriminant EEG patterns using linear decision bound-
aries between feature vectors for each class. In terms of
neural networks, they assemble layered human neurons
to approximate any nonlinear decision boundaries, where
the most common type in BCI applications is the Multi-
layer Perceptron (MLP) that typically uses only one or two
hidden layers. Moving to a nonlinear Bayesian classiﬁer,
such as a Bayesian quadratic classiﬁer and Hidden Markov
Model (HMM), the probability distribution of each class is
modelled, and Bayes rules are used to select the class to
be assigned to the EEG patterns. Considering the physical
distances of EEG patterns, the nearest neighbour classiﬁer,
such as the k nearest neighbour (kNN) algorithm, proposes
to assign a class to the EEG patterns based on its nearest
neighbour. Finally, classiﬁer combinations are combining the
outputs of multiple above classiﬁers or training them in a
way that maximizes their complementarity. The classiﬁer
combinations used for BCI applications can be an enhanced,
voting or stacked combination approach.
Additionally, to apply machine learning algorithms to
the EEG data, we need to pre-process EEG signals and
extract features from the raw data, such as frequency
band power features and connectivity features between two
channels [54]. Figure 4 demonstrates an EEG-based data
pre-processing, pattern recognition and machine learning
pipeline, to represent EEG data processing in a compact and
relevant manner.
4.2 Transfer learning
4.2.1 Why we need transfer learning?
Recently, one of the major hypotheses in traditional machine
learning, such as supervised learning described above, is
that training data used to train the classiﬁer and test data
used to evaluate the classiﬁer, belong to the same feature
space and follow the same probability distribution. How-
ever, this hypothesis is often violated in many applications
because of human variability [55]. For example, a change
in EEG data distribution typically occurs when data are
acquired from different subjects or across sessions and time
within a subject. Also, as the EEG signals are variant and
not static, extensive BCI sessions exhibit distinctive classiﬁ-
cation problems of consistency [56].
Thus, transfer learning aims at coping with data that
violate this hypothesis by exploiting knowledge acquired
while learning a given task for solving a different but
related task. In other words, transfer learning is a set of
methodologies considered for enhancing the performance
Fig. 4. Data pre-processing, pattern recognition and machine learning
pipeline in BCIs
of a learned classiﬁer trained on one task (also extended to
one session or subject) based on information gained while
learning another one. The advances of transfer learning can
relax the limitations of BCI, as it is no need to calibrate from
the beginning point, less noisy for transferred information,
and relying on previous usable data to increase the size of
datasets.
4.2.2 What is transfer learning?
Transferring knowledge from the source domain to the
target domain acts as bias or as a regularizer for solving
the target task. Here, we provide a description of transfer
learning based on the survey of Pan and Yang [57]. The
source domain is known, and the target domain can be
inductive (known) or transductive (unknown). The transfer
learning classiﬁed under three sub-settings in accord with
source and target tasks and domains, as inductive transfer
learning, transductive transfer learning, and unsupervised
transfer learning. All learning algorithms transfer knowl-
edge to different tasks/domains, in which situation the
skills should be transferred to enhance performance and
avoid a negative transfer.
In the inductive transfer learning, the available labelled
data of the target domain are required, while the tasks of
source and target could be different from each other regard-
less of their domain. The inductive transfer learning could
be sub-categorized into two cases based on the labelled data
availability. If available, then a multitask learning method
should be applied for the target and source tasks to be
learned simultaneously. Otherwise, a self-taught learning
technique should be deployed. In terms of transductive
transfer learning, the labelled data are available in the
source domain instead of the target domain, while the target
and source tasks are identical regardless of the domains (of
target and source). Transductive transfer learning could be