10
Fig. 6. Fuzzy sets, fuzzy rules, and fuzzy integrals for interpretability
architecture to create a self-adaptive architecture for the
identiﬁcation of the fuzzy model. The advantage of design-
ing such a hybrid structure is more explanatory because it
utilises the learning capability of the neural network.
4.3.2 EEG-based fuzzy models
Here, we summarized up-to-date interpretable solutions
based on fuzzy models for BCI systems and applications.
By using fuzzy sets, Wu et al. [80] proposed to extend the
multiclass EEG typical spatial pattern (CSP) ﬁlters from clas-
siﬁcation to regression in a large-scale sustained-attention
PVT, and later further integrated them with Riemannian
tangent space features for improved PVT reaction time esti-
mation performance [81]. Considering the advances of fuzzy
membership degree, [82] used a fuzzy membership function
instead of a step function, which decreased the sensitivity of
entropy values from noisy EEG signals. It did improve EEG
complexity evaluation in resting state and SSVEP sessions
[83], associated with healthcare applications [84].
By integrating fuzzy sets with domain adaptation, [85]
proposed an online weighted adaptation regularization for
regression (OwARR) algorithm to reduce the amount of
subject-speciﬁc calibration EEG data. Furthermore, by inte-
grating fuzzy rules with domain adaptation, [86] generated
a fuzzy rule-based brain-state-drift detector by Riemann-
metric-based clustering, allowing that the distribution of the
data can be observable. By adopting fuzzy integrals [87],
motor-imagery-based BCI exhibited robust performance for
ofﬂine single-trial classiﬁcation and real-time control of a
robotic arm. A follow-up work [88] explored the multi-
model fuzzy fusion-based motor-imagery-based BCI, which
also considered the possible links between EEG patterns
after employing the classiﬁcation of traditional BCIs. Ad-
ditionally, the fusion of multiple information sources is
inspired by fuzzy integrals as well, such as fusing eye
movement and EEG signals to enhance emotion recognition
[89].
Moving to FNN, due to the non-linear and non-
stationary characteristics of EEG signals, the application of
neural networks and fuzzy logic unveils a safe, accurate and
reliable detection and pattern identiﬁcation. For example,
a fuzzy neural detector proposed in backpropagation with
a fuzzy C-means algorithm [90] and Takagi-Sugeno fuzzymeasurement [91], to identify the sleep stages. Furthermore,
[90] proposed a recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural net-
work (RSEFNN) that employs an on-line gradient descent
learning rule to predict EEG-based driving fatigue.
5 D EEP LEARNING ALGORITHMS WITH BCI A P-
PLICATIONS
Deep learning is a speciﬁc family of machine learning
algorithms in which features and the classiﬁer are jointly
learned directly from data. The term deep learning refers to
the architecture of the model, which is based on a cascade
of trainable feature extractor modules and nonlinearities
[92]. Owing to such a cascade, learned features are usually
related to increasing levels of concepts. The representative
architectures of deep learning include Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), Generative Adversarial Network (GAN),
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), and broad Deep Neu-
ral networks (DNN). For BCI applications, deep learning
has been applied broadly compared with machine learn-
ing technology mainly because currently most machine
learning research concentrates on static data which is not
the optimal method for accurately categorizing the quickly
changing brain signals [34]. In this section, we introduce the
spontaneous EEG applications with CNN architectures, the
utilisation of GAN in recent researches, the procedure and
applications of RNN, especially Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM). We also illustrate deep transfer learning extended
from deep learning algorithms and transfer learning ap-
proaches, followed by exempliﬁcation of adversarial attacks
to deep learning models for system testing.
5.1 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
A Convolutional Neural Network (simplifying ConvNet or
CNN) is a feedforward neural network in which informa-
tion ﬂows uni-directionally from the input to the convolu-
tion operator to the output [93]. As shown in Fig. 7, such a
convolution operator includes at least three stacked layers in
CNN comprising the convolutional layer, pooling layer, and
fully connected layer. The convolutional layer convolves a
tensor with shape, and the pooling layer streamlines the
underlying computation to reduce the dimensions of the
data. The fully connected layer connects every neuron in the
previous layer to a new layer, resemble a traditional multi-
layer perceptron neural network.
The nature of CNNs with stacked layers is to reduce in-
put data to easily-identiﬁable formations with minimal loss,
and distinctive spatial dependencies of the EEG patterns
could be captured by applying CNN. For instance, CNN
has been used to automatically extract signal features from
epileptic intracortical data [22] and perform an automatic
diagnosis to supersede the time-consuming procedure of
vision examination conducted by experts [23]. In addition
to this, the recent ﬁve BCI applications employing CNNs
in fatigue, stress, sleep, motor imagery (MI), and emotional
studies, are reviewed below.
5.1.1 Fatigue-related EEG
As a complex mental condition, fatigue and drowsiness
are stated lack of vigilance that could lead to catastrophic