301
Inżynieria Mineralna — STYCZEŃ – CZERWIEC <2019> JANUARY – JUNE — Journal of the Polish Mineral Engineering Societyhttp://doi.org/10.29227/IM-2019-01-521) Ph.D., DSc.; AGH University of Science and Technology, Cracow, PolandAn Overview of Data Mining and Process Mining 
Applications in Underground Mining
Edyta BRZYCHCZY1) 
Abstract
The underground mining process can be analysed with a data-oriented or process-oriented approach. The first of them is popular 
and wide known as data mining while the second is still not often used in the conditions of the mining companies. The aim of this 
paper is an overview of data mining and process mining applications in an underground mining domain and an investigation of 
the most popular analytic techniques used in the defined analytic perspectives (“Diagnostics and machinery”, “Geomechanics”, 
“Hazards”, “Mine planning and safety”). In the paper two research questions are formulated: RQ1: What are the most popular 
data mining/process mining tasks in the analysis of the underground mining process? and RQ2: What are the most popular data 
mining/process mining techniques applied in the multi-perspective analysis of the underground mining process? In the paper sixty -
-two published articles regarding to data mining tasks and analytic techniques in the mentioned domain have been analysed. The 
results show that predominatingly predictive tasks were formulated with regard to the analysed phenomena, with strong overrepre -
sentation of classification task. The most frequent data mining algorithms is comprised of the following: artificial neural networks, 
decision trees, rule induction and regression. Only a few applications of process mining in analysis of the underground mining 
process have been found – they were briefly described in the paper.
Keywords: data mining, process mining, analysis, mining process, underground mining
Introduction
The Industry 4.0 concept has a strong impact on the 
analytic activities of companies, which are willing to im -
plement various solutions being an inherent part of modern 
smart factories. Nowadays, companies all over the world 
and across industries actively recognize and implement 4.0. 
solutions i.e. intelligent sensors, mobile devices or IoT plat -
forms. Therefore, as result very fast growth of data gathered 
in organisations that need processing can be observed. These 
data are a potential source of new, useful knowledge for the 
decision-making process, that should be discovered. The 
knowledge discovery process in data can be supported by IT 
systems of different types (i.e. databases, analytic software, 
and cloud computing) and the data analytics domain. That is 
why big data and advanced analytics are the key features of 
today’s companies.
The mining industry is also strongly involved in the im -
plementation on Industry 4.0. solutions and the development 
of analytic competences. The analytics of the mining process 
should take into account the specific conditions of the mining 
process realisation as well as the nature of the mining process 
itself. The mining process, especially underground, is a com -
plex system of people and machinery activities carried out 
in changeable working conditions. The occurrence of natural 
hazards, climate conditions as well as deposit geology have 
great impact on mining process performance.
The underground mining process can be analysed with the 
data-oriented or the process-oriented approach. The data-ori -
ented approach is called data mining (DM) and is comprised 
of various tasks, algorithms and techniques that are very pop -
ular and wide known whilst the process-oriented approach is 
still not widely used in mining process analytics. This rather new research discipline is called process mining (PM) and 
enables modelling, diagnostics and the enhancement of the 
business processes using event data from IT systems support -
ing and monitoring the process execution.
The aim of the paper is an overview of data mining and 
process mining applications in an underground mining do -
main and investigation of the most popular analytic tech -
niques used in the defined analytic perspectives. In the paper 
the following research questions are formulated:
RQ1: What are the most popular DM/PM tasks in the 
analysis of the mining process? 
RQ2: What are the most popular DM/PM techniques ap -
plied in the multi-perspective analysis of the underground 
mining process?
These questions will be answered with an overview of 
data mining and process mining applications in the multi-per -
spective analysis of the underground mining process.
The paper’s structure is as follows. In Section 2 the main 
analytic approaches are characterised. An overview of the 
DM and PM application in mining process analytics is pre -
sented in Section 3. Section 4 concludes the paper and pro -
vides the answers to the formulated research questions.
The main analytics approaches
In a modern business analytic two main approaches can 
be distinguished:
1. data-oriented analytics,
2. process-oriented analytics.
Data-oriented analytics offers new capabilities of knowl -
edge discovery from data with the use of classic and advanced 
algorithms of data science (namely data mining - DM). The Submission date: 11-07-2018  | Review date:  02-05-2019