303
Inżynieria Mineralna — STYCZEŃ – CZERWIEC <2019> JANUARY – JUNE — Journal of the Polish Mineral Engineering Societyfined analytics perspectives is rather regular. In the “Diag -
nostic and machinery” and “Mine planning and safety” per -
spectives 15 papers were analysed per group, while in the 
“Geomechanics” and “Hazards” 16 papers were analysed per 
group. 
In most publications, concerning the analysed phenome -
na, predictive tasks were formulated, with strong overrepre -
sentation of the classification task (Fig.5).
The distribution of data mining tasks in various analytic 
perspectives of the mining process is presented in Table 3.
Except for the classification task, as popular data mining 
tasks regression and rule induction can be found. The mul -
titask label introduced in the table indicates the presence of 
predictive and descriptive tasks in the published papers.
In the mentioned data mining tasks various techniques 
have been applied. A detailed overview with regard to the de -
fined analytic perspectives is presented in the following part 
of the paper.
In the first analytic perspective – “Diagnostic and ma -
chinery” - the analysed papers have been related to strictly 
diagnostic problems (8) i.e. belt conveyor diagnostic, as well 
as machinery performance and its prediction (7), i.e. long -
wall powered support capacity. The applied data mining tech -
niques in this perspective are presented in Table 4.
As it can be clearly observed the most popular techniques 
are artificial neural networks (8) and time series analysis (4).ANN are also popular (6 findings) in papers included in 
the “Geomechanics” perspective (Table 5).
This collection is extended with decision trees algorithms 
(4 papers). Tree classifiers used in the analysed sample are 
comprised of some simple algorithms as i.e. CART as well as 
more sophisticated i.e. boosted trees.
It is worth of mentioning that the “Geomechanics” per -
spective contains papers related to: rock mechanics (2 pa -
pers), rock mass characteristic (2), seismic (9) and subsidence 
(3). Analysing the papers in the scientific databases it can be 
observed that the prediction of seismic events in underground 
mines is very often the subject of research.
Other “Hazards” perspective collects papers related to 
natural hazards (except seismic), namely: methane (7 papers), 
rock burst (5) coal combustion (2), gas and rock outburst (1) 
and roof fall (1).
The data mining techniques used in the “Hazards” analyt -
ic perspective are presented in Table 6.
In the analysed papers the most often mentioned DM 
techniques were ANN (5 papers), decision trees (5) and re -
gression (5). Simple CART algorithms as well as the more 
advanced XGBoost were used. In the regression task simple 
models and logistic regression have been applied.
The last analytic perspective “Mine planning and safety” 
comprises of papers from a wide scope of issues related to 
mine planning i.e. equipment selection, production costs, coal Tab. 1. Example techniques used in DM tasks. Source: based on (Larose and Larose 2014)
Fig. 2. The number of papers in the Scopus database (query for “data mining” or “process mining” in the title, abstract or keywords).Tab. 1. Przykładowe techniki wykorzystywane w zadaniach DM
Rys. 2. Liczba artykułów w bazie Scopus (zapytanie dla “data mining” lub “process mining” w tytule, streszczeniu czy słowach kluczowych).