304
Inżynieria Mineralna — STYCZEŃ – CZERWIEC <2019> JANUARY – JUNE — Journal of the Polish Mineral Engineering Societyprices (9 papers) and safety, mainly related to the analysis of 
occupational accidents (6). The main data mining techniques 
applied in this analytic perspective are presented in Table 7.
In the table, it can be observed that the most popular tech -
niques are regression models (6 papers) and decision trees al -
gorithms (4). The variety of the used techniques results from 
the specificity of the analysed issue. In some cases several 
techniques have been applied i.e. (Krzemień, A. et. al. 2015).
A holistic view of the DM techniques application in vari -
ous analytic perspectives of the underground mining process 
is presented in Fig. 6.
A strong presence of “black-box” techniques can be 
found in “Diagnostic and machinery” and  “Geomechanics” 
perspectives, where complex phenomena are analysed, very 
often without full available context information.
The presentation of the most popular DM techniques in 
the analyzed papers is shown in Figure 7.
 The most popular DM techniques applied in the analytics 
of the mining process are: artificial neural networks, regres -
sion, tree models and rule induction.
An analysis of the mining process can be also supported 
with soft computing techniques. An example of their over -
view is presented in (Jang and Topal, 2014).Process Mining applications
Papers with process mining applications in the under -
ground mining process analysis have been searched with the 
use of the Science Direct, IEEE Explore, Scopus and Goo -
gle Scholar databases. Due to the characteristic word play 
– “process mining” and “mining process”, the following 
search terms have been used: “event+logs+process+under -
ground”, “event+logs+longwall+mining”, “event+logs+ un -
derground+process+analysis”.
The results of searching in the mentioned databases are 
presented in Table 8.
Process mining applications in underground mining are 
rare and only several papers focus on this type of analytics of 
a mining process.
The first paper (Brzychczy and Trzcionkowska 2017) focus -
es on the analysis of mechanized roof support operations in un -
derground mines. In the paper all three PM tasks can be found. 
Log Explorer, Mine Petri Net with Inductive Miner as well as Re -
play A Log on Petri Net for Performance/Conformance Analysis, 
plug-ins were used. In the paper (Brzychczy and Trzcionkowska 
2019) a general idea of the underground mining process analy -
sis based on sensor data and the creation of suitable event logs 
for process mining purposes are presented. Available data from Tab. 2. PM tasks. Source: based on (van der Aalst 2016; Augusto et al. 2019; Carmona et al. 2018)
Fig. 3. Papers – year of publication distributionTab. 2. Zadania PM
Rys. 3. Artykuły – rozkład wg roku publikacji