302
Inżynieria Mineralna — STYCZEŃ – CZERWIEC <2019> JANUARY – JUNE — Journal of the Polish Mineral Engineering Societymain tasks of data mining can be divided into descriptive and 
predictive tasks (Fig.1).
The main descriptive tasks include: summarization, clus -
tering and association rules. Summarization enables the char -
acterization of the dataset with the use of statistics and visual -
ization techniques. Clustering is used for the segmentation of 
observations from a dataset into groups based on similarities 
among the selected attributes. Association rules (often used 
in a basket analysis) indicate the patterns in a dataset between 
the observations in a form of simple or complex rules. The 
mentioned tasks concentrate on a description and grouping or 
pattern findings in an available dataset.
Predictive tasks include regression, classification and 
time series analysis. The main distinctive feature from the de -
scriptive tasks is that the obtained models built on the avail -
able dataset can be used for prediction. Regression enables 
the finding of a function describing the dependency between 
the selected variables (mainly of the numerical type). Clas -
sification is used for building the model describing rules for 
data mapping into predefined classes or groups (mainly of the 
categorical type). Time series analysis regards to analysis of 
variable values changes in the time.
Data-oriented algorithms are mainly a part of the machine 
learning domain and in dependency on the analytic tasks vari -
ous techniques are used (Table 1).
In general, machine learning can be divided into supervised 
and unsupervised learning. The distinction is based on the ne -
cessity of target variable indication (in supervised learning a 
target variable should be indicated). From this point of view, 
in descriptive tasks unsupervised learning is used, while in pre -
dictive tasks supervised techniques are applied.
The data mining approach is nowadays wide known and 
used in the analytic community, however very fast growth 
of process-oriented analytics cannot be disregarded (Fig.2).
The number of papers on process mining in the Scopus 
database has tripled in the last 8 years.
Process-oriented analytics offers new capabilities of 
knowledge discovery about process execution from event 
logs with the use of process mining techniques. Process min -
ing (PM) is a relatively new analytic discipline and is char -acterized as a bridge between data and process science (van 
der Aalst 2016).
The main tasks that could be proceed with process mining 
techniques include (van der Aalst 2016): the discovery of pro -
cess models, conformance checking and enhancement. Their 
characteristics are presented in Table 2.
The basic data structure for process mining – namely 
event log – includes: case id, the timestamp of an event and 
an event name. These data can be extended with other contex -
tual information related to resources, costs etc. The process 
models built on the top of the event log can be expressed in 
a form of dependency graphs, Petri nets or BPMN models. 
Process models enable conformance checking and in-depth 
process analysis in time, resource or case perspectives.
The presented approaches establish a complementary 
source of potentially new and useful knowledge in an organi -
zation for process improvement and optimization of the eco -
nomic or production results. In the next sections an overview 
of their applications in the multi-perspective analysis of the 
underground mining process is presented.
An overview of the data mining and process mining appli -
cations in underground mining process analytics
Data Mining applications
An overview of data mining applications in the under -
ground mining process analysis has been based on 62 pa -
pers searched with use of the Science Direct, Scopus, IEEE 
Explore and Google Scholar databases (examples of used 
terms: “analysis+mining+process+underground”, “predic -
tion+underground+mine”, “data+analysis+longwall”, “ma -
chine+learning+longwall”).
In the paper, for the purpose of a more detailed description 
of data mining applications in underground mining process 
analytics, the following perspectives have been introduced: 
“Diagnostic and machinery”, “Geomechanics”, (other) “Haz -
ards” and “Mine planning and safety”.
The distributions of the papers in terms of publication year 
and defined analytic perspective are presented in Fig.3 and Fig. 4.
Most of the analysed papers have been published in the 
last 5 years. The distribution of the papers in relation to de -Fig. 1. Main tasks of DM
Rys. 1. Główne zadania DM