Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks
very large graph datasets also present a computational challenge and require extensive GPU
resources to be studied (Chiang et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021).
Domain Dataset Task
A.Real World Graphs
ChemistryZINCGraph RegressionAQSOL
Social/Academic NetworksOGBL-COLLAB Edge Classiﬁcation
WikiCS Node Classiﬁcation
Computer VisionMNISTGraph ClassiﬁcationCIFAR10
B.Mathematical Graphs
Mathematical ModellingPATTERNNode ClassiﬁcationCLUSTER
Combinatorial Optimization TSP Edge Classiﬁcation
Isomorphism CSL Graph Classiﬁcation
Cycles in Graphs CYCLES Graph Classiﬁcation
Multi Graph Properties GraphTheoryProp Multi Node/Graph Task
Table 1: Summary statistics of datasets in-
cluded in the benchmark. Additional details
in Appendix Table 2 and Sec. C.On account of such challenges, we present
in our benchmark a collection of 12 graph
datasets, listed in Table 1, which are (i) col-
lected from real-world sources and generated
from mathematical models, (ii) of medium-
scale size suitable for academic research, (iii)
representative of the three fundamental learn-
ing tasks at graph-level, node-level and edge-
level, and (iv) from diverse end-application
domains. These datasets are appropriate to
statistically separate the performance of GNNs
onspeciﬁcgraphproperties, hencefulﬁllingthe
academic mission to identify ﬁrst principles.
Coding Infrastructure. Our benchmarking
infrastructure builds upon PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019) and DGL (Wang et al., 2019),
and has been developed with the following fundamental objectives: (a) Ease-of-use and
modularity, enabling new users to experiment and study the building blocks of GNNs; (b)
Experimental rigour and fairness for all models being benchmarked; and (c) Being future-
proof and comprehensive for tracking the progress of graph ML tasks and new GNNs. At a
high level as sketched in Fig 1, our benchmark uniﬁes independent components for: (i) Data
pipelines; (ii) GNN layers and models; (iii) Training and evaluation functions; (iv) Network
and hyperparameter conﬁgurations; and (v) Scripts for reproducibility. This standardized
framework has been of immense help to the community as aforementioned about its wide
community usage. It has enabled researchers to explore new ideas at any stage of the pipeline
without setting up everything else. We direct readers to the READMEuser manual included in
our GitHub repository for detailed instructions on using the coding infrastructure.
Parameter Budgets for Fair Comparison. One goal of this benchmark is not to ﬁnd
the optimal hyperparameters for a speciﬁc model (which is computationally expensive), but
to compare the model and their building blocks within a budget of parameters. Therefore,
we decide on using two model parameter budgets: i) 100k for each GNN for all the datasets,
and ii) 500k for GNNs where the scalability of a model to larger parameters and deeper layers
are investigated. The layers and dimensions are selected accordingly to match these budgets.
Discussion on Design Choices. First , our motivation behind the medium-scale datasets
in the benchmark is to enable swift yet reliable prototyping of GNN research ideas as we can
achieve statistical diﬀerence in GNN performance within 12 hours of single experiment runs
(see Appendix I). Medium-scale datasets are arguably more informative than small datasets
and more feasible than large-scale datasets in the academic-scale research. Second, our
coding infrastucture with standard protocols has enabled fair comparison of GNNs something
that was lacking in prior literature (Errica et al., 2019). Third, a ﬁxed budget of model
parameters for each GNN model allows for fair comparison of diﬀerent architectures. In
the absence of such design choice, it is comparatively diﬃcult to conclude whether a better
performing model’s gain arises from its architectural design or extra learning capacity brought
3