Dwivedi, Joshi, Luu, Laurent, Bengio and Bresson
neuroscience (Griﬀa et al., 2017). Developing powerful and expressive GNN architectures is a
key concern towards practical applications and real-world adoption of graph machine learning.
However, tracking progress is often challenging in the absence of a community-standard
benchmark as models that are evaluated on traditionally-used datasets with inconsistent
experimental comparisons make it diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate complex, simple and graph-agnostic
architectures (Hoang and Maehara, 2019; Chen et al., 2019a; Errica et al., 2019).
Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks Framework  
data
 configs
layers
nets
 train
 Main file
- Imports methods from other  
  modules: data, configs,nets,  
  train
- Executes 1 run of a single  
  experiment  
- Selected config file decides  
  which GNN network to run on  
  which dataset.  
- Customizable, eg. execution  
  of a dif ferent set of modules.  
- 1 file per task-dataset,  
  ensuring the same fair  
  comparison of all GNNs for  
  the task-dataset chosen.  - Data loading files  
- Customizable, eg. add
  positional encodings  
- Add custom dataset - Config files for gnn,  
  dataset, parameters  
  and hyperparams.  
- Customizable, eg.  
  tweak hyperparams.  
- Add custom configs- GNN network files of  
  multiple layers  
- Customizable, eg.  
  try combination of  
  different layers
- GNN layer definition  
- Customizable, eg.  
  adjust aggregation fn,  
  or activations.  
- Add custom layer- Train and Eval scripts  
- Different scripts for  
  sparse MP-GNNs and  
  dense WL-GNNs  
- Customizable, eg.  
  tweak eval metrics
DGL graph learning library based on PyT orch
Each module can be customized, and
extended to add new datasets (in data
module), or new GNNs (in layers  module),
as few examples.
Figure 1: Overview sketch of the proposed GNN benchmark-
ing framework with diﬀerent modular components. This
benchmark is built upon DGL and PyTorch libraries.We introduce an open-
source GNN benchmarking
framework (see Fig 1) that
brings forward a set of diverse
medium-scale datasets which
are discriminative to bench-
mark diﬀerent GNN models
when compared fairly on ﬁxed
parameter budgets. The exist-
ing collection of datasets, the
protocol to use the same pa-
rameter budgets for compari-
son, and the modular coding
infrastructure has been widely
used to prototype powerful
GNN ideas and develop new
insights, as shown by 2000+ stars and 380+ forks of the GitHub repository from its ﬁrst
release in March 2020, and 470+ citations gathered by the ArXiv technical report according
to Google Scholar. Aspects of the benchmark have led to facilitating several interesting
studies for GNNs such as on (i) the aggregation functions and ﬁlters (Corso et al., 2020; Tailor
et al., 2021; Elhag et al., 2022), (ii) improving expressive power of GNNs (Valsesia et al.,
2021; Bouritsas et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al., 2021), (iii) pooling mechanisms (Mesquita
et al., 2020), (iv) graph-speciﬁc normalization and regularization (Chen et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021), and (v) GNNs’ robustness and eﬃciency (Wei and Hu,
2022; Tailor et al., 2020) among other ideas contributed in the literature. In this paper,
we provide an updated overview of the proposed framework that extends on the previous
collection of datasets to (a) include a number of essential mathematical datasets which can
be used to test speciﬁc theoretical graph properties, and (b) incorporate another molecular
dataset, AQSOL (Sorkun et al., 2019) that has real-world experimental solubility targets
unlike ZINC’s computed targets, resulting in a collection of 12 datasets (see Table 1). The
remainder of the paper discusses a proof of concept of the benchmark that can be used to
explore and develop new insights for GNNs.
2. Overview of GNN Benchmarking Framework
Datasets. Collecting representative, realistic and medium-to-large scale graph datasets
presents several challenges. It is unclear what theoretical tools can deﬁne the quality of a
dataset or validate its statistical representativeness for a given task. Similarly, there are
several arbitrary choices when preparing graphs, such as node and edge features. Finally,
2