Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks
machine learning libraries represent batches of graphs as sparse block diagonal matrices,
enabling batched training of GCNs through parallelized computation (Jia et al., 2019).
Dense tensors are incompatible with the prevalent approach, disabling the use of batch
normalization for WL-GNNs. We experimented with layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016)
but without success. We were also unable to train WL-GNNs on CPU memory for the single
COLLAB graph, see Table 5. Practical applications of the new WL-GNNs may require
redesigning the best practices and common building blocks of deep learning, i.e.batching of
variable-sized data, normalization schemes, and residual connections.
3WL-GNNs perform the best among their class. Among the models in the WL-
GNN class, 3WL-GNN provide better results than its similar counter-part RingGNN and
achieves close to the best performance for AQSOL, see Table 4. The GIN model, while being
less expressive, is able to scale better and provides overall good performance.
Appendix E. Studies using the Benchmarking Framework
Oneoftheprimarygoalsofthisbenchmarkingframeworkistofacilitateresearcherstoperform
new explorations conveniently and develop insights that improve our overall understanding
of graph neural networks. This section provides a demonstration of two such studies that
we carry out by leveraging the datasets and the coding infrastructure which are part of this
framework. First, we explore the absence of positional information in graphs for MP-GCNs
which induces their low representation power. As a result, we develop a new insight that
Laplacian eigenvectors can very simply be used as graph positional encodings and improve
MP-GCNs. This insight has been received keenly in the recent literature and there are
a number of works that propose positional encoding schemes with some addressing the
challenges of using Laplacian eigenvectors (Kreuzer et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Lim
et al., 2022). Second, we study and show how the modiﬁcation of existing MP-GCNs with
joint edge representations help the models perform comparatively better than their vanilla
counterparts.
E.1 Laplacian Positional Encodings
As discussed in Section D, MP-GCNs outperforms WL-GNNs on the diverse collection of
datasets included in our proposed benchmark despite having theoretical limitations derived
from the alignment of MP-GCNs to the WL-tests. Also, WL-GNNs were found to be
computationally infeasible on medium and large scale datasets. Motivated by these results,
we propose ‘Graph Positional Encodings’ using Laplacian eigenvectors, thus referred as
Laplacian Positional Encodings, to improve the theoretical shortcomings of MP-GCNs, which
allows us to retain the computationally eﬃciency oﬀered by the message-passing framework
and improve the MP-GCNs performance.
E.1.1 Related Work
In Murphy et al. (2019); Srinivasan and Ribeiro (2020), it was pointed out that standard
MP-GCNs might perform poorly when dealing with graphs that exhibit some symmetries
in their structures, such as node or edge isomorphism. This is related to the limitation of
MP-GCNs due to their equivalence to the 1-WL test (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019).
37