Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks
E.1.3 Experiments and Analysis
We ﬁrst use the mathematical graphs such as CSL, CYCLES and GraphTheoryProp included
in our benchmark (Sections C.8-C.10) to validate the proposed Laplacian PE as simple
augmentations in MP-GCNs to improve their performance on the datasets. On CSL dataset,
Table 10 compares the MP-GCNs using the Laplacian eigenvectors as PE and the WL-GNNs.
The MP-GCN models were the most accurate with 99% of mean accuracy, while 3WL-GNN
obtained 97% and RingGNN 25% with our experimental setting. Similarly, in Table 11 for
CYCLES dataset and Table 12 for GraphTheoryProp dataset, where we simply select 2
representative MP-GCNs (GINs and GatedGCNs), we observe a consistent improvement
in the performance when GINs and GatedGCNs are augmented with Laplacian PE. This
demonstrates the importance of positional features to successfully detect cycles in a graph,
and also predict critical theoretical and geometric properties in a graph.
Next, we study ZINC, AQSOL, WikiCS, PATTERN, CLUSTER and COLLAB with
PE (note that MNIST, CIFAR10 and TSP do not need PE as the nodes in these graphs
already have features describing their positions in R2). We observe a boost of performance
for ZINC, AQSOL and CLUSTER (it was expected as eigenvectors are good indicators of
clusters (Von Luxburg, 2007)), an improvement for PATTERN, and statistically the same
result for COLLAB, see the respective tables in Section C. This way, MP-GCNs can be
augmented with Laplacian PE to overcome their limitations of not being able to detect simple
graph symmetries. Additionally, PEs also boost the models’ performance on real-world graph
learning tasks.
E.1.4 Challenges with using Laplacian eigenvectors
Ideally, positional encodings (PEs) should be unique for each node, and nodes which are
far apart in the graph should have diﬀerent positional features whereas nodes which are
nearby have similar positional features. Note that in a graph that has some symmetries,
positional features cannot be assigned in a canonical way. For example, if node iand nodej
are structurally symmetric, and we have positional features pi=a,pj=bthat diﬀerentiate
them, then it is also possible to arbitrary choose pi=b,pj=asinceiandjare completely
symmetric by deﬁnition. In other words, the PE is always arbitrary up to the number of
symmetries in the graph. As a consequence, the network will have to learn to deal with
these ambiguities during training. The simplest possible positional encodings is to give an
(arbitrary) ordering to the nodes, among n!possible orderings. During training, the orderings
are uniformly sampled from the n!possible choices in order for the network to learn to be
independent to these arbitrary choices (Murphy et al., 2019).
We propose an alternative to reduce the sampling space, and therefore the amount of
ambiguities to be resolved by the network. Laplacian eigenvectors are hybrid positional and
structural encodings, as they are invariant by node re-parametrization. However, they are
also limited by natural symmetries such as the arbitrary sign of eigenvectors (after being
normalized to have unit length). The number of possible sign ﬂips is 2k, wherekis the
number of eigenvectors. In practice we choose kn, and therefore 2kis much smaller n!
(the number of possible ordering of the nodes). During the training, the eigenvectors will be
uniformly sampled at random between the 2kpossibilities. If we do not seek to learn the
invariance w.r.t. all possible sign ﬂips of eigenvectors, then we can remove the sign ambiguity
39