Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks
detailed instructions on adding new datasets to the framework in our GitHub repository’s
README.
Parameter Budgets. As we have already mentioned, we designed the framework with the
objective that it is used to conveniently ‘identify ﬁrst principles’ in GNNs’ research and
not drive a model towards achieving SOTA performance. To enforce this, a straightforward
and sound choice is to constraint model parameters and ﬁx it to a speciﬁc number (as
eg. 100k and 500k) when comparing two or more GNNs. With this choice, we can likely
rely on the inference that performance gains are coming from architectural designs and not
merely large trainable parameters. The parameter budgeting also tells that the proposed
framework may not be ideal to optimize a model to achieve SOTA by tuning hyperparameters,
increasing model size to as much parameters as a server can ﬁt, etc. However, we believe we
condition the framework to be suitable for identifying performance trends and infer which
ﬁrst principles work robustly across diﬀerent model experiments. Once such principles are
identiﬁed, models can further be scaled without any constraints to achieve SOTA performance
targeted benchmarks, beyond the datasets we included here.
Codebase. A major contribution of this work is the release of the open-source coding
infrastructure on GitHub. As observed since the ﬁrst release in March 2020, the framework
has been used extensively to develop new ideas in the ﬁeld. In the existing literature prior
to this work (Errica et al., 2019), it was a major issue that diﬀerent research papers in this
ﬁeld adopted inconsistent model comparison methods. Our framework addresses this need of
having a standard codebase that helps in training and evaluating GNNs on a collection of
appropriate datasets with consistent settings. While a limiting perspective to such codebase
can be that it restricts on the diverse choices which researchers often adopt in deep learning
to fully realise the capabilities of a model, we understand that we have set out speciﬁc
objectives of the need of the proposed coding infrastructure and any extensions with other
training settings to the codebase can be done by augmenting methods or modules that applies
to each model in a fair and consistent way.
Appendix I. Hardware
Timing research code can be tricky due to diﬀerences of implementations and hardware
acceleration. Nonetheless, we take a practical view and report the average wall clock time
per epoch and the total training time for each model. All experiments were implemented in
DGL/PyTorch. We run experiments for MNIST, CIFAR10, ZINC, AQSOL, TSP, COLLAB,
WikiCS, CSL, CYCLES, GraphTheoryProp and TUs on an Intel Xeon CPU E5-2690 v4
server with 4 Nvidia 1080Ti GPUs (11 GB), and for PATTERN and CLUSTER on an Intel
Xeon Gold 6132 CPU with 4 Nvidia 2080Ti (11 GB) GPUs. Each experiment was run on a
single GPU and 4 experiments were run on the server at any given time (on diﬀerent GPUs).
We run each experiment for a maximum of 12 hours.
Appendix J. Memory Usage
For datasets that contain graphs with variable sizes, the memory consumed during training
by the GPU device changes at each batch of graphs. We report in Figure 16 the GPU memory
consumption during the training of GCN, GAT and GatedGCN on two datasets–ZINC and
47