Dwivedi, Joshi, Luu, Laurent, Bengio and Bresson
GNNs. Our observations reiterate how experiments on the small TU datasets are diﬃcult to
determine which GNNs are powerful and robust.
Appendix G. A Note on Graph Size Normalization
Intuitively, batching graphs of variable sizes may lead to node representation at diﬀerent
scales, making it diﬃcult to learn the optimal statistics andfor BatchNorm across
irregular batch sizes and variable graphs. A preliminary version of this work introduced a
graph size normalization technique called GraphNorm, which normalizes the node features
h`
iw.r.t. the graph size, i.e.,
h`
i=h`
i1p
V; (70)
whereVis the number of graph nodes. The GraphNorm layer is placed before the BatchNorm
layer.
We would like to note that GraphNorm does not have any concrete theoretical basis as
of now, and was proposed based on initially promising empirical results on datasets such
as ZINC and CLUSTER. Future work shall investigate more principled approaches towards
designing normalization layers for graph structured data.
Appendix H. Elaboration on Benchmarking Design Choices
In Section 2, we provided a brief overview on the design choices that we had to make to
build the proposed benchmarking framework. In particular, the decisions on the selection
of the speciﬁc graph datasets that we have included in this framework, the necessity to
constraint model parameters for comparison of GNNs’ performance, and whether a standard
codebase with data, training, evaluation pipelines is required can be derived from several
reasonings. In this section, we provide an elaborate discussion on these factors and how
possible extensions can be developed in future with ease and as per required by a research
agenda.
Datasets. Our collection of datasets is based on medium-scale size and criteria of diversity in
terms of the end-application domains, learning tasks at graph-, edge-, or node-levels, and their
source of construction being real or mathematical. The medium-scale size of datasets enables
quick prototyping of novel ideas and robust analysis could be generated in single experiments
in as less as 12 hours of maximum time per experiment. Similarly, the diversity ensures a
model can be tested on not just one end-application domain but a number of such domains.
However, despite the best eﬀorts, after any collection of datasets in such a research area where
a general GNN architecture is expected to be robust to a variety of tasks and domains, there
could always be need of additional datasets. Due to this necessity, the proposed framework
can be extended with new datasets conveniently by any researchers adopting it. We have also
observed the open-sourced GitHub repo of our framework being used accordingly with an
example repo being https://github.com/karl-zhao/benchmarking-gnns-pyg (Zhao et al.,
2020) which extends the framework with additional node classiﬁcation datasets as well as
adopts it in Pytorch Geometric (Fey and Lenssen, 2019) instead of DGL. Such adoption of our
framework demonstrates its ﬂexibility and the supported convenient extensions. We provide
46