Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2022) 1-48 Submitted 5/22; Revised 11/22; Published 12/22
Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi1vijaypra001@e.ntu.edu.sg
Chaitanya K. Joshi2chaitanya.joshi@cl.cam.ac.uk
Anh Tuan Luu1anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg
Thomas Laurent3tlaurent@lmu.edu
Yoshua Bengio4yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec
Xavier Bresson5xaviercs@nus.edu.sg
1Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,2University of Cambridge, UK,3Loyola Marymount
University, USA,4Mila, University of Montréal, Canada,5National University of Singapore
Editor: Joaquin Vanschoren
Abstract
In the last few years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the standard toolkit
for analyzing and learning from data on graphs. This emerging ﬁeld has witnessed an
extensive growth of promising techniques that have been applied with success to computer
science, mathematics, biology, physics and chemistry. But for any successful ﬁeld to become
mainstream and reliable, benchmarks must be developed to quantify progress. This led us
in March 2020 to release a benchmark framework that i) comprises of a diverse collection
of mathematical and real-world graphs, ii) enables fair model comparison with the same
parameter budget to identify key architectures, iii) has an open-source, easy-to-use and
reproducible code infrastructure, and iv) is ﬂexible for researchers to experiment with new
theoretical ideas. As of December 2022, the GitHub repository1has reached 2,000 stars and
380 forks, which demonstrates the utility of the proposed open-source framework through
the wide usage by the GNN community. In this paper, we present an updated version of our
benchmark with a concise presentation of the aforementioned framework characteristics, an
additional medium-sized molecular dataset AQSOL, similar to the popular ZINC, but with
a real-world measured chemical target, and discuss how this framework can be leveraged to
explore new GNN designs and insights. As a proof of value of our benchmark, we study the
case of graph positional encoding (PE) in GNNs, which was introduced with this benchmark
and has since spurred interest of exploring more powerful PE for Transformers and GNNs
in a robust experimental setting.
Keywords: Graph Neural Networks, Benchmarking, Graph Datasets, Exploration Tool
1. Introduction
Graph neural networks have beneﬁtted from a great interest recently with numerous methods
being developed for diverse domains including chemistry (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al.,
2017), physics (Cranmer et al., 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), social sciences (Monti
et al., 2019), transportation (Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021), knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull
et al., 2018; Chami et al., 2020), recommendation (Monti et al., 2017b; Ying et al., 2018), and
1. The framework is hosted at https://github.com/graphdeeplearning/benchmarking-gnns .
c
2022 Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K. Joshi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, Xavier
Bresson.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v23/22-0567.html .