APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
unicorn amongst large scale vision datasets, that is, the JFT-300M dataset [?]10. This dataset is inscrutable and operates
in the dark, to the extent that there has not even been ofﬁcial communication as to what JFT-300M stands for. All that
the ML community knows is it purportedly boasts more than 300M images spread across 18k categories. The open
source variant(s) of this, the Open Images V4-5-6 [63] contains a subset of 30.1M images covering 20k categories
(and also has an extension dataset with 478k crowd-sourced images across more than 6000 categories). While parsing
through some of the images, we found veriﬁably11non-consensual images of children that were siphoned off of ﬂickr
hinting towards the prevalence of similar issues for JFT-300M from which this was sourced. Besides the other large
datasets in Table 1, we have cases such as the CelebA-HQ dataset, which is actually a heavily processed dataset whose
grey-box curation process only appears in Appendix-C of [ 58] where no clariﬁcation is provided on this "frequency
based visual quality metric" used to sort the images based on quality . Benchmarking any downstream algorithm of
such an opaque, biased and (semi-)synthetic dataset will only result in controversial scenarios such as [ 68], where the
authors had to hurriedly incorporate addendums admitting biased results. Hence, it is important to reemphasize that
the existence and use of such datasets bear direct and indirect impact on people, given that decision making on social
outcomes increasingly leans on ubiquitously integrated AI systems trained and validated on such datasets. Yet, despite
such profound consequences, critical questions such as where the data comes from or whether the images were obtained
consensually are hardly considered part of the LSVD curation process.
The more nuanced and perhaps indirect impact of ImageNet is the culture that it has cultivated within the broader AI
community; a culture where the appropriation of images of real people as raw material free for the taking has come
be to perceived as the norm . Such norm and lack of scrutiny has played a role towards the creation of monstrous and
secretive datasets without much resistance, prompting further questions such as ‘what other secretive datasets currently
exist hidden and guarded under the guise of proprietary assets?’. Current work that has sprung out of secretive datasets,
such as Clearview AI [ 53]12, points to a deeply worrying and insidious threat not only to vulnerable groups but also to
the very meaning of privacy as we know it [57].
3.3 The Creative Commons fallacy
In May 2007 the iconic case of Chang versus Virgin mobile: The school girl, the billboard, and virgin [19] unraveled in
front of the world, leading to widespread debate on the uneasy relationship between personal privacy, consent, and
image copyright, initiating a substantial corpus of academic debate (see [ 15,20,21,52]). A Creative Commons license
addresses only copyright issues – not privacy rights or consent to use images for training. Yet, many of the efforts
beyond ImageNet, including the Open Images dataset [ 63], have been built on top of the Creative commons loophole
that large scale dataset curation agencies interpret as a free for all, consent-included green ﬂag. This, we argue, is
fundamentally fallacious as is evinced in the views presented in [ 69] by the Creative commons organization that reads:
“CC licenses were designed to address a speciﬁc constraint, which they do very well: unlocking restrictive copyright. But
copyright is not a good tool to protect individual privacy, to address research ethics in AI development, or to regulate
the use of surveillance tools employed online. ” . Datasets culpable of this CC-BY heist such as MegaFace andIBM’s
Diversity in Faces have now been deleted in response to the investigations (see [ 31] for a survey) lending further support
to the Creative Commons fallacy.
3.4 Blood diamond effect in models trained on this dataset
Akin to the ivory carving-illegal poaching , and diamond jewelry art-blood diamond nexuses, we posit that there is a
similar moral conundrum at play here that effects all downstream applications entailing models trained using a tainted
dataset. Often, these transgressions may be rather subtle. In this regard, we pick an examplar ﬁeld of application that
on the surface appears to be a low risk application area: Neural generative art . Neural generative art created using
tools such as BigGAN [ 11] and Art-breeder [ 95] that in turn use pre-trained deep-learning models trained on ethically
dubious datasets, bear the downstream burden13of the problematic residues from non-consensual image siphoning, thus
running afoul of the Wittgensteinian edict of ethics and aesthetics being one and the same. [33]. We also note that
there is a privacy-leakage facet to this downstream burden . In the context of face recognition, works such as [ 96] have
10We have decided to purposefully leave the ’?’ in place and plan to revisit it only after the dataset’s creator(s) publish the details
of it’s curation
11Seehttps://bit.ly/2y1sC7i . We performed veriﬁcation with the uploader of the image via the Flickr link shared.
12Clearview AI is a US based privately owned technology company that provides facial recognition services to various customers
including North American law enforcement agencies. With more than 3 billion photos scraped from the web, the company operated
in the dark until its services to law enforcement was reported in late 2019
13Please refer to the appendix ( Section B.5) where we demonstrate one such real-world experiment entailing unethically generated
neural art replete with responses obtained from human critiques as to what they felt about the imagery being displayed.
5