APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
4.2 Automated downstream removal from reverse search engines that allow for image deletion requests
We found that some of the reverse image search engines do allow for users to remove particular image from our [sic]
index via their "Report abuse" portals16. This allows for dataset auditors to enlist images found in their dataset(s)
containing identiﬁable individuals and direct them towards a guided image removal process from the reverse image
search engine(s), in order to mitigate some aspects of immediate harm.
4.3 Differentially private obfuscation of the faces
This path entails harnessing techniques such as DP-Blur [ 36] with quantiﬁable privacy guarantees to obfuscate the
identity of the humans in the image. The Inclusive images challenge [94], for example, already incorporated blurring
during dataset curation17and addressed the downstream effects surrounding change in predictive power of the models
trained on the blurred versions of the dataset curated. We believe that replication of this template that also clearly
included avenues for recourse in case of an erroneously non-blurred image being sighted by a researcher will be a step
in the right direction for the community at large.
4.4 Synthetic-to-real and Dataset distillation
The basic idea here is to utilize (or augment) synthetic images in lieu of real images during model training. Approaches
include using hand-drawn sketch images ( ImageNet-Sketch [106]), using GAN generated images [ 29] and techniques
such as Dataset distillation [107], where a dataset or a subset of a dataset is distilled down to a few representative
synthetic samples. This is a nascent ﬁeld with some promising results emerging in unsupervised domain adaptation
across visual domains [78] and universal digit classiﬁcation [83].
4.5 Ethics-reinforced ﬁltering during the curation
The speciﬁc ethical transgressions that emerged during our longitudinal analysis of ImageNet could have been prevented
if there were explicit instructions provided to the MTurkers during the dataset curation phase to enable ﬁltering of
these images at the source (See Fig.9 in [ 87] for example). We hope ethics checks become an integral part of the
User-Interface deployed during the humans-in-the-loop validation phase for future dataset curation endeavors.
4.6 Dataset audit cards
As emphasized in Section 4, context is crucial in determining whether a certain dataset ethical or problematic as it
provides a vital background information and datasheets are an effective way of providing context. Much along the lines
ofmodel cards [70] and datasheet for datasets [41], we propose dissemination of dataset audit cards . This allows large
scale image dataset curators to publish the goals, curation procedures, known shortcomings and caveats alongside their
dataset dissemination. In Figure 5, we have curated an example dataset audit card for the ImageNet dataset using the
quantitative analyses carried out in Section 5
5 Quantitative dataset auditing: ImageNet as a template
We performed a cross-categorical quantitative analysis of ImageNet to assess the extent of the ethical transgressions and
the feasibility of model-annotation based approaches. This resulted in an ImageNet census , entailing both image-level
as well as class-level analysis across the 57different metrics (see supplementary section) covering Count, Age and
Gender (CAG), NSFW-scoring, semanticity of class labels and accuracy of classiﬁcation using pre-trained models.
We have distilled the important revelations of this census as a dataset audit card presented in Figure 5. This audit
also entailed a human-in-the-loop based hybrid-approach that the pre-trained-model annotations (along the lines of
[30,115]) to segment the large dataset into smaller sub-sets and hand-label the smaller subsets to generate two lists
covering 62 misogynistic images and 30 image-classes with co-occuring children. We used the DEX [89] and the
InsightFace [45] pre-trained models18to generate the cardinality, gender skewness, and age-distribution results
captured in Figure 2. This resulted in discovery of 83,436 images with persons, encompassing 101,070 to 132,201
16Seehttps://pimeyes.com/en/faq/remove-from-database
17https://www.kaggle.com/c/inclusive-images-challenge
18While harnessing these pre-trained gender classiﬁcation models, we would like to strongly emphasize that the speciﬁc models
and the problems that they were intended to solve, when taken in isolation, stand on ethically dubious grounds themselves. In this
regard, we strongly concur with previous work such as [ 109] that gender classiﬁcation based on appearance of a person in a digital
image is both scientiﬁcally ﬂawed and is a technology that bears a high risk of systemic abuse.
8