APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
1.1 ImageNet: A brief overview
Table 1: Large scale image datasets containing people’s images
DatasetNumber of images
(in millions)Number of
categories
(in thousands)Number of
consensual
images
JFT-300M ([54]) 300+ 18 0
Open Images ([63]) 9 20 0
Tiny-Images ([103]) 79 76 0
Tencent-ML ([113]) 18 11 0
ImageNet-(21k,11k1,1k) ([90]) (14, 12, 1) (22, 11, 1) 0
Places ([117]) 11 0.4 0
1Seehttps://modelzoo.co/model/resnet-mxnet
The emergence of the ImageNet dataset [ 24] is widely considered a pivotal moment2in the Deep Learning revolution
that transformed Computer Vision (CV), and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in general. Prior to ImageNet, computer
vision and image processing researchers trained image classiﬁcation models on small datasets such as CalTech101
(9k images), PASCAL-VOC (30k images), LabelMe (37k images), and the SUN (131k images) dataset (see slide-37
in [64]). ImageNet, with over 14 million images spread across 21,841 synsets, replete with 1,034,908 bounding box
annotations, brought in an aspect of scale that was previously missing. A subset of 1.2 million images across 1000
classes was carved out from this dataset to form the ImageNet-1k dataset (popularly called ILSVRC-2012 ) which
formed the basis for the Task-1: classiﬁcation challenge in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC). This soon became widely touted as the Computer Vision Olympics3. The vastness of this dataset allowed a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with 60 million parameters [ 62] trained by the SuperVision team from University
of Toronto to usher in the rebirth of the CNN-era (see [2]), which is now widely dubbed the AlexNet moment in AI.
Although ImageNet was created over a decade ago, it remains one of the most inﬂuential and powerful image databases
available today. Its power and magnitude is matched by its unprecedented societal impact. Although an a posteriori
audit might seem redundant a decade after its creation, ImageNet’s continued signiﬁcance and the culture it has fostered
for other large scale datasets warrants an ongoing critical dialogue.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we cover related work that has explored the ethical
dimensions that arise with LSVD. In section 3, we describe the landscape of both the immediate and long term threats
individuals and society as a whole encounter due to ill-considered LSVD curation. In Section 4, we propose a set of
solutions which might assuage some of the concerns raised in section 3. In Section 5, we present a template quantitative
auditing procedure using the ILSVRC2012 dataset as an example and describe the data assets we have curated for the
computer vision community to build on. We conclude with broad reﬂections on LSVDs, society, ethics, and justice.
2 Background and related work
The very declaration of a taxonomy brings some things into existence while rendering others invisible [ 10]. A gender
classiﬁcation system that conforms to essentialist binaries, for example, operationalizes gender in a cis-centric way
resulting in exclusion of non-binary and transgender people [ 61]. Categories simplify and freeze nuanced and complex
narratives, obscuring political and moral reasoning behind a category. Over time, messy and contingent histories
hidden behind a category are forgotten and trivialized [ 97]. With the adoption of taxonomy sources, image datasets
inherit seemingly invisible yet profoundly consequential shortcomings. The dataset creation process, its implication
for ML systems, and subsequently, the societal impact of these systems has attracted a substantial body of critique.
We categorize such body of work into two groups that complement one another. While the ﬁrst group can be seen as
concerned with the broad downstream effects, the other concentrates mainly on the dataset creation process itself.
2.1 Broad critiques
The absence of critical engagement with canonical datasets disproportionately negatively impacts women, racial
and ethnic minorities, and vulnerable individuals and communities at the margins of society [ 7]. For example,
image search results both exaggerate stereotypes and systematically under-represent women in search results for
2“The data that transformed AI research—and possibly the world”: https://bit.ly/2VRxx3L
3https://engineering.missouri.edu/2014/01/team-takes-top-rankings-in-computer-vision-olympics/
2