APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
b
***
h
child_molester
c
****
e
c
**
t
molester
n
****
r
pedophile
rape_suspect
w
**r
e
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Number of images
Tiny Images Dataset
n_images
(a) Class-wise counts of the offensive classes
First 25 images of with label:n
****
r (b) Samples from the class labelled n**** r
Figure 1: Results from the 80 Million Tiny Images dataset exemplifying the toxicities of it’s label space
3 The threat landscape
In this section, we survey the landscape of harm and threats, both immediate and long term, that emerge with dataset
curation practices in the absence of careful ethical considerations and anticipation for negative societal consequences.
Our goal here is to bring awareness to the ML and AI community regarding the severity of the threats and to motivate a
sense of urgency to act on them. We hope this will result in practices such as the mandatory constitution of Institutional
Review Boards (IRB) for large scale dataset curation processes.
3.1 The rise of reverse image search engines, loss of privacy, and the blackmailing threat
Large image datasets, when built without careful consideration of societal implications, pose a threat to the welfare
and well-being of individuals. Most often, vulnerable people and marginalised populations pay a disproportionately
high price. Reverse image search engines that allow face search such as [ 1] have gotten remarkably and worryingly
efﬁcient in the past year. For a small fee, anyone can use their portal or their API8to run an automated process to
uncover the “real-world” identities of the humans of ImageNet dataset. For example, in societies where sex work is
socially condemned or legally criminalized, re-identiﬁcation of a sex worker through image search, for example, bears
a real danger for the individual victim. Harmful discourse such as revenge porn , are part of a broader continuum
of image-based sexual abuse [ 66]. To further emphasize this speciﬁc point, many of the images in classes such as
maillot ,brassiere , andbikini contain images of beach voyeurism and other non-consensual cases of digital
image gathering (covered in detail in Section 5). We were able to (unfortunately) easily map the victims, most of whom
are women, in the pictures to “real-world” identities of people belonging to a myriad of backgrounds including teachers,
medical professionals, and academic professors using reverse image search engines such as [ 80]. Paying heed to the
possibility of the Streisand effect9, we took the decision not to divulge any further quantitative or qualitative details
on the extent or the location of such images in the dataset besides alerting the curators of the dataset(s) and making a
passionate plea to the community not to underestimate the severity of this particular threat vector.
3.2 The emergence of even larger and more opaque datasets
The attempt to build computer vision has been gradual and can be traced as far back as 1966 to Papert’s The Summer
Vision Project [76], if not earlier. However, ImageNet, with its vast amounts of data, has not only erected a canonical
landmark in the history of AI, it has also paved the way for even bigger, more powerful, and suspiciously opaque
datasets. The lack of scrutiny of the ImageNet dataset by the wider computer vision community has only served
to embolden institutions, both academic and commercial, to build far bigger datasets without scrutiny (see Table 1).
Various highly cited and celebrated papers in recent years [ 11,16,54,100], for example, have used the unspoken
8Please refer to the supplementary material in Appendix A for the screenshots
9The Streisand effect “is a social phenomenon that occurs when an attempt to hide, remove, or censor information has the
unintended consequence of further publicizing that information, often via the Internet” [110]
4