LARGE DATASETS : A P YRRHIC WIN FOR COMPUTER VISION ?
Vinay Uday Prabhu
UnifyID AI Labs
Redwood City
vinay@unify.idAbeba Birhane
School of Computer Science, UCD, Ireland
Lero - The Irish Software Research Centre
abeba.birhane@ucdconnect.ie
July 27, 2020
ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate problematic practices and consequences of large scale vision datasets.
We examine broad issues such as the question of consent and justice as well as speciﬁc concerns such
as the inclusion of veriﬁably pornographic images in datasets. Taking the ImageNet-ILSVRC-2012
dataset as an example, we perform a cross-sectional model-based quantitative census covering factors
such as age, gender, NSFW content scoring, class-wise accuracy, human-cardinality-analysis, and
the semanticity of the image class information in order to statistically investigate the extent and
subtleties of ethical transgressions. We then use the census to help hand-curate a look-up-table of
images in the ImageNet-ILSVRC-2012 dataset that fall into the categories of veriﬁably pornographic:
shot in a non-consensual setting (up-skirt), beach voyeuristic, and exposed private parts. We survey
the landscape of harm and threats both society broadly and individuals face due to uncritical and
ill-considered dataset curation practices. We then propose possible courses of correction and critique
the pros and cons of these. We have duly open-sourced all of the code and the census meta-datasets
generated in this endeavor for the computer vision community to build on. By unveiling the severity
of the threats, our hope is to motivate the constitution of mandatory Institutional Review Boards
(IRB) for large scale dataset curation processes.
1 Introduction
Born from World War II and the haunting and despicable practices of Nazi era experimentation [ 4] the 1947 Nuremberg
code [108] and the subsequent 1964 Helsinki declaration [34], helped establish the doctrine of Informed Consent
which builds on the fundamental notions of human dignity and agency to control dissemination of information about
oneself. This has shepherded data collection endeavors in the medical and psychological sciences concerning human
subjects, including photographic data [ 8,71], for the past several decades. A less stringent version of informed consent,
broad consent , proposed in 45 CFR 46.116(d) of the Revised Common Rule [27], has been recently introduced that still
affords the basic safeguards towards protecting one’s identity in large scale databases. However, in the age of Big Data ,
the fundamentals of informed consent, privacy, or agency of the individual have gradually been eroded. Institutions,
academia, and industry alike, amass millions of images of people without consent and often for unstated purposes under
the guise of anonymization. These claims are misleading given there is weak anonymity and privacy in aggregate data
in general [ 72] and more crucially, images of faces are not the type of data that can be aggregated. As can be seen in
Table 1, several tens of millions of images of people are found in peer-reviewed literature. These images are obtained
without consent or awareness of the individuals or IRB approval for collection. In Section 5-B of [103], for instance, the
authors nonchalantly state “ As many images on the web contain pictures of people, a large fraction (23%) of the 79
million images in our dataset have people in them ”. With this background, we now focus on one of the most celebrated
and canonical large scale image datasets: the ImageNet dataset. From the questionable ways images were sourced, to
troublesome labeling of people in images, to the downstream effects of training AI models using such images, ImageNet
and large scale vision datasets (LSVD) in general constitute a Pyrrhic win for computer vision. We argue, this win has
come at the expense of harm to minoritized groups and further aided the gradual erosion of privacy, consent, and agency
of both the individual and the collective.
Equal contributionsarXiv:2006.16923v2  [cs.CY]  24 Jul 2020