APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
occupations [ 60]; object detection systems designed to detect pedestrians display higher error rates for recognition
of demographic groups with dark skin tones [ 111]; and gender classiﬁcation systems show disparities in image
classiﬁcation accuracy where lighter-skin males are classiﬁed with the highest accuracy while darker-skin females
suffer the most misclassiﬁcation [ 14]. Gender classiﬁcation systems that lean on binary and cis-genderist constructs
operationalize gender in a trans-exclusive way resulting in tangible harm to trans people [ 61,93]. With a persistent trend
where minoritized and vulnerable individuals and communities often disproportionately suffer the negative outcomes
of ML systems, D’Ignazio and Klein [ 28] have called for a shift in rethinking ethics not just as a fairness metric to
mitigate the narrow concept of bias but as a practice that results in justice for the most negatively impacted. Similarly,
Kasy and Abebe [ 59] contend that perspectives that acknowledge existing inequality and aim to redistribute power
are pertinent as opposed to fairness-based perspectives. Such understanding of ethics as justice then requires a focus
beyond ‘bias’ and fairnesss’ in LSVDs and requires questioning of how images are sourced, labelled, and what it means
for models to be trained on them. One of the most thorough investigations in this regard can be found in [ 22]. In
this recent work, Crawford and Paglen present an in-depth critical examination of ImageNet including the dark and
troubling results of classifying people as if they are objects. Offensive and derogatory labels that perpetuate historical
and current prejudices are assigned to people’s actual images. The authors emphasise that not only are images that were
scraped across the web appropriated as data for computer vision tasks, but also the very act of assigning labels to people
based on physical features raises fundamental concerns around reviving long-discredited pseudo-scientiﬁc ideologies of
physiognomy [114].
2.2 Critiques of the curation phase
Within the dataset creation process, taxonomy sources pass on their limitations and underlying assumptions that are
problematic. The adoption of underlying structures presents a challenge where — without critical examination of the
architecture — ethically dubious taxonomies are inherited. This has been one of the main challenges for ImageNet
given that the dataset is built on the backbone of WordNet’s structure. Acknowledging some of the problems, the
authors from the ImageNet team did recently attempt to address [ 115] the stagnant concept vocabulary of WordNet.
They admitted that only 158 out of the 2,832 existing synsets should remain in the person sub-tree4. Nonetheless, some
serious problems remain untouched. This motivates us to address in greater depth the overbearing presence of the
WordNet effect on image datasets.
2.3 The WordNet Effect
ImageNet is not the only large scale vision dataset that has inherited the shortcomings of the WordNet taxonomy. The
80 million Tiny Images dataset [ 103] which grandfathered the CIFAR-10/100 datasets and the Tencent ML-images
dataset [ 113] also used the same path. Unlike ImageNet, these datasets have never been audited5or scrutinized and
some of the sordid results from inclusion of ethnophaulisms in Tiny-Images dataset’s label space are displayed in
Figure 1. The ﬁgure demonstrates both the number of images in a subset of the offensive classes (sub-ﬁgure(a)) and the
exemplar images (sub-ﬁgure(b)) that show the images in the noun-class labelled n**** r6, a fact that serves as a stark
reminder that a great deal of work remains to be done by the ML community at large.
Similarly, we found at least 315 classes7of the potentially 1593 classes deemed to be non-imageable by the ImageNet
curators in [ 115] still retained in the Tencent-ML-Images dataset that includes image classes such as [transvestite,
bad person, fornicatress, orphan, mamma’s boy, and enchantress] .
Finally, the labeling and validation of the curation process also present ethical challenges. Recent work such as [ 44]
has explored the intentionally hidden labour, which they have termed as Ghost Work , behind such tasks. Image labeling
and validation requires the use of crowd-sourced platforms such as MTurk, often contributing to the exploitation of
underpaid and undervalued gig workers . Within the topic of image labeling but with a different dimension and focus,
recent work such as [ 104] and [ 6] has focused on the shortcomings of human-annotation procedures used during the
ImageNet dataset curation. These shortcomings, the authors point out, include single label per-image procedure that
causes problems given that real-world images often contain multiple objects, and inaccuracies due to “overly restrictive
label proposals”.
4In order to prune all the nodes. They also took into account the imageability of the synsets and the skewed representation in the
images pertaining to the Image retrieval phase
5In response to the mainstream media covering a pre-print of this work, we were informed that the curators of the dataset have
withdrawn the dataset with a note accessible here: https://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/TinyImages/
6Due to its offensiveness, we have censored this word (and other words throughout the paper), however, it remains uncensored on
the website at the time of writing.
7Seehttps://bit.ly/30DybmF
3