APREPRINT - JULY 27, 2020
demonstrated that CNNs with high predictive power unwittingly accommodate accurate extraction of subsets of the
facial images that they were trained on, thus abetting dataset leakage14.
3.5 Perpetuation of unjust and harmful stereotypes
Finally, zooming out and taking a broad perspective allows us to see that the very practice of embarking on a
classiﬁcation, taxonomization, and labeling task endows the classiﬁer with the power to decide what is a legitimate,
normal, or correct way of being, acting, and behaving in the social world [ 10]. For any given society, what comes
to be perceived as normal oracceptable is often dictated by dominant ideologies. Systems of classiﬁcation, which
operate within a power asymmetrical social hierarchy, necessarily embed and amplify historical and cultural prejudices,
injustices, and biases [ 97]. In western societies, “desirable”, “positive”, and “normal” characteristics and ways of
being are constructed and maintained in ways that align with the dominant narrative, giving advantage to those that
ﬁt the status quo. Groups and individuals on the margins, on the other hand, are often perceived as the “outlier” and
the “deviant”. Image classiﬁcation and labelling practices, without the necessary precautions and awareness of these
problematic histories, pick up these stereotypes and prejudices and perpetuate them [ 35,73,74]. AI systems trained
on such data amplify and normalize these stereotypes, inﬂicting unprecedented harm on those that are already on the
margins of society. While the ImageNet team did initiate strong efforts towards course-correction [ 115], the Tiny Images
dataset still contains harmful slurs and offensive labels. And worse, we remain in the dark regarding the secretive and
opaque LSVDs.
4 Candidate solutions: The path ahead
Decades of work within the ﬁelds of Science and Technology Studies (STS) and the Social Sciences show that there is
no single straightforward solution to most of the wider social and ethical challenges that we have discussed [ 5,28,99].
These challenges are deeply rooted in social and cultural structures and form part of the fundamental social fabric.
Feeding AI systems on the world’s beauty, ugliness, and cruelty, but expecting it to reﬂect only the beauty is a fantasy
[5]. These challenges and tensions will exist as long as humanity continues to operate. Given the breadth of the
challenges that we have faced, any attempt for a quick ﬁx risks concealing the problem and providing a false sense
of solution. The idea of a complete removal of biases, for example, might in reality be simply hiding them out of
sight [ 43]. Furthermore, many of the challenges (bias, discrimination, injustice) vary with context, history, and place,
and are concepts that continually shift and change constituting a moving target [ 7]. The pursuit of panacea in this
context, therefore, is not only unattainable but also misguided. Having said that, there are remedies that can be applied
to overcome the speciﬁc harms that we have discussed in this paper, which eventually potentially play constituent roles
in improving the wider and bigger social and structural issues in the long run.
4.1 Remove, replace, and open strategy
In [115], the authors concluded that within the person sub-tree of the ImageNet dataset, 1593 of the 2832 people
categories were potentially offensive labels and planned to "remove all of these from ImageNet." . We strongly advocate
a similar path for the offensive noun classes in the Tiny Images dataset that we have identiﬁed in section 2.1, as well
as images that fall into the categories of veriﬁably15pornographic, shot in a non-consensual setting (up-skirt), beach
voyeuristic, and exposed genitalia in the ImageNet-ILSVRC-2012 dataset. In cases where the image category is retained
but the images are not, the option of replacement with consensually shot ﬁnancially compensated images arises. It is
possible that some of the people in these images might come forward to consent and contribute their images in exchange
for fair ﬁnancial compensation, credit, or out of sheer altruism [ 12]. We re-emphasize that our consternation focuses on
the non-consensual aspect of the images and not on the category-class and the ensuing content of the images in it. This
solution, however, brings forth further questions: does this make image datasets accessible only to those who can afford
it? Will we end up with pool of images with a predominantly ﬁnancially disadvantaged participants?
Science is self-correcting so long as it is accessible and open to critical engagement. We have tried to engage critically
and map actionable ways forward given what we know of these LSVDs. The secretive and opaque LSVDs, however,
thread a dangerous territory, given that they directly or indirectly impact society but remain hidden and inaccessible.
Although the net beneﬁt of the open science movement remains controversial, we strongly contend that making LSVDs
open and accessible allows audits of these datasets, which is a ﬁrst step towards a responsible scientiﬁc endeavour.
14We’d like to especially highlight the megapixel.cc project [ 46] for the ground-breaking work on datasets to train such facial
recognition systems
15We use the term veriﬁably to denote only those NSFW images that were hand-annotated by the volunteers indicating that they
also contained the textual context that was of pornographic phraseology. We have an example grid of these images in the Appendix.
6