obstacle are neglected and only the random points in the obstacle free area
are considered as viable nodes. All these nodes are connected from one to an-
other to determine their feasibility path. Once all these nodes are connected,
the path links that travel through an obstacle are categorized as infeasible
and are abandoned. In the nal stage, the shortest path between the initial
location and the destination is identied from the remaining feasible paths
(Kavraki et al., 1996; Sudhakara et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2017).
Genetic Algorithm (GA)
Genetic Algorithm (GA), introduced by John Holland in 1975, is a search
optimization algorithm based on the mechanics of the natural process (Hol-
land et al., 1992). The fundamental principle of this approach is based on the
survival of the strongest members of a population while the weaker members
are abandoned. Each member of a population is dene as a chromosome
where each chromosome represents a possible solution for an optimization
problem. The feasibility of the chromosomes are evaluated by measuring
their tness function. GA updates its population, strengthening its found
solutions (chromosomes), by generating o-springs based on their best chro-
mosomes through several processes or operators such as crossover and mu-
tation. GA also has an elitism process that protects the best performing
chromosome, ttest solution found (Holland et al., 1992; Corne and Lones,
2018; Kora and Yadlapalli, 2017).
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
Kennedy and Eberhart introduced Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
in 1995. PSO is a meta-heuristic algorithm inspired by swarm intelligence
behaviors (e.g. bird 
ocking and sh schooling). This method denes mem-
bers of a population as particles, possible solutions for a given problem, and
it undergoes processes such as generation, evaluation, and update to help
these particles to converge towards an optimal solution (Kennedy and Eber-
hart, 1995). In this algorithm, every particle's location in the search-space is
represented by a position, X. PSO guides its solutions towards better regions
in the search-spaces that have higher potential using a velocity equation, V
(see equation 4). The best solution found by each particle is known as per-
sonal best ( PBest ) and the best solution found among the whole swarm is
known as global best ( GBest ). PSO updates its particles' velocity through
7