Dijkstra's Algorithm (DA)
Edsger Dijkstra introduced Dijkstra's Algorithm (DA) in 1959, a classical
algorithm that has proven its eciency in nding the shortest possible path
within a web of inter-connected nodes that represent spaces between obstacles
(Dijkstra, 1959). DA method is known to be computationally intensive and
being less eective if the distance between the starting location and the
destination is far from each other (Noto and Sato, 2002). Noto and Soto
(Noto and Sato, 2002) proposed an extended version of DA to solve this
particular problem. DA main applications are in routing problems (Dijkstra,
1959; Risald et al., 2018; Broumi et al., 2017; Parungao et al., 2018).
Rapidly-Exploring Random Tree (RRT)
The Rapidly-Exploring Random Tree (RRT), introduced by LaValle and
Kuner Jr., is an algorithm based on stochastic search strategies (Kuner
and LaValle, 2002). The RRT is commonly applied in single query prob-
lems. Application of RRT in path planning is achieved by constructing a
tree branching solution which revolves around random points selected within
the searching space. In this approach, the starting point is considered as the
root node for the RRT. Moving forward, a random point, selected based on
the closest node construct will be identied. This step is repeated until the
nal destination is found and the outcome will form a feasible path which
looks like a tree and covers almost all the empty space in the search space
(Kuner and LaValle, 2002; Connell and Manh La, 2018; Pimentel et al.,
2018). This study utilised the variation of RRT, named RRT-based local
path planning, as one of the base methods for its performance comparison.
This variant uses the same concept and approach of global RRT with the
main dierence being lack of constructing a path rst and execute it. In this
variation, a random point or target point is chosen whilst the robot is moving
depending on some probability calculated (Wong et al., 2018).
Probabilistic Road Map (PRM)
The main dierence between Probabilistic Road Map (PRM) and RRT is
in PRM's ability in multi-query planning. PRM was rst introduced in 1996
by Kavraki et al. with their main goal being to provide a path for a robot in
a static work-space (Kavraki et al., 1996). PRM generates a path between
the initial and the destination positions by linking random nodes in the ob-
stacle free area within the environment. The algorithm starts with selecting
random points within the search area. The random points that fall on the
6