Keywords: Path Planning, Classical, Meta-heuristic, Mobile Robot,
Navigation
1. Introduction
Navigation, an important factor in mobile robotics, is dened as the pro-
cess of identifying the robot's position accurately, planning the path, and
following the path planned (Pennock, 2005). Localization is the ability of
the robot to determine its exact location in the real-world with respect to
its position inside a map; path planning is considered as the computation of
a path through a map which represents the environment. This given path
is chosen based on the problem objectives so that the expected destination
can be achieved. As such, a reliable map is essential for navigation without
which robots are not capable of accomplishing their goals. In navigational
approaches, the reliability of the map is challenged due to the dynamic and
unpredictable nature of the real-world applications (Atyabi et al., 2010; Fre-
und and Kaever, 2017).
This study explores the feasibility of meta-heuristic based approaches for
motion planning and navigation of a mobile robot in static environments
with numerous obstacles resulting in a hard to manoeuvre path. The main
hypothesis is that a mobile robot controlled by a meta-heuristic approach
(e.g. Genetic Algorithm (GA), Dierential Evolution (DE), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO), and Cuckoo Search Algorithm (CSA)) is expected to
perform as well as, or better than, conventional motion planning and navi-
gation techniques (e.g., Dijkstra's Algorithm (DA), Probabilistic Road Map
(PRM), Rapidly Random Tree (RRT) and Potential Field (PF)). In order
to evaluate the feasibility of the utilised meta-heuristic based methods, two
sets of experiments with dierent layouts are considered. In the rst layout,
a mobile robot needs to manoeuvre in maze layout setting. In the second
experiment, a symmetrical layout with an irregular shape obstacle placed
in the middle of the environment is considered. Multiple start and destina-
tion locations are considered in this layout resembling paths with varying
complexities raised from hard to manoeuvre corridors to obstacle dense en-
vironments. The experimental layouts considered in this study are designed
to comprehensively attest the feasibility of meta-heuristic based and conven-
tional motion planning methods. The following section presents the problem
statement of the study.
2