methods are chosen based on the ndings and recommendations of (Ab Wa-
hab et al., 2015) where using a collection of benchmark functions, variations
of PSO (Linear-PSO, Rand-PSO and CPSO) and DE outperformed other
meta-heuristic methods. Two sets of experiments featuring a maze and a
symmetric layout are designed to further evaluate the feasibility of these
meta-heuristic methods under motion planning problems. The layouts are
designed to be hard-to-manoeuvre and obstacle-rich.
The results indicated DA as the benchmark performing method with un-
derstanding that this approach had access to prior knowledge of the environ-
ment and a pre-planned path whilst other techniques only had information
about their starting location ( S) and their target destination ( D). Therefore,
DA's performance is considered as the control or benchmark result and its
performance is considered as the best possible outcome that can be achieved
in these experimental layouts. The summary of the rst, second, and third
best performing algorithms for all experiments are presented in Table 6. The
results points to CPSO as the best performing algorithm by outperforming
all other meta-heuristic based and conventional motion planning approaches
investigated in this study. CPSO is found to be among the top 3 performing
algorithms across all experiments and performance measure factors consid-
ered in this study. CPSO outperformed all other methods in 2 experiments
under execution time, Battery Consumption and consistency of trajectory
trace performance factors. CPSO outperformed other methods in 3 experi-
ments in Travelled Distance performance factor. The main drawback of this
method is observed under Convergence Iteration performance factor where
it only been in top 3 performing algorithms for one of the experiments and
been outperformed by other meta-heuristic methods under this performance
measure factor.
It is noteworthy that no statistical signicance is found between CPSO
and DA under travelled distance category in any of the motion planning
experiments. Such lack of signicant dierence between CPSO and DA is
also observed in the execution times and battery consumption categories.
The consistent competitive performance of CPSO under benchmark func-
tions problems are also reported in (Ab Wahab et al., 2015). CPSO's supe-
rior performance observed under the assessed experimental motion planning
problems investigated in this study testies on its eciency and suitability
for local path planning and navigation problems. This is an emerging eld
that its solutions can be embedded in any autonomous system and problem
domain such as driver-less cars and autonomous robotic systems.
39