Table 2: The settings for all algorithms involved in all Experiment
Algorithm Settings
PF Laser Scan Minimum range set to 0.8 meter.
DA Several unoccupied points between starting point and end point are dened
before running the algorithm and full layout of the environment is presented
to the algorithm.
RRT Randomness point is set to 0.5.
PRM 100 random points are created for next moving point.
GA Population size is set to 100 with 10% of population considered as best chro-
mosomes in selection stage. Mutation rate is set 0.05% where mutation op-
eration is to be selected if tness is not improved in 5 consecutive iterations.
DE Population size is set to 100 with crossover constant being set to 0.5
CSA pais set to 0.25 and maximum number of nests are set to 100.
Fix-PSO Inertia weight is set to 0.7 (FIW). Cognitive and social coecients are set to
0.5 and 2.5 respectively (FIC).
Rand-PSO Random values between 1.0 and 0.5 is used for inertia weight (RANDIW).
Cognitive and social coecients are set to random values number between 2.5
and 0.5 (RANDAC).
TVAC-PSO Linear decreasing value is used for all inertia weight (LDIW) and Time Vary-
ing for Acceleration Coecients (TVAC). Inertia weight is set to 0.9 as start-
ing and 0.4 as end value. For social component, the acceleration coecient is
set to 2.5 as starting value and decreased to 0.5 with the respect of iteration
while for cognitive component, the acceleration coecient value is set to 0.5
initially and increased to 2.5 towards the end of iterations.
Linear-PSO Linear decreasing approach varying from 0.9 to 0.4 is utilised for linear de-
creasing inertia weight (LDIW). Cognitive and social coecient are set to x
values of 0.5 and 2.5 respectively (FAC).
CPSO Cognitive and social coecient are set to x values of 0.5 and 2.5 respectively
(FAC) with constricted value, K of 0.7299.
the environments from a xed starting point towards a xed destination loca-
tion. From the classical motion planning methods discussed, Potential Field
(PF), Dijkstra's algorithm (DA), Rapidly-exploring Random Tree (RRT) and
Probabilistic Road Map (PRM) are considered, with the detailed informa-
tion (full map) of the environment only being provided to DA while other
methods are solely depending on their real-time sensory perception. Each
node in the DA represents a centre point between two nearby obstacles and
the distance between these nodes are considered as weights. As discussed
earlier, from existing meta-heuristic methods, GA, DE, CSA and variations
of PSO are considered. The parameter settings applied to the meta-heuristic
methods are based on ndings in (Ab Wahab et al., 2015).
4. Results and Discussion
To evaluate the performance of the selected algorithms in experiments I
and II, seven performance factors are considered with Dijkstra's Algorithm
(DA) is set as the benchmark of the best possible results that other algorithms
17