Sub-Experiment 3: Path from S2 to D2 in Fig. 3. The travelled path
in this sub-experiment is similar to of Sub-Experiment 1 (from S1 to D1 in
Fig. 3). This sub-experiment is designed to investigate a dierent approach-
ing angle of the irregular shape obstacle that is positioned in the center of the
Experiment II environment layout. In here, the close-by sharp edges of the
IR obstacle results in generating pseudo Cul-De-Sac type obstacles that in
some degree increases the diculty of path generation specially if the robot
get trapped in such tight and hard to manoeuvre corners. The results are
assessed based on the performance factors introduced earlier.
1.Ability to Arrive at Destination ,Number of Collisions &
Displacement Problem : Similar to previous ndings in this environ-
ment, in this sub experiment, all algorithms managed to drive the robot
to its destination safely without any obstacle collision or displacement
problems and within 0.5 meter radius of destination point.
2.Execution Time (s) : DA benchmark this factor by clocking an av-
erage of 90.64 seconds execution time. This is considerably lower that
CPSO and PF performances as second and third best performing meth-
ods in this performance factor. CPSO clocked an average execution
time of 169.81 seconds and PF achieved an average execution time of
184.33s.
3.Battery Consumption (%) : DA benchmark this category with only
0.37% average battery consumption, followed by the CPSO and PF
performances with 0.7031% and 0.7270% respectively.
4.Travelled Distance (m) : DA travelled the shortest path on average
with 7.1247 meters followed by CPSO and PRM with 7.6538 and 7.6842
meters respectively.
5.Convergence Iteration : Rand-PSO emerged as the best performing
algorithm with an average of 444.2 iterations. CPSO closely followed
with an average performance of 453.9 iterations and GA as the third
best performing algorithm for this category with an average of 462.0
iterations.
6.Trajectory Traces : The trajectory traces of the methods utilised in
this experiment are illustrated in Fig. 14. Similar to the previous exper-
iments, DA is consistent within its chosen path and considered as the
benchmark results. CPSO also demonstrated consistency in its chosen
path although it is not identical to DA. Rand-PSO is chosen in this
31