are mostly found to be dependent on complete prior knowledge of the en-
vironment in order to create a feasible path between the starting and the
destination points.
Meta-heuristic approaches can overcome these issues due to their pro-
ciency in handling unknown or partially known environments. These meth-
ods create a set of temporary paths within each of their iterations, bring-
ing them closer to the destination location one step of the algorithm at a
time. The Meta-heuristic methods use dierent approaches compared to the
classical methods where rather than creating a global path based on the
prior knowledge (e.g. environment map) and execute it, they create a sub-
population of possible maneuvers in each iteration. Later, the best path
created will be chosen based on their tness and the path will be executed.
Atyabi and Powers (Atyabi and Powers, 2013) considered approaches such as
Genetic Algorithm (GA), Neural Networks (NN), Particle Swarm Optimiza-
tion (PSO), and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) as meta-heuristic based
methods for motion planning. Duguleana and Mogan (Duguleana and Mo-
gan, 2016) presented the combination of Neural Networks and Reinforcement
Learning to enhance the capabilities of mobile robots to deal with static and
dynamic obstacles.
The classical algorithms for motion planning considered in this study are
Potential Field (PF), Dijkstra's Algorithm (DA), Rapidly-explore Random
Tree (RRT) and Probabilistic Road Map (PRM). These four approaches
are chosen because of their well known reputation in the community and
being widely and successfully applied in path planning problems (Zafar and
Mohanta, 2018; Elbanhawi and Simic, 2014; Zammit and Van Kampen, 2018;
Mohanan and Salgoankar, 2018). The overall performances of these methods
are known to be modest in global motion planning problems. PF, RRT
and PRM are also utilised in local path planning problems (Chen, 2014;
Contreras-Cruz et al., 2015; Mohanta and Keshari, 2019). In this study, GA,
DE, variants of PSOs and CSA are chosen as candidates in meta-heuristic
category due to their popularity and their high potential in addressing local
motion planning problems (Atyabi et al., 2010; Zafar and Mohanta, 2018;
Patle et al., 2019; Sathiya and Chinnadurai, 2019; Lamini et al., 2018).
One of recent enhanced classical methods for path planning is introduced
by Bayat et al. (Bayat et al., 2018), where Electrostatic potential eld ap-
proach is utilised for mobile robots' path planning. This approach requires
complete layout/map of the environment in order to generate a feasible path
between the initial location and the nal location which is the main draw-
4