respectively.
It is noteworthy that DA, as the benchmark performing approach, only
considered regions 4, 5, 6 and 8 in its trajectories with regions 5 and 8 having
the highest and the least contributions in robot's chosen trajectory respec-
tively. Given that regions 2, 5, and 8 are the regions containing three parallel
rows of obstacles, these regions are likely to be the most dicult to manoeu-
vre in. This issue is re
ected in the pie charts illustrated in Fig. 8 where the
highest percentage is recorded in region 5. This is with exception of RRT
algorithm in which region 8 received the highest percentage of occupation. It
is also noticeable that in case of PRM algorithm the occupation percentage
observed in region 6 of other methods is shared between regions 5 and 6. Un-
like other approaches, PRM also included region 7 and 9 in its trajectories.
The inclusion of these extra regions (7 and 9) are likely the reason behind
the poor performances achieved by PRM algorithm in this experiment. RRT,
unlike PRM, did not include any extra regions in its trajectory towards the
destination. However, from the results depicted in the pie chart, it is no-
ticeable that this approach spent an unusual amount of time in region 8.
This is evident from allocating 38% of travelled path to region 8 by RRT in
comparison with DE and GA in which the robot occupied this region in only
13% of its trajectory toward the destination. The best performing algorithm,
CPSO, reported a smaller percentage (20%) for occupying region 6 compared
with DA (26%). Furthermore, in comparison to DA, CPSO also reported a
smaller percentage of travelled path in region 4 (destination region) while
it performed poorly in region 5. Similar performance is observed by PF,
recording 56% in average travelled path in region 5 while out-manoeuvring
DA and CPSO in region 4 with 11% average occupation. The dierences
observed between CPSO and DA in their manoeuvrability in region 5 can be
due to DA's advantage in terms of having full knowledge of the environment
layout.
Experiment II (Symmetric Layout)
The results achieved from Experiment II are reported in Table 4. In
order to have better understanding of how various approaches performed
in this symmetric layout, the results are reported within four folds of Sub-
Experiments and overall achievements. The results are discussed based on
performance factors such as 1) Ability to Arrive at Destination: , 2)Number
of Collisions: , 3)Displacement Problem: , 4)Execution Time (s) , 5)Battery
Consumption (%) , 6)Travelled Distance , and 7) Convergence Iteration (s) .
23