1.Ability to Arrive at Destination ,Number of Collisions &
Displacement Problem : Similar to previous experiments, neither
collision nor displacement problems are observed in any of the execu-
tions with neither of the approaches utilised where all of them stop
within 0.5 m radius from the destination point.
2.Execution Time (s) : DA set the benchmark by clocking an average
execution time of 77.03 seconds. This performance is followed by PF
and CPSO with 106.66 and 115.98 seconds respectively.
3.Battery Consumption (%) : DA set the benchmark for other meth-
ods in average battery consumption performance factor with 0.31%.
This performance is matched by CPSO who also achieve 0.31% aver-
age battery consumption. PF is the second best performing method in
this performance factor by achieving 0.42% average battery consump-
tion.
4.Travelled Distance (m) : CPSO and PF followed DA's 5.9697 meters
average travelled distance with 6.1953 and 6.2051 meters respectively.
5.Convergence Iteration : CPSO outperformed other meta-heuristic
methods in average convergence iterations performance factor with
370.0 iterations. This performance is closely followed by DE with 388.8
and Linear-PSO with 396.8 iterations.
6.Trajectory Traces : Fig. 12 depicts the trajectory traces of approaches
employed in Sub-Experiment 2 of experiment II. In here, each sub-gure
depicts ten paths, each presented using a unique colour, travelled by
the turtlebot robot from the start to destination location. From the
observations, DA is the benchmark for other algorithms by repeating
its routes through 10 runs. Other algorithms such as PF - Best per-
former, TVAC-PSO - Average performer, and RRT - least favourable
performer constructed almost similar routes. In this performance fac-
tor, after DA that had prior knowledge of environment layout, PF and
RRT recorded the most and the least consistent paths across 10 execu-
tions respectively.
Fig. 13 provides pie chart representation of robot's manoeuvres in dif-
ferent regions in the experiment layout. In this Sub-Experiment, the initial
and nal positions of the robot are placed in regions 1 and 7 respectively.
Irregular shape obstacle is located in region 5 with partial coverage of region
4.
28