Sub-Experiment 1: Path from S1 to D1 in Fig. 3. The average results
acquired from 10 executions of motion planning algorithms in Experiment II
are reported in Table 4. The results are discussed based on the performance
factors discussed earlier.
1.Ability to Arrive at Destination ,Number of Collisions &
Displacement Problem : Similar to previous experiments, Experi-
ment I, neither collision nor displacement problems are observed in
any of the executions with neither of the approaches utilised where
all of them stop within 0.5 m radius from the destination point. A
route between the starting and the destination locations is found by all
algorithms.
2.Execution Time (s) : DA set the benchmark with an average execu-
tion time where it clocked only 87.55 seconds to complete the navigation
task. CPSO and PF followed DA's performance in this category with
116.67 seconds and 126.76 seconds respectively.
3.Battery Consumption (%) : DA set the bar for other methods in
battery consumption performance factor by only consuming 0.35% en-
ergy on average. CPSO's performance was the closest to the benchmark
with 0.46% and followed by PF with 0.50% average energy consump-
tion.
4.Travelled Distance (m) : CPSO and DE outperform DA with an
average travelled distance of 7.1822 meters and 7.4456 meters respec-
tively. DA only come as third best performing approach with 7.4706
meters. This is likely due to the fact that unlike DA that places its
nodes in the middle point of two nearby obstacles (safe distance from
either obstacle), CPSO and PF are allowed to risk colliding with obsta-
cle by coming very close to the edges of the obstacles. Such advantage
allows these methods to shorten their travelled distance while risking
collision with obstacles.
5.Convergence Iteration : CPSO also outperformed others in the av-
erage convergence iteration category with 432.8 iterations. This per-
formance is closely followed by DE with 449.1 iterations.
8.Trajectory Traces : Fig. 9 illustrates the trajectory traces for em-
ployed approaches in Sub-Experiment 1 in experiment II. Four sub-
gures in Fig. 9 represent 10 paths travelled by the turtlebot robot
using an specic motion planning and navigation technique. These 10
24