back for classical methods. Nazarahari et al. proposed a hybrid method
containing classical (PF) and meta-heuristic (Enhanced-GA) methods. In
their approach, PF initially will generate feasible paths, and later EGA will
select the best optimal path between starting point and the destination point
before the motion planner is executed (Nazarahari et al., 2019). Kamil et
al. suggested to equip the robot with proper sensor such as range-nder
to deal with not only static obstacles but also dynamic obstacles (Kamil
et al., 2017). Mac et al. also discussed about several classical algorithms
and heuristic-based algorithms related to path planning, however, all the al-
gorithms discussed focusing on the global path planning (Mac et al., 2016).
The details of methods considered in this study are presented in following
sections.
Potential Field (PF)
Potential Field (PF) considers the dierences between two opposite forces,
known as attraction and repulsion, to help a robot maneuvering within the
environment (Khatib, 1985). In this approach, the next maneuvering location
is determined based on how close the nal destination is (attraction) and
how strong the repulsive force of nearby obstacles are (Orozco-Rosas et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2017; Mohammad et al., 2019). Since its rst introduction
by Khatib (1985), several modications and variations of the PF algorithm
been introduced to address it weaknesses such as getting trapped in local
minima or being computationally intensive (MahmoudZadeh et al., 2018;
Chen, 2017).
Song and Kumar introduced a decentralized PF-based control unit for di-
recting and maneuvering multiple agents in scenarios where they are tasked
to nd goals collaboratively and trap and lead them towards a nal desti-
nation (Peng Song and Kumar, 2003). One of the main concerns of PF is
getting trapped in local minima. This issue has been addressed by Cheng
and Zelinsky using temporary high magnitude attraction forces at a random
position to take the robot out of local optima (Cheng and Zelinsky, 1995).
Sfeir et al. (Sfeir et al., 2011) proposed using repelling force in order to re-
duce oscillations and reduce a chance of collision whenever the target is too
close to obstacles. Sabatta and Siegwart proposed a hybrid PF that utilizes a
vision-based component that computes PF cost function, assisting in deter-
mining the feasibility of various possible maneuvers (Sabatta and Siegwart,
2014).
5