Fix-PSO: Fix Inertia Weight (FIW) and Fix Acceleration Coecients
(FAC).
Rand-PSO: Random Inertia Weight (RANDIW) and Random Acceler-
ation Coecients (RANDAC).
TVAC-PSO: Linearly Decreasing Inertia Weight (LDIW) and Time
Varying Acceleration Coecient (TVAC).
LDIWPSO: Linearly Decreasing Inertia Weight (LDIW) and Fix Ac-
celeration Coecients (FAC).
CPSO: Constricted Particle Swarm Optimization.
It is noteworthy that the choice of meta-heuristic methods in this study,
beside their successful ongoing implementations in robotics problems, is also
based on the ndings in (Ab Wahab et al., 2015) where these methods showed
potential in benchmark problems. Two sets of experiments are considered
in this study. Sub-Experiments that impose additional complexities and
possible trajectories are introduced for further assessment of feasibility of
motion planning methods utilised in this study. The scenarios are set to
navigate a robot from a starting position towards a nal destination within
an obstacle-dense and hard to maneuver maze-like environment. Two sets
of environment layouts are considered in these experiments mimicking maze
and indoor navigation scenarios. Except for the DA method, neither classical
nor meta-heuristic-based approaches are provided with any prior information
about the location of obstacles or the environmental layouts. The pseudo
code for Classical Path Planning Algorithms; Potential Field (Algorithm 1),
Dijkstra's Algorithm (Algorithm 2), Rapidly exploring Random Tree (Algo-
rithm 3), Probabilistic Road Map (Algorithm 4)) and Meta-heuristic Algo-
rithms; Genetic Algorithm (Algorithm 5), Dierential Evolution Algorithm
(Algorithm 6), Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm (Algorithm 7), and
Cuckoo Search Algorithm (Algorithm 8) for local path planning are available
in the Supplement Section.
Experiment I: Maze Layout
The Maze layout is illustrated in Fig.1. This layout is organized in a maze
manner where the obstacles are scattered in such order that the path towards
the destination is constantly encircled with obstacles for the robot. In this
12