can achieved because it has full knowledge about the environment. These
factors are:
1.Ability to Arrive at Destination : The ability of the algorithm to
successfully direct the robot to the assigned destination based on odom-
etry and stop the robot within 0.5m from the destination point. 0.5m
is used due to the consideration of the size of the mobile robot and the
location of the odometry which is in the middle of the robot.
2.Number of Collisions : The number of collisions happened during
the executions.
3.Displacement Problem : If the robot's nal position is out of the
tolerance of the destination location, then it is considered as a dis-
placement problem . The tolerance range is dene as the radius around
the goal location which is set to be one and a half size of the robot's
radius. If the robot's nal position is within the dened range, the trial
is considered acceptable and the goal is considered reached.
4.Execution Time : The overall time taken by the robot to travel from
the starting location to the destination position.
5.Battery Consumption (%) : The overall percentage of battery con-
sumed by the robot to fully execute the task.
6.Travelled Distance : The overall distance travelled by the robot from
the starting location to the destination position.
7.Convergence Iteration : This factor is considered to measure the
numbers of iterations needed by meta-heuristic methods to nd the
destination location irrespective to the robot's ability to reach to that
destination (in case of failed runs).
8.Robot's Trajectory : The trajectory is constructed based on the data
produce by odometry sensor on the turtlebot. This factor shows the
algorithm's consistency across multiple runs in terms of nding the
path towards the destination dened.
Experiment I (Maze Layout)
The average results acquired from ten executions of motion planning al-
gorithms in Experiment I are reported in Table 3. The results are discussed
based on the factors introduced in previous section.
Considering the discussed performance factors, following observations are
made:
18