1.Ability to Arrive at Destination ,Number of Collisions , &
Displacement Problem : All algorithms managed to drive the robot
to its destination safely without any obstacle collision or displacement
problems and within 0.5 meter radius of destination point.
2.Execution Time (s) : CPSO managed to outperform other algorithms
including DA with 252.66 seconds on average across 10 executions. DA
average execution time was 255.65 seconds, making it the second best
performing algorithm. DE was the third performing algorithm with
257.44 seconds average execution time.
3.Battery Consumption (%) : CPSO outperformed other algorithms
once again while only using 1.53% battery on average to complete the
navigation task. DA, as the gold standard, had 1.55% battery consump-
tion on average. The third best performing algorithm in this category
is DE, utilizing 1.59% average battery consumption to travel the path
it generated from start location to destination.
4.Travelled Distance (m) : DA achieved the best performance, an av-
erage travelled distance of 11.8966 meters. This performance is closely
followed by CPSO with an average travelled distance of 12.0188 meters
and Linear-PSO with average travelled distance of 12.1073 meters.
5.Convergence Iteration : This performance factor is only considered
with meta-heuristic methods. CPSO out-performed other meta-heuristic
methods with an average 484.5 iterations over 10 runs. DE and Linear-
PSO were the 2ndand 3rdbest performing methods with 502.0 and
531.90 average iterations respectively.
Fig. 5 illustrates the average performance dierences from DA (e.g., the
optimal global path planner method considered in this study) achieved by
algorithms considered in this study. Given that DA had a prior knowledge of
the Maze layout, its performance is considered as the benchmark performance
that can be achieved by any method.
The results indicate that PF, DE, Fix-PSO, Rand-PSO and CPSO are the
only methods with less than 5% dierence compared to DA in execution time
factor (Blue line in Fig. 5). Other methods shown more than 5% performance
dierences from DA with RRT and PRM showing more than 25% dierences.
This is due to RRT and PRM requiring initialization in their process once
they are diverted from their initial path.
In energy consumption performance factor (Orange line in Fig. 5), PF,
RRT, PRM and Fix-PSO achieved more than 10% performance dierences
19