performed exceptionally well in all regions apart from region 2. This is likely
due to the robot experiencing Cul-De-Sac problem by being surrounded by
several obstacles and not being able to nd a clear way out resulting in
achieving poor performances in this region. It is noticeable that the average
travelled distance dierences of CPSO is close to DA and superior to other
conventional motion planing methods such as PRM. This is indicative that
although CPSO performed poorly in region 2, but its exceptionally ecient
performance in other regions (especially region 5 that contained the irregular
shaped obstacle) resulted in the method becoming the second best performing
approach in this sub-experiment.
Overall results across all sub-experiments in Experiment II:
Considering the overall performances of all motion planning techniques across
the three sub-experiments in this symmetric layout, CPSO is considered as
the best performing approach. It should be noted that DA is considered the
benchmark or the best result that other approaches can achieve since it has
access to layout of the environment prior to conducting motion planning. PF
and DE are the second and third best performing methods in this experiment
due to their consistent high performances in most categories across all three
sub-experiments in this layout.
Figs. 16, 17, 18 and 19 shows comparison of all methods in four cat-
egories of Execution Time ,Battery Consumption ,Travelled Distance , and
Convergence Iteration respectively. These gures capture average perfor-
mance information of all methods across all three Sub-Experiments. From the
ndings in Fig. 16, the Execution Time performance factor, DA is emerged as
the best performing method and is considered the performance benchmark.
The results in Fig. 16 indicate that the shape of the graph for each sub-
experiment is almost identical from one to another. Only PF and CPSO
have approximately 5% performance dierent compared with DA in this per-
formance measure factor with DE closely following DA's performance with
approximately 5% dierence in every sub-experiment. The worst performing
method in this performance measure factor is RRT where all sub-experiments
have at least 15% performance dierence compared to DA.
In Energy Consumption category (see Fig. 17), PF and CPSO are per-
forming similarly to the best performing method, e.g. DA, in all sub-experiments
by consuming less than 5% energy compared to DA. The least favourable per-
forming approach in this category is Fix-PSO where its overall performance
is more than 20% dierent from DA.
Fig.18 demonstrate the dierences between the performance of DA and
34