❙✐♥❣❧❡✲❚ ✉♥♥❡❧❧❡❞ ●❘❯ ❢♦ r ❆❜♥♦ r♠❛❧✐t ② ❉❡t❡❝t✐♦♥
temporal dimension like videos. Recently, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) have gaining popularity due to their abil-
ity of handling sequential data. Generalized RNN and its
variant Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are widely used
for AED and other time sequence tasks such as speech recog-
nition [ 8,30]. In addition, over the past years standard RNNs
and LSTMs have gone through several structural modiﬁca-
tions which led to the rise of a simpliﬁed version of LSTM,
called GRU. GRUs are widely applied and have shown their
eﬀectiveness for speech processing, medical image process-
ing and video segmentation tasks [ 14,30,32]. Despite their
consumption for diﬀerent computer vision problems, abnor-
mal event detection has not taken full advantage of GRUs’
inherent nature to develop optimized and eﬀective models,
and much eﬀort has not been put forth to exploit GRUs for
this task.
The main contributions of this work are summarized be-
low:
• We propose a novel, optimized GRU with a single-
gate architecture by removing the reset gate from stan-
dard GRUs. It can preserve the signiﬁcant past content
without only favouring current input.
• We present an end-to-end deep neural network called
Single-Tunnelled GRU (SiTGRU) that achieves com-
putationally eﬃcient and improved abnormality de-
tection performance over standard recurrent neural
networks. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
employs GRUs for appearance and motion based ab-
normal event detection task.
• Empirical evaluations show that our method SiTGRU
performs eﬀectively better than standard GRU and
standard LSTM based methods on AED benchmarks,
and outperforms standard recurrent neural networks
on generalizing abnormalities across multiple AED
benchmarks. Besides, our model performs well on the
sole detection of motion abnormalities.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2dis-
cusses related works. In Section 3, we explore our methodol-
ogy and the proposed model structure. Detailed experiments
are discussed in Section 4. Our conclusions are drawn in
Section 5.
2. Related Work
Abnormal event detection in videos has shown remark-
able progress in the past few years. Diﬀerent approaches
have been proposed through this period whose underlying
assumptions have also shown deviations. A popular way for
abnormal event detection comprises two core steps. First,
features are learnt only from normal events during train-
ing. Then an abnormal event is tested against the "normally"
trained model to detect cases that diverge from the normal
pattern [ 17,29,34].2.1. Handcrafted Feature Based Method
Hinami et al. [ 17] proposed an approach that jointly
detects and recounts abnormal events by exploiting generic
knowledge. Multi-task Fast R-CNN is used to detect dis-
tinct visual concepts, which are then supplied to three sepa-
rate anomaly detectors (viz., One-Class Support Vector Ma-
chine, Nearest Neighbour and Kernel Density Estimation)
to measure anomaly scores of each visual concept in a scene
and identify whether it is anomalous or not. The proposed
recounting process provides evidence on the anomalous be-
havior of a detected abnormal event.
2.2. Deep Learning Based Method
Generative adversarial network based method. Deep
learning through generative adversarial networks (GANs)
for abnormal event detection was introduced by Ravan-
bakhsh et al. [ 29]. GANs are used to learn and model normal
crowd behaviour using unsupervised data. During testing,
learnta models are used to produce appearance and motion
information. As the network is learnt to generate only nor-
mal patterns, it will fail to precisely reconstruct test frames
consisting of appearance and motion details of anomalous
regions. The diﬀerence between the original test frames and
the generated frames is used to detect the presence of abnor-
mality in the frame region.
Spatio-temporal based method. A spatio-temporal neural
network architecture for anomaly detection consisting of two
major components was presented by Chong et al. [ 8], which
was evaluated in multiple scenes including crowded scenes.
One of the components is responsible for representing spa-
tial features, whereas the other component learns temporal
evolution of spatial features. The introduction of autoen-
coders with LSTMs has shown success in learning tempo-
ral patterns and predicting time series information, making
them suitable for anomaly detection tasks. The compatibil-
ity and eﬃciency of spatio-temporal autoencoders are fur-
ther strengthened by introducing 3D convolutional layers
[20] in neural networks to learn spatial and temporal fea-
tures from videos [ 37]. The typical reconstruction loss in
autoencoders is accompanied by introducing a new weight-
decreasing prediction loss capable of generating and predict-
ing future frames, hence enhancing learning of motion fea-
tures. The approach is also typiﬁed by the presence of over-
lapping operations in extracting feature representations. 3D
convolution [ 20] is beneﬁcial for exploiting spatial and tem-
poral details, which indicates that information from multiple
channels can be fused together and regularization can be ap-
plied on high-level features.
Ravanbakhsh et al. [ 28] proposed a Binary Quantiza-
tion layer which uses external hashing method to initial-
ize its convolutional weights, and append it at the end of a
CNN. This layer is capable of representing temporal motion
patterns in video frames for anomaly detection task. The
core concept behind this approach is to show how to easily
capture local anomalies by tracking temporal CNN feature
variations. Coupling CNN and Convolutional LSTM with
autoencoder for the unbounded problem of video anomaly
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier P ❛❣❡ ✷ ♦❢ ✶✺