❙✐♥❣❧❡✲❚ ✉♥♥❡❧❧❡❞ ●❘❯ ❢♦ r ❆❜♥♦ r♠❛❧✐t ② ❉❡t❡❝t✐♦♥
GRU neurons 
GRU layers 
tanh activation layer 
Batch normalization 
layer Reconstruction 
GRU(32) GRU(16) GRU(8) 
GRU(16) 
GRU(32) GRU(1) Input Cuboid 
Tx224 x224 x1 Reconstructed 
Sequence 
Encoding 
module Decoding 
module 
Figure 1: The architecture of our SiTGRU network (appears best in colour and zoom). From left to right: an input layer
followed by an encoding module, a decoding module and an output layer. Hyperbolic tangent activation and batch nor-
malization layers consecutively follow each GRU layer (except the last layer). The green arrows inside GRU layers depict
intra-connections and recurrent connections in GRU units.
detection was introduced by Luo et al. [ 26]. The ConvL-
STM module is shown to capture appearance changes well
and the autoencoder is capable of encoding motion patterns
of normal events. However, this method is sensitive to ap-
pearance and motion deviations during evaluation. A fully
convolutional autoencoder network that generalizes abnor-
malities across various datasets by learning temporal regu-
larity in videos was presented by Hasan et al. [ 16]. Con-
ventional handcrafted techniques in Histogram of Oriented
Gradients (HOG) [ 9] and Histogram of Optical Flow (HOF)
[3] are used as appearance and motion feature descriptors.
The learnt appearance and motion information are then fed
to a fully connected autoencoder to model temporal regular-
ity in videos.
Despite rigorous attempts using handcrafted techniques
and variants of deep neural networks, the ability of recurrent
neural networks in general and GRUs in particular for abnor-
mal event detection task has been overlooked. Besides, they
are not adopted as an integral component for modelling such
problems.
3. Methodology
Though deep neural networks can achieve excellent per-
formance using a large-scale labelled training data, their
ability usually comes short on sequential data [ 35]. Our pro-
posed Autoencoder-shaped, deep-GRU-based approach an-
alyzes the disparity between consecutive frames to detect thepresence of abnormal events. We train an end-to-end model
populated with GRU layers that are able to learn long-term
sequential patterns and extract spatial features from input
video frame sequences. Our trained model reconstructs reg-
ular motion features from test videos with little error while
incurring higher reconstruction cost for outlier features. As
discussed in the related work on abnormal event detection,
our model is made to learn normal patterns by training on
videos which do not contain any anomalies. To our knowl-
edge, this work is the ﬁrst attempt to apply GRUs for video
abnormality detection and proposes a new, optimized GRU
cell that is further extended to produce a novel SiTGRU ar-
chitecture.
3.1. Overview of Our SiTGRU Network
Figure 1shows the architecture of our SiTGRU net-
work, which learns the spatio-temporal regularity of train-
ing videos. It is made up of six GRU layers each consisting
of varying number of units. The ﬁrst and second from last
GRU layers contain 32cells; the second and fourth layers
are made of 16cells while the bottleneck layer in the middle
consists of 8cells. A ﬁnal GRU layer with a single unit is
appended before the output layer to generate a decoded re-
constructed sequence with same size as input cuboid . Each
GRU layer (except the last layer) is followed by hyperbolic
tangent activation and batch normalization layers. We apply
batch normalization on feed-forward connections to obtain
improved system performance and computationally eﬃcient
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier P ❛❣❡ ✸ ♦❢ ✶✺