❙✐♥❣❧❡✲❚ ✉♥♥❡❧❧❡❞ ●❘❯ ❢♦ r ❆❜♥♦ r♠❛❧✐t ② ❉❡t❡❝t✐♦♥
3.6. Abnormality Generalization
Generalizing abnormalities across diﬀerent datasets and
developing generalized models that can detect abnormalities
from multiple datasets has long been a challenge in AED
task. We tackle this problem by learning models from a sin-
gle and multiple dataset.
After training and obtaining models which have learnt
spatio-temporal features from a dataset with its speciﬁc con-
text, abnormality generalization evaluates the robustness and
sensitivity of these models by testing on a completely diﬀer-
ent dataset. For multiple dataset learning, we build a model
by training on a dataset prepared by collecting samples from
CUHK Avenue and UCSD datasets. Even though the evalu-
ation context is diﬀerent from the training context for gener-
alization task (unlike detection task), we use same AUC by
EER measure for performance computation on test sets as
these tasks are similar except a diﬀerence in the approaches
pursued.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets and Setting
4.1.1. Datasets
We train and test our model on three famous video
anomaly detection datasets: CUHK Avenue [ 25], UCSD
Ped1 and UCSD Ped2 [ 23]. These datasets are made up of
videos taken from a stationary camera in an outdoor envi-
ronment. Training sets are populated with videos containing
only normal events while test sets contain videos with both
normal and abnormal scenes (with abnormal scenes having
the lion’s share). The abnormality of the events varies from
one dataset to another; i.e., events that are identiﬁed (classi-
ﬁed) as abnormal in the test set of Avenue dataset are not the
same for UCSD, and vice versa. In all datasets, we use train-
ing sets for model learning and determining the structure of
the network, whereas test sets are merely used to evaluate
performance of trained models.
CUHK Avenue is prepared from videos captured at the av-
enue of Chinese University of Hong Kong campus. It con-
tains16training and 21testing videos with 15,328frames
in train set and 15,324frames in test set [ 25]. Each frame
has a resolution of 640 × 360 pixels. Pixel-level masks are
provided for ground truth annotation for frames in test set.
The test set has 47instances of abnormalities manifested
over3,820anomalous frames. Fourteen events (viz., walk-
ing in wrong direction towards the camera, running or romp-
ing across a walkway, throwing objects like paper or bag, and
pushing a bike) are treated as abnormal behaviour in Avenue
dataset.
UCSD is made up of videos taken from a pedestrian walk-
way, and is considered one of the most challenging datasets
for abnormal event detection task [ 23]. It has two subsets,
Ped1 and Ped2. Ped1 is composed of 34training and 36
testing videos whose frames have a resolution of 238×158
pixels. Ped2 contains 16training and 12testing videos with
360×240 frame resolution. Each test video in Ped1 is sliced
into200frames, whereas videos in Ped2 test set are slicedinto120,150and180frames. Ped1 is provided with full
frame-level ground truth annotation and pixel-level annota-
tion for10videos, whereas Ped2 has frame-level and pixel-
level ground truth annotation for all test videos. UCSD treats
the presence of car, wheelchair, bicycle, skateboard, and
stepping on grass or wrong direction movement across the
walkway as abnormal behaviour. Ped1’s test set contains
a total of 7,200frames of which 4,005frames exhibit ab-
normal behaviour. On the other hand, Ped2’s test set com-
prises of2,010frames from which 1,636frames are treated
as anomalous.
4.1.2. Implementation Details
Preprocessing. In this stage, raw video data obtained from
public datasets are converted into a type that can easily be
provided as input to the model. Each raw video in both train-
ing and testing set is converted into frames whose size is
rescaled to a common 224×224 pixels. To make sure that
these input frames are on a similar scale, we scale down the
pixel values to an interval of [0,1]. We then subtract every
frame from the global average image to normalize the data
and average the pixel values at each location in the training
set. The image frames are ﬁnally changed to gray-scale and
normalized to attain zero mean and unit variance.
The input to the model is a video cuboid constructed
from sequential frames with varying number of skipping
strides. To cater for the large number of parameters and
increase the training set, we adopt a technique followed by
Hassan et al. [ 16] and carry out data augmentation across
temporal dimension. Building the input to the model as stack
of/u1D447frames (/u1D447= 4 in all our setups) making up a cuboid
helps to better entertain and deal with the temporal dimen-
sion of videos during training and testing. The constructed
input cuboid has a size of /u1D447×224×224×1 .
Training. We use85% of the train set on both Avenue and
UCSD datasets for training the network and the rest ﬁfteen
percent as validation set to validate the model. We train the
proposed network for 60epochs with the mini-batch size
/u1D441= 8. We use the Adam optimizer [ 21] with a learning
rate of0.00001 ,/u1D6FD1= 0.9, and/u1D6FD2= 0.9999 for optimizing
our end-to-end network. Adam is computationally eﬃcient
and inexpensive, capable of handling large data and parame-
ters, and can automatically adjust the learning rate based on
history of model weight updates.
We empirically witness that Adam produces models that
yield better performance evaluation than AdaGrad (Adap-
tive Gradient) [ 11] and SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent)
[31] optimizers. While training on all datasets, we cus-
tomize diﬀerent parameters, experiment on a varying num-
ber of epochs (to determine the convenient epoch), and pick
the model output whose objective function produces the best
AUC by EER result on the test set. We experimentally evalu-
ate that sparse categorical cross entropy loss yields best de-
tection results on UCSD Ped1 and Ped2 test sets, whereas
mean squared error loss achieves best results on Avenue test
set.
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier P ❛❣❡ ✼ ♦❢ ✶✺