SiTGRU: Single-Tunnelled Gated Recurrent Unit for Abnormality
Detection
Habtamu Fantaa,Zhiwen Shaob,c,a ,∗and Lizhuang Maa,d,∗
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
bSchool of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
cKey Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China
dSchool of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords :
Abnormality detection
Gated recurrent unit
Abnormality generalization
Recurrent neural networkA B S T R A C T
Abnormality detection is a challenging task due to the dependence on a speciﬁc context and the uncon-
strained variability of practical scenarios. In recent years, it has beneﬁted from the powerful features
learnt by deep neural networks, and handcrafted features specialized for abnormality detectors. How-
ever, these approaches with large complexity still have limitations in handling long-term sequential
data (e.g., videos), and their learnt features do not thoroughly capture useful information. Recur-
rent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been shown to be capable of robustly dealing with temporal data
in long-term sequences. In this paper, we propose a novel version of Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU),
called Single-Tunnelled GRU for abnormality detection. Particularly, the Single-Tunnelled GRU dis-
cards the heavy-weighted reset gate from GRU cells that overlooks the importance of past content by
only favouring current input to obtain an optimized single-gated-cell model. Moreover, we substi-
tute the hyperbolic tangent activation in standard GRUs with sigmoid activation, as the former suﬀers
from performance loss in deeper networks. Empirical results show that our proposed optimized-GRU
model outperforms standard GRU and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks on most met-
rics for detection and generalization tasks on CUHK Avenue and UCSD datasets. The model is also
computationally eﬃcient with reduced training and testing time over standard RNNs.
1. Introduction
Abnormal Event Detection (AED) is a computer vision
task for detecting abnormal events or behaviours from a
given image or video. Automatic abnormal event detection
has recently gained remarkable attention in the ﬁeld of com-
puter vision [ 12,17], in which humans are freed from con-
trolling surveillance whenever an alert pops up. The surveil-
lance system only focuses on abnormal events while the cap-
tured videos contain immense invaluable information. To
reduce the unnecessary overheads of reviewing irrelevant
videos, it is meaningful to conduct abnormal event detec-
tion. However, modelling normal and abnormal video data
is a cumbersome task, due to the high-dimensional charac-
teristic of videos, the presence of noises, and the entangle-
ment of various events [ 8,22].
In recent years, many abnormal event detection methods
are proposed and have achieved great successes [ 12,17,34].
However, it is still a challenging problem due to two key fac-
tors. (i) The lack of large-scale annotated training data lim-
its the performance of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNNs) [ 28,29]. (ii) The contentious deﬁnition of the
term “abnormal” or “anomaly” causes signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent solutions in diﬀerent context (environment) [ 12,28,29].
Abnormality is not clearly deﬁned as it is context-speciﬁc,
leaving a room for unintentional subjectivity in data an-
notation [ 12,17,28]. For instance, Sun et al. [ 34] de-
∗Corresponding authors.
habtamu_fanta@sjtu.edu.cn (H. Fanta); shaozhiwen@sjtu.edu.cn (Z.
Shao);ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn (L. Ma)
ORCID (s):0000-0002-8394-8416 (H. Fanta); 0000-0002-9383-8384 (Z.
Shao);0000-0003-1653-4341 (L. Ma)ﬁned “anomaly” as an event or scene that is rarely mani-
fested. Thus, the generalization of abnormal event detec-
tion, in which a model built for a particular dataset can de-
tect anomalies from another unrelated dataset, is a tricky and
challenging task, as the context on which a system is built
plays a big part for its success in another context.
In addition to these main challenges, addressing tempo-
ral contexts and capturing long-term dependencies amongst
consecutive frames in video data also play a role on the diﬃ-
culty of abnormality detection tasks [ 19,33,34]. In this pa-
per, we try to address the problem of capturing appearance
and motion features in long-term sequences by introducing a
new optimized Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) model that also
yields enhanced performance for abnormality generalization
task.
In the past few years, most eﬀorts for abnormal event de-
tection resort to complicated handcrafted features. The use
of such features has shown limitations as prior knowledge
about the context has to be obtained, which is expensive for
video scenes [ 12]. Besides, these handcrafted features ex-
tracted from low-level patterns have limited representation
capabilities, which are hard to capture motion patterns of
complex videos [ 29]. To alleviate these shortcomings, deep
learning based methods have recently taken the stage bring-
ing large performance improvements.
Due to the robust and ﬂexible underlying representation
power [ 17,28], DCNNs are capable of classifying or re-
gressing concepts by modelling them with large-scale pos-
itive samples and can better represent spatial and temporal
features. Spatio-temporal based networks have shown their
success in learning and representing data with spatial and
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 15