❙✐♥❣❧❡✲❚ ✉♥♥❡❧❧❡❞ ●❘❯ ❢♦ r ❆❜♥♦ r♠❛❧✐t ② ❉❡t❡❝t✐♦♥
model [ 18]. Batch normalization lessens internal covariate
shift, where distribution of network features varies heavily
when training a deep network. It normalizes the activations
going into each layer. This enables the mean and variance to
be resistant to parametric changes in underlying layers and
speeds up the training process. Training GRU networks with
batch normalization also generates models that can better
generalize themselves to diﬀerent contexts.
Developing deep RNNs by stacking RNN layers on one
another eﬀectively deals with sequence based problems. A
stacked GRU based network where a GRU layer is piled on
top of another layer with each layer made up of multiple
GRU cells, is capable of modelling spatial and temporal in-
formation in long sequences. We stack six hidden Single-
Tunnelled GRU layers together to build the backbone of the
network.
Input Layer. We construct the input layer by stacking /u1D447
consecutive frames in sliding window to make up a tempo-
ral cuboid. Building and supplying such cuboid as input
to the network enables to better incorporate temporal de-
tails of input video frames. This is mainly attributed to the
cuboid’s ability of keeping appearance and motion patterns,
and sustaining temporal information from multiple frames
for longer duration [ 16,34,37]. This allows reliable and
better feature representation across the model. We do not de-
ploy any feature extraction tasks in the input layer. Instead,
we group gray-scale raw frames into cuboid.
Encoding module. The Encoding module is structured in a
similar way to an encoder module in Autoencoders. Three
GRU layers (with 32,16and8units respectively) each fol-
lowed by hyperbolic tangent activation and batch normaliza-
tion layers are stacked together to form this module. These
layers are capable of narrowing down the dimensionality of
the input cube thereby encoding its features to extract and
preserve spatio-temporal information.
Decoding module. This module exhibits the structure of an
Autoencoder’s decoder component. We group two GRU lay-
ers (with16and32units respectively) each appended by hy-
perbolic tangent activation and batch normalization layers.
This module is terminated by a single-unit GRU layer. It re-
builds the encoded sequence fed from encoding module back
to the original input. The rebuilt sequence then goes through
reconstruction process to generate competitive matching fea-
tures with input cuboid.
The training process generates a model that stores the
network architecture and model weights of an anomaly-
free context. During testing, we feed the model with a se-
quence of frames mostly containing anomalous scenes. The
model is expected to be robust enough to eﬀectively iden-
tify anomalous events as it is not trained with such content.
We employ a reconstruction loss mechanism (discussed in
Section 3.4) to evaluate the capability of our trained model
in generating the reconstructed sequence back to input test
frames. A robust model is expected to carry out the recon-
struction process of anomaly-free pixels with minimal cost.
If an anomaly exists in a test frame, the model struggles to
perfectly reconstruct these pixel regions resulting in largercost. We perform a series of training procedures by modify-
ing diﬀerent components and parameters in our network and
pick the model that produces the best evaluation with least
cost.
3.2. Standard GRU
Computer vision problems such as abnormal event de-
tection require handling temporal dependencies among in-
puts, and modelling short-term and long-term sequences.
Recurrent neural networks are capable of handling and pro-
cessing such kind of sequential data in a better way. In con-
trast to traditional neural networks, RNNs focus on manip-
ulating state neurons to learn contextual relations in and be-
tween sequential data [ 27]. The limitation that comes with
such recurrent networks is the presence of vanishing and ex-
ploding gradients that make training RNNs a complex task.
GRUs are able to solve the vanishing and explosion of
gradients manifested in conventional recurrent neural net-
works [ 5,6]. The most widely adopted RNNs are LSTM
networks that are shown to achieve state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on various machine learning and deep learning tasks.
As a variant of LSTM, GRU is shown to produce equally
competent results to LSTM. GRUs diﬀer from LSTMs in
that their gates monitor the ﬂow of information from previ-
ous time steps while the three gating mechanisms in LSTMs
control the ﬂow of information within internal cell unit [ 13].
GRUs deploy two peculiar gates, update gate and reset gate,
to address the vanishing gradient problem of RNNs and dy-
namically handle temporal information in long-term video
sequences. These gating mechanisms allow such RNN vari-
ants to be trained to keep necessary and relevant information
for longer period from previous states, or discard informa-
tion with less importance from previous states [ 5,6]. Re-
cent works have shown the importance of RNNs with gating
mechanisms in achieving improved results for classiﬁcation
and generation tasks with sequence modelling [ 2,10,35].
Recurrent neural networks’ inherent capability of adequately
modelling sequential data supplemented by the advantages
of gated features in GRUs enables them to eﬀectively model
tasks that use short-term or long-term video sequences. For
such sequences, maintaining temporal features across frames
is invaluable for feature learning. Thus, GRUs’ gating mech-
anisms provide a trained model with consistent memory ca-
pable of seizing both short-term and long-term dependencies
amongst video frames more eﬀectively.
The architecture of GRU is illustrated in Figure 2. GRU
is a simpliﬁed version of LSTM where only two gates are de-
ployed to generate candidate memory by using current input
and previous memory state. As shown in Figure 2, at each
time step /u1D461, a GRU cell takes the contents of previous hidden
stateℎ/u1D461−1and current input /u1D465/u1D461, manipulates them through
reset and update gates, and sends the computed current state
ℎ/u1D461to the next time step. The following formulae deﬁne a
standard GRU cell:
/u1D467/u1D461=/u1D6FF(/u1D44A/u1D467/u1D465/u1D461+/u1D448/u1D467ℎ/u1D461−1+/u1D44F/u1D467), (1a)
/u1D45F/u1D461=/u1D6FF(/u1D44A/u1D45F/u1D465/u1D461+/u1D448/u1D45Fℎ/u1D461−1+/u1D44F/u1D45F), (1b)
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier P ❛❣❡ ✹ ♦❢ ✶✺