❙✐♥❣❧❡✲❚ ✉♥♥❡❧❧❡❞ ●❘❯ ❢♦ r ❆❜♥♦ r♠❛❧✐t ② ❉❡t❡❝t✐♦♥
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 7: Left-to-right: (a)sample regularity score of test videos from Avenue, Ped1 and Ped2 datasets respectively; (b)pair
of frames with anomalous events (red rectangle) and generated sample frame heat maps from Avenue dataset (left to right:
throwing, sporting and romping respectively); (c)pair of frames with anomalous events (red rectangle) and generated sample
heat maps from Ped1 dataset (left to right: skating and biking, car, and wheelchair respectively); (d)pair of frames with
anomalous events (red rectangle) and generated sample frame heat maps from Ped2 (left to right: biking, car, and skating and
biking respectively) dataset. On the heat maps, regions highlighted in dark yellow and red show pixels that the model failed
to reconstruct because of the presence of anomalies, whereas blue regions denote normal, anomaly-free pixels (appears best
in colour).
SiTGRU w/ ReLU on such cumbersome scenarios. This
shows that if coupled with noise reduction and occlusion-
resistant features, the performance of our SiTGRU can be
enhanced well for diﬀerent environments.
4.3. Qualitative Analysis
After model training, the reconstruction error is used to
compute regularity score of test videos. Regular frame se-
quences show lower reconstruction error while anomalous
sequences manifest higher error. We qualitatively evaluate
the performance of our model with test datasets in Figures 6
and7. The qualitative evaluation asserts the reported quanti-
tative results in Table 1and correlates frame behaviour with
detected anomalous scenes. Figure 6gives a visualization of
the anomalies caught by standard RNNs and SiTGRU. Each
row consists of a sample anomalous frame (anomaly en-
closed in red rectangle) and the equivalent residual heatmaps
generated after evaluating diﬀerent models with the anoma-lous frame.
Figure 7presents regularity score and multiple anomaly
visualization of our proposed method. Figure 7(a) shows
regularity score of sample test videos from CUHK Avenue
(video#6), UCSD Ped1 (video #1) and Ped2 (video #2), re-
spectively. The regions highlighted in light-red show the
presence of anomalous events (viz., person walking towards
camera in Avenue, and biking in Ped1 and Ped2 datasets) in
frames within shaded range. The ﬁgure also presents sam-
ple pairs of anomalous events and their equivalent heat maps
from Avenue, Ped1 and Ped2 test sets ((b) - (d)) respectively.
As shown in Figure 7(c) and (d), multiple abnormalities ap-
pearing on a single frame are identiﬁed and detected by the
proposed structure.
❍✳ ❋ ❛♥t❛ ❡t ❛❧✳✿ Preprint submitted to Elsevier P ❛❣❡ ✾ ♦❢ ✶✺