Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 7 of 38
Journals, Science Direct, Scopus, TRID, Web of Science, and Wiley Online Library, was used to complete
an online search. The search was carried out towards the end of December 2019 using the query string
of ((“artiﬁcial intelligence” OR “AI”) AND (“smart” OR “smarter” OR “smartness”) AND (“city” OR
“cities” OR “urban”)) to search the titles and abstracts of available articles. The publication date was
left open. From this search it was determined that the one of the earliest studies on AI and the city was
from Schalko [23]. The abstracts were then read, and if the article was considered to be relevant to the
research aim, the full-text was reviewed to decide whether it was suitable to include in ﬁnal analysis.
The second phase involved carrying out the review of relevant articles. The initial search resulted
in a total of 799 records. These records were then screened and reduced to 245 by applying the inclusion
criteria—i.e. journal articles that were peer-reviewed, and available online. The articles were then
‘eye-balled’ to ensure they were consistent with the keyword search, the abstracts assessed against the
research aim, and duplicates removed. The total number of articles was reduced to 208. The full-text
of the selected articles were read to determine the relevance with respect to the aim of the study and
the results were narrowed down to 119 articles. After another round of full-text screening, the number
of articles was reduced to 93. Finally, these 93 articles were reviewed, categorized, and analyzed. The
criteria for formation of the themes is presented in Table 1. For the categorization, the main smart
city development dimensions—i.e., economy, society, environment, and governance—were selected.
Figure 3 below presents these dimensions in the context of smart cities.
Table 1. Selection criteria for formulating categories.
Selection Criteria
1. Determine the literature relevant to the research aim by using the eye-balling technique;
2. Identify the suitable literature pieces focusing on AI and smart cities after reading the full-text;
3. Group the identiﬁed AI technology, algorithm and application areas with similarities into
broad categories;
4. Narrow down the selected categories and review the reliability of these against other published literature;
5. Review the selected literature again and update the shortlisted categories if necessary;
6. Conﬁrm and ﬁnalize the categories selected for the classiﬁcation of literature;
7. Catalog the literature selected for the review under the selected categories.
Energies 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 36 
 on AI and the city was from Schalkoff  [23]. The abstracts were then read, and if the article was 
considered to be relevant to the research aim, the full-text was reviewed to decide whether it was 
suitable to include in final analysis. 
The second phase involved carrying out the review of relevant articles. The initial search 
resulted in a total of 799 records. These records we re then screened and reduced to 245 by applying 
the inclusion criteria—i.e. journal articles that were  peer-reviewed, and available online. The articles 
were then ‘eye-balled’ to ensure they were consis tent with the keyword search, the abstracts assessed 
against the research aim, and duplicates removed. The total number of articles was reduced to 208. 
The full-text of the selected articl es were read to determine the rele vance with respect to the aim of 
the study and the results were narrowed down to 119 articles. After another round of full-text 
screening, the number of articles was reduced to  93. Finally, these 93 articles were reviewed, 
categorized, and analyzed. The criteria for formatio n of the themes is presented in Table 1. For the 
categorization, the main smart city development dimensions—i.e., economy, society, environment, 
and governance—were selected. Figure 3 below pres ents these dimensions in the context of smart 
cities. 
Table 1. Selection criteria for formulating categories. 
Selection criteria 
1. Determine the literature relevant to the resear ch aim by using the eye-balling technique; 
2. Identify the suitable literature pieces focusing  on AI and smart cities after reading the full-
text; 
3. Group the identified AI techno logy, algorithm and application areas with similarities into 
broad categories; 
4. Narrow down the selected cate gories and review the reliability of these against other 
published literature; 
5. Review the selected literature again and update  the shortlisted categories if necessary; 
6. Confirm and finalize the categories selected for the classification of literature; 
7. Catalog the literature selected for the review under the selected categories. 
 
Figure 3. Smart city conceptual framework highlig hting key domains, derived from [62]. 
Figure 3. Smart city conceptual framework highlighting key domains, derived from [62].