Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 2 of 38
These e orts provided some hope, despite the political and policy quagmires in many countries.
Nevertheless, there has been no signiﬁcant climate action undertaken to address the crisis. Instead,
in recent years, with the advancement of the current digital revolution, a large portion of policymakers,
practitioners, and scholars have increased their faith in smart urban technologies to mark a major
turning point in the history of humankind [ 9]. This technocentric view—in solving urban and
environmental problems with the aid of technology—has increased the popularity of the ‘smart
cities’ notion [ 10]. These cities—also referred to as ‘geographies of disruption’ [ 11]—harness digital
technologies to o er new business opportunities, shape the urban fabric, improve the quality and
performance, and overcome many of the challenges confronted by urban areas [12].
The prospects of smart urban technologies range from expanding infrastructure capacity to
generating new services, from reducing emissions to engaging the public, from minimizing human
errors to improved decision-making, and from supporting sustainable development to improving
performances of commercial enterprises and cities [ 13,14]. The most popular technologies in the
context of smart cities include but are not limited to internet-of-things (IoT), autonomous vehicles
(AV), bigdata, 5G, robotics, blockchain, cloud computing, 3D printing, virtual reality (VR), digital
twins, and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [ 15–17]. While all these technologies are critical in transforming
our cities into smarter ones, AI combined with these technologies has signiﬁcant potential to address
the urbanization challenges of our time [ 18]. Furthermore, AI is certainly seen as the most disruptive
technology among them [19,20].
The prospective beneﬁts of AI for cities continue to be discussed in the literature in the context of
smart cities—that are enabled by community, technology, and policy to deliver productivity, innovation,
livability, wellbeing, sustainability, accessibility, as well as good governance and planning [ 15,21,22].
Despite the growing number of articles on the topic, there is no scholarly work that provides a
comprehensive review of the growing literature. This paper organizes the literature to examine how AI
can contribute to the development of smarter cities. As the methodologic approach, the study adopts a
systematic literature review on the topic of ‘AI and the smart city’.
2. Conceptual and Application Background
In broad terms, AI is deﬁned as “machines or computers that mimic cognitive functions that
humans associate with the human mind, such as learning and problem solving” [ 23]. In other words,
AI, where machines mimic human cognitive functions, can make decisions, think, learn and improve
themselves. It was ﬁrst introduced in 1956 at Dartmouth College, but development was slow until
recently due to immature computational technologies. In recent times, advances in hardware, software,
and networking technologies have enabled us to design, develop, and deploy AI systems at scale.
The application areas of AI ranges from banking and ﬁnance to marketing and gaming, and from
agriculture and healthcare to AVs and space exploration—and many more areas [24].
AI-driven computational techniques are diverse and range from rule-based systems to deep
learning systems. A popular AI knowledge map was created by Corea [ 25]. His conceptualization
brings together the AI paradigms and the AI problem domains (Figure 1). The X-axis categories
various computational paradigms and the Y-axis outlines problem domains. Various technologies are
then mapped to illustrate their potential value. For example, rule-based systems (e.g., expert systems,
robotic process automation) that are logic-driven knowledge engines, which are common in urban
systems, are often used to capture and automate structured workﬂows.