Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 14 of 38
3. AI in the context of smart cities is an emerging ﬁeld of research and practice. Hence, further
research is needed to consolidate the knowledge in the ﬁeld;
4. The central focus of the literature is on AI technologies, algorithms, and their current and
prospective applications;
5. AI applications in the context of smart cities mainly concentrate on business e ciency, data
analytics, education, energy, environmental sustainability, health, land use, security, transport,
and urban management areas, and;
6. Upcoming disruptions of AI on cities and societies have not been adequately investigated in the
literature; thus, further investigations are needed on that issue.
The results of the review revealed that AI-inspired computational systems are bound to make
a profound impact on our cities. The impact will not only be on the physical setup of our cities but
also in how our cities operate and achieve system-level objectives (e.g., livability, resilience, and so
on). In order to ensure that cities advance in keeping with the values and aspirations of their key
stakeholders (i.e., residents, businesses, and so on), it will be vital for us to ensure that AI systems
are designed take on a value-sensitive design approach [ 170]. AI systems will need to account for the
multiple aspects of diversity that are omnipresent in our cities. In addition, these systems will need
to possess a degree of transparency, adaptability (to respond to varying environmental conditions),
and accountability (for levels of performance). Doing so is non-trivial, but paramount to achieving
responsible innovation in the context of AI and cities.
While advances in computational science and technologies will continue to progress at an
astounding rate, the level of impact they will have on our future cities comes down to the level of trust
individuals and organizations place in these systems. As we continue to live through times where
levels of trust in government are at an all-time low [ 171], planners and public managers needs to
consider how social license [ 172] impacts their ability to deploy emerging technologies. Engaging
stakeholders into the design processes when it comes to AI-systems will be critical. Stakeholders
should be allowed to shape the elements of these systems and their expected deployment trajectories.
Engaging stakeholders will also enable a city to increase the overall knowledge of the community
when it comes to the innovative potential of these technologies. To date, we have limited frameworks
on how to engage many diverse stakeholders, who have varying knowledge of the intricacies of AI
systems, into design processes for urban innovation [173].
We need to enable multiple stakeholders to contribute their technology solutions. Cities need
to build platforms that promote the co-creation and sharing of technology solutions [ 174,175]. While
cities have embraced the notion of open data [ 176] and have created periodic programs to source
innovation from external stakeholders (e.g., Hackathons) [ 177], much more is needed when it comes to
designing platforms for co-creation in the context of AI technologies. Stakeholders can be engaged
in the auditing of algorithms that underlie AI applications. In addition, they can provide feedback
on the performance of these systems, and identify critical choke points. As an example, consider the
following innovation by a resident in Berlin, who was able to create tra c jam alerts on Google Maps
by slowly moving 99 phones with location services turned on around the city [ 178]. Residents, such as
this individual, enable us to see the limits of AI technologies and their failure points. Such perspectives
are critically important as we infuse and design next-generation smart urban technologies.
AI systems will impact cities at multiple levels, from the individual, to the local community
(the residents), the neighborhood to the organizational (the city), and even the ecosystem (the city is
connected to other cities) level. Impacts at the local level, will have e ects up and down the hierarchy.
Consider the case of algorithms used to promote sharing economy platforms (e.g., Uber, Lyft, AirBnB,
and so on). These algorithms not only provide opportunities to individuals to earn rent on their
assets and fees for their services, they also impact zoning rules, they impact the use of established
public transport networks, they in turn impact the creation of new service opportunities for existing
businesses, and even shape the nature of public ﬁnances of a city. More e ort is needed to understand
the cascading e ects of AI innovations across the various levels of a city’s functions. In addition, the