Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 16 of 38
ethical arguments around facial recognition, Clearview AI reveals Australian law enforcement agencies
have such limited technical and organizational accountability that we should be questioning their
competency even to evaluate, let alone use, this kind of technology”. Similarly, the New South Wales
state government of Australia is using AI to spot drivers with mobile phones (often mixed phones
with other rectangular items), and the Australian government welfare agency Centrelink is using AI
(often incorrectly) to issue debt notices to welfare recipients [190].
Furthermore, scholars warn us of the possible risks of advanced AI. For instance, these risks
range from unsafe recommendations for treating illnesses [ 191] to fatal autonomous car accidents [ 192],
and from racist chatbots [ 193] to social manipulation [ 194]. While various dystopian futures have
been advanced, including those in which humans eventually become obsolete, with the subsequent
extinction of the human race, [ 195] put forward the following scenarios to think about the ways
to protect us from the risks of advanced AI: (a) An AI system tasked with preventing HIV decides
to eradicate the problem by killing everybody who carries the disease, or one tasked with curing
cancer decides to kill everybody who has any genetic predisposition for it; (b) An autonomous AI
military drone decides the only way to guarantee an enemy target is destroyed is to wipe out an entire
community, and; (c) An environmentally protective AI decides the only way to slow or reverse climate
change is to remove technologies and humans that induce it.
Lastly, abovementioned challenges also relate to the speciﬁc characteristics of AI technologies that
include opacity (‘black box-e ect’), complexity, unpredictability and partially autonomous behavior,
may make it hard to verify compliance with and may hamper the e ective enforcement of rules of
existing laws meant to protect fundamental rights [ 196]. In order to address this issue, the [ 197] white
paper entitled ‘Artiﬁcial intelligence: a European approach to excellence and trust’ underlined the
following seven key requirements for a successful AI utilization: (a) Human agency and oversight;
(b) Technical robustness and safety; (c) Privacy and data governance; (d) Transparency; (d) Diversity,
non-discrimination, and fairness; (e) Societal and environmental well-being, and; (f) Accountability.
On that very point, Salmon et al. [ 195] propose the immediate application of the following three sets of
controls for AI development and testing: (a) The controls required to ensure AI system designers and
developers create safe AI systems; (b) The controls that need to be built into the AIs themselves, such
as ‘common sense’, morals, operating procedures, decision-rules, and so on, and; (c) The controls that
need to be added to the broader systems in which AI will operate, such as regulation, codes of practice,
standard operating procedures, monitoring systems, and infrastructure. As Elon Musk stated, “we
need to regulate AI to combat an ’existential threat’ before it’s too late” [198]. Fortunately, we are not
short of ideas and plans to tackle these issues, and now is the time to implement them before it is too
late [199].
6. Conclusions
The study reported in this paper o ers a novel contribution to the literature by mapping out the
scientiﬁc landscape of the understudied ‘AI and the smart city’ area. This study helps not only in
identifying the current and potential contributions of AI to the development of smarter cities—to aid
urban policymakers, planners and researchers—, but also in determining the gaps in the literature to
bridge them in prospective studies. The study also gives a heads up for urban policymakers, planners
and scholars for them to prepare for the disruptions that AI will cause in our cites, societies and
businesses [200].
The broad ﬁndings of our systematic literature review ﬁndings reveal that: (a) AI has an evident
potential—but only if utilized responsibly [ 201]—to provide a positive change in our cities, societies, and
businesses by promoting a more e cient, e ective and sustainable transition /transformation [ 202,203],
and; (b) Particularly, AI, with its technology, algorithms, and learning capabilities, can be a useful
vehicle in automating the problem solving and decision-making processes that, in return, could reform
urban landscapes and support the development of smarter cities [62].