Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 4 of 38
AI systems ingest vast amounts of data, apply learning algorithms, and learn patterns from
the data to enable predicting outcomes [ 37]. Today, cities are deploying machine learning systems
to exploit data across their ecosystem from sensors on public infrastructure, to machine readable
cards that provide access to city services (e.g., public transport), to images and videos that capture
movements around the city, and even devices that capture auditory, olfactory, and tactile data [ 38,39].
Urban infrastructures, such as tra c lights, are becoming connected. Tra c lights are connected to
road sensors to reduce wait time at signals based on the tra c ﬂow. Scotland’s Glasgow city has
installed networks of sensors that connect to streetlights and tra c lights to help monitor tra c ﬂow
and increase connectivity, aggregately reducing travel time for drivers. Further, the tra c data also
feeds into maps in real-time to help drivers, cyclists, and pedestrians make decisions to plan their
commutes [40].
The Las Vegas Health Department, in partnership with the University of Rochester trialed the
nEmesis app which utilized machine learning to collect and examine tweets, the purpose of which
was to select restaurants which were suitable for inspection [ 41]. Following controlled experiments,
the nEmesis app was found to be 64% better at identifying restaurants with food safety issues than
established processes involving random inspections. It also had success at identifying restaurants
that were unlicensed and had infectious sta . Overall, the app was very e ective at helping the Las
Vegas Health Department address issues with their restaurant inspection process without the need for
additional resources [ 41]. The harm assessment risk tool (HART) was developed by UK’s Durham
Constabulary to detect patterns of recidivism among criminals [ 42]. The tool was trained on crime
data from 2008–2012, including information about suspects’ gender and zip code. The tool was used
to predict the recidivism rate in 2013. It successfully predicted 98% of low-risk o enders and 88% of
high-risk o enders.
In 2017, the Seattle Police Department launched a data analytics platform to transition towards
improved oversight, data-driven decisions, and community engagement [ 43]. This platform helps the
department to manage, govern, and support insightful policing. The system is designed to help the
department’s leadership team to track trends related to operations. It integrates 17 internally tracked
metrics and develops visualizations for department heads. The system tracks several measures such as
use-of-force incidents, number of arrests, self-initiated trips, response to calls, number of stops, and
civilian complaints. The department can use this detailed information on each police o cer to take
appropriate measures (e.g., counselling). Since 2012, the police department in San Diego has collected
over 65,000 face scans, in an attempt to match them to a directory of over 1 million images collected as
part of the San Diego County Sheri ’s Tactical Identiﬁcation System (TACIDS) [ 44]. More recently,
London Metropolitan Police has announced plans to use facial recognition technology to aid police in
identifying suspects.
While the housing and urban development space today is data rich, much of the data is often
left unanalyzed, thereby resulting in an inability to keep policies and enforcement standards current.
Researchers from Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University, and University of California,
Irvine collaborated with the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department (AFRD) to develop an algorithm which
was able to predict ﬁre risk in buildings [ 45]. Using data from 2010–2014, the algorithm included over
50 variables—including property location, building size, structure, age, and history of ﬁre incidents—to
predict ﬁre risk. The algorithm classiﬁed ﬁre risk ratings for 5000 buildings and found another 19,397
buildings requiring inspection. Furthermore, the algorithm was able to predict 73% of ﬁre incidents
which occurred within the study area [45].
AI-enabled computational tools also help in protecting cyber-infrastructure that is the core fabric
of smart cities [ 46]. Four US cities, namely Pensacola, New Orleans, Galt, and St Lucie, were all
victims of di erent cyberattacks throughout December that rendered telephone and email systems,
law enforcement systems, waste, energy, and payment systems inoperable. Often, these attacks
demand a ransom, and councils ﬁnd themselves either paying the attackers or employing external
cybersecurity and consulting ﬁrms to mitigate and repair the situation. In Lake City, Florida, council