Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 15 of 38
interdependencies between functions and the implications for overall objectives (i.e., ensuring that
local optimization does not compromise global performance) is also critical.
From a design perspective, research on how to design AI technologies in a more agile [ 179]
and frugal [ 180,181] manner is of critical importance. The public sector has a notorious record of
accomplishment when it comes to managing, and delivering on, information systems projects [ 182].
Cities around the world have had to contend with failed deployments of information system projects
that has wasted signiﬁcant public resources. The study by Desouza et al. [ 183] provides examples of
both success and failure factors of technology-driven smart city attempts, including AI.
Given the signiﬁcance of technology investments in our cities, we need to see vast improvements
in projects management to deliver on their intended value. In this regard, two considerations are
critical. First, we must build technologies that are agile, i.e., they have the ability to adopt, adjust, and
have the capacity for transformation under changing environmental conditions. Second, we must
build technologies in a manner that is in keeping with frugal engineering. Doing so will require us to
move away from mega-scale smart cities projects and reconsider the issue of scale. Today, a dominant
design paradigm is to build AI technologies that can scale and promote the re-use of components. This
thinking is outdated. Today, it is possible to build technologies that work for speciﬁc contexts, in an
agile and frugal manner, to promote personalization to a speciﬁc context and purpose [184].
The security of our next-generation urban technologies is of paramount importance. AI technologies,
like most technologies, should be secured and this normally takes the form of traditional information
security. Technologies that traverse our urban environments are already targets of hackers and have
vulnerabilities. For instance, Greenberg [ 185] highlights a deep ﬂaw in cars that lets hackers shut
down safety features. But, even beyond what one thinks of when it comes to traditional security,
today, AI-driven systems can cause harm even if they are not hacked. For example, as stressed by the
BBC [ 186], China coronavirus misinformation spreads online about its origin and scale, i.e., AI inspired
platforms that are used for di erent urban functions can also be manipulated to spread fake news.
Cities need to be aware of this as they use these platforms to share information on urban functions, such
as the use of social media to engage with citizens. For instance, as reported by Martinez [ 187], “Rumors
of child abductors spread through WhatsApp in a small town in Mexico : : :. The rumors were fake,
but a mob burned two men to death before anyone checked.” Likewise, as we have discussed earlier,
cities have had their information systems been held for ransom. The incidents will only increase as
cities infuse more technologies into their environments. Hence, there is a need for research to examine
the security and risk implications of AI-enabled system deployments.
The success of AI deployment to make our cities smarter will depend on the knowledge and
care with which such technologies are deployed responsibility and in keeping with our public values.
If done well, AI can help us tackle some our most complex urban challenges. However, it can also
make our cities more fragile [ 54]. As stated by Stephen Hawking on the BBC, “The development of
full artiﬁcial intelligence could spell the end of the human race. It would take o on its own, and
re-design itself at an ever-increasing rate. Humans, who are limited by slow biological evolution,
couldn’t compete, and would be superseded.”
On that very point, Gherhes and Obrad [ 188] report the ﬁndings of their study on technical and
humanities student perspectives on the development and sustainability of AI. The study discloses that
out of 928 participants 58.3% considers that AI will have a positive inﬂuence on the society. On the
other hand, the percentage of those confessing to being confused or concerned is also quite signiﬁcant
(41.7%). The probability that AI might destroy humankind and replace people in certain activities and
jobs are among the greatest fears [188].
As the AI applications are becoming more common, there grows the skepticism on the misuse of
the technology. For example, most recently the Clearview AI facial recognition system has generated
major concerns on the privacy issues. Australian police have been using this unaccountable facial
recognition service that combines machine learning and wide-ranging data gathering practices to
identify members of the public from online photographs. As stated by Golenfein [ 189] “Beyond the