Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 6 of 38
the accident, Tesla has implemented several features to keep drivers engaged while their car is in
autopilot mode.
Chrysler recalled about 1.4 million cars and trucks, because these vehicles could be hacked
remotely over the Internet [ 57]. These vehicles used UConnect features to connect with Sprint networks
for navigation. Hackers could access these cars’ navigation systems to control air conditioners, cut
obrakes, and shut down engines, and so on. Software installed in vehicles need to be constantly
upgraded to protect against hacks and security breaches [58].
Economically, local governments may lose revenue streams because of AVs due to a decrease
in speeding tickets, towing fees, and driving under inﬂuence charges [ 59]. Cities in Arizona such as
Phoenix and Mesa collected about $10.8 million and $4.2 million from drivers for tra c violations [ 60].
On an average, cities in California generated $40 million in towing violations annually [15].
The conceptual and application background of AI as presented above underlines the importance
of further investigations into how we can best integrate AI systems in addressing critical urban issues.
Particularly the challenges we face—e.g., climate emergency—calls for smarter systems in place. This
is also highly critical to increase the smartness of our cities. A recent study that evaluated the smartness
levels of 180 Australian local government areas argues for the importance of better integration of urban
technologies, including AI, into local service delivery and governance [14].
3. Materials and Method
We undertook a systematic review of the literature to answer the following research question:
How can AI contribute to the development of smarter cities? We adopted a three-phase methodologic
approach (Figure 2) following the study steps of Yigitcanlar et al. [61].
Energies 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 36 
 conditioners, cut off brakes, and shut down engines, and so on. Software installed in vehicles need to 
be constantly upgraded to protect agai nst hacks and security breaches [58]. 
Economically, local governments may lose revenue streams because of AVs due to a decrease in 
speeding tickets, towing fees, and driving under in fluence charges [59]. Cities in Arizona such as 
Phoenix and Mesa collected about $10.8 million and $4.2 million from drivers for traffic violations [60]. On an average, cities in California generated $40 million in towing violations annually [15]. 
The conceptual and application ba ckground of AI as presented ab ove underlines the importance 
of further investigations into how we can best integrate AI systems in addressing critical urban issues. Particularly the challenges we face—e.g., climate emergency—calls for smarter systems in place. This 
is also highly critical to increase the smartne ss of our cities. A recent study that evaluated the 
smartness levels of 180 Australian local government areas argues for the importance of better integration of urban technologies, including AI, into local service delivery and governance [14]. 
3. Materials and Method 
We undertook a systematic review of the literature to answer the following research question: 
How can AI contribute to the development of smar ter cities? We adopted a three-phase methodologic 
approach (Figure 2) following the study steps of Yigitcanlar et al. [61]. 
 
Figure 2. Literature selection procedure. 
The first phase is planning, which involves develop ing the research aim, research question, a list 
of keywords, and criteria for the inclusion and excl usion of articles. The research aim was framed to 
generate insights into forming a greater understand ing on how AI can contribute to the development 
of smarter cities. The inclusion criteria were intended to be peer-reviewed journal articles, that were 
available online, in English, and ha d relevance with respect to the research aim. A university’s library 
search engine, which gives access to 393 differen t databases including: Directory of Open Access 
Journals, Science Direct, Scopus, TRID, Web of Science, and Wiley Online Library, was used to complete an online search. The search was carried out towards the end of December 2019 using the 
query string of ((“artificial intelligence” OR “AI”) AND (“smart” OR “smarter” OR “smartness”) AND (“city” OR “cities” OR “urban”)) to search the titles and abstracts of available articles. The publication date was left open. From this search it  was determined that the one of the earliest studies 
Figure 2. Literature selection procedure.
The ﬁrst phase is planning, which involves developing the research aim, research question, a list
of keywords, and criteria for the inclusion and exclusion of articles. The research aim was framed to
generate insights into forming a greater understanding on how AI can contribute to the development
of smarter cities. The inclusion criteria were intended to be peer-reviewed journal articles, that were
available online, in English, and had relevance with respect to the research aim. A university’s library
search engine, which gives access to 393 di erent databases including: Directory of Open Access