Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 17 of 38
The speciﬁc ﬁndings of our systematic literature review disclose that: (a) AI in the context of
smart cities is an emerging ﬁeld of research and practice; (b) The central focus of the literature is on AI
technologies, algorithms, and their current and prospective applications; (c) AI applications in the
context of smart cities mainly concentrate on business e ciency, data analytics, education, energy,
environmental sustainability, health, land use, security, transport, and urban management areas;
(d) There is limited scholarly research investigating the risks of wider AI utilization, and; (e) Upcoming
disruptions of AI on cities and societies have not been adequately investigated in the literature.
AI provides a new hope for addressing some of the urbanization problems we failed to solve due to
the complexities involved. Nevertheless, AI is not a silver bullet. While we are currently far away from
such advance application of AI, there are numerous contributions of the rapidly developing technology
for our cities and societies. Some of these contributions are presented in the paper and some warnings
have been made for the good use of the technology. While there is a promise of the emerging advanced
technologies, such as AI, our rapid urbanization, industrialization, and globalization practices are
perhaps making even technology struggle with coming up solution. The recent anthropogenic climate
change triggered environmental catastrophes and disasters—such as 2020 Australian Bushﬁres—and
urbanization and globalization triggered epidemics—such as COVID-19—require more than technology
for them not to be repeated again.
The paper opened with a viewpoint on technocentric solutions being widely seen as remedies for
global issues—including climate change and urbanization problems. Indeed, AI and other technologies
will deﬁnitely equip us with better data analytics and prediction models in more e cient and e ective
ways. To date, there are two di erent approaches to AI: rules-based (coded algorithms of if-then
statements that are basically meant to solve simple problems) and learning-based (diagnoses problems
by interacting with the problem), where both AI approaches have valid use cases when it comes to
studying the environment and solving climate change. In other words, when it comes to helping solve
climate change, a learning-based AI could essentially do more than just crunch CO 2emission numbers,
where a learning-based AI could actually record those numbers, study causes and solutions, and then
recommend the best solution [ 204]—’in theory’. We say ‘in theory’, because “fully functioning AI
systems do not yet exist, and it has been estimated that they will be with us anywhere between 2029
and the end of the century” [195].
While we do not disagree with the positive contributions of technological prescriptions—such as
AI and other urban technologies—[205], we close the paper with the following quote by Andrew Ng,
co-founder and lead of Google Brain. “Much has been written about AI’s potential to reﬂect both the
best and the worst of humanity. For example, we have seen AI providing conversation and comfort
to the lonely; we have also seen AI engaging in racial discrimination. Yet the biggest harm that AI
is likely to do to individuals in the short term is job displacement, as the amount of work we can
automate with AI is vastly bigger than before. As leaders, it is incumbent on all of us to make sure we
are building a world in which every individual has an opportunity to thrive.”
Author Contributions: T.Y. designed the study, supervised the systematic review, and prepared the ﬁrst draft
of the manuscript. L.B. and F.R. undertook the systematic review tasks, and identiﬁed the key ﬁndings. K.C.D.
contributed to the write up and improved the rigor, relevance and reach of the study. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial or not-for-proﬁt sectors. The authors thank the managing editor and anonymous referees for their
invaluable comments on an earlier version of the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.