IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, 2020 1
Anomaly Detection in Automated Vehicles Using Multistage
Attention-based Convolutional Neural Network
Abdul Rehman Javed, Muhammad Usman, Saif ur Rehman,
Mohib ullah Khan, and Mohammad Sayad Haghighi, Senior Member ,IEEE
Connected and Automated Vehicles (CA Vs), owing to their
characteristics such as seamless and real-time transfer of data,
are imperative infrastructural advancements to realize the
emerging smart world. The sensor-generated data are, however,
vulnerable to anomalies caused due to faults, errors, and/or
cyberattacks, which may cause accidents resulting in fatal ca-
sualties. To help in avoiding such situations by timely detecting
anomalies, this study proposes an anomaly detection method that
incorporates a combination of a multi-stage attention mechanism
with a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)-based Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN), namely, MSALSTM-CNN. The data
streams, in the proposed method, are converted into vectors and
then processed for anomaly detection. We also designed a method,
namely, weight-adjusted ﬁne-tuned ensemble: WA VED, which
works on the principle of average predicted probability of mul-
tiple classiﬁers to detect anomalies in CA Vs and benchmark the
performance of the MSALSTM-CNN method. The MSALSTM-
CNN method effectively enhances the anomaly detection rate in
both low and high magnitude cases of anomalous instances in
the dataset with the gain of up to 2.54% in F-score for detecting
different single anomaly types. The method achieves the gain of
up to 3.24% in F-score in the case of detecting mixed anomaly
types. The experiment results show that the MSALSTM-CNN
method achieves promising performance gain for both single and
mixed multi-source anomaly types as compared to the state-of-
the-art and benchmark methods.
Index Terms —Anomaly Detection, Connected and Automated
Vehicles (CA Vs), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), In-
telligent Transportation System (ITS), Multi-source Anomaly
Detection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
CONNECTED and Automated vehicles (CA Vs) technol-
ogy is among the most focused research areas because of
its potential for decreasing the likelihood of accidents, enhanc-
ing human satisfaction, maintaining a sustainable environment,
and improving the effectiveness of Intelligent Transportation
System (ITS) [1]. The ITS ecosystem is an amalgamation of
several communication channels such as Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Manuscript received July 3, 2020; revised September 1, 2020; accept
September 16, 2020. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Usman.)
Abdul Rehman Javed is with the National Center for Cyber Security, Air
University, Islamabad, Pakistan (e-mail: abdurrahman.j74@gmail.com).
Muhammad Usman is with the Faculty of Computing, Engineering and
Science, University of South Wales, Pontypridd CF37 1DL, U.K. (e-mail:
muhammad.usman@southwales.ac.uk).
Saif ur Rehman is with the Faculty of Computing and AI, Air University,
Islamabad, Pakistan (e-mail: 181065@students.au.edu.pk).
Mohib ullah Khan is with the National University of Computer and
Emerging Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan (e-mail: mohib khn@outlook.com).
Mohammad Sayad Haghighi is with the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Iran (e-mail:
sayad@ut.ac.ir).(V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I), and Vehicle-to-Cloud
(V2C) [2]. According to a study on connected vehicles and
cybersecurity, it is expected that CA V technology will reduce
vehicle crashes by 80%, as well as reduces the 6.9 billion hours
that Americans spend in trafﬁc annually [3]. However, this
depends upon the provision of appropriately designed data-
driven and associated services offered by CA Vs [4], [5], [6].
The correct functioning of these services is heavily dependent
on the accuracy and quality of data [7], [8]. The erroneous and
anomalous readings, generated through errors or attacks, can
disrupt key functionalities such as acceleration, current speed,
current position, braking, and adaptive controls. Moreover,
some difﬁcult situations such as multiple sorts of trafﬁc,
transfer stations, and some harsh weather conditions can
happen [9]. Therefore, designing and analyzing an appropriate
anomaly detection method is critical for CA Vs.
Several anomaly detection and classiﬁcation methods have
been studied in the literature, primarily employing the premise
of artiﬁcial intelligence [1], [4], [10]. A study carried out on a
critical examination of the probability of the crash occurrence
due to cyberattacks [11]. The methodologies also support IoT
frameworks that rely on cyber-physical systems [12]. These
methods, however, have limitations such as (i) poor detection
performance over lower magnitudes of anomalous data and for
single as well as mixed anomaly types using deep learning
methods in CA Vs and (ii) absence of a suitable ensemble
machine learning approach to substantiate the performance of
the method designed to detect anomalies addressing limita-
tion (i). To effectively detect various types of anomalies in
CA Vs by addressing the above-cited limitations, maintain a
strategic check for detecting a dynamic behavioral change,
and prevent the effect of irregular readings, this paper makes
the following contributions:
We design a method that comprises of multi-stage atten-
tion mechanism with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)-
based ﬁne-tuned Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
namely, MSALSTM-CNN to classify multi-source sensor
readings as anomalous or normal. The MSALSTM-CNN
method focuses on different parts of streaming input data
to learn paying attention to only the signiﬁcant parts.
We also design a method, namely, WA VED, that com-
prises a weight-adjusted ensemble of distinct classiﬁers.
The method is designed to detect anomalies in multi-
sensor streams of data by using the optimal weight
vector of classiﬁers to assign unique voting weight to the
prediction of each classiﬁer to detect anomalous behavior.
The results of the experiments demonstrate that