IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, 2020 4
Fig. 1: An overview of the proposed framework
for test purposes. These parameters enable a model to achieve
highest detection rates. The performance of the proposed
method can be affected by various hyper-parameters involved
in the network. We tuned those parameters to attain the best
performance. To avoid over-ﬁtting, we used L2-regularization
weight decay method. The 20% dropout probability was
used in the network layer. The non-linear activation function
Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (Relu) was employed in the network. A
Batch size of 200 with 200 epochs was used. For optimization,
we used Adam, a method for stochastic optimization, with a
decay rate of 0.025. To select the best weights, we introduced
a checkpoint to record all the weights in a ﬁle whenever the
loss was detected. In the last output layer, we used a sigmoid
function because of the binary output. The purpose of the
attention layer was to create a context vector for input [26].
1) MSALSTM-CNN Algorithm
LetDdenote the dataset containing instance I=
fi1;i2;:::;i ngandHrepresents the one-hot encoding trans-
former function to convert the labels into vectors, V. To
normalize data, the ﬁrst step is to subtract the mean, , from
data and then normalize the variance . The next step is
conversion of data to a 2D matrix using the NumPy function.
The third step is the weight initialization, using the Gaussian
variable, where the number of layers is represented as L, the
number of features as nand weight matrix is represented
asW. The dimension of the Weight matrix is represented
asxy. In the next step, the 2D matrix, D2, contains
the training dataset that is converted into a 3D matrix, D3,
using the reshape function and is then fed into the CNN.
Furthermore, the CNN model produces the feature map F,
which is converted further into vectors Vafter max-pooling. It
is given as input to the LSTM model, where aspect and context
acbetween data sequences are analyzed. This information is
used by attention mechanism to assign scores, WS, to each
sequence vector, SV. Those vectors are then multiplied with
their scores and summed up in the form of the context vector,
CV, to predict the target label, TL.
The target labels are converted into one-hot encoding.
Next, the dataset is scaled with the standard scaling method.
Data points are converted into data sequences and passed toMSALSTM-CNN in 3 dimensions. The features are extracted
and than the feature vectors are fed into the LSTM memory
units after max-pooling. The sequence patterns of anomalies
are then learned and with the help of attention mechanism,
scores are assigned to the data based on their signiﬁcance. This
process improves the learning procedures and helps to achieve
the higher accuracies in the anomaly detection process.
B. Ensemble Learning
The idea behind ensemble methods is to combine various
classiﬁers and use the majority voting strategy (e.g., average
predicted probability) to estimate the target labels. A voting
classiﬁer is one of the ensemble methods. These methods
are helpful in balancing the individual weaknesses of well-
performing classiﬁers [27]. To make the intrusion anomaly de-
tection process more efﬁcient, our ensemble method combines
the predicted results of the multiple classiﬁers and outputs the
results using a majority voting strategy. Each classiﬁer is tuned
to deliver the best results. The votes are collected using (12)
y=argmax (Nc(y1
t);Nc(y2
t);:::;N c(yn
t)) (12)
whereNc(yt)represents the class that receives the highest
number of votes. We evaluated several models such as Random
Forest (RF), AdaBoost, and Support Vector Machine (SVM).
Random Forest: achieves a reduced variance by aggregat-
ing the diverse decision trees, sometimes at the cost of slightly
higher bias [28]. In practice, however, the reduction of variance
is often signiﬁcant and results in a better classiﬁer model. The
model provides functionality to work with complex data unlike
traditional classiﬁers. The RF generates various decision trees
and each decision tree votes for the best target label. The
prediction is done by majority voting. The parameters used
in our ensemble method are the following: bootstrap = true,
criterion = entropy, max-depth = 100, max-leaf-nodes = 2,
max-samples = 1000, min-samples-leaf = 1, min-samples-split
= 2, n-estimators = 100, n-jobs = 10, and random-state = 2.
AdaBoost: is a classier that combines weak-learning classi-
ﬁers to enhance the performance [29]. AdaBoost is adaptive in
a sense that successive weak learners are pushed in favor of