IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, 2020 7
outperforms the WA VED method in terms of accuracy, sen-
sitivity, and F1-score across all experiments. The WA VED
method shows gradual variation in the performance, but the
MSALSTM-CNN method shows consistency. However, both
methods show descending performance in the last row. The
advanced neural network attention method still gets the best
feature sequence, which helps to generate more accurate
results. The WA VED method tends to perform well as the num-
ber of instances increases, but the MSALSTM-CNN method
performs well in most of the cases. The maximum F1-Score
is observed in row 3, i.e, 97.41% by the MSALSTM-CNN
method. The minimum F1-score is observed in row 5 by
the WA VED method. This shows the better performance of
the MSALSTM-CNN method over the WA VED method is
achieved due to increase in duration. To better synthesise the
data sequence in the process, the LSTM comes into action to
better learn and adapt the pattern to make the MSALSTM-
CNN method better in identifying constant anomalies more
effectively.
3) Gradual Drift
Table IV highlights the results of the gradual drift anomaly
detection by the MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED models. The
MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED methods perform reasonably
well. The maximum F1-Score is observed in the row 2, i.e,
97.62% by the MSALSTM-CNN method when the duration
is 20 epochs and the anomaly magnitude conﬁguration is
(basevalue +linespace (0;4)). The minimum F1-score is
observed when the anomaly magnitude is least in row 3, i.e,
94.90% by the WA VED method. Moreover, the MSALSTM-
CNN method maintained consistency in the performance,
with minor variation, throughout the experiments, but the
WA VED method shown more variations. The superiority of
the MSALSTM-CNN over WA VED method is mainly because
the gradual drift is challenging data to work with, but by
employing the advance attention method with CNN to ﬁgure
out the best feature enables LSTM to handle complex patterns.
4) Bias
Table V presents the results of the bias anomaly detection
by the MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED methods. The results
in rows 1 to 3 show the ascending performance of the
MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED methods to detect anomalies.
Similarly, in rows 3 to 5, the performance of both the
MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED methods descend when the
magnitude of the abnormal values randomly decreases. The
maximum F1-Score is observed in row 3, i.e, 97.37% by the
MSALSTM-CNN method when the magnitude is maximum,
while also having the maximum accuracy of 96.56%. The
minimum F1-score is observed when the anomaly magnitude
is least in row 1 by the WA VED method. However, a side
by side comparison of the MSALSTM-CNN and WA VED
methods shows that the MSALSTM-CNN method performs
better than the WA VED method, due to its capabilities such as
advance neural network performs better with large data, long
duration, and with complex sequences of data. Our designed
method is generic in nature such that with the assistance of
attention mechanism, it handles the short duration complex
data and ﬁgures out the signiﬁcant patterns to identify the
anomalies.B. Mixed Anomaly Types
In this section, we examine the performance of the
MSALSTM-CNN method in the case of mixed anomaly types.
As shown in Table VI, the MSALSTM-CNN method performs
well in detecting mixed anomaly types. We test our method
with instant, constant, gradual drift, and bias anomalies with
different parametric conﬁgurations and sensors. Each category
has 3 sensors whose anomaly values are tested. In the case of
the instant anomaly type, the model shows the highest F1-
score of 78.11% for sensor 1. Similarly, in the case of the
constant anomalies, MSALSTM-CNN shows the highest F1-
score of 90.43% for sensor 1. In the case of the gradual drift
anomalies, MSALSTM-CNN shows the highest F1-score of
84.30%. In the case of the bias anomalies, MSALSTM-CNN
shows the highest F1-score of 90.45% for sensor 1. The F1-
score shows varying behavior in different anomaly types and
sensors. The highest observed F1-score is 90.45% for detecting
the bias anomalies. The overall variance in values is mainly
because of different conﬁgurations, but the values illustrate the
promising performance.
C. Comparative Overview
As shown in Table VII, our method shows promising results
for mixed anomaly types. In all cases, i.e., instant, constant,
gradual drift, and bias, our method outperforms the baseline
approach, except for sensor 2 in the case of Bias anomaly type.
Table VIII shows a detailed comparison of the MSALSTM-
CNN and WA VED methods with the baseline approaches,
i.e, KF and CNN-KF. It can be observed from Table VIII,
that the overall performance boost is achieved in terms of
accuracy and F1-score by the MSALSTM-CNN method with a
maximum F1-score of 98.68% in detecting instant anomalies,
97.41% in detecting constant anomalies, 97.62% in gradual
drift anomalies, and 97.37% in detecting bias anomalies. Fig.
3 shows the graphical depiction of the detailed comparison
between the MSALSTM-CNN and the baseline competitor:
KF-CNN. The comparison is based on F1 - Score. It can
be seen from the graph the MSALSTM-CNN method shows
a step ahead performance than the baseline approach in the
case of mixed anomalies. Senor 1, Sensor 2, and Sensor 3
represent the In-Vehicle Longitudinal speed sensor, in-Vehicle
Longitudinal acceleration sensor, and GPS speed sensor.
Fig. 3 shows the graphical depiction of the detailed com-
parison between the MSALSTM-CNN and the baseline com-
petitor: KF-CNN [1]. This comparison is based on F1 - Score.
It can be seen from the graph the MSALSTM-CNN method
shows a step ahead of performance than the baseline approach
in the case of mixed anomalies.
Table VIII shows a detailed comparison of the MSALSTM-
CNN and WA VED methods for single anomaly types with the
baseline approaches , i.e, kalman ﬁlter (KF) and convolutional
neural network-based Kalman ﬁlter (CNN-KF) [1]. It can
be observed from Table VIII, that the overall performance
boost is achieved in terms of accuracy and F1-score by the
MSALSTM-CNN method with the highest F1-score of 99.02%
in detecting instant anomalies, 97.41% in detecting constant
anomalies, 97.62% in gradual drift anomalies, and 97.37%