8 Rahim Taheri et al.
It uses a generative adversarial network (GAN) for
building new samples. The GAN applies two neural net-
works which use the back-propagation technique. One
network generates candidates (called generative ), and
the other evaluates them (called discriminator ). In the
GAN, the training process is applied in the generative
function in such a way as to increase the error rate
of the discriminator function. The GAN structure is a
competitive setting, i.e., versus the discriminator func-
tion and simplied Turing learning [22].
Alg. 4 clearly explains the steps of the GAN-wise
countermeasure. In detail, we give the samples as an
input set to the generator function. We modied these
samples using the important features of benign sam-
ples to fool the discriminator function by producing
novel synthesized instances that appear to have come
from the benign dataset. In other words, the discrimi-
nator functions task is to discover the benign samples
from the malware ones. If the discriminator function
correctly recognizes a malware sample, that sample re-
turns to the generator function to re-train the sample.
In this algorithm, we rst generate a poison model,
called Model_poison , using the logistic regression algo-
rithm (see line 1). Then, in line 2 of Alg. 4, we build
10% samples of the malware dataset which are KNN
nearest to the established poison model and save these
samples in Lesslikely set. Indeed, Lesslikely set is com-
posed of samples that have the greatest similarity to
the malware dataset. For each sample in Lesslikely , if it
belongs to the poison model we label it as `M' for Mal-
ware, then we try to modify it with the most important
features in the benign dataset until it falls out from the
malware dataset and is classied as part of the benign
dataset (see the lines 5-7 of Alg. 4).
Hence, if a sample in GAN is recognized as a benign
sample, we add it to the synthetic data set. After ana-
lyzing all the samples, we use 80% of the synthetic data
samples set with the training dataset (malware and be-
nign) to generate the new model and feed it to the clas-
sication algorithms. The remaining samples are in the
synthetic data with a test dataset for analyzing the new
model. In a nutshell, we will see that the new model im-
proves the level of accuracy.
5.3 Time/Space complexity of the attack and defense
algorithms
In the following section, we conduct time and space
complexity analysis on the presented attacks and de-
fenses.5.3.1 Time complexity
Focusing on the time complexity of Alg. 1, we consider
four attack scenarios which have similar code interac-
tions from lines 10{19. Note that this common part
(forloop presents in lines-10{19) runs o the order of
O(n) for all samples (i.e., we have a total of nsam-
ples), where is the selected features of our mtotal
number of the featured applied per sample in this paper.
Also, we know that in malware dataset  < m << n .
So, we can list the time complexity of each attack sce-
nario as follows:
{ Trivial attack. In this scenario, we select features
from a total of mfeatures in the original dataset (i.e.,
X). In the worse case, it runs o the order of O(n)
for all samples. As a result, the overall complexity of
a trivial attack is about O(mn).
{ Distribution attack. In this scenario, we put the
feature in descending order and select the highest
ranked features. Hence, in the worse case, it runs
o the order ofO(m2) per sample. As a result, the
overall complexity of distribution attack, considering
the common block of the Alg. 1, is about O(m2n).
{ KNN based attack. In this scenario, we rst se-
lectfeatures of the ordered vector of mfeatures
(the time takes is of the order of O(m2)). Second,
we randomly select 10% of the malware samples (the
time takes is of the order of O(n)). Finally, we select
theKsample, so the time taken for selecting is of
the order ofO(kn) [2], where we use kas a xed
value in this scenario. As a result, the overall time
complexity of the KNN attack is about O(kn).
{ LR based attack. In this scenario, we randomly
selectimportant features from the benign dataset
using the LR algorithm and select 10% samples of
the malware dataset which are near to the legitimate
samples, which takes of the order of O(n). Consider-
ing the common block of Alg. 1, the overall time is
taken for the LR attack is about O(n).
{ ACO attack. In this scenario which is detailed in
Alg. 2, we rst build a discriminator and select 10%
of the malware samples near the discriminator, which
takes of the order of O(n). The main forloopntimes
run the ACO algorithm. Therefore, the overall time
taken for the ACO attack is about O(n4)).
We present two defense mechanisms in this paper.
In each method, we try to modify the current model
and build an updated model that has more intelligence
against the attacks mounted. In the following, we de-
scribe the time it takes to build the new retrained model:
{ Adversarial training defense. In this method, which
is detailed in Alg. 3, we rst randomly select 60% of