Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 13
 20 30 40 50 60 70 80TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMATrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Drebin
(a) Attack-Drebin
 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMATrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Contagio (b) Attack-Contagio
 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMATrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Gnome (c) Attack-Genome
 25 30 35 40 45
GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Drebin
(d) Defense-Drebin
 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44
GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Contagio (e) Defense-Contagio
 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train GAN Adv-Train
Permission API IntentAUC (%)Gnome (f) Defense-Genome
Fig. 5: Comparisons of the average AUC value for attack/defense algorithms on dierent datasets using RF classier for API,
permission, and intent data.
GAN and the adversarial training algorithm for API
les are about 1.1%, 1%, and 0.75% for the Drebin,
Contagio and Genome datasets, respectively; and sec-
ondly, the dierences in the FPR rates for the GAN de-
fense method compared with the LR algorithm for API
les (i.e. the highest FPR rate attack algorithm for API
les) for the Drebin, Contagio and Genome datasets are
about 25%, 9%, and 6%. This indicates that our GAN
defense algorithm is an ecient method for reducing
the misclassication rate of authentic programs as mal-
ware, and is comparable with other results.
In Fig. 5, we present the AUC values for the at-
tack and defense algorithms. Fig. 5a shows the AUC
values for the attack algorithms (including JSMA [13])
for the permission, API and intent data for the Drebin,
Bagging, and Gnome datasets using RF classier. For
an attacker's point of view, it is vital to obtain smaller
AUC values that allow adversarial samples to be gener-
ated and the learning model to be easily modied. From
this gure, we can draw three conclusions. Firstly, at-
tack algorithms perform better for permission data than
for API and intent data. This means that our attack
algorithms can manipulate the sample data to produce
adversarial samples and fool the classication algorithm
more easily. Secondly, the LR and distribution attack
algorithms have lower values for AUC for all datasets
compared with the JSMA algorithm and with respect
to the FPR values presented in Fig. 3. Hence, these twoalgorithms can be selected as stronger attack methods.
Finally, our algorithms show better AUC results for the
Drebin dataset for all three le types. This means that
the average rate of AUC for all of our attack algorithms
applied to permission data from the Drebin dataset is
about 15%, which is 11% lower than for the API and in-
tent data. However, the average AUC rate for all three
le types is approximately the same for the Contagio
dataset.
A comparison between the defense algorithms pre-
sented in Figs. 5d-5f shows that it is essential to ob-
tain a signicant value of AUC. Hence, from these g-
ures, we can see that the results for the proposed de-
fense methods applied to the API data of the Con-
tagio dataset perform better than for the Drebin and
Genome datasets. In contrast, when we perform our de-
fense algorithms on the permission data, the AUC re-
sults for the Contagio dataset have smaller values com-
pared with the Drebin and Genome datasets. When we
run the defense algorithms on the intent les, the AUC
ratio for the Drebin dataset is higher than permission
and API le types for the two other datasets. Moreover,
the GAN defense method has higher AUC values than
the adversarial training defense algorithm, and the rates
are approximately the same for both le types. Hence,
GAN is an ecient solution that can be applied to all
datasets, and especially the Drebin dataset, as a de-
fense against the adversarial example produced by the