2 Rahim Taheri et al.
the generated malware sample is statistically identical
to a benign sample. To do so, adversaries adopt adver-
sarial machine learning algorithms (AML) to design an
example set called poison data which is used to fool ma-
chine learning models. Adversaries adopt several AML
methods like DroidAPIMiner [4], Mystique [24], PIn-
droid [18], and DroidChameleon [32] to reduce the de-
tection rate of classication algorithms.
According to [30], the methods used by AML fo-
cus on two general axes: i) Attack Complexity : this
involves reducing the complexity to craft attacks, and
ii)Attacker's Knowledge : this is related to knowl-
edge about architecture, training examples and algo-
rithm to gain knowledge about the detector. If an ad-
versary is aware of the architecture, training data or
features derived from applications, the attack is called
awhite-box attack (see some approaches like [13]). On
the other hand, if the Adversary's knowledge is lim-
ited, then the attack is a black-box attack (see some
approaches like [11]). Adversarial classication can be
False positive orFalse negative . In the former, an at-
tacker generates a negative sample to misclassify as a
positive one. On the contrary, in the latter case mal-
ware is injected with part of the benign data to by-
pass detection. Adversarial specicity can be targeted
ornon-targeted .
In targeted malware detection systems, an adver-
sary can fool a classier and predict all adversarial sam-
ples as the same class. This also maximizes the prob-
ability of a targeted adversarial class. Conversely, non-
targeted adversaries can arbitrarily target a class. To do
so, this group of adversaries conducts several targeted
attacks and takes the one with the smallest perturba-
tion from the results or minimizes the probability of the
correct class. Finally, adversarial attack frequencies can
beOne-time ormultiple times/iterative . If a set of poi-
son data is required to be generated in real-time, adver-
saries should choose a one-time attack; otherwise, the
attack strategy can be iterative to update the poison
data. Moreover, it requires more interactions with the
victim classier, and it costs more computational time
to generate them. To cope with these attacks, we need
some adversarial training which injects poison data into
training data to increase robustness and detect the mal-
ware [36].
1.1 Contribution
Dierent questions arise about this context, such as:
How to nd a way to produce poison data that will be
added to the current ML model and will be unrecog-
nized by the current anti-malware solutions? How canwe leverage machine learning to improve system secu-
rity by presenting some adversary-aware approaches?
Do we require retraining of the current ML model to de-
sign adversary-aware learning algorithms? How to prop-
erly test and validate the countermeasure solutions in
a real-world network? The purpose of this paper is to
clarify these issues. To be precise, the main contribution
of this research is proposing a white-box AML mecha-
nism against poison attacks .
To sum up, we make the following contributions:
{We propose ve dierent attack scenarios to gener-
ate poisoned malicious apps to disguise the learned
model.
{We implement two countermeasure methods as de-
fense mechanisms that improve the detection accu-
racy of the compromised classier.
{We evaluate attack and defense using three bench-
mark malware dataset. Additionally, we conducted
theoretical analysis by estimating space and time com-
plexity to prove the scalability of our approach.
{Furthermore, we compared the proposed attack sce-
narios against the state-of-the-art method employing
the Jacobian matrix [13]. Moreover, we conclude that
the attacks modeled by us have the net eect identi-
cal to prior research work, in terms of misclassica-
tion rate.
1.2 Roadmap
The paper is divided and arranged as follows: In Sec-
tion 2, discusses the literature review of related works.
Section 3 details the preliminary dierent attack sce-
narios proposed in AML architecture and the related
components. Section 4 reports the proposed approaches
for malware detection systems, including poison attack
scenarios using AML, while Section 5 presents the de-
fensive strategy against attacks. Next, in Section 6 we
present the performance analysis of proposed methods.
In Section 7 we describe the achievement of the ex-
periment and provide some open discussion regarding
our method. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper and
presents future directions of work.
2 Related Work
We divide related works into three dierent classes: i)
AML methods in dierent contexts which we present
them in Section 2.1, ii) AML in Android malware that
we exemplify them in Section 2.2, and iii) AML applies
in Android malware with static features and their pre-
sented countermeasures that we add them in Section