Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 11
This process continues until one of the two following
conditions is fullled: (i) the maximum number of changes
allowed is reached, or (ii) a misclassication is success-
fully caused.
Test metrics. We use certain metrics to evaluate the
results, which are listed as follows:
{True Positive (TP): Denote malware correctly clas-
sied as malware.
{True Negative (TN): is the number of legitimate ap-
plications precisely identied by the classication al-
gorithm.
{False Positive (FP): denote the number of misclassi-
ed benign applications.
{False Negative (FN): is the count of malware les
misclassied as goodware.
{Accuracy: This is the ratio between the number of
correct predictions and the total number of input
samples. A higher value of accuracy indicates that
the algorithm is able to correctly identify the label
of the samples with a higher probability. Thus, we
have
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN; (7)
{Precision: This is the fraction of relevant instances
among the retrieved instances. Hence we have:
Precision =TP
TP+FP; (8)
{Recall: This is the fraction of retrieved instances over
the total amount of relevant instances. Both precision
and recall are therefore based on an understanding
and measure of relevance. This can be written as:
Recall =TP
TP+FN; (9)
{False Positive Rate (FPR): This is dened as the
ratio between the number of negative events incor-
rectly classied as positive (false positive) and the
true number of negative events (false positive + true
negative). Therefore we have
FPR =FP
TP+TN; (10)
{Area Under Curve (AUC): This denes a metric for
determining the best class prediction model using all
possible thresholds. Thus, AUC measures the trade-
o between (1-FPR) and FPR. The intrinsic goal of
AUC is to solve the situation in which a dataset con-
sists of unbalanced samples (or a skewed sample dis-
tribution), and it is necessary that the model is not
overtted to the class consisting of a higher number
of instances. This can be written as:
AUC =1
2TP
TP+FP+TN
TN+FP
: (11)6.2 Experimental results
In this section, we apply the above attacks to our orig-
inally trained classiers to examine the impact of GAN
and adversarial training as defensive mechanisms against
adversarial examples in the domain of malware detec-
tion.
6.2.1 Evaluation of dierent features
In the rst results, we present the machine learning
metrics for our attack scenarios and defense algorithms
versus the JSMA attack method [13] for dierent num-
bers of selected features. We present three sets of plots.
In the rst group, we compare the FPR metric de-
scribed in Section 6.1 for various attack algorithms; in
the second group, we compare the aforementioned FPR
ratio for the defense algorithms; and in the last group,
we validate the AUC metric for the defense and attack
algorithms to indicate the success of the proposed at-
tacks and defenses.
Comparison of attack algorithms: In the following g-
ures, we compare the FPR values for our attack algo-
rithms and the JSMA attack algorithm, using the API
and permission data from the Drebin, Contagio and
Genome datasets. As we can see, the three sets of com-
parison plots (Figs. 3a-3c, Figs. 3d-3f, and Figs. 3g-3i)
show that for the API and intent type les, the LR
attack performs much better than the other algorithms
(i.e., for each of the four selected samples, the LR attack
can modify the features of one of them in such a way to
fool the classier). This eect can be explained by con-
sidering that performing predictive analysis on promi-
nent features avoids overtting in the poison learning
model, which leads to a greater FPR. For permission
type apps, the FPR value 
uctuates and depends on the
features selected. Hence, the FPR values for all attacks
do not change smoothly. This value is always higher for
the LR, Distribution and KNN attack algorithms than
for the JSMA method [13].
Comparison of AUC for dierent datasets
Comparison of the defense algorithms: To fully evalu-
ate our defense algorithms, we test the FPR rate for the
various number of feature and le types using various
datasets, as shown in Fig. 4. The following gures show
the adversarial training and GAN defense algorithms.
From Fig. 4, we can elicit two main conclusions: rstly,
the performance of the GAN defense method (the latter
defense method) is better than the former defense al-
gorithm, and the dierences between the FPR rates for