Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 3
2.3. Then, we describe the works that fall into each
class.
2.1 AML in general
Adversaries apply complex algorithms to generate small
perturbations on original datasets in order to increase
the probability of fooling ML algorithms. Some of the
most ecient and important methods are presented in
[36,8,35,10,21,9,20]. For the rst time, authors in [36],
introduce a set called adversarial examples1that have
directly emerged as an input to a classication model
using gradient-based optimization. This set of data is
similar to misclassied data and shows that they can
target a class without emulating any of the human-
perceptible attributes of that class. Recently, several
authors have incorporated adversarial examples for dif-
ferent realistic case studies, such as the audio adversar-
ial example reported in [8], manipulating a trac sign
recognition system to detour autonomous vehicles [21],
and a perturbed physical objects model to evade object
detection methods [9]. Recently, Papernot et al. [28]
study the positive eect of attack distillation for neu-
ral networks (NN) and propose a defense mechanism
against adversarial perturbations.
2.2 AML in Android malware
Having applications initially requesting less permission
during installation time can defeat a machine-learning
system based on permissions. In particular, an adver-
sary may create malicious applications to have a uni-
form distribution of permissions as in a benign dataset.
Since static analysis necessarily does not extract all the
Android apps features, the training process of the de-
tection model will not be trained based on all of the
features. Therefore, in cases where malware has been
distinguished from benign by these additional features,
the proposed models do not have the ability to dis-
criminate between them. Consequently, the developed
models will yield a higher misclassication rate. Stud-
ies in [25] report the extraction of sensitive data from
devices with apps demanding zero permission during
installation. Meanwhile, the authors in [27] illustrate
that a zero permission app could be used to infer the
users location and routes traveled using an accelerator,
magnetometer, and gyroscope. Besides, the authors in
[14] present a new hypothesis which identies adver-
sarial inputs based on classier output. They validate
this method using statistical tests before they are even
1In this paper, poison data is used interchangeability as
the adversarial example.fed to the ML model as inputs. The approach is excit-
ing and moves one step further on adversarial exam-
ple appliances in ML. However, they did not present
any countermeasure to manage such malicious behav-
ior. Conversely, we introduce two re-training defense
strategies to mitigate this limitation. Moreover, in [7],
the authors present a classication system which helps
adversaries to craft misclassied inputs and easily evade
a deployed system. This attack method, which is estab-
lished during the test phase, learns to increase the at-
tackers knowledge of the system, is classied as a tar-
geted iterative attack, and helps the attacker to ma-
nipulate attack samples. This is a skillful method that
increases the attacker's 
exibility and performance. It
also injects poison examples into training data to fool
the learning algorithm and causes misclassication er-
rors. However, it was only tested on one dataset and
did not discuss countermeasure for such a white-box
attack, while our paper addresses these aspects.
2.3 AML in Android countermeasures
The authors in [11] present two new adversarial models
inspired by Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [11]
that is based on minimax two-player between the gen-
erator (adversary) and the discriminator (classier or
system). In other words, GAN is a game which termi-
nates at a saddle point that is a minimum with respect
to the generator and a maximum with respect to the
discriminator.
In another work [13], the authors adopt adversarial
examples to construct an eective attack against mal-
ware detection models. Unlike the previous solution,
such attack directs discrete and binary input datasets,
like the DREBIN dataset, which is a targeted, iterative
white-box method. The interesting point in this method
is that it also incorporates some potential defense mech-
anisms, e.g., defensive distillation [29] and adversarial
training [21], using deep neural networks (DNNs) to
handle malware detection models. Their achievements
indicate that their countermeasures provide robustness
based on the perturbation of the distribution and re-
duce the rate of misclassied adversarial examples. The
paper is of some interest; however, our method has two
signicant benets compared with this method. First,
our method uses a dierent type of attack strategies
on various datasets, which enables adversaries to easily
target the discrete domains based on the form of the
distributed datasets. Second, we use GAN and retrain-
ing as defense strategies to improve detection rate.
Recently, in [17], the authors analyze white-box
and grey-box attacks to an ML-based malware detec-
tor and conduct performance evaluations in a real-world
setting. Their main goal is to investigate the vulnera-