Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 7
Fig. 1: Adversarial training model.
Algorithm 3 Adversarial training: pseudo-Code of the re-
training defense
Input:X,Y,X,Y
Output:Model new
1:Xtrn; Ytrn Randomly select 60% data from XandY
2:X
trn; Y
trn Randomly select 60% data from Xand
Y
3:Xtrn Xtrn[X
trn
4:Ytrn Ytrn[Y
trn
5:Model new=RandomForestClassifier (Xtrn;Ytrn)
6:returnModel new
We present the steps of retraining method in the
Alg. 3. The input of this algorithm is the dataset, and
corresponding labels of adversarial examples (i.e., poi-
son data) and the original dataset, and the output will
be the new retrained model using the Random For-
est classier [15]. First, we randomly select 60% of the
dataset and corresponding labels and save them in the
training subset for the original and poison data (See
lines 1 and 2 of Alg. 3). Then, we build the new train-
ing data as presented in lines 3 and 4 of Alg. 3. Next, we
feed the adversarial model using such new trained data
with the help of the RandomForest Classier and re-
train the model. The new model is used to implement
data classication. It is rational that the new model
which is produced by the poison data and the prelimi-
nary dataset has higher precision in data classication
compared to the existing model.
5.2 Generative adversarial network (GAN)
In the second defense method, which is called genera-
tive adversarial network (GAN), we exploit the Ran-
dom Forest Regression to select 10% of malware sam-
ples that have the greatest similarity to the benign sam-
ples in the training dataset and generate a less likely
malware set. We use the GAN as a synthetic data gener-
ator set. The GAN has two functions called Generator
and Discriminator . The generator function is used to
modify the less likely malware samples. To do so, oneAlgorithm 4 GAN: pseudo-code of the GAN defense
Input:X,Y,X,Y,
Output:Model new
1:Model poison Fit a model on XtrnusingLR
2:Lesslikely Fit 10% model of Xmwith KNN to
Model poison
3:foreachx2Lesslikely do
4:xnew x
5: whilexnew2Model poison Classify as Mdo
6:xnew Add ranked( ) features from Xb[xnew
7: end while
8:synthetic data synthetic data[xnew
9:end for
10:Model new Fit Model on Xtrn[synthetic data
11:returnModel new
random feature from the highest ranked features with
zero value in the training dataset is selected and its
value is changed to one and generates a new sample.
The new sample is fed to the second function, the dis-
criminator { which works like a classier { to predict
the class variable. The discriminator module modies
the features until the discriminator function is cheated
and labels such a sample among the benign samples.
Further, we gather the wrongly estimated malware sam-
ples into a synthetic data generator set. Besides, we use
80% of the synthetic data generator set with the train-
ing dataset to update the adversarial learning model.
We use the remaining synthetic data generator samples
(i.e., 20% of the data samples) with the test dataset to
analyze the classication. Figure 2 presents the GAN
defense architecture.2
Fig. 2: GAN defense architecture.
2GAN is also can be used to generate adversarial example
and fool the classier which is out of the scope of this paper.