16 Rahim Taheri et al.
and this is presented in the same cell as the poisoning
time for each classication algorithm. According to the
last six rows of Table 4, the defense time for the adver-
sarial training algorithm is about half of the time taken
by the GAN defense learning model against adversarial
example injections. However, the duration of the train-
ing and testing phases for both defense algorithms are
comparable. It is also clear that API apps require more
time than other le types for both defense algorithms.
Overall, the SVM classier requires more time than RF
for all three phases (i.e., training, testing, and defense).
Table 4 conrms that GAN is the best defense algo-
rithm; among the classication algorithms, RF is the
most ecient classier and requires less time than the
other classication algorithms.
7 Discussion and Limitations
The primary goal of crafting adversarial samples is to
evaluate the robustness of Machine Learning based mal-
ware classier for identifying malware camou
aged as
legitimate samples. In order to ascertain the aforesaid
conjecture, we developed malicious samples statistically
identical to benign applications by implementing dif-
ferent poisoning methods. In each attack scenario, the
functionality of malicious samples was preserved. How-
ever structural changes at the Android component level
was carried out. To be precise, we considered two re-
strictions which assure app functionality. Firstly, we
modify the manifest features that are related to the
AndroidManifest.xml le in any Android app. Secondly,
we change the features that are added to the real ap-
plication. These features are written using a single line
of code. Comprehensive experiments carried in this pa-
per clearly depict that malware samples can be shifted
to a benign class by altering permission and intents.
In the majority of cases, we observed that there was
an increase in FPR between 26.5%-28.5%. Further, we
also conclude that the transformation of a malicious
app's to trusted ones could be undertaken with ad-
ditional eorts, requiring augmentation of large code
blocks as compared to attributes like permission and in-
tents. We observed that retraining with adversarial ex-
amples with corrected labels and GAN generated sam-
ples the trained model can appropriately identify sam-
ples drawn from the unseen distribution. One of the
main limitations of the proposed method is the detec-
tion of malicious samples launching an attack on execu-
tion time. This can be addressed by creating a system
call 
ow graph and focusing on critical path depict-
ing frequent operations. Subsequently, feeding the ma-
chine learning classier with the statistics of a sequence
of frequent operations. Alternatively, apps, if analyzedindependently, may appear legitimate but when they
collude shows malicious behavior. Detection of samples
exhibiting such behavior is beyond the scope of this
work. However, such apps can be detected by estimat-
ing 
ow by representing the information 
ow using -
nite state with the output. This way of representing
an application state can exhibit ne-grained informa-
tion 
ow from multiple states to the subset of states or
specic states of given automata. Additionally, we can
infer the current state and next state information on an
event to discover the vulnerable source and sink pairs.
8 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we propose ve dierent attack algo-
rithms: a trivial algorithm, a benign distribution, KNN,
LR, and a bio-inspired method based on the ant colony
algorithm. We compare these algorithms with the most
recent static approach based on a Jacobian method,
called JSMA, in terms of providing adversarial exam-
ples based on Android mobile data to fool classication
algorithms. We also propose two defense algorithms
based on adversarial training and GAN architecture.
We validate our attack and defense algorithms using
three public datasets, namely the Drebin, Genome, and
Contagio datasets, using API, intent and permission le
types. We test our models before and after implement-
ing attacks on three classication algorithms: the RF,
SVM and Bagging algorithms. It is observed that us-
ing 300 ranked syntax features of these Android mobile
datasets, the benign distribution and LR attack algo-
rithms could fool the classication algorithms using the
Drebin dataset. This was particularly true for RF, with
an FPR of more than 27%, an accuracy of less than 72%
and an AUC of up to 50%. These achievements are in-
teresting as they are higher than the JSMA approach
by about 5% for AUC, 5% for FPR, and 5% for accu-
racy. The GAN approach can also decrease the FPR
value by about 10%, increase the precision by about
50%, and increase the accuracy by up to 25%, and can
be used as an ecient solution for such attacks.
For the future development of our work, we may fur-
ther improve the level of per feature robustness against
various adversarial manipulations. To do so, we need to
add the knowledge of feature robustness to the learn-
ing model to make it dicult for the attacker to identify
the feature characteristics which are more complicated
to manipulate.