14 Rahim Taheri et al.
attack algorithms. As a conclusion, we understand that
Drebin dataset can be an ecient dataset that we can
perform attack/defense algorithms on it and evaluate
our methods compared with the JSMA method [13].
6.2.2 Performance of attack/defense algorithms on the
Drebin dataset
First, we evaluate the average FPR values for all feature
lengths for the various attack algorithms, using three
types of les for the Drebin dataset and all classiers,
as described in Section 6.2.2. We then select the much
more easily modiable features, which can accelerate
the attack process as described in Section 6.2.2. Finally,
we evaluate the robustness of the attack and defense
strategies against the JSMA method [13] and present
the ML metrics for the selected features described in
Section 6.2.2.
Performance of FPR vs. le types vs. classiers As an
attacker, we need to narrow the attack algorithm tar-
gets using the specic classier and le types. We there-
fore calculate the FPR value for each le type when
manipulated with attack algorithms for various classi-
cation methods. Figure 6 demonstrates the results of
this evaluation and suggests two ndings. Firstly, the
average FPR value ratio for the API and permission
les is lower than for the intent les. This drives the at-
tack algorithms to concentrate on the last group of les
(see the right-hand set of bar charts in Fig. 6). Hence,
the intent le type is much easier to modify using attack
algorithms. Secondly, most of our algorithms can pro-
duce a larger value of FPR than the JSMA method, for
all classication methods. However, the SVM classica-
tion algorithm is the weakest classication algorithm,
and RF is the strongest.
Performance of reasonable feature selection In this study,
an attacker needs to know the minimum number of fea-
tures of each sample in order to manipulate them and
falsify the classier. We therefore compare and evaluate
the FPR rate for dierent numbers of selected features.
Table 2 shows the FPR rate for each attack algorithm
for the various numbers of features chosen to run the in-
tent data in the Drebin dataset using the RF classier.
From Table 2, we can conclude that when increasing the
number of features for testing in each scenario, the av-
erage FPR remains approximately xed, while the time
of execution clearly increases.
Performance of ML metrics for three selected features
In the following, we evaluate the robustness of our clas-
siers when encountering ve dierent attacks and two
 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA  TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA  TrivialDistrbKNNLRACOJSMA
Permission API IntentFPR (%)RF Bagging SVMFig. 6: Comparison of average FPR values for attack algo-
rithms for the Drebin dataset using dierent classiers and
dierent le types.
defense scenarios for three selected features. Table 3
shows the results of the proposed algorithms for the in-
tent data from the Drebin dataset. As shown in this
table, we rst apply classication algorithms without
an attack strategy. It is noticeable that the accuracy
of the classiers without an attack is above 84%. The
maximum FPR value with no attack is 13.23% for the
RF classier. Furthermore, the FPR values for the two
other classiers are even less than 13%.
The trivial algorithm inserts random noise into sam-
ples. Hence, the accuracy value for the trivial algorithm
is approximately the same for all classication algo-
rithms and is about 72%. Conversely, the FPR value
increases, but due to the lack of targeted changes in
this method, the FPR is lower than for the other pro-
posed attacks. The distributed attack only manipulates
the features of the malware samples that are within the
distribution of benign samples in the training set. As
can be seen from Table 3, this algorithm is more suc-
cessful in reducing the accuracy than the other methods
for the Bagging classier and reduces it by about 9%
compared to the rate before the attack. The distribu-
tion algorithm also has the lowest precision compared
to the other proposed attack scenarios and has a value
similar to the JSMA method of about 26%. Hence, this
attack oers a reasonable level of accuracy and can be
a suitable option for the Drebin dataset using the Bag-
ging classier. The KNN attack scenario is an aggres-
sive attack since it reduces the accuracy to the low-
est value for the RF classier compared to the other
attack algorithms. This attack selects kbenign sam-
ples near to each malware sample and changes their
features. Hence, a KNN attack can obtain the highest
recall values. When using the LR attack scenario as a
discriminator, we tried to change the benign samples