Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 9
original and poison data and build new training set
which runs for around O(n). Then, we gather the
trained and poison data which run for around O(n).
Then, we run the Random Forest regression func-
tion on these two datasets and build a new model.
The Random Forest regression function utilizes a de-
cision tree for classifying the data and identies the
important features based on the results of the clas-
sication. Since we have nsamples and mfeatures,
the time taken to establish each tree is about O(m
nlogn). As a result, the overall time taken for the
adversarial training defense method is in the order of
O(mnlogn).
{ GAN defense. According to Alg. 4, building the
poison model takes in the order of O(n). Then, we
use the KNN method to make a Lesslikely matrix
which takes for about O(mn). The loop runs for
each sample out of Lesslikely matrix and for each of
them while the instruction is checked on the poison
model (see lines 5-7). Hence, the duration of the for
loop runs for about O(n2). As a result, the overall
time taken for the GAN defense method is in the
order ofO(n2).
5.3.2 Space Complexity
Focusing on the space complexity of Alg. 1, for the Triv-
ial attack , we need a vector space to select features
amongmavailable features, so the required space is in
the order ofO(n) for all samples. Regarding the Dis-
tribution attack , we also need to select lambda features
out ofmfeatures, so the overall space complexity of
this scenario runs of the order of O(n) for all sam-
ples. Regarding the KNN based attack , rst, we rank
the features, which is applied as in-place ordering that
runs of the order of O(n) for all samples. Then, we
need a space to save 10% of the malware dataset, which
runs o the order of O(mn). Finally, the overall space
complexity required for this scenario runs of the or-
der ofO(mn). Regarding the LR attack , LR takes at
most a dataset space to randomly select features in
the benign dataset and occupy O(mn) space to nd
10% of nearest malware dataset to the discriminator.
As a result, the overall space complexity of the LR sce-
nario is in order of O(mn). Focusing on the space
complexity of Alg. 2, we rst select features out of
mfeatures for each sample, so we need a space of the
order ofO(mn) for this. Then, we need to consider
the order ofO(mn) for the required space to nd 10%
of the nearest malware dataset to the discriminator. In
theforloop, we build the dataset at most ntimes. As
a result, the overall space complexity of the ACO sce-
nario is in the order of O(mn2). Focusing on the spacecomplexity of Alg. 3 for adversarial training defense,
similar to the previous algorithms, the space required
for running the lines 1-4 runs for around O(nm). Also,
the space required to generate RandomForestClassier
function is in the order of O(NTnm) [3], where
NTis the number of trees we need to consider to run
this function. As a result, the overall space complex-
ity takes aboutO(NTnm). Focusing on the space
complexity of Alg. 4 for GAN defense, similar to the
previous algorithms, the space required for the Logis-
ticRegression function and Lesslikely matrix is in the
order ofO(nm). All the classication algorithms us-
ing the Lesslikely dataset can consume space in order
ofO(nm). As a result, the overall space complexity is
in the order ofO(nm).
6 Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we report an experimental evaluation of
the proposed attack algorithms and their countermea-
sures by testing them under dierent scenarios.
6.1 Simulation setup
In the following, we present the classiers, datasets,
training/testing structure, test metrics, and hyper- pa-
rameter tuning.
Classiers. We use three classiers as described in
Section 3.2, in which we set the k-fold variable to 10.
As explained previously, the random forest (RF) algo-
rithm classies the data by constructing multiple deci-
sion trees. In this paper, the number of decision trees
used is 100. In RF, the maximum number of features
used to nd the best split of the features is set to 3. In
the Bagging algorithm, we use the DecisionTreeClassi-
eras the base estimator. The number of decision trees
used is 100. We average our results over 10 independent
runs for each classier.
Datasets: We conducted our experiments using three
datasets, as detailed below:
{Drebin dataset: The Drebin dataset [5] is a set of An-
droid samples that we can straightforwardly apply in
a lightweight static analysis. For each Android ap-
plication, we perform a linear sweep over the app's
content and obtain the manifest and the disassem-
bled dex code. We then extensively analyze all the
extracted features, which are represented as a set
of binary strings. These features are classied into
permissions, intents and API calls. The samples con-
tain 131,611 applications over about two years (2010-
2012) containing both benign and malware/malicious