Cluster Computing manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled:
an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach
Rahim Taheri Reza Javidan Mohammad Shojafar* Vinod P 
Mauro Conti
Received: 08 October 2019 / Revised: 22 February 2020/ Accepted: 29 February 2020
Abstract The widespread adoption of smartphones dra-
matically increases the risk of attacks and the spread
of mobile malware, especially on the Android platform.
Machine learning-based solutions have been already used
as a tool to supersede signature-based anti-malware sys-
tems. However, malware authors leverage features from
malicious and legitimate samples to estimate statisti-
cal dierence in-order to create adversarial examples.
Hence, to evaluate the vulnerability of machine learning
algorithms in malware detection, we propose ve dier-
ent attack scenarios to perturb malicious applications
(apps). By doing this, the classication algorithm inap-
propriately ts the discriminant function on the set of
data points, eventually yielding a higher misclassica-
tion rate. Further, to distinguish the adversarial exam-
ples from benign samples, we propose two defense mech-
anisms to counter attacks. To validate our attacks and
solutions, we test our model on three dierent bench-
mark datasets. We also test our methods using various
classier algorithms and compare them with the state-
of-the-art data poisoning method using the Jacobian
matrix. Promising results show that generated adver-
sarial samples can evade detection with a very high
probability. Additionally, evasive variants generated by
our attack models when used to harden the developed
anti-malware system improves the detection rate up to
R. Taheri and R. Javidan
Computer Engineering and IT Department,
Shiraz University of Technology, Shiraz, Iran
E-mail:fr.taheri, javidangsutech.ac.ir
M. Shojafar, Vinod P., and M. Conti
Department of Mathematics,
University of Padua, Padua, Italy
E-mail: pvinod21@gmail.com, moham-
mad.shojafar@unipd.it; m.shojafar@ieee.org,
conti@math.unipd.it50% when using the Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) method.
Keywords Adversarial machine learning Android
malware detection poison attacksgenerative
adversarial network Jacobian algorithm.
1 Introduction
Nowadays using the Android application is very pop-
ular on mobile platforms. Every Android application
has a Jar-like APK format and is an archive le which
contains Android manifest and Classes.dex les. Infor-
mation about the structure of the Apps holds in the
manifest le and each part is responsible for certain
actions. For instance, the requested permissions must
be accepted by the users for successful installation of
applications. The manifest le contains a list of hard-
ware components and permissions required by each ap-
plication. Furthermore, there are environment settings
in the manifest le that are useful for running appli-
cations. The compiled source code from each applica-
tion is saved as the classes.dex le. Android application
corporate machine learning (ML) algorithms to ana-
lyze the manifest information and user proles/histories
to customize the functionality and speed up the user
demands [6,33]. Also, ML algorithms utilize an An-
droid application to detect anomalies and malware soft-
ware [31]. The aim of the malware as a malicious soft-
ware in mobile applications is to steal condential data
and to obtain root privileges of each APK [34]. Malware
authors (i.e., adversaries) look for the length of malware
propagation cycle to launch attacks on ML-based detec-
tors [26]. To accomplish this, malware applications are
repackaged with attributes extracted from legitimate
programs to evade detection [16,23,37]. In a nutshell,arXiv:1904.09433v2  [cs.CR]  29 Feb 2020