Can Machine Learning Model with Static Features be Fooled: an Adversarial Machine Learning Approach 5
classication function f. Furthermore, we assume the
attacker has complete knowledge of the target system,
and formally represent the model as V= (X;M;f)2
S. We assume that the initial set of input data (i.e., or
samples)Xis given. The attack strategy is to modify
the data samples using a modication function 
( X).
Assume that the attacker's knowledge x, we de-
ne a set of manipulated attacks as X2
(X)Z,
then, we can dene the attacker's goal as an objective
functionW(X;V)2R which evaluates the extent to
which the manipulated attacks Xmeet the attacker's
goal. Hence, we can dene the optimal attack strategy
as:
OPT (X) = arg maxX2
(X)W(X;V): (3)
To this end, we summarize each attack scenario as
follows:
Scenario 1: The attacker randomly manipulates the
features of the malware applications without having
knowledge of which feature is prominent; we call this
atrivial attack .
Scenario 2: The attacker manipulates the malware in-
stances in training set by altering features statistically
relevant in the legitimate application distribution; we
call this a Distribution attack .
Scenario 3: The attacker computes the similarity of
the malicious sample with the distribution of benign
samples and tries to modify those samples which are
closest to the k(e.g.,k= 10) nearest benign samples;
we called this KNN based attack .
Scenario 4: The attacker manipulates the feature vec-
tor corresponding to each sample using the logistic re-
gression function (LR) that ts the data points. We
select those data points which are close to the benign
feature vector. Such well-crafted attacks are referred to
us as Logistic Regression attack orLR.
Scenario 5: The attacker manipulates the malware in-
stances by adopting the LR function and bio-inspired
solution to nd a global solution. In this scenario, we
adopt ant colony optimization (ACO) as a sample of the
bio-inspired method to produce poison malware sam-
ples found close to goodware. We name this attack as
ACO attack .
We repeat each algorithm ten times and select the
average values for each parameter. For all these scenar-
ios, we divide the training and test datasets based on
the class parameters into Malware andBenign datasets.
Subsequently, we apply feature ranking on benign ex-
amples and select 10% of the top-ranked features. The
ranking re
ects those attributes which can classify an
unseen sample to benign class with high probability.
Furthermore, we choose some percentages of the se-
lected features among the selected malware samples andAlgorithm 1 Scenarios 1-4: Trivial, Distribution, KNN,
and Logistic Regression attacks.
Input:x,y,
Output:x,y
Scenario 1: Trivial Attack.
1: Randomly select features from X
Scenario 2: Distribution Attack.
2: Randomly select ranked( ) features from Xb
Scenario 3: KNN Attack.
3: Ranked( ) features from Xb
4:Xs Randomly select 10% of samples from Xm
5:for8x2Xsdo
6:x Find KNN of samples from Xb
7:end for
Scenario 4: Logistic Regression Attack.
8:discriminator Randomly select features from Xbus-
ingLR
9:x select 10% of Xmneardiscriminator
Common parts for Scenario 1-4.
10:foreach attribute a2inxdo
11: if(x[a] = 0) then
12:x[a] 1
13:x x
14: if(F(x) =y)then
15: break
16: end if
17: end if
18:end for
19:returnx,y
modify the feature values. Formally speaking, we select
the feature with zero value which has not been selected
before and changes zero to one. At this stage, we add
such modied malware samples to the test dataset and
classify the dataset using classication methods.
4.2 Trivial attack
In Alg. 1, focusing on line 1 and 9-18, the list variable
explains the features applied. To be precise, rst, we
select three features from the list variables and modify
them; then, we repeat this process on all of the mem-
bers in the feature list . In the loop, for each selected
sample, we check the selected feature ain theset and
change the zero values of the feature to one and save
that sample in x(line 8-10 of Alg. 1). Then, it is impor-
tant to check the modied sample and understand if it
changes to a benign sample or not. We use F(x) =y
to check this condition. If it is satised, we can call x
as an adversarial sample (i.e., poison sample) which is
the output of Alg. 1.
4.3 Distribution attack
In this scenario, we randomly manipulate the selected
ranked features of malware samples placed in the mal-
ware dataset (see line 2 and loop lines 9-18 of Alg. 1).