6 Rahim Taheri et al.
After the modications, we feed the modied malware
with the benign sample of the test dataset to the learn-
ing model and update the learning parameters.
4.4 KNN based attack
In this scenario, we rst rank the features of the sam-
ples in the benign dataset. Second, we randomly select
10% of the malware data (samples). We calculate the
Manhattan distance of each selected sample with be-
nign les. Moreover, we select the K(in this paper, we
considerk= 10) nearest benign vectors to the corre-
sponding sample the highest ranked features. Indeed,
we haveknew poison samples for each malware sample.
We should recall that the ranking is used to understand
the highest features in the benign samples. Then, we
add these poison samples with benign data from xto
the learning model (see line 3-7 and loop lines 9-18 of
Alg. 1).
4.5 Logistic regression attack
In this scenario, we apply an LR algorithm on the train-
ing dataset, and the result of this algorithm will be the
discriminator . The nearest malware samples to this dis-
criminator are the best choices for the modications.
Therefore, we select 10% of the malware samples in the
training dataset which are near to the discriminator.
After that, we compare the selected malware (selected
based on 10% of the malware samples in the training
dataset) with the malware samples in the test dataset
and add ten malware samples to the test dataset for
each malware sample in the training dataset. In this
step, for 10% of the training dataset, we select the
samples with all zero features and apply logical `OR'
with randomly selected malware samples in the same
dataset. The resulting sample will be poison data which
can be used for the classication (see line 8-7 and loop
lines 9-18 of Alg. 1).
4.6 Ant colony based attack
In this scenario, new adversarial samples are gener-
ated using an ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm
(see line 1 of Alg. 2). First, we apply a linear regres-
sion algorithm to select the malware samples which
are most similar to the benign samples in the training
dataset (i.e., 10% of the malware samples in the training
dataset). Formally speaking, we nd the nearest mal-
ware to the discriminator in the training dataset (i.e.,
we search only in the 10% of the malware samples in theAlgorithm 2 ACO scenario
Input:X,Y,,ACOthreshold
Output:X,Y
1:discriminator Randomly select features from Xbus-
ingLR
2:Xs select 10% of Xmneardiscriminator
3:foreachx2Xsdo
4:x ACOFunction (x)
5: if(distance (x;discriminator )ACOthreshold )
then
6: if(F(x) =y)then
7: X X[x
8: end if
9: end if
10:end for
11:returnX,Y
training dataset) (see line 5 of Alg. 2). In Alg. 2, the
functionACOFunction is used to nd the adversary
sample data. In this way, the ACO pheromone value is
the number of the feature that is going to be changed.
First, we start the ACO with one feature, and we gen-
erate new samples by modifying the malware samples
with the absence of attributes which are present in le-
gitimate applications. We repeat this action by using
more features. If the distance between the newly gener-
ated sample and the discriminator is within the range
of the selected malware and the discriminator, then we
add this newly generated sample to the recently gen-
erated samples; otherwise, we discard this sample and
change the feature and re-calculate the distances. We
continue this process until the maximum iteration is
reached or the classier misclassies malware samples.
The algorithm of the ACO scenario attack is described
in Alg. 2.
5 Defensive Strategies Against Attacks
In this section, we discuss two countermeasures as the
main solution for the raised attacks.
5.1 Adversarial training
In the rst defense method, we re-train the classication
algorithm [21]. The main dierence between the new re-
trained classication dataset and the current version is
that we add the poison data with the training dataset.
Figure 1 presents the structure of the adversarial train-
ing countermeasure. In Fig. 1, the left-side boxes illus-
trate the training set which is used as a training model
and the lower-side boxes are used as a testing phase
for the learning model. The presented model uses dif-
ferent classication algorithms such as SVM, Bagging,
and Random Forest in this paper.