4 Rahim Taheri et al.
bilities of an ML-based malware detector and generate
some countermeasures for such type attacks. In their
attack scenario, they can bypass the real-world ML-
based malware detector only by modifying one bit in
the feature vector.
3 Preliminaries
In the following, we brie
y introduce data modeling for
static malware detection methods in Section 3.1 and
ML-based detection methods in Section 3.2.
3.1 Data modeling for static malware detection
The purpose of constructing adversarial instances in
malware detection systems is to fool the classication
algorithms used by these systems and cause that sys-
tem work in the way the attacker intends. In this pa-
per, we consider the standard setting for designing a
classier in a problem that includes discrimination be-
tween benign ( B) and malware ( M) samples. In this
way, we rst select the learning algorithms and perfor-
mance evaluation settings. Then, we collect a dataset D
that includes nlabeled examples and extract mfeatures
for each sample. Hence we have
D=f(xi;yi)j8i= 1;:::;ng; (1)
wherexiis theith sample vector of a dataset in which
each element shows the selected feature and yiis the
related label of the samples, and yi2f0;1g. Letxij
be the value of the jth feature in ith sample where
f8j= 1;:::;mg. If vectorxihas thejth feature then
xij= 1; elsexij= 0. In this denition nis the number
of samples in dataset, and Xf0;1gmis a feature
space with mdimension.
Furthermore, we consider binary classication algo-
rithms in which the adversary changes the malicious
dataset to prevent detection. The adversary tries to
change the malicious data set yi= 1 in each direction
by adding a non-zero value to the feature vector. For in-
stance, adversaries may add benign-related features to
the only malware samples to evade detection by classi-
ers. Therefore, we can construct an adversarial exam-
plexfrom a benign sample xwhich is misclassied by
the classier Fand present it in equation (2):
X=X+x;s.t.F(X+x)6=F(X); (2)
wherexis the minimum value can used as a perturba-
tion and cause misclassication.3.2 Machine learning based detection method
Goodfellow et al. [12] validate that practical attack in
deep neural networks is possible because these models
are locally linear. Also, they conrm that boosted trees
are even more susceptible to attack than neural net-
works. Therefore, it can be a good reason that we ap-
ply our attack scenarios on existing tree type classiers.
Hence, in this paper, we use three classiers: Random
Forest, Bagging, and SVM. We provide a short descrip-
tion of each of them in the following:
{ Random Forest (RF). RF is a machine learning
algorithm that creates multiple decision trees and
combines the results to provide more accurate and
reliable predictions.
{ Bagging. A Bagging classier is an estimator that
combines the base classier results on random sets
and builds an ensemble learning-based classier. Each
classication training set is randomly generated, with
replacement.
{ Support Vector Machine (SVM). Support Vec-
tor Networks are learning models with supervised
learning algorithms that inspect the data used for
classication and regression analysis.
4 Adversarial Approaches for Malware
Detection System
We dene ve dierent scenarios which are detailed in
the following subsections. Our attack scenarios are a
targeted attack. This means that the attacker generates
some misclassied samples to infect a particular device.
The main notations and symbols used in this paper are
listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Notation and symbols used in this paper.
Notations Description
X Input data (unmodied data), x2f0;1gm,jXj=n
Y Label of class in the classication problem, y2f0;1gm
XAdversarial example (modied input data)
YLabel of adversarial class in target adversarial example
M Number of features, a2M,jMj=m
f ML model, f:X!Y
 Parameters of ML model f
 Percentage of features
4.1 Attack strategy and scenarios
The attack strategy denes how the attacker compro-
mises the system, based on the hypothesized goal, knowl-
edge, and capabilities. In this paper, we characterize the
attacker's knowledge in terms of a set Sthat encodes
knowledge of the data X, the feature set Mand the