Network of Neural Networks 82:9
shown in same color activate for similar classes. Also, the bigger the size of the circle, the more
importantisthefilterfor thecorrespondingclass(i.e.,it hashigheraverage activity).
Tocreatethefilteractivationnetwork,thereexistmultiplestrategies(i.e.,rules R)bywhichthe
filters can be connected. Figure 4(d) illustrates two such strategies: (i) Activation Hubs (AH):
Encourage connections between very important and less important filters (i.e., less number of
high-importance filters get surrounded by many low-importance filters and thus act as hubs),
and(ii) Co-Activation (CA): Filters that activate together for similar classes get connected. The
former rule encourages partitions of roughly equal importance (since each partition will have a
fewimportantfilters).Thelatterrulepartitionsthefiltersintosemanticallysimilarparts.Formally,
Fij=⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩/summationtext
valaiaj|ai−aj|AHRule
/summationtext
valaiaj
|ai−aj|+1CARule(3)
LetusanalyzewhathappensduringtheAHcase.If iandjaretwofilterswithaverageactivities
aiandaj, respectively, the Fijlink weight for AH case will be high if, for a given image, either
aiis high and ajis low, or vice versa. Note that, if either aiorajis close to zero, that link is not
created. Further, when aiandajare both very high for the same image (i.e., both filters are im-
portant for same class), then that link will also not be encouraged (since the link weight will be
lowduetothe|ai−aj|part).Therefore,importantfiltersfromthesameclasswillbediscouraged
from connecting together. Consequently, for AH Rule, highly important filters (with high ai) will
be encouraged to connect with not-so-important filters (from same or other classes). Important
filters from same classes will be forced to occupy separate communities; hence, the knowledge is
distributed uniformly across the students. Similar discussion holds for CA Rule where the com-
munities represent semantically-similar features. Of note, this flexibility in partitioning teacher’s
fconv comesfromnetworkscienceideas.
Ofcourse,therecanbeotherwaysfiltersmaybeconnected.Indeed,ifthedatasetcontainstoo
many semantically similar classes, CA can lead to heterogeneous student models (because many
filters from Tfconvwill go into a few partitions). Hence, to obtain student models of similar sizes,
weonlyexploreAHinthispaper.Inmatrixform,adjacencymatrixofAHnetworkcanbewritten
asfollows:
FAH=/summationdisplay
n∈valanaT
n⊙|Dn−DT
n|, (4)
where,anisthevectorofaveragefilteractivities( ai’s)foreachimage n∈val,matrix Dncontains
all columns as an,a n d⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. To partition this AH network, we
need to detect communities by maximizing a modularity function as explained in the network
scienceliterature[ 17]:
max
g={д0,д1,...,дl−1}1
2m/summationdisplay
ij⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣FAH
ij−1
γ·kikj
2m⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦δ(дi,дj), (5)
where,mis #edges, kiis degree (number of connections) of node i, resolution γcontrols the
size/number of communities, and δis Kronecker delta. The idea is to find groups of tightly
connected nodes, g={д0,д1,...,дl−1}, which map the nodes Vtolcommunities. Finally, these
lcommunities are converted to kpartitions Piby combining the communities such that the
partition sizes are almost equal (so that resulting students stay within the budget). This parti-
tioningPis then used to train individual student networks. Of note, removing community д0
(which consists of all disconnected nodes in the filter network) often has very little impact on
teacher’s accuracy. Hence, partition P0=д0is obtained directly by community detection. Con-
sequently, we solve problem ( 2) by detecting and removing the largest community д0that does
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems,Vol. 18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.