82:20 K.Bhardwaj et al.
Fig.8. Accuracyassomedevicesbecomeunavailableduetodevicefailures(e.g.,duetoprocessorornetwork
failures,andbatterydepletion).NoNNachievesmorethan91%accuracy,onaverage,whenonlythreedevices
are available. When four devices areavailable, NoNN achieves morethan 93% accuracy.
Figure8showstheaccuracydropasweremovesomedevices.Onanaverage,NoNNisstillable
toachievemorethan91%accuracywhenonlythreedevicesareavailable.Moreover,ifaminimum
of four devices are available, the average accuracy is more than 93%. As more devices become
unavailable,thedifferencebetweentheminimumandthemaximumaccuracyincreasessincethe
finaldecisiondependsonoutputfromalldevices.Whenonlyafewdevicesareavailable,thefinal
result depends on the characteristics of each student, some being able to deliver higher accuracy
than others. For instance, one of the students is able to achieve 82.82% accuracy alone (i.e., the
maximumpointwhenonlyonestudentisactiveinFigure 8).Therefore,deployingthisstudenton
theprimarydevice(whichwillalwaysbeavailable)willguaranteeatleast82.82%accuracy.Other
devices can then be used to further improve the accuracy of the system. Hence, NoNN is robust
to random device failures. Of note, robustness can also be formulated as part of the partitioning
problemitself;this,however,is left asafuturework.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed a new NoNN paradigm to compress a large teacher model into
multiple highly-compressed student modules that can be distributed across a network of edge
devices with minimal communication overhead. To this end, we have first proposed a network
science-based partitioning of teacher’s knowledge, and then trained individual students on the
correspondingpartitions.
With extensive experiments, we have demonstrated that NoNN achieves close to teacher’s ac-
curacy with significantly lower memory (2 .5×-24×gain w.r.t. teacher) and computation (2 ×-15×
fewerFLOPSw.r.t.teacher),whileguaranteeingthatindividualmodulesofNoNNfitwithinsome
given memory/FLOP budget. We have also shown thatNoNN achieves higher accuracythan sev-
eralbaselineswithno communicationamong studentsuntilthelastlayer.
Finally, we have deployed the proposed models for CIFAR-10 dataset on Raspberry Pi and
Odroid, and have demonstrated 6 .22×-12.22×improvement in performance and 12 .99×-14.36×
in energy per node w.r.t. teacher. We have further shown that NoNN model results in up to 33 ×
reduction in total latency for distributed inference on multiple edge devices w.r.t. a state-of-the-
art model compression baseline. Hence, the proposed communication-aware model compression
can ultimately lead to effective deployment of deep networks on multiple memory-constrained
IoT-devices.
The current work opens up several new directions. In future, we plan to address problems like
how to accurately map deep network partitions to heterogeneous devices, and also make robust-
ness as a primary objective of NoNN. We further plan to explore NoNN for other types of deep
learningmodels suchasRNNs.
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems, Vol.18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.