82:16 K.Bhardwaj et al.
accuracy with 2 .5×-24×lower memory, and 2 ×-15×fewer FLOPS than the teacher model. Next,
wedeployourmodelsonrealedgedevicesandshowsignificantgaininperformanceandenergy.
6 CASE STUDY: HARDWARE DEPLOYMENT
Inthissection,asacasestudy,wedeployourNoNNmodelsontwohardware-constraineddevices
to quantifytheireffectivenessin termsof latencyand energyon realhardware.
6.1 Hardware Setup
We implement NoNN on edge devices such as Raspberry Pi (RPi) and Odroid-XU4S. We demon-
strate an extensive exploration of two scenarios that can benefit from our approach: ( i) Homoge-
neouscaseinwhichalldevicesareidentical,and( ii)Heterogeneouscase,wheredeviceshavedif-
ferentresourcesandcomputingpower.Weperformdetailedevaluationofaccuracy,performance,
and energy for each scenario. We show these results for our teacher (WRN40-4), NoNN-2S, and
NoNN-8Smodels trainedontheCIFAR-10dataset.
We use eight Raspberry Pi-3 Model-B and eight Odroid-XU4S boards. Each RPi has an Arm
Cortex-A53 quad-core processor with nominal frequency of 1.2GHz and 1GB of RAM. We scaled
thefrequencyofRPi’sdownto400MHzastheRPi’srunningatmaximumfrequencydemonstrated
unstable behavior and would often crash due to high temperature. The XU4S boards have a Sam-
sung Exynos5422 SoC, which has an Arm big.LITTLE architecture with 4 big Cortex-A15 and 4
little Cortex-A7 cores, and 2GB of RAM. The Odroid is executed at the nominal frequency: 2GHz
for the big cores and 1.4GHz for the little cores. To maximize performance, we run the inference
on thebigcoresintheOdroids.
In order to measure voltage, current, and power, we use the Odroid Smart Power 2 for the
Odroid-XU4S and AVHzY USB Power Meter for the RPi’s. In addition, we use an x86 machine
(Core i7), further referred as server, to send the images to the devices, concatenate the results,
and apply the fc layer. Of note, the fc is small and could also be placed in another edge/mobile
device. We perform all of our experiments with a point-to-point wired local network connecting
alldevices together.
Since the NoNN models were built with PyTorch, we use TVM3, a deep learning compiler that
optimizes NN models for several hardware architectures, to deploy the trained model into the
RPi’s and Odroid boards. To achieve this, the PyTorch models are converted into an intermediate
representationwithOpenNeuralNetworkExchange(ONNX)[ 2].ThentheONNXrepresentation
isusedbyTVMtogeneratethebinarythatisdeployedinthetargetdevice.Inaddition,weintegrate
thesebinariesintoaTCP-wrappersothateachstudentcanbedistributedtoseparatedevicesand
thecommunication isperformedthroughtheTCP protocol.
6.2 Hardware Results
We first show the results for NoNN when all devices are identical (i.e., the homogeneous case).
Then, we address the heterogeneous scenario, where one device is more powerful than the rest.
We also discussthecasewhensome devicesareunavailable forinference.
6.2.1 Homogeneous Devices. Table6presents the evaluation of NoNN-2S, NoNN-8S, and
teacher models for both RPi’s and Odroids. In this experiment, each student is deployed on a dif-
ferentdevice,sointhe8-studentcasewehaveeightseparatedevices(eitherRPiorOdroid).From
theexperimentinSection 3,sincesplittingtheteachermodelhorizontallyleadstomorethan10 ×
increment in latency (even on powerful x86 machines), we executed the teacher on a single edge
device,as otherwiseit would takeeven longer.
3TVM Compiler: https://tvm.ai/ .
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems, Vol.18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.