Network of Neural Networks 82:5
Fig.2. (a)KnowledgeDistillation(KD)isbasedonasignificantlysmallerstudentmodeltrainedtomimica
largeteachernetwork.(b)Networkcommunitiesandhubnodes.InSection 4,wewillexplainhowteacher’s
activations from(a) can beusedtocreate anetworksimilar tothatshownin(b).
addressthememoryduetomodel-weights.Incontrast,wetakethedistributedinferenceonestep
furthertoanevenmoreconstrainedIoTenvironment(e.g.,500KBmemory)wherethephysicalIoT-
devicescannotfitasinglemodel.Insuchcases,themodelitselfmustbesplitinnon-intuitiveways
whichcanresultinheavycommunicationcostateverylayer.Therefore,inthispaper,ourproposed
NoNN compresses the model (to reduce the memory and computation costs such that individual
modules fiton thedevices) whileaccountingfor communicationamong thestudentnodes.
Note that, most of the prior techniques above are complementary to our work so they can be
usedsynergisticallyontopofourapproach.Forinstance,anotherrecentworkcalledMeDNN[ 15]
extendsMoDNNwithapruningtechniquetoreducetheper-nodecomputation.Sincepruningcan
stillbeperformedontopofourproposedNoNNandbecausebothMeDNNandMoDNNpartition
thefeaturemaps(andnottheweights),ourworkiscomplementarytoMeDNN[ 15].Wealsoshow
that we can achieve higher accuracy than several KD baselines and SplitNet in our experiments,
i.e.,theonly twotechniquesin Table 1thatdo notcomplement ourwork.
2.2 Knowledge Distillation Background
KD, as shown in Figure 2(a), consists of two deep networks: ( i)Teacheris the large deep network
which we want to compress, and ( ii)Studentis a significantly smaller neural network which is
trained to mimic the output of the teacher network. To mimic the teacher, the simplest way is to
directly train a student model on teacher’s logits(see Figure 2(a)) – the unnormalized outputs of
theteachermodelbeforethesoftmax–insteadoftrainingontruelabelsfromthedataset[ 1].The
basicideahereisthatwhiletrainingthestudentmodel,usinglogitsinsteadofdirectclassification
probabilities can transfer more information about the teacher to the student. Hinton et al. [ 6]
argued that we must not only train the student model on the correct predictions made by the
teacher, but must also quantify how wrong the teacher was about the incorrect classes. Hence,
Hintonetal.introducedKD[ 6]whichusesboththe hard-labelloss (basedontruelabelsfromthe
dataset),aswellasthe soft-labelloss (basedonlogits)totrainasignificantlysmallerstudentmodel.
Mathematically, let lTandlSbe the logits of teacher and student respectively, and τis a tem-
perature parameter (see [ 6]),ybe the true labels, and Pτ
TandPτ
Srespectively denote the softmax
over relaxedlogits lT/τandlS/τ.T he n ,t heK Dl o s s( Lkd)is given by:
Lkd(θS)=(1−α)H(y,PS)+αH(Pτ
T,Pτ
S) (1)
where, His the standard cross-entropy loss, θSdenotes the parameters of the student network,
andαcontrols the weight of hard-label loss vs.soft-label loss. The temperature parameter in the
second term of Equation ( 1) improves knowledge transfer from the teacher to the student. Other
variants of KD like Attention Transfer-based KD (ATKD) further use intermediate outputs of
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems,Vol. 18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.