Network of Neural Networks 82:19
Fig. 7. Performance and energy as the number of Raspberry devices is reduced and the workload for the
Odroidboardis increased, always executing a totalof eight students.
slightly more powerful device (Odroid), the latter running on the big cores to maximize perfor-
mance.Eachsmalldevice(RPi)executesonlyonestudent,whilethemorepowerfuldevice(Odroid)
executesmultiplestudents.
Figure7(a) breaks down the latency into three parts: latency of RPi’s, the single Odroid, and
thetotal latency including the server. The total latency represents the execution time, starting
whentheservertransmitsthefirstimageandendingwhenfclayerisapplied(afterreceivingand
concatenating results from all students). The RPi performance represents the latency (i.e., both
computationandcommunication time)for the slowestdevice.
As the Odroids are considerably faster than the RPi’s in the current setup, a single Odroid is
abletoexecutefourstudentsinthesameamountoftimeaRPitakestocomputeonestudent(Fig-
ure7(a)). As the number of students in the Odroid increases even further, its latency becomes a
bottleneckandthetotallatencyincreases.Thedifferencebetweenthetotallatencyandtheslow-
est device is the communication time between the server and the devices, which is 30.65ms on
average.Theserver(x86machine)takes0.1mstoconcatenateandapplythefclayer,whichisneg-
ligible.Notethat,untilfourstudentsaredeployedinOdroid,thetotallatencyinFigure 7(a)keeps
on reducing since the server can process the Odroid results while the RPi’s are still running the
individualstudents.Hence,performingthistaskinparallelreducesthecriticalpath.
Figure7(b) depicts the energy consumption for allRPi devices and the single Odroid device.
Asevident,wehaveatrade-offamongperformance,energy,andnumberofdevices.Forinstance,
when the Odroid runs just one student, the total energy gets minimized because Odroid is more
energy-efficient than the RPi for the one student case. However, as we increase the workload for
theOdroid(i.e.,numberofstudents),thetotalenergyincreaseseventhoughthenumberofdevices
(RPi’s)decreases.Inthecurrentsetup,inferenceoneightseparateRPi’sconsumesthesameamount
of energy as using six RPi’s plus two students on the Odroid. Comparing the two extreme cases
(eight students in eight RPi’s, or all eight students in a single Odroid), the Odroid consumes 25%
more energy.
Therefore, this evaluation demonstrates three important aspects: ( i) NoNN approach demon-
stratesgoodperformanceinbothhomogeneousandheterogeneousenvironments,( ii)Intermsof
energy, distributing the students on several devices instead of using a single more powerful de-
vice can reduce the total energy consumption for inference. ( iii) Finally, to maximize the energy
savings for the entire system, deploying NoNN on a combination of several devices can trade-off
betweenenergy dissipationand number ofdevices.
6.2.4 Robustness of NoNN. We now evaluate a scenario where some devices may become un-
available due to a variety of reasons such as power depletion or processor/network failure. We
evaluateallpossiblecasesinwhichsuchdevicesmayfail.Forinstance,forsixactivedevices,any
twodevices may fail, resultingin 28possiblescenarios,and soon fortheremainingcases.
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems,Vol. 18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.