82:8 K.Bhardwaj et al.
Fig.4. Completeflowofourapproach.(a)Thepretrainedteachermodelexhibitscertainactivationpatterns
for the validation set. (b) We use these activation patterns to build a network of filter activity. Community
detection on the filter network partitions teacher’s knowledge into simpler functions. (c) Train individual
students in NoNN to mimic each partition. (d) Teacher’s knowledge can be partitioned in different ways
dependingon howthefilteractivation networkisbuilt(e.g.,viaCo-Activation (CA)ruleor ActivationHubs
(AH) rule). Node colors represent filters relevant to a given class, whereas node sizes represent importance
of a filter(determined byactivation value).
where,|Δval|denotes the absolute value of change in validation accuracy due to removal of P0
filters. Also,|Pi|does not denote the absolute value, but rather the number of elements in the
setPi(i.e., the cardinality of Pi). The first constraint in ( 2) aims to keep the sizes of all partitions
(exceptP0) almost equal since the sizes of student models must be below the fixedmemory bud-
getBmem. The objective function and the second constraint aim to minimize change in teacher’s
validation accuracy while removing as many useless filters from Tfconvas possible. The last two
constraints in problem ( 2) specify the per-device memory- and FLOP-budgets that must be satis-
fied by each student (which will be deployed on individual devices). Note that, while it is always
possibleto satisfy memory- and FLOP-constraints,therewill be a tradeoffbetweenmodel-size or
computationandtheNoNNaccuracy.Forinstance,forfixednumberofstudents,largerindividual
student modules can lead to higher overall accuracy. Finally, the rule Rneeded to determine how
thepartitionsare formedis describedbelow.
4.2 Network Science-Based Knowledge Partitioning: Filter Activation Network
Weproposeanetworkscience-basedsolutiontotheknowledgepartitioningproblem.Theideais
to uniformly distributeknowledge from teacher’sfconv using networksciencein order to jointly
trainindividualstudentsin theNoNN.
To partition teacher’s fconv, we first build a network F={Fij}of filter activation patterns,
whereiandjare two filters. Now, let aidenote the average activity of a filter ifor a given image
in the validation set (val). Average activity of a filter iis defined as the averaged output of the
correspondingoutputchannelofteacher’sfconv.Forinstance,supposeateachernetwork’sfconv
has256outputchannels,andheightandwidthofitsactivationmapis8 ×8pixels.Then,toobtain
averageactivityoffilter i,weaveragethevalueofits8 ×8outputchannelactivationmap.Essen-
tially,weusethisaverageactivitymetricasameasureof importance ofafilterforagivenclassof
images;thatis,thehighertheaverageactivityofafilter,themoreimportantitisforclassification
for some class of images. In Figure 4(d), each circle depicts a filter at teacher’s fconv, and filters
ACM Transactions on EmbeddedComputingSystems, Vol.18,No. 5s,Article 82.Publicationdate:October2019.