Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
3 E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our framework’s usability on multiple time series datasets with dynamic latent states
that change over time. We compare classiﬁcation performance and clusterability against two state-of-
the-art approaches for unsupervised representation learning for time series: 1. Contrastive Predictive
Coding (CPC) (Oord et al., 2018) that uses predictive coding principles to train the encoder on
a probabilistic contrastive loss. 2. Triplet-Loss (T-Loss), introduced in (Franceschi et al., 2019),
which employs time-based negative sampling and a triplet loss to learn representations for time
series windows. The triplet loss objective ensures similar time series have similar representations
by minimizing the pairwise distance between positive samples (subseries) while maximizing it for
negative ones. (See Appendix A.2 for more details on each baseline.)
For a fair comparison and to ensure that the difference in performance is not due to the differences
in the models’ architecture, the same encoder network is used across all compared baselines. Our
objective is to compare the performance of the learning frameworks, agnostic to the encoder’s
choice. Therefore, we selected simple architectures to evaluate how each framework can use a simple
encoder’s limited capacity to learn meaningful representations. We assess the generalizability of the
representations by 1) evaluating clusterability in the encoding space and 2) using the representations
for a downstream classiﬁcation task. In addition to the baselines mentioned above, we also compare
clusterability performance with unsupervised K-means and classiﬁcation with a K-Nearest Neighbor
classiﬁer, using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) to measure time series distance. All models are
implemented using Pytorch 1:3:1and trained on a machine with Quadro 400 GPU1. Below we
describe the datasets for our experiments in more detail.
3.1 S IMULATED DATA
The simulated dataset is designed to replicate very long, non-stationary, and high-frequency time
series for which the underlying dynamics change over time. Our generated time series consists of
2000 measurements for 3features, generated from 4different underlying states. We use a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) to generate the random latent states over time, and in each state, the time
series is generated from a different generative process, including Gaussian Processes (GPs) with
different kernel functions and Nonlinear Auto-regressive Moving Average models with different sets
of parameters ( and). Besides, for it to further resemble realistic (e.g., clinical) time series, two
features are always correlated. More details about this dataset are provided in the Appendix A.1.
For this experimental setup, we use a two-directional, single-layer recurrent neural network encoder.
We have selected this simple architecture because it handles time series with variable lengths, and it
easily extends to higher-dimensional inputs. The encoder model encodes multi-dimensional signal
windows of = 50 into10dimensional representation vectors. The window size is selected such
that it is long enough to contain information about the underlying state but not too long to span over
multiple underlying states. A more detailed discussion on the window size choice is presented in
Appendix A.4.
3.2 C LINICAL WAVEFORM DATA
For a real-world clinical experiment, we use the MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation dataset (Moody, 1983).
This dataset includes 25long-term Electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings ( 10hours in duration) of
human subjects with atrial ﬁbrillation. It consists of two ECG signals; each sampled at 250 Hz. The
signals are annotated over time for the following different rhythm types: 1) Atrial ﬁbrillation, 2)
Atrial ﬂutter, 3) A V junctional rhythm, and 4) all other rhythms. Our goal in this experiment is to
identify the underlying type of arrhythmia for each sample without any information about the labels.
This dataset is particularly interesting and makes this experiment challenging due to the following
special properties:
•The underlying heart rhythm changes over time in each sample. This is an opportunity to
evaluate how different representation learning frameworks can handle alternating classes in
non-stationary settings;
1Code implementation can be found at https://github.com/sanatonek/TNC_
representation_learning
5