Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
5 R ELATED WORK
While integral for many applications, unsupervised representation learning has been far less studied
for time series (Längkvist et al., 2014), compared to other domains such as vision or natural language
processing (Denton et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2015; Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2012; Wang & Gupta,
2015). One of the earliest approaches to unsupervised end-to-end representation learning in time
series is the use of auto-encoders (Choi et al., 2016a; Amiriparian et al., 2017; Malhotra et al.,
2017) and seq-to-seq models (Lyu et al., 2018), with the objective to train an encoder jointly with
a decoder that reconstructs the input signal from its learned representation. Using fully generative
models like variational auto-encoders is also useful for imposing properties like disentanglement,
which help with the interpretability of the representations (Dezfouli et al., 2019). However, in many
cases, like for high-frequency physiological signals, the reconstruction of complex time series can be
challenging; therefore, more novel approaches are designed to avoid this step. Contrastive Predictive
Coding (Oord et al., 2018; Löwe et al., 2019) learns representations by predicting the future in
latent space, eliminating the need to reconstruct the full input. The representations are such that the
mutual information between the original signal and the concept vector is maximally preserve using
a lower bound approximation and a contrastive loss. Very similarly, in Time Contrastive Learning
(Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016), a contrastive loss is used to predict the segment-ID of multivariate
time-series as a way to extract representation. Franceschi et al. (2019) employs time-based negative
sampling and a triplet loss to learn scalable representations for multivariate time series. Some other
approaches use inherent similarities in temporal data to learn representations without supervision.
For instance, in similarity-preserving representation learning (Lei et al., 2019), learned encodings are
constrained to preserve the pairwise similarities that exist in the time domain, measured by DTW
distance. Another group of approaches combines reconstruction loss with clustering objectives to
cluster similar temporal patterns in the encoding space (Ma et al., 2019).
In healthcare, learning representation of rich temporal medical data is extremely important for
understanding patients’ underlying health conditions. However, most of the existing approaches for
learning representations are designed for speciﬁc downstream tasks and require labeling by experts
(Choi et al., 2016b;c; Tonekaboni et al., 2020). Examples of similar works to representation learning
in the ﬁeld of clinical ML include computational phenotyping for discovering subgroups of patients
with similar underlying disease mechanisms from temporal clinical data (Lasko et al., 2013; Suresh
et al., 2018; Schulam et al., 2015), and disease progression modeling, for learning the hidden vector
of comorbidities representing a disease over time (Wang et al., 2014; Alaa & van der Schaar, 2019).
6 C ONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel unsupervised representation learning framework for complex multivariate
time series, called Temporal Neighborhood Coding (TNC). This framework is designed to learn
the underlying dynamics of non-stationary signals and to model the progression over time by
deﬁning a temporal neighborhood. The problem is motivated by the medical ﬁeld, where patients
transition between distinct clinical states over time, and obtaining labels to deﬁne these underlying
states is challenging. We evaluate the performance of TNC on multiple datasets and show that our
representations are generalizable and can easily be used for diverse tasks such as classiﬁcation and
clustering. We ﬁnally note that TNC is ﬂexible to be used with arbitrary encoder architectures;
therefore, the framework is applicable to many time series data domains. Moreover, in addition to
tasks presented in this paper, general representations can be used for several other downstream tasks,
such as anomaly detection, which is challenging in supervised learning settings for time series data in
sparsely labeled contexts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the Government of Canada
through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vector Institute. This research was undertaken, in part,
thanks to funding from the Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) and the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
9