Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
A.2 B ASELINE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Implementation of all baselines are included in the code base for reproducibility purposes, and
hyper-parameters for all baselines are tuned using cross-validation.
Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC): The CPC baseline ﬁrst processes the sequential signal
windows using an encoder Zt=Enc(Xt), with a similar architecture to the encoders of other
baselines. Next, an autoregressive model garaggregates all the information in Ztand summarizes
it into a context latent representation ct=gar(Zt). In our implementation, we have used a single
layer, a one-directional recurrent neural network with GRU cell and hidden size equal to the encoding
size as the auto-regressor. Like the original paper, the density ratio is estimated using a linear
transformation, and the model is trained for 1step ahead prediction.
Triplet-Loss (T-Loss): The triplet loss baseline is implemented using the original code made
available by the authors on Github3.
KNN and K-means: These two baselines for classiﬁcation and clustering are implemented using
the tslearn library4, that integrates distance metrics such as DTW. Note that evaluating DTW is
computationally expensive, and the tslearn implementation is not optimized. Therefore, for the
waveform data with windows of size 2500, we had to down-sampled the signal frequency by a factor
of two.
A.3 TNC IMPLEMENTATION EXTRA DETAILS
To deﬁne the neighborhood range in the TNC framework, as mentioned earlier, we use the Augmented-
Dickey Fuller (ADF) statistical test to determine this range ( ) as the region for which the signals
remain stationary. More precisely, we gradually increase the range, from a single window size up to
3 times the window size (the upper limit we set), and repeatedly perform the ADF test. We use the
p-value from this statistical test to determine whether the Null hypothesis can be rejected, meaning
that the signal is stationary. At the point where the p-value is above our deﬁned threshold ( 0:01), we
can no longer assume that the signal is stationary, and this is where we set the parameter. Now,
once the neighborhood is deﬁned, we make sure the non-neighboring samples are taken from the
distribution of windows with at least 4away fromWt, ensuring a low likelihood of belonging to the
neighborhood. Note that for implementation of ADF, we use the stats model library5. Unfortunately,
this implementation is not optimized and does not support GPU computation, therefore evaluating
the neighborhood range using ADF slows down TNC framework training. As a future direction, we
are working on an optimized implementation of the ADF score for our framework.
A.4 S ELECTING THE WINDOW SIZE
The window size is an important factor in the performance of a representation learning framework,
not only for TNC but also for similar baselines such as CPC and triplet loss. Overall, the window size
should be selected such that it is long enough to contain information about the underlying state and
not too long to span over multiple underlying states. In our settings, we have selected the window
sizes based on our prior knowledge of the signals. For instance, in the case of an ECG signal, the
selected window size is equivalent to 7 seconds of recording, which is small enough such that the
ECG remains in a stable state and yet has enough information to determine that underlying state. Our
understanding of the time series data can help us select an appropriate window size, but we can also
experiment with different to learn this parameter. Table 4 shows classiﬁcation performance results
for the simulation setups, under different window sizes. We can clearly see the drop in performance
for all baseline methods when the window size is too small or too large.
3https://github.com/White-Link/UnsupervisedScalableRepresentationLearningTimeSeries
4https://tslearn.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
5https://www.statsmodels.org/dev/generated/statsmodels.tsa.stattools.
adfuller.html
14