Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
UNSUPERVISED REPRESENTATION LEARNING
FOR TIMESERIES WITH
TEMPORAL NEIGHBORHOOD CODING
Sana Tonekaboni
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
The Hospital for Sick Children
stonekaboni@cs.toronto.eduDanny Eytan
The Hospital for Sick Children
biliary.colic@gmail.com
Anna Goldengerg
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
The Hospital for Sick Children
anna.goldenberg@utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
Time series are often complex and rich in information but sparsely labeled and
therefore challenging to model. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised frame-
work for learning generalizable representations for non-stationary time series. Our
approach, called Temporal Neighborhood Coding (TNC), takes advantage of the
local smoothness of a signal’s generative process to deﬁne neighborhoods in time
with stationary properties. Using a debiased contrastive objective, our framework
learns time series representations by ensuring that in the encoding space, the
distribution of signals from within a neighborhood is distinguishable from the
distribution of non-neighboring signals. Our motivation stems from the medical
ﬁeld, where the ability to model the dynamic nature of time series data is especially
valuable for identifying, tracking, and predicting the underlying patients’ latent
states in settings where labeling data is practically impossible. We compare our
method to recently developed unsupervised representation learning approaches
and demonstrate superior performance on clustering and classiﬁcation tasks for
multiple datasets.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Real-world time-series data is high dimensional, complex, and has unique properties that bring about
many challenges for data modeling (Yang & Wu, 2006). In addition, these signals are often sparsely
labeled, making it even more challenging for supervised learning tasks. Unsupervised representation
learning can extract informative low-dimensional representations from raw time series by leveraging
the data’s inherent structure, without the need for explicit supervision. These representations are
more generalizable and robust, as they are less specialized for solving a single supervised task.
Unsupervised representation learning is well studied in domains such as vision (Donahue & Simonyan,
2019; Denton et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2015) and natural language processing (Radford et al.,
2017; Young et al., 2018; Mikolov et al., 2013), but has been underexplored in the literature for time
series settings. Frameworks designed for time series need to be efﬁcient and scalable because signals
encountered in practice can be long, high dimensional, and high frequency. Moreover, it should
account for and be able to model dynamic changes that occur within samples, i.e., non-stationarity of
signals.
The ability to model the dynamic nature of time series data is especially valuable in medicine. Health
care data is often organized as a time series, with multiple data types, collected from various sources
at different sampling frequencies, and riddled with artifacts and missing values. Throughout their stay
at the hospital or within the disease progression period, patients transition gradually between distinct
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~stonekaboni/
1arXiv:2106.00750v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jun 2021