II. T HEROOTS OF RNN
In this section, we will derive the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) from differential equations [60, 61]. Let ⃗ s(t)be the value
of the d-dimensional state signal vector and consider the general nonlinear first-order non-homogeneous ordinary differential
equation, which describes the evolution of the state signal as a function of time, t:
d⃗ s(t)
dt=⃗f(t) +⃗ϕ (1)
where ⃗f(t)is ad-dimensional vector-valued function of time, t∈R+, and ⃗ϕis a constant d-dimensional vector.
One canonical form of ⃗f(t)is:
⃗f(t) =⃗h(⃗ s(t), ⃗ x(t)) (2)
where ⃗ x(t)is the d-dimensional input signal vector and ⃗h(⃗ s(t), ⃗ x(t))is a vector-valued function of vector-valued arguments.
The resulting system,
d⃗ s(t)
dt=⃗h(⃗ s(t), ⃗ x(t)) +⃗ϕ (3)
comes up in many situations in physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering [65, 72].
In certain cases, one starts with sandxas entirely “analog” quantities (i.e., functions not only of time, t, but also of another
independent continuous variable, ⃗ξ,denoting the coordinates in multi-dimensional space). Using this notation, the intensity of
an input video signal displayed on a flat 2-dimensional screen would be represented as x(⃗ξ, t)with⃗ξ∈R2. Sampling x(⃗ξ, t)
on a uniform 2-dimensional grid converts this signal to the representation x(⃗i, t), where ⃗iis now a discrete 2-dimensional
index. Finally, assembling the values of x(⃗i, t)for all permutations of the components of the index, ⃗i, into a column vector,
produces ⃗ x(t)as originally presented in Equation 3 above.
One special case of ⃗f(t)in Equation 2 is:
⃗f(t) =⃗ a(t) +⃗b(t) +⃗ c(t) (4)
whose constituent terms, ⃗ a(t),⃗b(t), and ⃗ c(t), are d-dimensional vector-valued functions of time, t. Equation 4 is called the
“Additive Model” in Brain Dynamics research literature, because it adds the terms, possibly nonlinear, that determine the rate
of change of neuronal activities, or potentials, ⃗ s(t). As a cornerstone of neural network research, the abstract form of the
Additive Model in Equation 4 has been particularized in many ways, including incorporating the effects of delays, imposing
“shunting” (or “saturating”) bounds on the state of the system, and other factors. Biologically motivated uses of the Additive
Model span computational analyses of vision, decision making, reinforcement learning, sensory-motor control, short-term and
long-term memory, and the learning of temporal order in language and speech [18]. It has also been noted that the Additive
Model generalizes the Hopfield model [23], which, while rooted in biological plausibility, has been influential in physics and
engineering [18, 19]. In fact, a simplified and discretized form of the Additive Model played a key role in linking the nonlinear
dynamical systems governing morphogenesis, one of the fundamental aspects of developmental biology, to a generalized version
of the Hopfield network [23], and applying it to an engineering problem in image processing [59, 62].
Consider a saturating Additive Model in Equation 4 with the three constituent terms, ⃗ a(t),⃗b(t), and ⃗ c(t), defined as follows:
⃗ a(t) =Ks−1X
k=0⃗ ak(⃗ s(t−τs(k))) (5)
⃗b(t) =Kr−1X
k=0⃗bk(⃗ r(t−τr(k))) (6)
⃗ r(t−τr(k)) =G(⃗ s(t−τr(k))) (7)
⃗ c(t) =Kx−1X
k=0⃗ ck(⃗ x(t−τx(k))) (8)
where ⃗ r(t), the readout signal vector, is a warped version of the state signal vector, ⃗ s(t). A popular choice for the element-wise
nonlinear, saturating, and invertible “warping” (or “activation”) function, G(z), is an optionally scaled and/or shifted form of
3