168 CognComput(2019)11:159–171
producing this AI is not justified with its use. When the
level of automation matches the level of autonomy, the AIis trustworthy, and the overall system is balanced.
The risk in the human-AI relationship could be traced to
who is doing what in each of the four components (sense-making, decision-making, execution ability and execution
authority), resulting in a number of situations as shown in
Table 4.
Table 4assumes that a full block is assigned to either
the AI or the human. For example, the overall sense-makingfunctional-block is a human’s responsibility alone or theAI’s alone. The human-AI relationship is normally designedon a finer level of granularity. Since the interaction of a
human with an AI would invoke multiple functions, Lee
and See [52] referred to this fine level of granularity asfunction specificity, where the human interacts with specific
functions. One function may be trustworthy, while another
may not. This situation may cause the human to distrustthe overall system. This naturally takes us back to function
allocation and the need for a smart allocation logic, such as
e-cookie, to manage the relationship and ensure trustworthyhuman-AI interaction.A central point in the discussion above is to be able to
assess the level of autonomy. The literature relies on indirectindicators to assess the level of autonomy. In particular,
performance has been a central focus in designing these
indicators.
Neglect tolerance [54] represents the reduction in an
autonomous system performance when it is being neglectedby its human supervisor. A fully autonomous system willcontinue to function at the same level, while a semi-
autonomous system will suffer from severe drops in
performance. In effect, neglect tolerance measures howskilled a system is.
Interaction efficiency [ 54] complements the above metric.
A fully autonomous system could successfully undertake atask without human intervention. However, the performanceof that system may improve once a human interacts with
it. If effect, interaction efficiency measures the level of
competency a skilled system has.
Neglect Benevolence [55] represents the time an
autonomous system needs to stabilise between two succes-sive instructions. This time could be seen equivalent to theconcept of task switching, and represents the time needed
Table 4 The risk in the human-AI relationship
Human control Sense-making Decision-making Execution ability Execution authority Nature of risk
Absolute H H H H Limited human cognition and bounded rationality
could lead to high errors, information overload,
and inability to manage complex tasks.
High AI H H H Undesirably biased analytics could drive the
human to unfair decisions, while human bias andlimited cognition could add more complexity tothe mix.
High H AI H H Undesirably biased recommendations could make
the human accountable for unethical or legallyuncompliant decisions, although the human couldbe overwhelmed by the available data, and theirown bias and limited cognition could add morecomplexity to the mix.
Medium AI AI H H In the absence of transparency and explainabil-
ity of the AI, the human does not have enoughinformation to form a judgement regarding thechosen decision. Information and situation com-plexity could overload the human. The humancould become accountable for inappropriate deci-sions.
Low AI AI AI H In the absence of transparency and explainability
of the AI, the human has no understanding ofthe rationale of the decision. Information andsituation complexity could overload the human.The human’s accountability is blinded.
Low AI AI H AI The AI controls human actions and could lead the
human to wrong actions.
None AI AI AI AI The human is out of the loop, legal responsibilitiesand accountabilities of the decision are bothunclear.