160 CognComput(2019)11:159–171
landscape has evolved steadily from simple automation to
advanced automation that can respond better than a human
in a specific situation. For example, a collision avoidance
system in a car can sense danger faster than a human and
can execute a resolution strategy in a time critical, life-
or-death situation. Despite this long history of physical
and basic-level cognitive augmentation, never before havehumans been able to augment their intelligence. Tools,
including computers, have always been under significant
human control. The human is the master and the tool hasalways been the slave that has no mind of its own tochallenge its human master.
Artificial intelligence (AI) promised for many years to
revolutionise this form of augmentation. Since its inception,AI has promised to solve problems on behalf of the human
independently; it can understand humans and communicate
with them, and it can even challenge humans in their uniquecharacteristic: natural intelligence. The Turing test [10]h a s
been the primary test for AI, challenging AI developers
to design an AI to be indistinguishable from humans [11].However, for decades, the promise of AI was bigger thanits reality, creating valleys of AI death [11], where far more
complex properties of humans are still in their infancy in the
AI world.
Over the last decade, the fate of AI has started to turn,
together with its enabling technologies, such as sensors,communication, the Internet, computer speed and storage.Micro-services [12], which break down large tasks into
many small programs that can be distributed everywhere
and anywhere and be summoned on demand when theneed arises, offered industry an opportunity to replace asingle giant AI program with many independent services
performing specialised functions [ 13]. This concept of
micro-services is used today by many companies, including
Microsoft, and has been the basis for some of the most
recent media stunts, such as those associated with the robot
Sophia becoming the first robot to be granted citizenshipby a country [ 14]. Micro-services will not only conceal
the reality of AI affairs today but will also allow suddenunanticipated tipping points to appear in the technologicallandscape of AI. As we approach these tipping points, weneed to pose the question: what is AI exactly, and what roles
should humans play in safeguarding society against AI?
WhatIsArtiﬁcialIntelligence?
There are many definitions of AI [ 15,16], thanks to the
complexity of expressing the concept of intelligence in
finite words and the blend of beauty and ambiguity inhuman language. These attempts spent little time arguing
what “artificial” refers to in AI and much time arguing
what “intelligence” is. Properly, computational intelligenceis a more adequate terminology to avoid the philosophyof what artificial is and what it is not, and to focus moretechnologically on the fact that the AI I discuss in this
article is of a computational nature. Nevertheless, I start by
offering my own definitions for AI for two reasons. First, tocommunicate to the reader what AI means to me, which will
facilitate an understanding of the remainder of this paper.
Second, to offer a structure for this paper that naturallyunfolds the relationship between AI and humans as well as
that between AI and other concepts and research areas, such
as autonomy, smart autonomous systems, trusted autonomyand robotics.
I begin with my functional definition of AI:
Definition 21 Artificial intelligence is concerned with the
design of computer algorithms, methods and methodologies
that enable machines to: understand the world and assess
themselves and their context to identify hazards, threatsand opportunities affecting their goals; generate, choose
and execute appropriate courses of actions to achieve their
goals; learn to improve their performance and adapt tochanges in their surroundings; and educate and transfer theirknowledge to others (humans and machines).
I like to simplify the above definition technologically to
the following:
Definition 22 Artificial intelligence aims to design algo-
rithms to provide computers with cognitive skills and com-
petencies for sense-making and decision-making.
These two definitions are anchored in the underlying
philosophy of this paper. The first lists the characteristics ofdifferent AI algorithms to be able to:
– interpret data, represent and understand context and
situations
– assess opportunities and risks in contexts and situations
– design, plan and generate courses of actions, select and
execute one or more of them, and reason about and
explain the choices they make,
– learn and adapt
– share knowledge by transferring it to other AIs or,
through explanation, to a human.
The second definition posits AI as the automation
of cognition (machine cognition) to develop skills andcompetencies to perform tasks. It highlights the two major
streams of applications we see in today’s world of AI:
data analytics, which focuses on analysing, interpreting andtransforming data into knowledge, and autonomy, whichfocuses on producing actions that assist the AI in achieving
its own design objectives.