CognComput(2019)11:159–171 163
This led to the Australian born CoCyS [26] concept,
which revolutionised the adaptation process from a machine
adapting to a human to smart adaptive agents (called “e-
cookies”) that act as autonomous relationship managers
between humans and machines. In essence, we couldimagine that it is possible to standardise all AI systems
by adding to the AI a front-end that communicates with
the human, assess the human trustworthiness, and mostimportantly, is able to present to the human information
at sufficient pace and form suitable for the human to
understand and act on, while simultaneously able totranslate back and forth these information with its internalcomponents. CoCyS offer an alternative that is more design
friendly, cost effective, and could be designed and added
to any existing system. Similar to human relationshipmanagers, e-cookies are AI relationship managers with their
sole responsibility being to manage the relationship between
humans and other AIs or autonomous systems. For example,e-cookies do not play chess, but they interface between
the human who is playing chess and the AI recommender
system who is supporting this human to play chess. E-cookies sit in between to ensure that the human and the AIrecommender system work in harmony and in a trust-worthy
manner.
Each e-cookie analyses different data sources (e.g. EEG,
muscle movements, heart rate, skin temperature, eye track-ing, voice, images) measured from the human under
observation, objectively inferring human states (e.g. work-load, attention, emotion). It equally analyses different
data sources from the automation itself to understand
autonomously the state of the task and predict its futurestates. An e-cookie then learns from this information toidentify when and how to adapt the function allocation strat-
egy. An e-cookie also acts as a smart regulator and/or smart
safety net to ensure the trustworthiness of the relationship.
CoCyS opened the way to a new and more sophisticated
form of AAL, one that is trust based, allowing an e-cookieto reallocate the functions between humans and machinesbased on trust indicators. If a machine is hacked or spoofed,
some functions are retracted from the machine and allocated
to the human. If there is a suspicious change in humanidentity, some functions that were performed by the humanare reallocated to the machine. Adaptive allocation created
a control agent between humans and machines. To avoid
confusion between the automation we have discussed so farand the automation of the agent responsible for adaptive
allocation, I refer to the latter as the allocation agent. An
example of an AI-based allocation agent I have discussedabove is e-cookie. This naturally raises the question of
who is doing the allocation agent job, and who has the
authority to make a decision to execute the allocationagent’s recommended course of action. These two questionswill be addressed next.FunctionAllocationResponsibility
Humans can control the allocation agent; thus, they can
assess a situation and adopt a strategy of when they wish
to push a function to the AI and when they wish toretract a function from the AI. Equally, the control of the
allocation agent can be automated. For example, when the
system notices a critical event, it can reallocate a functionfrom a human to a machine or vice versa based on a set
of predefined rules. E-cookie is an example of advanced
automation of the allocation agent. However, what type ofintervention triggers are needed for the human or AI tointervene, when and how? This line of thinking, however,
depends on the level of automation and the role the human
plays in the system.
Levels of automation (LOA) refers to the maturity level
of automation. Sheridan [33, 34] defined 10 levels using
a “who-centred” approach, while Endsley and Kaber [ 35]
defined another 10 levels from an information-sharing
and situation awareness perspective. The latter were then
refined, with Endsley [ 36,37] increasing the levels to 12.
The two approaches are presented in Table 1.
LOA have evolved in a culture of decision-making in
safety critical systems where the physical body of the AI inthe form of a robot is not part of the operator’s responsibilityand, therefore, is irrelevant to the relationship between
humans and machines. Nonetheless, in the field of human-
robot interaction, the relationship between the human andthe robot can take different forms.
Scholtz [38] defined five roles for humans in human-
robot interaction: supervisor, operator, teammate, bystanderand mechanic. In a supervisory role, the human overseeswhat the machine does and advises accordingly. A
supervisor does not become involved with low-level
tasks for which the machine is responsible. Instead, thesupervisor takes meta-actions and makes plans and high-
level decisions. An operator, however, monitors low-level
action-level tasks. A teleoperation scenario is an exampleof a human operator responsible for performing low-level
tasks. A teammate is a role in which the human works
collaboratively with the machine to perform the mission.They can both issue advice to each other and delegatetasks to one another. As a mechanic, the human modifies
any abnormal behaviour the machine displays or fixes a
mechanical problem with the machine. A bystander actsas a facilitator between the robot and the environment,
for example, a bystander might remove an obstacle from
the robot’s path if the robot is not designed for managingobstacles or if the robot is so expensive and fragile that such
damage would be costly.
In summary, a supervisor guides the robots, an operator
controls low-level actions, a teammate collaborates with the
robot to perform the mission, a mechanic fixes the robot