CognComput(2019)11:159–171 165
system might foresee a weather cell five minutes ahead.
The allocation agent assesses that the complexity of thissituation is not suitable for the autopilot to fly the aircraft
and hands over control to a human. The 5-min window
allows the human to overcome the effect of a surprise,comprehend the situation and prepare for action. If the time
window were five seconds instead, this would not provide
sufficient time for the human to perform the function.Therefore, time criticality depends not only on the decision
to be made but also on the capabilities of the agent that will
make the decision, the context and the exact situation theagent is facing.
The second influencing factor, skills to judge, relates
to when the human or machine is not sufficiently skilledto authorise; that is, the human or machine lacks theskill to judge whether a change in function allocation
should take place or not. The third factor concerns whether
the severity of consequences is high or not. Figure 1
summarises all possible combinations of these factors and
the recommended authority for the decision.
The red areas highlight the need and importance of
the pre-design analysis to ensure that either the human
or the machine has the necessary skills to judge the
appropriateness of a change in function allocation.
The table could be further adopted to suit the specific
context for adaptation to occur. For example, while a humancould authorise the action when the time is uncritical and
even when the machine is skilled, a skilled machine couldequally authorise the action if the human is overloaded.
RelationshipsofEquals:WhyIsTeaming
HardforAIAgents?
The discussion so far has highlighted the function allocation
problem and described the relationship between humansand machines purely in terms of function allocation. As
the LOA for machines approach Level 12, the relationship
between humans and machines changes in nature. Functionallocation focuses the effort on well-engineered concepts,leaving out elements where machines could have a different
intent from humans and could even “supervise” the human.Take, for example, a robot teacher supervising a child while
learning multiplication, or a robot coach supervising a groupof swimmers. In these cases, current LOA are insufficient,
and therefore limited in their abilities to describe these
future AI systems; hence, it would be restrictive to limit thediscussion of challenges in the human-AI relationship using
only LOA.
Scholtz’s roles [ 38], discussed above in the “ Function
Allocation Responsibility” section, could be useful here;they can be summarised functionally as to guide, to
control, to collaborate, to fix and to modulate. Withsmart (advanced AI-based) autonomous systems, we shouldassume that these functions are available for both humans
and automation. In one situation, the human might supervise
a robot performing low-level control, while in another, thehuman might perform the low-level control task while the
robot supervises the human. A first-aid robot could perform
a mechanical role to treat humans if they are injured.
When the AI takes an equal role to a human, the level of
control could take a multitude of forms, as shown in Table 2.
Clearly, before AI takes more control in the world, it
should reach a level of maturity that makes it, at least,able to collaborate with humans. Human-AI collaboration
is a non-trivial problem. Klien et al. [ 43] listed 10 different
challenges that the technology faces before AI can reach
the level of maturity required to collaborate with humans
as equals. I list these challenges here for completeness
(Table 3):
Scrutinising the 10 challenges above, one can easily
observe the gap between AI technology as it stands todayand the requirement for AI to be able to collaborateas equal to humans. For example, the second challengecalls for AI to be able to model humans’ intentions and
humans to be able to model AI’s intentions. A significant
amount of research is still under way to infer humanintention in simple human-robot interaction tasks with
unsolved problems, never mind complex interaction tasks.
The research community is still developing solutions for AIto be, interpretable [ 2–4], transparent and explainable [ 1]
to allow humans to understand the intention of an AI anddevelop mutual predictability and shared understanding. Itis tempting for some to claim that taking the human out
Fig.1 Skills to judge