CognComput(2019)11:159–171 169
for task switching such that the system is able to perform
each task at its best.
The primary problems in the indicators above include
being post-development; that is, they are proposed by thehuman-robot interaction literature where the system hasalready been designed and built. Therefore, they cannot
guide the design of the system efficiently. Our discussion
in this paper suggests another set of indicators that couldguide the design of the system, functional analysis. By
decomposing the mission into functions, weighting each
function based on its level of criticality and complexity ofthe skills required to perform them, level of autonomy couldbe measured as the percentage of the weighted sum of those
functions implemented and those available for a mission.
The post-development indicators could then be used as
modifiers for testing each function. For example, neglecttolerance and interaction efficiency could then be measured
on the level of individual functions. Similarly, neglectbenevolence could be evaluated between each two functions
that could be required in a mission to operate serially. From
this discussion, we could formalise the metrics as follows:
AutonomyLevel =100∗sum
M
iWi
sumN
jWj
AutonomyLevel =100∗sumM
iWi∗NTi∗IEi
sumN
jWj∗NTj∗IEj
AutonomyLevel =50∗sumM
iWi∗NTi∗IEi
sumN
jWj∗NTj∗IEj
+50∗/summationtextMM
ikWi∗Wk∗NBik/summationtextNN
jlWj∗Wl∗NBjl
where Nis the total number of functions required to
complete a mission effectively and efficiently, Mis the
number of functions that have been implemented, Wiis
the weight of function ireflecting its criticality and skill
complexity, NTiis neglect tolerance for function i,IEiis
the interaction efficiency for function i,a n dNBikis neglect
benevolence for function iwhen followed up by function k.
All metrics above generate values between 0 and 100%;
thus, they are bounded. Their range could be mapped
to categories such as low, medium and high autonomy
level based on the specifics of the mission and design
requirements.
ManyQuestions,FewAnswers
The paper has drawn on a large transdisciplinary body
of literature to demonstrate that there has been a wealthof research conducted in which scientists, technologists
and engineers have thought about the relationship betweenhumans and AI. While methodologies exist, new funda-
mental and challenging questions continue to emerge. The
complexity of AI is increasing; thus, what used to workjust in a structured safety critical environment, such as air
traffic control, needs now to be used in unstructured envi-
ronments, in the hands of the public, and in situations whereit is not necessarily possible to think through responses in
advance. This calls for new test and evaluation methods [ 56]
and leaves us with more questions than the current state of
science can readily answer. I will focus on a few.
Should humans have control over AI? AI operates in a
social context. Whatever roles it will play as a technology, itwill be serving a role in society. Some aspects of this role arebetter performed by AI in which human intervention could
be undesirable, while other aspects need human approval.
For example, a self-driving car should self-manage itselfwhen an obstacle suddenly appears. In this situation, any
delegation to a human could be fatal, since the human does
not have the cognitive capacity to respond in time. Thedestination of the self-driving car is a human choice, whichthe human needs to approve. The answer, therefore, is not
a straightforward yes or no; it is a matter of when and
how. Function allocation gives us the scientific foundationsto search for an answer. As more AI becomes integrated
into society, we need to simultaneously dig deep to explore
the functions and design the required functional allocationlogic.
What are the risks associated with becoming over-reliant
on AI? Under-reliance represents inefficiency, while over-reliance represents risk. This question raises the importanceof understanding the true trustworthiness of an AI and its
capability, and of conducting a continuous assessment of
its behaviour to calibrate levels of trustworthiness. Usinga risk lens, the answer would also lie in the frequency of
being over-reliant, the magnitude of consequences and the
trustworthiness of the AI. Over-reliance will lead to negativeconsequences. The more negative consequences we see,
the more likely we will distrust an AI and remove it from
service. Can we design triggers for intervention? Shouldhumans intervene in the functioning of the AI? If yes, whenshould they? A good starting point towards answering these
questions is the literature on function allocation. Different
forms of human-AI relationships call for different answersto these questions. If the AI is skilled in a task where
it is supervising a human, it would be inefficient for the
human to intervene in the AI’s task. In a supervisory controltask where the human supervises the AI, clearly the human
is authorised and exists to intervene with the AI when
needed.
Recalling that e-Cookies are AI agents that act as
relationship managers between humans and autonomous