CognComput(2019)11:159–171 167
a speaker’s expertness, reliability, intentions, activeness,
personal attractiveness and the majority opinion of thelistener’s associates as elements of trust. Thus, trust blends
a complex array of interaction factors including attitude,
beliefs, control, emotion, risk and power.
Behavioural psychologists see trust from a social
dilemma lens. Deutsch [ 50,51], for example, viewed trust
as a path of ambiguity that could lead to one of two possibleoutcomes: one is perceived to have negative valency that is
greater than the positive valency perceived to be associated
with the second. The trustee controls the outcome anddecides which event will occur. If the trustor chooses thispath, the trustor is said to trust the trustee; otherwise,
the trustor distrusts the trustee. The literature on trust is
immense, with definitions from many perspectives. Twocommon definitions are selected. Mayer et al. defined trust
as “willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions
of another party based on the expectation that the otherwill perform a particular action important to the trustor,
irrespective of the ability of monitor or control that other
party.” [48, p. 712] Lee and See “the attitude that anagent will help achieve an individual’s goals in a situationcharacterised by uncertainty and vulnerability.” [ 52,p .5 1 ]
The common thread in these two definitions, and many
other definitions in the literature, is that trust exposesa person to vulnerability [ 26]. Borrowing definitions of
vulnerabilities from the risk assessment literature could helpus better understand human-AI trust. A vulnerability couldbe broken down as follows [53]:
Vulnerability =f(Capability,Opportunity,Intent)
(1)
The above relationship explains the three dimensions
affecting a vulnerability. The first is the capability of thetrustee. The more capable a trustee is, the more serious a
vulnerability could become because it could cause moredamage if the trustee defects. The second is the opportunity
that the trustor gives to the trustee. When the trustor trusts
the trustee, the trustor gives the trustee an opportunity todefect. The third is the intent of the trustee. A capable trustee
that is given an opportunity (is trusted) will not defect if the
intent is good.
The above explanation fits perfectly with AI. The
capability of an AI represents its skills and competencylevels, and thus, the level of automation of that AI. Theopportunity is the level of autonomy, the degrees of freedomwith which the AI is permitted to execute its actions and
the authority delegated to it. The intent in simple AI agents
is the design intent, whereas the intent in AI agents thatlearn and adapt could change as they interact with the
environment. Thus, human-AI trust could be mapped across
the two dimensions of level of automation and level ofautonomy, assuming the AI’s intent is aligned with the
human’s intent.
Figure 2summarises the human-AI relationship using a
vulnerability lens. If the intent of the AI is not aligned with
that of the human, the AI is likely to make decisions that
disappoint the human and cause the human to suspect the
intent of the AI, thus leading to a situation of human mistrustregardless of the AI’s level of automation (capability) and
level of autonomy (opportunity). If the intent of the AI is
aligned with the human, automation and autonomy start tomoderate the relationship. When the level of automation
is lower than the level of autonomy, the AI is given
opportunities that exceed its abilities, leading to the humanover-relying on the AI, culminating in disappointment,distrust and an untrustworthy AI. When the level of
automation is greater than the level of autonomy, the AI
is more capable than the opportunities it is given. In thisunderutilisation case, the trustworthy AI performs the tasks
successfully despite being underused but the high cost of
Fig.2 The human-AI
relationship using a
vulnerability lens