CognitiveComputation(2019)11:159–171
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-018-9619-0
SocialIntegrationofArtiﬁcialIntelligence:Functions,Automation
AllocationLogicandHuman-AutonomyTrust
HusseinA.Abbass1
Received:14August2018/Accepted:20November2018/Publishedonline:14January2019
©TheAuthor(s)2019
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) is finding more uses in the human society resulting in a need to scrutinise the relationship
between humans and AI. Technology itself has advanced from the mere encoding of human knowledge into a machine todesigning machines that “know how” to autonomously acquire the knowledge they need, learn from it and act independentlyin the environment. Fortunately, this need is not new; it has scientific grounds that could be traced back to the inceptionof computers. This paper uses a multi-disciplinary lens to explore how the natural cognitive intelligence in a human couldinterface with the artificial cognitive intelligence of a machine. The scientific journey over the last 50 years will be examinedto understand the Human-AI relationship, and to present the nature of, and the role of trust in, this relationship. Risks and
opportunities sitting at the human-AI interface will be studied to reveal some of the fundamental technical challenges for a
trustworthy human-AI relationship. The critical assessment of the literature leads to the conclusion that any social integrationof AI into the human social system would necessitate a form of a relationship on one level or another in society, meaningthat humans will “always” actively participate in certain decision-making loops—either in-the-loop or on-the-loop—thatwill influence the operations of AI, regardless of how sophisticated it is.
Keywords Adaptive aiding ·Adaptive automation ·Artificial intelligence ·Augmented cognition ·Automation logic ·
Cognitive cyber symbiosis ·Function allocation ·Human-AI teaming ·Human-autonomy teaming ·Trust
Background
Since the inception of the human race, technologies have
been an integral part of human society. The Oldowan stone
tools [ 5] assisted humans 2.6 million years ago in farming,
hunting and construction. Simple tools created opportunitiesfor humans, providing them with more resources to support
their families and enabling them to improve their quality
of life. For millions of years, these technologies physicallyaugmented the human. Only a thousand years ago, when
the Chinese invented Suanpan [6] (one of the first forms of
a calculator known in history), did humankind start to seethe birth of cognitive augmentation: tools that help humans
/envelopebackHussein A. Abbass
h.abbass@adfa.edu.au
1School of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of New South Wales, Canberra,
ACT 2600, Australiato think faster and do complex counting and arithmetic
operations that cannot be done by the human brain alone.This form of augmentation enabled humans to be more
efficient in trade.
Digital calculators then added greater functionalities
that ranged from complex calculations to the ability of
storing and memorising information. As humanity started
to develop the first electronic digital computers throughBabbage’s work in 1821 [7], new extensions to humancognition began to appear. Present day technology enables
a computer to augment humans’ planning abilities, as in the
case of a GPS planner in a car, and can memorise items
to extend human memory, as in the case of memorising
appointments using a calendar. Sensor technologies with
natural biological sensors enable humans to see, hear
and feel things they could not see, hear or feel before.
Robotic actuators allow humans to extend their body [8,
9] when they lose an arm or a leg, or when they need
extra strength, by using an exoskeleton to carry more
weight than they could normally support. The technological