166 CognComput(2019)11:159–171
Table 2 Roles of humans and ai in different control tasks
Human-led AI-led
Guidance Human guides, AI performs: a surgeon
guiding an AI during a medical proce-
dure [40].AI guides, human performs: AI guiding apilot to control the workload of air trafficcontrollers [41].
Control Human controls, AI senses and actuates:
human teleoperating a vehicle in min-ing [ 42].AI controls, human senses and actuates: asmart intelligent artificial limb.
Collaboration Human and AI work together, possibly as
equals: collaborative planning [43].
Fixing/mechanic Human fixes, AI performs: a human
engineer adjusting the actuators of ahumanoid robot to avoid falling whilewalking.AI fixes, human performs: an AI mod-ulating the level of insulin in humanblood [44].
Modulation/by-standing Human modulates the environment, AI
does: human removing obstacles from the
path of a robot that could damage the
robot.AI modulates the environment, humanperforms: an AI clearing land mines for
humans to advance [ 45].
of the loop will make collaboration easier because different
AIs could exchange intentions more efficiently in their owncomputer language than by attempting to learn intentions
or communicate them with a human. Even in this situation,
challenges 1, 7, 8, 9 and 10 impose significant burdenson the current most-advanced AI systems. For example,
negotiation alone is a computationally expensive, mostly
intractable problem [ 46].
The discussion above demonstrates that the development
of an AI that could truly collaborate, as an equal teammate,with humans is technologically distant from today. Evenif an AI exists that is so sophisticated that it can claim tobe more intelligent than a human, such an AI will struggle
significantly to work as a team member with other AIs
because of the computational complexity required to scalethe AI for team negotiation and self-synchronisation of
actions. Most of the challenges above could have solutions
once the context has been appropriately limited. Thetechnological reality discussed above for AIs working inopen-ended contexts does not preclude us having in the nearfuture very advanced AI systems that could truly outperform
humans in specific real-world tasks. These advanced AI
systems will require effective methodologies for their socialintegration in the human system and a level of trust to allow
them autonomy in their specific operating context. These AI
systems form the context for discussion in the next section.
Human-AITrust
Trust is the glue of social systems because it assists
humans to manage and reduce complexity in the world [47].
Some of the factors that allow a trustor to trust a trusteeinclude the ability to carry out a given task, benevolencetowards the trustor, and integrity such as fairness and
honesty [48]. Giffin [49] noted listeners’ perceptions of
Table 3 Ten challenges of human-automation collaboration, as listed in Klien et al. [ 43]
Challenge 1: To be a team player, an intelligent agent must fulfil the requirements of a Basic Compact [a commitment of goal
alignment] to engage in common-grounding activities.
Challenge 2: To be an effective team player, intelligent agents must be able to adequately model the other participants’ intentions and
actions vis- `a-vis the joint activity’s state and evolution - for example, are they having trouble? Are they on a standard path proceeding
smoothly? What impasses have arisen? How have others adapted to disruptions to the plan?
Challenge 3: Human-agent team members must be mutually predictable.
Challenge 4: Agents must be directable.Challenge 5: Agents must be able to make pertinent aspects of their status and intentions obvious to their teammates.
Challenge 6: Agents must be able to observe and interpret pertinent signals of status and intentions.
Challenge 7: Agents must be able to engage in goal negotiation.Challenge 8: Support technologies for planning and autonomy must enable a collaborative approach.
Challenge 9: Agents must be able to participate in managing attention.
Challenge 10: All team members must help control the costs of coordinated activity.