164 CognComput(2019)11:159–171
Table 1 Levels of automation from Endsley [ 36,37] and Sheridan [33, 34]
Endsley’s Levels Sheridan’s Levels
L1: Manual control: human performs all aspects of tasks. L1: Human performs whole job up to the point of turning it over to
the computer to implement.
L2: Information cueing: computer aids by highlighting key
information on screen or decluttering irrelevant information.L2: Computer helps by determining the options.
L3: Situation awareness support: system gathers key informationand integrates for levels 2 & 3 of situation awareness.L3: Computer helps to determine options and suggests one, whichhuman need not follow.
L4: Action support/teleoperation: computer aids by executing each
action as instructed.L4: Computer selects action and human may or may not perform it.
L5: Batch processing: computer completely performs singular or
sets of tasks commanded by human.L5: Computer selects action and implements it if human approves.
L6: Shared control: computer and human generate decisionoptions; human decides and performs with support.L6: Computer selects action and informs human in plenty of timeto stop it.
L7: Decision support: computer generates recommended options,
human decides (or inputs own choice) and system performs.L7: Computer performs whole job and necessarily tells human whatit did.
L8: Blended decision-making (management by consent): computergenerates recommended options and selects best; human mustconsent (or override) and system performs.L8: Computer performs whole job and tells human what it did onlyif human explicitly asks.
L9: Rigid system: computer generates recommended options from
which human may select (cannot override) and system performs.L9: Computer performs whole job and decides what the humanshould be told.
L10: Automated decision-making: computer generates recom-mended options along with human; system selects best and systemperforms.L10: Computer performs the whole job if it decides it should bedone and, if so, tells human, if it decides that the human should betold.
L11: Supervisory control (management by exception): computergenerates recommended options, selects best and system performs;human can intervene if desired.
L12: Full automation: computer performs all aspects of task with
no human intervention possible.
or its mistakes, and a bystander modulates the relationship
between the robot and the environment. Other forms of
human-machine relationships can be seen in the LOA table
above, such as shared control, supervisory control, mixedinitiatives or blended decision-making.
These different forms of human-AI relationships have a
significant impact on function allocation. A static functionallocation works in simple tasks where the exact divisionof labour between the AI and the human is clear. In
more complex tasks, where the environment is naturally
uncertain, it becomes more difficult to follow a staticfunction allocation. The authority for function allocation
becomes more important than ever and should be considered
in the design of the AI. Who should authorise a reallocation?Should the function allocation agent itself be allowed to
change? These questions will be addressed next.
FunctionAllocationAuthority
The allocation agent could be a human or an AI. It might
be delegated to authorise a change in function allocation oranother human or an AI might authorise the change. In thelatter case, the allocation agent makes a recommendation,
while the authoriser accepts or rejects this recommendation.Regardless of the nature of the allocation agent, the question
remains: what are the conditions for a machine to authorise
a change in function allocation? Inagaki [39] offered
examples for situations that could justify the machineauthorising such a decision and noted:
“The automation may be given the right to take an
automatic action for maintaining system safety, even whenan explicit directive may not have been given by an operatorat that moment, providing the operators have a clear
understanding about the circumstances and corresponding
actions which will be taken by the automation.” [ 39, p. 17]
While safety is indeed an important factor, it seems
more appropriate to generalise Inagaki’s perspective usinga risk lens. I distil from the literature three factors thatshould influence this decision: time criticality, skills to
judge and severity of consequences. In a situation where
the time needed to act is insufficient for a human to makethe decision, either the machine needs to decide or theconsequences of inaction need to be evaluated.
A function is time critical when the difference between
the time by which the decision needs to be made tobe an effective decision and the time required to make
that decision becomes smaller and approaches zero. An
allocation agent in an aircraft flying using the autopilot