162 CognComput(2019)11:159–171
Static allocation presents a multitude of problems. First,
it assumes that the suitability of a human or a machine
for a function does not change over the course of the
mission. This is clearly not the case, because the state of the
environment, AI and humans are all factors that influencethe suitability of a human or a machine for a particular
function in a particular context. In a situation with severe
consequences, a function that is performed by a machinemight need to be performed by a human, and vice versa—
a function that a human does well under normal workload
conditions might need to be switched to a machine if thehuman is overloaded.
Second, none of the three classes of static allocation
described above considers the human element. Each seeshumans as machines, and the allocation is based purelyon factors such as performance and cost. This could
lead to assigning humans uninteresting functions, causing
human boredom and demotivation. A third problem is theunderlying assumption that it is the designer who decides
what to allocate to humans and machines. The human
operator does not have a say and is assumed to “listen” towhatever the designer has decided when using this form of“technologically centred design”.
The problems described above gave birth to a new
category of function allocation called adaptive allocation,developed to serve a “human-centred design”. Different
names of this category emerged, including adaptive aiding,
adaptive automation, and adaptive allocation, but the origincan be traced back to the early 1960s [18, 19]. The
concept was popularised with a United States Air Forceproject in the 1970s on cockpit automation [ 20]. Adaptive
allocation changes function allocation during a mission.Rouse [21] discussed three strategies (called automation
allocation logic [AAL]) to control when a change in
function allocation needs to be triggered:
– critical event logic, where automation hands over a
function to a human if there is a critical event or vice
versa
– measurement-based logic, where the handover could
occur in any direction at any point in time based ona continuous measurement of a state such as humanworkload level
– modelling-based logic, where human performance is
captured in a model that predicts future humanworkload and makes decisions about when a differentfunction allocation is needed.
The earlier versions of adaptive allocation focused on simple
models of human performance that were built through
observational research. This was true for adaptive aid-
ing [19] and adaptive automation [ 18]. Research areas such
as human-machine interaction [22], man-machine symbio-sis [23], human-machine teaming [5] and human-autonomyteaming [24] have largely relied on simple models to eitheranalyse or model the relationship. Meanwhile, a second evo-lutionary path has been growing steadily since the 1970s,
which has led to the newer concepts of augmented cogni-
tion [25] and cognitive-cyber symbiosis (CoCyS; [ 26]).
However, dynamic function allocation could distract
humans, disturb their situational awareness and, conse-quently, negatively affect safety and performance in thetasks assigned to them. Moreover, if the allocation is
based on subjective data and/or objective data that inter-
fere with the task with which a human is involved, theallocation errors could increase, resulting in higher errorsin the human-AI relationship. Therefore, the use of aug-
mented cognition and CoCyS attempts to overcome these
limitations.
Augmented cognition [27, 27] is encephalography
(EEG)-based adaptive allocation. EEG represents thesignals occurring because of brain activities that aretriggered by brain functions. In 1875, Richard Caton
demonstrated that fluctuations in brain activities follow
mental activities. This finding meant that brain signals couldpossibly indicate the impact of the mental processing ahuman is experiencing while performing certain functions.
However, Caton’s work (as cited in [28]) was demonstrated
on animals. It was not until 1929 that Hans Berger [ 29]
published the first study to record EEG data from humans.
In 1934, Adrian and Matthews [30] demonstrated that not
only are brain waves triggered by mental activities but alsoby external stimuli, which could influence the way they are
triggered. This idea was possibly the first scientific evidence
for neurofeedback, a recent field in clinical psychology [ 28],
which retrains the human brain to produce signals to correctphysiological causes of some psychological illnesses, such
as attention deficit disorder.
In 1970, the United States Department of Defense (DoD)
recognised the potential of this maturing line of research
and embarked on two projects on biocybernetics [ 31]a
 n d
brain computer interfaces [32]. The ability to record and
interpret human EEG opened a variety of opportunities,
including the potential for deriving workload, attention
and situational awareness objective indicators from EEG toguide AAL, even in real time in an operating environment.Another United States DoD activity in the early 2000s led to
the new concept of augmented cognition. As EEG sensors
developed and became more reliable, the science evolvedto a reasonable technological maturity level, and function
allocation research using EEG became well established.
In this line of research, function allocation logic haspossibly been the simplest form of AI. It was pre-designed,
lacked flexibility because it did not change its behaviour
once deployed and, simply put, lacked the smartness andautonomy to match the complexity of the AI it wasattempting to manage in the first instance.