CognComput(2019)11:159–171 161
In data analytics—a core step for sense-making–-the results
of the analysis inform humans or another AI to identify an
appropriate course of action. The classic cycle of data min-
ing and knowledge discovery in databases commence with
an objective for the analysis and a set of data that thengoes through a series of steps including cleaning, feature
selection, application of a machine learning technique, and
identification of an appropriate model for point/class pre-diction, or some sort of summarisation and understanding
of the data through association rules, clustering and/or sum-
marisation techniques. The output of data analytics enablesthe decision maker (human or AI) to understand the envi-ronment, make prediction and anticipate consequences of
options.
Since data analytics does not produce decisions per se,
the risk of that AI needs to be managed by those who willuse the output of data analytics to generate the actions.
For example, a panel display in a vehicle shows the resultof the analysis performed by the AI to transform raw
signals received by the car into information to be used by
the driver, for example, external temperature informationand navigation. The human could choose to ignore thisinformation or use it as appropriate.
Decision-making produces actions based on the data and
understanding provided to the agent (a human or an AI). Ifthe decision-making agent acts directly on the environment,
part of the risk of that decision is transferred to the inputs
to that agent. A loan assessment tool makes decisions byitself and acts on the information it receives. If the tool
guarantees to make the right decision, this would likely be
conditional on receiving the correct information with anappropriate level of accuracy. This tool could still makethe wrong decision if the human feeds it with incorrect
information. Nevertheless, the tool might simply make a
recommendation to a human who has the authority toaccept or reject this recommendation; hence, the risk of the
decision could still be managed.
Autonomy requires an AI with both sense-making
and decision-making abilities, as well as the ability andauthority to execute the decision. This form of AI senses
information from its environment, assesses context, makesdecisions, executes the decisions and is authorised toexecute these decisions. An autonomous loan agent would
collect information about the borrower, analyse the risk
profile of the borrower and their financial abilities, decidethe size of loan the borrower may obtain, initiate the loan
in the system and authorise the loan. When an autonomous
loan agent works together with a human financial adviser,the human-AI relationship needs to be considered at the
design stage of the AI development and during human
training. Since the relationship has been a long-studiedresearch topic, it is pertinent to discuss the literature for thereader to appreciate that the design of this relationship couldhappen on a fine level of granularity, which manages the risk
for the society. While challenges exist, as I discuss later in
this article, an important piece of enabling science revolves
around the concept of function allocation.
FunctionAllocationtoHumansand
Machines
At the design stage of a new technology, the potential
missions and contexts for which the technology will be
used are analysed to identify the different functions required
for these missions. If the mission is to drive a car from
one place to another, we could have a function to observe
the environment, a function to evaluate the observations to
understand the current location of the car, a function to
detect hazards, a function that plans the next location of
the car, a function to decide on appropriate acceleration
and de-acceleration rates to control the velocity of the car,
and a function to steer the wheel. These seem sufficient for
our purpose to avoid unnecessarily complete enumeration
of this cumbersome task. When a car has some levelof automation, which functions should we delegate to
automation, when and how? These questions have been the
subject of a long history of research focusing on function
allocation: the process by which functions are allocated to
humans and machines. It is a form of division of labour.
Function allocation raises three key questions:
– Methodology: How should functions between humans
and machines be allocated?
– Responsibility: Who is doing the allocation?
– Authority: Who can authorise an allocation?
FunctionAllocationMethodologies
Two distinct categories of methods exist for functionallocation: static and adaptive allocation. Rouse and
Rouse [17] defined three classes of static allocation:
– comparison allocation, where the better performer is
chosen; that is, if the human is better than the machine
in one function, the human is chosen, otherwise themachine
– leftover allocation, where every function that could be
automated is allocated to automation and only thosefunctions for which no automation is possible areallocated to humans
– economic allocation, which uses a cost-benefit analysis
approach, where if automating a function is not cost-effective, even if it could be automated, it is assigned to
a human.