Towards JavaScript program repair with Generative Pre-trained
Transformer (GPT-2)
Márk Lajkó
mlajko@inf.u-szeged.huViktor Csuvik
csuvikv@inf.u-szeged.hu
Department of Software Engineering
MTA-SZTE Research Group on
Artificial Intelligence
University of Szeged
Szeged, HungaryLászló Vidács
lac@inf.u-szeged.hu
ABSTRACT
The goal of Automated Program Repair (APR) is to find a fix to
software bugs, without human intervention. The so-called Gener-
ate and Validate (G&V) approach deemed to be the most popular
method in the last few years, where the APR tool creates a patch
and it is validated against an oracle. Recent years for Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) were of great interest, with new pre-trained
models shattering records on tasks ranging from sentiment analysis
to question answering. Usually these deep learning models inspire
the APR community as well. These approaches usually require a
large dataset on which the model can be trained (or fine-tuned) and
evaluated. The criterion to accept a patch depends on the underly-
ing dataset, but usually the generated patch should be exactly the
same as the one created by a human developer. As NLP models are
more and more capable to form sentences, and the sentences will
form coherent paragraphs, the APR tools are also better and better
at generating syntactically and semantically correct source code. As
the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) model is now avail-
able to everyone thanks to the NLP and AI research community,
it can be fine-tuned to specific tasks (not necessarily on natural
language). In this work we use the GPT-2 model to generate source
code, to the best of our knowledge, the GPT-2 model was not used
for Automated Program Repair so far. The model is fine-tuned for a
specific task: it has been taught to fix JavaScript bugs automatically.
To do so, we trained the model on 16863 JS code snippets, where
it could learn the nature of the observed programming language.
In our experiments we observed that the GPT-2 model was able
to learn how to write syntactically correct source code almost on
every attempt, although it failed to learn good bug-fixes in some
cases. Nonetheless it was able to generate the correct fixes in most
of the cases, resulting in an overall accuracy up to 17.25%.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
APR’22, May 19, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9285-3/22/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524459.3527350CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Natural language generation;
Neural networks; •Hardware →Failure recovery, maintenance
and self-repair ;•Software and its engineering →Software
testing and debugging.
KEYWORDS
Automated Program Repair, Machine learning, JavaScript, Code
Refinement, GPT
ACM Reference Format:
Márk Lajkó, Viktor Csuvik, and László Vidács. 2022. Towards JavaScript
program repair with Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT-2). In Inter-
national Workshop on Automated Program Repair (APR’22), May 19, 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3524459.3527350
1 INTRODUCTION
The existence of large datasets and the availability of cheap com-
puting capacities have facilitated the great development of artificial
intelligence and machine learning in recent years [ 48]. The tech-
nologies underpinning AI have made huge leaps in the past decade,
bringing exciting applications such as language understanding, vi-
sion recognition, and intelligent digital assistants. Recent years
also changed the field of Automated program Repair, where several
data-driven approach has been published thus forming a separate
branch of research [ 34]. These techniques usually create a large
train-test-validate database and evaluate the APR tool on that, just
like a traditional ML model. The criterion to accept a patch as
a correct one is rather strict in these cases: the produced patch
should be exactly the same as the one which were created by the
developer who fixed the bug. By comparison tools that follow the
Generate and Validate approach, validation is usually done against
an oracle, which is usually the test suite. A program is marked as
a possible fix, if it passes all the available test cases. This latter
condition gives no assurance that the program is correct , since over-
and underfitting [ 27] often occurs, resulting in inadequate patches.
Although there are some approaches that tried to tackle with this
problem [ 8,10,14], the question of patch correctness is considered
to be still open [15].
As more and more data-driven APR approaches are being pub-
lished, the recorded results are promising [ 9,10,22,31,46]. The
architecture of the underlying model and the dataset varies from
paper to paper, thus the comparison is rather challenging. A first