Towards JavaScript program repair with Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT-2) APR’22, May 19, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2 APPROACH
In Figure 1 one can observe the high-level approach of this paper.
First, JavaScript files are being preprocessed so they can be used
as training samples to our GPT-2 model. These samples form a
(pbuддy ,pf ixed )tuple, where pbuддyis the state of the program
before it has been fixed, while pf ixed is the applied patch. Note
that we focused on bugs which affect only one line, thus pf ixed
is always a single line, while pbuддyis the 900 tokens before that.
After training the model is able to predict patches for a given input.
To evaluate the model we compared these outputs to developer
fixes. Note that the GPT-2 model is able to generate more than a
single line, taking advantage of this, we handled the output as an
ordered list and made experiments that investigate not only the
first line (candidate patch) but the the ones that follow as well. In
the next sections we describe the used dataset and briefly introduce
the GPT-2 model.
2.1 Dataset
For the experiments we created our own dataset from BugsJS [ 19]
which contains reproducible JavaScript bugs from 10 open-source
Github projects. The dataset contains both single- and multi-line
bugs as well. The detailed description of these bugs are beyond the
scope of the current research, the interested reader is encouraged
to take a look at the original paper for further details. We retrieved
commits from it using GitHub REST API [ 18] and GH Archive [ 16]
to get detailed information about a commit. Since GH Archive stores
the commit hash and the commit message as well, we could filter
on bug-fixing commits in this step. All commit messages containing
one of the following keywords are identified as a bug-fix: ["fix",
"solve", "bug", "issue", "problem", "error"] . The same
patterns are used in the work of Tufano et al. [42] and a similar
approach in [ 13]. Next, files are being fetched that are affected
by the commit. Using GitHub API, we were able to filter out non-
JavaScript files (files with not ".js" extension) and download the
before- (i.e. pbuддy) and after (i.e. pf ixed ) state of it. At the end of
this phase we identified 18736 files. These files served as the basis
of our preprocessing step descibed in Section 3.1.
Figure 2: Loss curve2.2 Model
Although not in details, in this section we describe the GPT-2
model [ 2]. The original Generative Pre-trained Transformer, or
in short GPT, model was published in 2018, a descendant and im-
proved version of this is GPT-2. It’s architecture is based on the
Transformer, which is an attention model - it learns to focus at-
tention on the previous words that are the most relevant to the
task at hand: predicting the next word in the sentence. Since it was
designed to generate sentences, it has fixed input and output dimen-
sions. Since it is a statistical architecture, no linguistic information
is hardcoded into it, by fine-tuning it, the model can learn to write
source code as well.
3 EXPERIMENT SETUP
3.1 Preprocessing
We formed the dataset so it is suitable to be the input of our model.
First every comment is being removed since they do not affect
the execution. Then we split the 18736 mined JS files into 16863
training files and 1873 test (to predict candidates) files. For training
we used code snippets from all 16863 training files (interval of
tokens around the bug location from the fixed file) and from the
1873 test files we generated candidates for 1559 files only because
the bug environment is not always adequate. The training data
source code is preprocessed from the start of the file until we reach
the bug location and additional 10 lines (so the fix is also included).
Note that for training we picked the fixed version of the files, so the
model only learns correct code and not buggy ones. For evaluation
purposes from the evaluation split we created 1 file for generation
which contains all tokens from the start of the file till the bug
location (from the original buggy file but this part of the original
buggy and fixed files are essentially the same) and 1 for evaluation
for each file, the latter described file for evaluation consists 3 lines
after the bug location so we can use this file for comparing generated
patches to the target. Since the model takes input sequences of fixed
length (see Section 2.2) of text, we had to add a post-processing
step before the input can be fed. For training purposes as described
previously, the code chunks are extracted from the beginning of the
file until the bug location + 10 lines. This data is of course not of
equal length, so the last 2040 tokens are taken from this chunk. The
input is then saved to a file where every line consists of 2040 tokens
and it will be fed to the model line-by-line. Keep in mind that the
preprocessing steps are different for training and prediction and in
later sections we are going to further reduce the number of tokens
fed to GPT-2 and the number of these tokens are going to depend
on whether we are using the model for training or inference.
3.2 Training
The GPT model’s input is a simple text file in natural language
processing (there is no target like in classic machine learning, the
model itself can learn on plain text to generate additional text). In
our paper the model’s input is a simple text file (later train.txt) as
in NLP but instead of text we train on code. In our train.txt in each
line we have a part of a code (interval of tokens around the bug
location from the fixed file) belonging to one of our training sample.
As we described earlier in each line of our train.txt there are 2040