Figure 1: Comparison between real and ﬁtted Gaussian distribution of results.
line), assuming that their distribution follows a Gaussian distribution. We have
also plotted the Gaussian distributions with the mean and standard deviation of
eachpopulation. Inthiscontext, thereisadiﬀerencebetweenthetwomeansand
the test could reject the null hypothesis. However, if we consider the estimated
distributions, they are overlapped. This overlapping lead to the concept of
eﬀect size , which indicates not only if the population means can be considered
as diﬀerent, but quantiﬁes this diﬀerence. In subsubsection 3.4.1 and Section 4
we will go in-depth in the study of this issue.
Nonetheless, there is a diﬀerence between the estimated Gaussian distribu-
tions and the real densities. This is the reason why Non-Parametric Tests arose
as an eﬀective alternative to their parametric counterparts, as they do not sup-
pose the normality of the input data. In the Bayesian procedure, we would make
an estimation of the distribution of the diﬀerences between the algorithms’ re-
sults as we have made with the results themselves in Figure 1. Then, with the
estimated distribution of the parameter of interest, i.e. the diﬀerence between
the performances of the algorithms, we could extract the desired information.
Bayesian paradigm makes statements about the distribution of the diﬀerence
between the two algorithms, which can reduce the burden of the researchers the
NHST do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the algorithms.
Other signiﬁcant concepts in the description of statistical tests come with
the comparison of the tests themselves. Type I error occurs when H0is rejected
but it should not be. In our scenario, this means that the equivalence of the
algorithms has been discarded although there is not a signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween them. Otherwise, type II error arises when there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
but this has not been detected. We denote alphaas the probability of making a
type I error (often called signiﬁcance level or size of test) and betaas the prob-
4