We will mainly use two data sets, one with all the results (all iterations
of the execution of all the algorithms in all benchmark functions for all
dimensions), cec17.extended.final , and the mean data set (which ag-
gregates the results among the runs), cec17.final .
In most of the pairwise comparisons we have involved EBOwithCMAR
and jSO algorithms, as they are the best-classiﬁed algorithms in the com-
petition.
Table 3 shows the mean among diﬀerent runs of the results obtained at
the end of all of the steps of each algorithm on each benchmark function
for the 10 dimension scenario.
The tables included in this section are obtained with the function Ad-
justFormatTable of the package used, which is helpful to highlight the
rejected hypotheses by emboldening the associated p-values.
8.1 Parametric Analysis
As we have described before, traditionally the statistical tests applied to the
comparison of diﬀerent algorithms belonged to the parametric family of tests.
We start the statistical analysis of the results with these kinds of tests and the
study of the prerequisites in order to use them safely.
The traditional parametric test used in the context of a comparison of mul-
tiple algorithms over multiple problems (benchmarks) is the ANOVA test, as
we have seen in subsection 3.1. This test makes some assumptions that should
be checked before it is performed:
1. The distribution of the results for each algorithm among diﬀerent bench-
marks follows a Gaussian distribution.
2. The standard deviation of results among groups is equal.
InTable4wegatherthe p-valuesassociatedwiththenormalityofeachgroup
of mean results for an algorithm in a dimension scenario. All the null hypotheses
are rejected because the p-values are less than 0:05, which means that we reject
that the distribution of the mean results for each benchmark function follow a
normal distribution. This conclusion could be expected because of the diﬀerent
diﬃculty of the benchmark functions in higher dimension scenarios. This is
marked with boldface in subsequent tables.
In some circumstances like the Multi-Objective Optimisation we need to
include diﬀerent measures in the comparison. We will now consider the re-
sults of the diﬀerent dimensions as if they were diﬀerent measures in the same
benchmark function. Then, in order to perform the Hotelling’s T2test we ﬁrst
check the normality of the population with the multivariate generalisation of
Shapiro-Wilk’s test. Table 5 shows that the normality hypothesis is rejected for
every algorithm. Therefore, we stop the parametric analysis of the results here
because the assumptions of parametric tests are not satisﬁed.
23