classiﬁcation problems [8]. In the following we also describe some diﬀerences
with respect to the NHST and their problems addressed in the previous section.
5.1 Bayesian Parameter Estimation and Notation
In this Bayesian approach, a set of candidate values of a parameter, which
includes the possibility of no diﬀerence between samples, is set up [7]. Then we
compute the relative credibility of the values in the candidate set according to
the observations and using Bayesian inference. This approach is preferable in
optimisation comparison to Bayesian model comparison approach, because this
kind of comparison does not have a null value that brings the NHST objections
back to Bayesian analysis.
Bayesian analysis is executed in three steps:
First step Establish a mathematical model of the data. In a parametric model
it will be the likelihood function P(Dataj).
Second step Establish the prior distribution P(). The common procedure is
to select a prior distribution whose posterior distribution is known.
Third step Use Bayes’ rule to obtain the posterior distribution P(jData )
fromthecombinationoflikelihoodandpriordistribution. Thismeansthat
we can see the distribution of the diﬀerence of performance between the
algorithms, which may reveal that their results diﬀer but that there is no
algorithm that outperforms the other. For instance, if one algorithm gets
better results in one problem, but worse in another one, using Frequentist
statistics we would not reject the hypothesis of equivalence, but we could
not know if their results are similar in all the observations.
The tests described in this section are oriented to obtain the posterior dis-
tribution of the diﬀerence of performance between two algorithms, noted as
z. We set a prior Dirichlet Process (DP) with base measure . This process
is a probability measure on the set of probability measures on a determined
space (as we are interested in the distribution of z, this space will be R). This
means that if we make a sample from a DP, we do not obtain a number, like
we would do if we make a sample from a uni-dimensional Gaussian distribu-
tion, but a probability measure on R. Moreover, as a property of the DP, if
PDP(), for any measurable partition of RB=fB1;:::;Bmg, we obtain
P(B1);:::;P (Bm)Dir((B1);:::; (Bm)).
This procedure could be thought as if we started with a distribution of
the probability of an algorithm outperforming another algorithm. Then, using
the observations we change this distribution: so that while before it was a
wider distribution with no certainty regarding the results, now it is closer to the
observations made.
17