4 Known Criticisms to Null Hypothesis Statisti-
cal Tests
The need of the use of statistical tests in the analyses and experimentation is
unquestioned. However, certain controversy exists regarding the types of these
tests and the implications of their results, mainly from a Bayesian perspective
[75]. The most repeated criticisms about the NHST are:
They do not provide the answer that we expected [76, 8]. Commonly,
when we are using statistical tests to compare optimisation algorithms,
we want to prove that our algorithm outperforms existing algorithms.
Then, once an NHST is carried out, a p-value is obtained and this is often
misunderstood as the probability of the null hypothesis being true. As we
previously mentioned, the p-value is the probability of getting a sample
as extreme as the observed one, i.e. the probability of getting that data if
the null hypothesis is true, P(DjH0), instead of P(H0jD).
We can almost always reject H0if we get enough data, making a little
diﬀerence signiﬁcant through a high number of experiments. This implies
thatatestcoulddetermineastatisticallysigniﬁcantdiﬀerencebutwithout
practical implications. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence may
not be detected when there is insuﬃcient data. Usually when an NHST is
made,allhypotheseswith p-valuep0:05arerejected,andthosewith p>
0:05are considered not signiﬁcant. This issue could lead to the inclusion
in the experimentation of a new proposal of many benchmark functions to
cause the rejection of the null hypothesis although the diﬀerences between
the algorithms were random and very small.
There is an important misconception related to the reproducibility of the
experiments, as a lower p-value does not mean a higher probability of
obtaining the same results if the experiments are replicated as is described
by Berrar and Lozano [73]. This is because, if the null hypothesis is
rejected, the probability of obtaining a signiﬁcant p-value is determined
by the power of the test, which depends on the level, the true eﬀect
size in the target distribution and the size of the test set, but not on the
p-value.
A crucial issue is that we have no information when an NHST does not
reject the null hypothesis and not ﬁnding a signiﬁcant diﬀerence does not
mean that the algorithms performance is equivalent.
5 Bayesian Paradigm and Distribution Estima-
tion
In recent years, the Bayesian approach has been proposed as an alternative of
frequentist statistics for comparing algorithms performance in optimisation and
16