Page test
10 dimensions scenario
Comparison LSSPA-jSO jSO-LSSPA
statistic L 22902 22773
p.value 0.4253 0.5759
100 dimensions scenario
Comparison jSO-DYYPO (100) DYYPO-jSO (100)
statistic L 25730 19945
p.value 0 1
Table 12: Page test
dimension scenario, the test detects an increasing trend in the ranks of the
diﬀerence between jSO and DYYPO as the null hypothesis is rejected.
8.2.4 Conﬁdence Intervals and Conﬁdence Curves
In this subsection, we show the use of conﬁdence intervals and conﬁdence curves
in the comparison of optimisation results as mentioned in subsection 3.4. First,
we must advise that these comparisons only take care of two algorithms at a
time, and a post-hoc correction would be needed if the comparison involved a
greater number of algorithms, as we will see in the following examples.
We perform the comparison of the ﬁnal results of PPSO and jSO algorithms
for the 10 dimension scenario. Results are shown in Table 13.
As the 0 eﬀect is not included in the non-parametric conﬁdence interval, the
null hypothesis is then rejected. The interval is very wide, so we have not much
certainty the true location of the parameter. If we only had done the Wilcoxon
test, we would have obtained the associated p-value, and the null hypothesis
would also be rejected, so the diﬀerence between the medians are detected with
both methods. If we look at the conﬁdence curve, we can reject the classic
null hypothesis if the interval bounded by the intersections of the horizontal
line at the value and the curve does not contain 0. The conﬁdence curve
associated with the previous test is plotted in Figure 3, where we check that the
null hypothesis can be rejected. The estimated diﬀerence is represented with
the dotted vertical line. The width of the intersection between the curve and
the dotted horizontal line indicates that there is not much certainty about the
true location of the parameter, primarily in the upper bound.
8.3 Bayesian Tests
In this subsection we illustrate the use of the described Bayesian tests. The
considerations are analogous to the ones made in the frequentist case, as the
described tests use the aggregations of the runs to compare the results of the
diﬀerent benchmark functions, or use these runs with the drawback of obtaining
a restrained statement about the results in one single problem.
30