8.3.3 Imprecise Dirichlet Process Test
The Imprecise Dirichlet Process, as we have seen in subsection 5.3, consists of
a more complex idea of the previous tests although the implications of the use
of the Bayesian Tests could be clearer. In this test, we try to not introduce any
prior distribution, not even the prior distribution where both algorithms have
the same performance, but all the possible probability measures , and then
obtain an upper and a lower bounds for the probability in which we are inter-
ested. The input consists of the aggregated results among the diﬀerent runs for
all the benchmark functions for a single dimension. The other parameters of the
function are the strong parameter sand the pseudo-observation c. With these
data, we obtain two bounds for the posterior probability of the ﬁrst algorithm
outperforming the second one, i.e. the probability of P(XY)0:5. These
are the possible scenarios:
Both bounds are greater than 0.95: Then we can say that the ﬁrst algo-
rithm outperforms the second algorithm with 95% probability.
Bothboundsarelowerthan0.05: Thisistheinversecase. Inthissituation,
thesecondalgorithmoutperformstheﬁrstalgorithmwith95%probability.
Both bounds are between 0.05 and 0.95: Then we can say that the prob-
ability of one algorithm outperforming the other is lower than the desired
probability of 0.95.
Finally, if only one of the bounds is greater than 0.95 or lower than 0.05,
the situation is undetermined and we cannot decide.
IDP - Wilcoxon test
Posterior DistributionUpper Bound 0.591
Lower Bound 0.452
Table 16: Imprecise Dirichlet Process of Wilcoxon test
According to the results of the Bayesian Imprecise Dirichlet Process (see Ta-
ble 16), the probability under the Dirichlet Process of P(EBOjSO)0:5,
that is the probability of EBO-CMAR outperforming jSO, is between 0.59 and
0.45, so there is not a probability greater than 0.95 of EBO-CMAR outper-
forming jSO. These numbers represent the area under the curve of the upper
and lower distributions when P(XY)0:5. In Figure 5 we can see both
posterior distributions.
34