set of benchmark functions, although diﬀerent trends have been proposed since
then [1], such as:
The ﬁrst amendment after the popularisation of the use of statistical tests
was the proposal of non-parametric tests that consider the underlying
distribution of the analysed results, improving the robustness of the drawn
conclusions [2].
With this new perspective, some non-parametric tests [3], whose assump-
tions were less restrictive than the previous ones, were suggested for the
comparison of computational intelligence algorithms [4].
However, there are other approaches and considerations, like the conver-
gence of the solution [5], robustness with respect to the seed and results
over diﬀerent runs and the computation of the conﬁdence interval and
conﬁdence curves [6].
As has already occurred in several research ﬁelds, a Bayesian trend [7] has
emergedwithsomecriticismstothewellknownNullHypothesisStatistical
Tests (NHST) and there are some interesting proposals of Bayesian tests
analogous to the classic frequentist tests [8].
Inferential statistics make predictions and obtain conclusions from data, and
these predictions are the basis for the performance comparisons made between
algorithms [9]. The procedure followed to reach relevant information is detailed
below:
1. The process begins with the results of the runs from an algorithm in a
single benchmark function. These results assume the role of a sample
from an unknown distribution whose parameters we can just estimate to
compare it with another algorithm’s distribution.
2. Depending on the nature and purpose of the test, the results of the algo-
rithms involved in the comparison will be aggregated in order to compute
a statistic.
3. The statistic is used as an estimator of a characteristic, called parameter,
of the distribution of interest, either the distribution of the results of our
algorithm or the distribution of the algorithms’ performance diﬀerence
when we are comparing the results from a set of algorithms.
This procedure allows us to get information from experimental results, al-
though it must be followed in order to obtain impartial conclusions which can
also be reached by other researchers. Statistical tests should be considered as a
toolbox to collect relevant information, not as a set of methods to conﬁrm the
previously stated conclusion. There are two main approaches:
2