continuity, are less restrictive than parametric ones and non-parametric tests
are more robust and less sensitive to dirty data [15, 27].
3.2.1 Check of the preconditions
The goodness of ﬁt tests, for example, Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Shapiro-Wilk or
D’Agostino-Pearson, are used to determine whether the normality of the distri-
butioncan be rejected[3,4]. Thiscanbeused toassureasaferuseofparametric
tests like ANOVA or t-test. Another usual prerequisite of parametric tests is the
homoscedasticity, that is, the equivalence of the variances of the populations.
Levene’s test is used to this purpose, so that we can reject the hypothesis of
the equivalence of the variances at a level of signiﬁcance, and then one of the
alternatives would be to use a non-parametric test [64, 29]. Although it is cor-
rect to use non-parametric tests to achieve our main goal before even checking
these preconditions, it is worth doing it because parametric tests make more as-
sumptions about the population and when they are satisﬁed they have stronger
information and consequently in these circumstances they are more powerful.
However, non-parametric tests also make some assumptions that are easier
to fulﬁl than parametric tests, like symmetry in the Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks
test. This means that a safe use of this test is depending on the symmetry of
thepopulation, i.e.theprobabilitydensityfunctionisreﬂectedaroundavertical
line at some value [65].
3.2.2 Pairwise comparisons
The ﬁrst kind of experimental study would consist in the comparison of a pair
of algorithms’ performance in several benchmarks. A pair of non-parametric
tests are presented in this section.
Sign-test This simple test developed by Dixon and Mood [66] gives an idea of
the way that non-parametric tests are developed. The assumption made
here is that if the two algorithms involved in the comparison had an equiv-
alent performance, the number of cases where each algorithm outperforms
the other would be similar.
Wilcoxon signed-rank test The underlying idea of this test [67] is the next
step in non-parametric tests, not just making a count of the wins of each
algorithm but ranking the diﬀerences between the performance and devel-
oping the statistic over them [68]. This is already a widespread test used
to compare two algorithms when t-test prerequisites are not fulﬁlled.
These tests receive the means of the runs for each benchmark function of two
algorithms. Unlike the parametric tests, in which null hypothesis consists in the
equivalence of the means, in these tests H0is the equivalence of the medians.
10