as the Binomial Sign test to recently proposed Bayesian techniques such as Im-
precise Dirichlet Process, with tools that can help researchers to complete their
experimental study.
In this paper, we undertake an extensive statistical analysis of the results of
the CEC ’17 Special Session and Competition on Single-Objective Real Param-
eter Optimisation. The statistical analysis of the competition results provides
diﬀerent results according to the test used in diﬀerent circumstances. Then, we
have used this case of study to make some recommendations about which test is
the most appropriate to each situation and how to proceed with the information
that we get from them. Although the used paradigm depends on the intention
of the researchers, they should consider using parametric tests only if the nor-
mality and homoscedasticity prerequisites are fulﬁlled. We have described some
tests for the comparison of two algorithms, and the procedure when more algo-
rithms are involved in the comparison, with speciﬁc tests for this purpose and
some post-hoc procedures that indicate where the diﬀerences are.
Finally, we encourage the joint use of non-parametric and Bayesian tests in
order to obtain a complete perspective of the comparison of the algorithms’ re-
sults. While non-parametric tests can provide signiﬁcant results when there is a
diﬀerence between the compared algorithms, in some circumstances these tests
do not provide any valuable information and Bayesian tests can help to eluci-
date the real diﬀerence between them. Furthermore, the rNPBST package and
theshinytests application implement both perspectives and the procedures
described in this tutorial.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and
Competitiveness under the Spanish National Research Project TIN2017-89517-
P. J. Carrasco was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science under the FPU
Programme 998758-2016 and by a scholarship of initiation to research granted
by the University of Granada
References
[1] M. Hellwig, H.-G. Beyer, Benchmarking evolutionary algorithms for sin-
gle objective real-valued constrained optimization – A critical review,
Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 44 (2019) 927–944. doi:10.1016/
j.swevo.2018.10.002 .
[2] J. Demšar, On the appropriateness of statistical tests in machine learning,
in: Workshop on Evaluation Methods for Machine Learning in Conjunction
with ICML, 2008, p. 65.
[3] D. J. Sheskin, Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric Statistical Pro-
cedures, crc Press, 2003.
43