Recent Trends in the Use of Statistical Tests for
Comparing Swarm and Evolutionary Computing
Algorithms: Practical Guidelines and a Critical
Review
J. Carrasco1, S. García1, M.M. Rueda2, S. Das3, and F. Herrera1
1Department of Computer Science and AI, Andalusian Research Institute in Data
Science and Computational Intelligence, University of Granada, Granada, Spain
2Department of Statistic and Operational Research, University of Granada,
Andalusian Research Institute of Mathematics, Granada, Spain
3Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, 203
B.T.Road, Kolkata 700108, West Bengal, India
February 24, 2020
Abstract
A key aspect of the design of evolutionary and swarm intelligence
algorithms is studying their performance. Statistical comparisons are also
a crucial part which allows for reliable conclusions to be drawn. In the
present paper we gather and examine the approaches taken from diﬀerent
perspectivestosummarisetheassumptionsmadebythesestatisticaltests,
the conclusions reached and the steps followed to perform them correctly.
In this paper, we conduct a survey on the current trends of the proposals
of statistical analyses for the comparison of algorithms of computational
intelligence and include a description of the statistical background of these
tests. We illustrate the use of the most common tests in the context of
the Competition on single-objective real parameter optimisation of the
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) 2017 and describe
the main advantages and drawbacks of the use of each kind of test and
put forward some recommendations concerning their use.
Keywords statisticaltests,optimisation,parametric,non-parametric,Bayesian
1 Introduction
Over the few last years the comparison of evolutionary optimisation algorithms
and statistical analysis have undergone some changes. The classic paradigm
consisted of the application of classic frequentist tests on the ﬁnal results over a
1arXiv:2002.09227v1  [cs.NE]  21 Feb 2020