3 Frequentist tests
In this section, we describe the classic frequentist tests: the properties of the
parametric tests and their assumptions, and the diﬀerent non-parametric tests
and their application in the context of the comparison of single-objective and
bound-constrained evolutionary optimisation algorithms. Although there are
other tests, algorithms and proposals, as reﬂected in Table 2, the tests presented
in this section represent the core of the statistical comparison methodology.
3.1 Parametric Statistical Tests
Parametrictestsmaketheassumptionthatoursamplecomesfromadistribution
that belongs to a known family, usually the Gaussian family, and it is described
with a little number of parameters [3].
t-testThis classic test is used to compare two samples. Null hypothesis con-
sistsintheequivalenceofthemeansofbothpopulations. Themainassumptions
made by t-test is that the samples have been extracted randomly and the dis-
tribution of the populations of the samples are normal.
The required input of this test is the group of observations of the diﬀerent
runs of the pair algorithms that will be compared for a single problem.
Analysis of Variance When we are interested in the comparison of kdis-
tinct algorithms, we need another test, because repeating the t-test for every
pair of algorithms would increment the type I error. The Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) test of the null hypothesis consists in the equivalence of all the means:
H0:1==k;
againstH1:9i6=j; i6=j. ANOVA test deals with the variance within a
group, between groups or a combination of the two types.
Here the input consists of a matrix where each column represents an algo-
rithm and each row is a single benchmark function, while the cells contain the
mean of the performance for all runs of each algorithm in each benchmark [19].
These tests are very relevant in the statistical comparison, although they
have troublesome prerequisites in the ﬁeld of comparison of optimisation algo-
rithms. Then, non-parametric statistical tests were proposed to address this
issue with a known methodology.
3.2 Non-Parametrical Statistical Tests
According to Pesarin [63], Pis a non-parametric family of distributions if it is
not possible to ﬁnd a ﬁnite-dimensional space in which there is a one-to-one
relationship between andP. This means that we do not have to assume
that the underlying distribution belongs to a known family of distributions.
Consequently, the prerequisites for non-parametric tests such as symmetry or
9