reliable and repeatable results, diverse summaries of the data must be oﬀered
and the underlying process must be clearly understood and none of them can be
substituted with a single index. This association now makes some proposals and
gives some suggestions to avoid these pitfalls [97], like not asserting “statistically
signiﬁcant”, accepting uncertainty or being more open to sharing the data and
procedures.
Criticisms on the Bayesian paradigm Bayesian paradigm has a clear
drawback of more complex tests and results, which causes this kind of test
to be used less in experimentation. Moreover, some criticisms made regarding
NHST and the decisions that depend on the researcher’s intention, like the 
value or the number of samples, remain in the Bayesian paradigm.
These decisions are the family and parameters from the prior distribution.
The Bayesian tests described in this paper also contain the ropeparameter
for the equivalence of two algorithms, whose bounds are set to 0:01in the
original proposal for a classiﬁcation scenario. Opting to adjust the results using
Bayesian inference, selecting the prior distribution and making statements using
this adjustment would lead to a model that could have a low representation of
the data. Then a special consideration should be made in order to select a
representative prior, with less information concerning the parameter of interest.
Frequentist and Bayesian Tests Relation Although there is a clear diﬀer-
ence between the frequentist and the Bayesian paradigms, we could still hope to
see a relationship between the results of both kinds of tests [98]. In this line of
argument, Couso et al. [99] built a frequentist test that simulates the behavior
of the IDP test presented in subsection 5.2 for when the underlying distribution
satisﬁes some properties. This study shows that in some circumstances the im-
precise scenario using a set of prior distributions suggested from the Bayesian
perspective is reﬂected in the distribution of p-values in the frequentist version.
Therefore, there is not a single way of obtaining conclusions, and they are
not exempted from possible misuses or misunderstandings. The proliferation of
the statistical tests and their application in erroneous circumstances can lead
to spurious conclusions. Thus, the use of diﬀerent tests can help to put the
results in context. These considerations are independent of the guidelines for
the experimentation in the ﬁeld of evolutionary optimisation. The algorithms
involved in the comparison should represent the state-of-the-art and the used
benchmark should be relevant in the ﬁeld of study.
11 Conclusions
This work contains an exhaustive set of statistical procedures and examples of
their use in the comparison of results from experimental studies of optimisa-
tion algorithms, speciﬁcally in the scenario of a competition. In this paper we
have described a broad set of methods, from basic non-parametric tests such
42