competition can be considered to be a relevant benchmark for the comparison of
any newly proposed algorithms. Moreover, the results achieved and ﬁnal rank-
ings of this competition are supposed to indicate what is the state-of-the-art in
evolutionary computation and against which algorithms our proposals should
be compared.
The code for the tests and the analysis, tables and plots are included as a
vignette in the developed Rpackage rNPBST1[14]. We have also developed a
shinyapplication to facilitate the use of the aforementioned tests. This applica-
tion processes the results of two or more algorithms and performs the selected
test. The results are exported in T EXformat and an HTML table. Cases in
which there is a plot associated with the test are highlighted.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we include a survey on
the main statistical analyses proposed in the literature for evaluating the clas-
siﬁcation and optimisation algorithms. Section 3 contains a depiction of the
well-known parametric tests and non-parametric tests respectively. In Section 4
we describe the main criticisms and proposals concerning the traditional tests.
Section 5 introduces Bayesian test concepts and notations. Due to the rele-
vance of the Multi-Objective problem in the optimisation scientiﬁc community,
we have gathered the tests that address this issue in Section 6 regardless of their
statistical nature. In Section 7, we describe the setting of the CEC’2017 Special
Session, which is performed in Section 8 and summarised in Section 9. The
lessons learnt and test considerations are presented in Section 10. Section 11
summarises the conclusions obtained in the analyses.
2 Survey on Statistical Analyses Proposed
In this section, we provide a chart with an extensive survey on the diﬀerent
statistical proposals made for the comparison of machine learning and optimi-
sation algorithms. The survey is included in Table 2. This table includes a
categorisation of the methodologies according to their statistic nature, a brief
description of the underlying idea and the considered scenario of the comparison
of the data.
The proposals are sorted by the year of publication. This order highlights
past and present trends in the statistical comparison. The ﬁrst proposals were
made from a frequentist and fundamentally parametric point of view. Later,
with the work of Demšar [15] non-parametric tests arose as the alternative
to parametric ones in certain circumstances. In recent years, some Bayesian
proposals were made, although they still depend on the results’ distributions
and are focused on the comparison of classiﬁers.
Moreover, most of the proposals are oriented to compare classiﬁers. The
tests and guidelines made for the comparison of optimisation algorithms are
consistent and are constantly used in the literature. However, there is not
a speciﬁc test that takes account of the multiple runs in the same benchmark
1https://github.com/JacintoCC/rNPBST
6