investigated as demonstrated in Figure 3, we found that the difference is insigniﬁcant, which means
that the predicted mel-spectrogram from Tacotron2 was already noisy. To improve the audio quality
in the end-to-end setting, we applied ﬁne-tuning with predicted mel-spectrograms of Tacotron2 in
teacher-forcing mode (Shen et al., 2018) to all the models up to 100k steps. MOS scores of all the
ﬁne-tuned proposed models over 4, whereas ﬁne-tuned WaveGlow did not show quality improvement.
We conclude that HiFi-GAN adapts well on the end-to-end setting with ﬁne-tuning.
5 Conclusion
In this work, we introduced HiFi-GAN, which can efﬁciently synthesize high quality speech audio.
Above all, our proposed model outperforms the best performing publicly available models in terms of
synthesis quality, even comparable to human level. Moreover, it shows a signiﬁcant improvement in
terms of synthesis speed. We took inspiration from the characteristic of speech audio that consists
of patterns with various periods and applied it to neural networks, and veriﬁed that the existence of
the proposed discriminator greatly inﬂuences the quality of speech synthesis through the ablation
study. Additionally, this work presents several experiments that are signiﬁcant in speech synthesis
applications. HiFi-GAN shows excellent ability to generalize unseen speakers and synthesize speech
audio comparable to human quality from noisy inputs in an end-to-end setting. In addition, our
small footprint model demonstrates comparable sample quality with the best publicly available
autoregressive counterpart, while generating samples in an order-of-magnitude faster than real-time
on CPU. This shows progress towards on-device natural speech synthesis, which requires low latency
and memory footprint. Finally, our experiments show that the generators of various conﬁgurations
can be trained with the same discriminators and learning mechanism, which indicates the possibility
of ﬂexibly selecting a generator conﬁguration according to the target speciﬁcations without the need
for a time-consuming hyper-parameter search for the discriminators.
We release HiFi-GAN as open source. We envisage that our work will serve as a basis for future
speech synthesis studies.
9