HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for
Efﬁcient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis
Jungil Kong
Kakao Enterprise
henry.k@kakaoenterprise.comJaehyeon Kim
Kakao Enterprise
jay.xyz@kakaoenterprise.com
Jaekyoung Bae
Kakao Enterprise
storm.b@kakaoenterprise.com
Abstract
Several recent work on speech synthesis have employed generative adversarial
networks (GANs) to produce raw waveforms. Although such methods improve the
sampling efﬁciency and memory usage, their sample quality has not yet reached
that of autoregressive and ﬂow-based generative models. In this work, we propose
HiFi-GAN, which achieves both efﬁcient and high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis. As
speech audio consists of sinusoidal signals with various periods, we demonstrate
that modeling periodic patterns of an audio is crucial for enhancing sample quality.
A subjective human evaluation (mean opinion score, MOS) of a single speaker
dataset indicates that our proposed method demonstrates similarity to human quality
while generating 22.05 kHz high-ﬁdelity audio 167.9 times faster than real-time
on a single V100 GPU. We further show the generality of HiFi-GAN to the mel-
spectrogram inversion of unseen speakers and end-to-end speech synthesis. Finally,
a small footprint version of HiFi-GAN generates samples 13.4 times faster than
real-time on CPU with comparable quality to an autoregressive counterpart.
1 Introduction
V oice is one of the most frequent and naturally used communication interfaces for humans. With
recent developments in technology, voice is being used as a main interface in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) voice assistant services such as Amazon Alexa, and it is also widely used in automobiles, smart
homes and so forth. Accordingly, with the increase in demand for people to converse with machines,
technology that synthesizes natural speech like human speech is being actively studied.
Recently, with the development of neural networks, speech synthesis technology has made a rapid
progress. Most neural speech synthesis models use a two-stage pipeline: 1) predicting a low resolution
intermediate representation such as mel-spectrograms (Shen et al., 2018, Ping et al., 2017, Li et al.,
2019) or linguistic features (Oord et al., 2016) from text, and 2) synthesizing raw waveform audio
from the intermediate representation (Oord et al., 2016, 2018, Prenger et al., 2019, Kumar et al.,
2019). The ﬁrst stage is to model low-level representations of human speech from text, whereas the
second stage model synthesizes raw waveforms with up to 24,000 samples per second and up to 16
bit ﬁdelity. In this work, we focus on designing a second stage model that efﬁciently synthesizes high
ﬁdelity waveforms from mel-spectrograms.
Various work have been conducted to improve the audio synthesis quality and efﬁciency of second
stage models. WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016) is an autoregressive (AR) convolutional neural network that
demonstrates the ability of neural network based methods to surpass conventional methods in quality.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.