Figure 1: The generator upsamples mel-spectrograms up to jkujtimes to match the temporal resolution
of raw waveforms. A MRF module adds features from jkrjresidual blocks of different kernel sizes
and dilation rates. Lastly, the n-th residual block with kernel size kr[n]and dilation rates Dr[n]in a
MRF module is depicted.
ﬁeld fusion (MRF) module, which we describe in the next paragraph. Figure 1 shows the architecture
of the generator. As in previous work (Mathieu et al., 2015, Isola et al., 2017, Kumar et al., 2019),
noise is not given to the generator as an additional input.
Multi-Receptive Field Fusion We design the multi-receptive ﬁeld fusion (MRF) module for our
generator, which observes patterns of various lengths in parallel. Speciﬁcally, MRF module returns
the sum of outputs from multiple residual blocks. Different kernel sizes and dilation rates are selected
for each residual block to form diverse receptive ﬁeld patterns. The architectures of MRF module
and a residual block are shown in Figure 1. We left some adjustable parameters in the generator; the
hidden dimension hu, kernel sizes kuof the transposed convolutions, kernel sizes kr, and dilation
ratesDrof MRF modules can be regulated to match one’s own requirement in a trade-off between
synthesis efﬁciency and sample quality.
2.3 Discriminator
Identifying long-term dependencies is the key for modeling realistic speech audio. For example,
a phoneme duration can be longer than 100 ms, resulting in high correlation between more than
2,200 adjacent samples in the raw waveform. This problem has been addressed in the previous
work (Donahue et al., 2018) by increasing receptive ﬁelds of the generator and discriminator. We
focus on another crucial problem that has yet been resolved; as speech audio consists of sinusoidal
signals with various periods, the diverse periodic patterns underlying in the audio data need to be
identiﬁed.
To this end, we propose the multi-period discriminator (MPD) consisting of several sub-discriminators
each handling a portion of periodic signals of input audio. Additionally, to capture consecutive patterns
and long-term dependencies, we use the multi-scale discriminator (MSD) proposed in MelGAN
(Kumar et al., 2019), which consecutively evaluates audio samples at different levels. We conducted
simple experiments to show the ability of MPD and MSD to capture periodic patterns, and the results
can be found in Appendix B.
Multi-Period Discriminator MPD is a mixture of sub-discriminators, each of which only accepts
equally spaced samples of an input audio; the space is given as period p. The sub-discriminators
are designed to capture different implicit structures from each other by looking at different parts
of an input audio. We set the periods to [2, 3, 5, 7, 11] to avoid overlaps as much as possible. As
shown in Figure 2b, we ﬁrst reshape 1D raw audio of length Tinto 2D data of height T=p and width
pand then apply 2D convolutions to the reshaped data. In every convolutional layer of MPD, we
restrict the kernel size in the width axis to be 1 to process the periodic samples independently. Each
sub-discriminator is a stack of strided convolutional layers with leaky rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
activation. Subsequently, weight normalization (Salimans and Kingma, 2016) is applied to MPD. By
reshaping the input audio into 2D data instead of sampling periodic signals of audio, gradients from
MPD can be delivered to all time steps of the input audio.
3