However, because of the AR structure, WaveNet generates one sample at each forward operation; it is
prohibitively slow in synthesizing high temporal resolution audio. Flow-based generative models are
proposed to address this problem. Because of their ability to model raw waveforms by transforming
noise sequences of the same size in parallel, ﬂow-based generative models fully utilize modern
parallel computing processors to speed up sampling. Parallel WaveNet (Oord et al., 2018) is an
inverse autoregressive ﬂow (IAF) that is trained to minimize its Kullback-Leibler divergence from a
pre-trained WaveNet called a teacher. Compared to the teacher model, it improves the synthesis speed
to 1,000 times or more, without quality degradation. WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019) eliminates the
need for distilling a teacher model, and simpliﬁes the learning process through maximum likelihood
estimation by employing efﬁcient bijective ﬂows based on Glow (Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018). It
also produces high-quality audio compared to WaveNet. However, it requires many parameters for its
deep architecture with over 90 layers.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which are one of the most
dominant deep generative models, have also been applied to speech synthesis. Kumar et al. (2019)
proposed a multi-scale architecture for discriminators operating on multiple scales of raw waveforms.
With sophisticated architectural consideration, the MelGAN generator is compact enough to enable
real-time synthesis on CPU. Yamamoto et al. (2020) proposed multi-resolution STFT loss function to
improve and stabilize GAN training and achieved better parameter efﬁciency and less training time
than an IAF model, ClariNet (Ping et al., 2018). Instead of mel-spectrograms, GAN-TTS (Bi ´nkowski
et al., 2019) successfully generates high quality raw audio waveforms from linguistic features through
multiple discriminators operating on different window sizes. The model also shows fewer FLOPs
compared to Parallel WaveNet. Despite the advantages, there is still a gap in sample quality between
the GAN models and AR or ﬂow-based models.
We propose HiFi-GAN, which achieves both higher computational efﬁciency and sample quality
than AR or ﬂow-based models. As speech audio consists of sinusoidal signals with various periods,
modeling the periodic patterns matters to generate realistic speech audio. Therefore, we propose
a discriminator which consists of small sub-discriminators, each of which obtains only a speciﬁc
periodic parts of raw waveforms. This architecture is the very ground of our model successfully
synthesizing realistic speech audio. As we extract different parts of audio for the discriminator, we
also design a module that places multiple residual blocks each of which observes patterns of various
lengths in parallel, and apply it to the generator.
HiFi-GAN achieves a higher MOS score than the best publicly available models, WaveNet and
WaveGlow. It synthesizes human-quality speech audio at speed of 3.7 MHz on a single V100 GPU.
We further show the generality of HiFi-GAN to the mel-spectrogram inversion of unseen speakers
and end-to-end speech synthesis. Finally, the tiny footprint version of HiFi-GAN requires only
0.92M parameters while outperforming the best publicly available models and the fastest version of
HiFi-GAN samples 13.44 times faster than real-time on CPU and 1,186 times faster than real-time on
single V100 GPU with comparable quality to an autoregressive counterpart.
Our audio samples are available on the demo web-site1, and we provide the implementation as open
source for reproducibility and future work.2
2 HiFi-GAN
2.1 Overview
HiFi-GAN consists of one generator and two discriminators: multi-scale and multi-period discrimina-
tors. The generator and discriminators are trained adversarially, along with two additional losses for
improving training stability and model performance.
2.2 Generator
The generator is a fully convolutional neural network. It uses a mel-spectrogram as input and
upsamples it through transposed convolutions until the length of the output sequence matches the
temporal resolution of raw waveforms. Every transposed convolution is followed by a multi-receptive
1https://jik876.github.io/hiﬁ-gan-demo/
2https://github.com/jik876/hiﬁ-gan
2