Broader Impact
Speech synthesis technology has been developed for a long time, and recently, it has reached the level
of producing speech at human level by applying neural networks. However, although the quality of
synthesized audio is very high, there are several limitations for applying the neural network based
speech synthesis technology in real production due to the high computation cost and slow synthesis
speed. Speech synthesis models that perform high speed synthesis have also been studied, but the
quality of these models needed to be improved compared to that of human.
Our work addressed these problems, and showed that the proposed model achieves both high quality
and fast speech synthesis. This could bring advantages to service providers who provide voice
interfaces. Service providers can improve user satisfaction by providing natural and higher quality
speech audio allows listeners to understand content more quickly and accurately. In addition, the
high computational efﬁciency obtained in our work could reduce the usage of computing devices
such as GPUs and CPUs, which can contribute to the cost savings of the service providers. It could
also enable on-device operation of neural network based speech synthesis, which could lower the
service latency and computation cost on servers.
Meanwhile, the high efﬁciency and quality of the speech samples that our work is capable of
generating can accompany certain adverse effects. First, the demand for recordings of professional
voice actors may be reduced. In many applications such as subway announcements, recordings of
professional voice actors are embedded. So, when a new announcement is needed, a professional
voice actor will record the utterance for the announcement. However, if the neural network based
speech synthesis model is capable of producing natural speech like humans, it can replace the
work of professional voice actors. This could be considered an inevitable change in the job due to
technological advancements. However, we need to devise a way such as contracts for the use of voice,
not the cost of recording, to mitigate the sudden impact on our society.
Furthermore, high-performance speech synthesis technology can be used for criminal activities such
as voice phishing. If a neural network based speech synthesis model was trained with a dataset
consisting of speaker characteristics that give someone conﬁdence, such as those of news anchors, it
might be used for making people feel secure in the deceptions. In addition, our work has shown that it
is possible to generate high-quality speech audio with extremely fast inference speed, which could be
used for voice phishing attackers to generate response in real-time during conversation with targets.
By combining the speaker characteristics and fast speech synthesis, it might result in increasing the
success rate of the voice phishing attacks.
The unintended abuse of voice in datasets could also be a problem. Since the speech synthesis models
based on neural networks are trained with audio clips of real human speech, the synthesized audio is
also very similar to the voice of a speaker who recorded audio clips in the training data. It would not
be a problem if the trained model is only to be used in a controlled environment. However, if the
model is stolen by a malicious person or if the speech synthesis model is released as a service to allow
synthesizing any utterances without restrictions, it could be abused regardless of the original intention
of the voice owners or the model owner. Therefore, we believe that institutes and companies that
study and use speech synthesis models should pay particular attention to the security of the models
and the training datasets.
The results of our model failure could be audio clips with noise, distortion, or inaccurate or missing
pronunciation. These issues might be acceptable in most cases, but could be a problem when the
model is applied to critical tasks such as emergencies or applications designed to listen to audio only
once. As is known, most neural network based models are not fully controllable. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to guarantee that it works 100% robust under any conditions. We believe that neural network
based speech synthesis technology should be carefully applied in mission critical domains.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We would like to thank Bokyung Son, Sungwon Kim, Yongjin Cho and Sungwon Lyu.
All resources used for this work were provided by Kakao Enterprise.
10