At a high level, the convergence of GD and SGD are careful applications of the two technical the-
orems above: indeed, Theorem 3 shows that as long as the objective value is high, the gradient is
large; and Theorem 4 shows that if one moves in the (negative) gradient direction, then the objective
value can be sufﬁciently decreased. These two technical theorems together ensure that GD/SGD
does not hit any saddle point or (bad) local minima along its training trajectory. This was practically
observed by Goodfellow et al. [19] and a theoretical justiﬁcation was open since then.
An Open Question. We did not try to tighten the polynomial dependencies of (n;d;L )in the
proofs. When mis sufﬁciently large, we make use of the randomness at initialization to argue that,
for all the points within a certain radius from initialization, for instance Theorem 3 holds. In practice,
however, the SGD can create additional randomness as time goes; also, in practice, it sufﬁces for
those points on the SGD trajectory to satisfy Theorem 3. Unfortunately, such randomness can — in
principle — be correlated with the SGD trajectory, so we do not know how to use that in the proofs.
Analyzing such correlated randomness is certainly beyond the scope of this paper, but can possibly
explain why in practice, the size of mneeded is not that large.
3.1 Conclusion
Overall, we provide the ﬁrst proof of convergence of GD/SGD for non-linear neural networks that
have more two layers. We show with overparameterization GD/SGD can avoid hitting any (bad)
local minima along its training trajectory. This was practically observed by Goodfellow et al. [19]
and a theoretical justiﬁcation was open since then. We present our result using recurrent neural
networks (as opposed to the simpler feedforward networks [3]) in this very ﬁrst paper, because
memorization in RNN could be of independent interest. Also, our result proves that RNN can
learn mappings from different input tokens to different output tokens simultaneously using the same
recurrent unit.
Last but not least, we build new tools to analyze multi-layer networks with ReLU activations that
could facilitate many new research on deep learning. For instance, our techniques in Section 4
provide a general theory for why ReLU activations avoid exponential exploding (see e.g. (4.1),
(4.4)) or exponential vanishing (see e.g. (4.1), (4.3)); and our techniques in Section 5 give a general
theory for the stability of multi-layer networks against adversarial weight perturbations, which is at
the heart of showing the semi-smoothness Theorem 4, and used by all the follow-up works [1–3, 9].
PROOF SKETCH
The main difﬁculty of this paper is to prove Theorem 3 and 4, and we shall sketch the proof ideas in
Section 4 through 8. In this main body, we only include Section 4 and 5 because they already given
some insights into how the proof proceeds. We shall put our emphasize on
how to avoid exponential blow up in L, and
how to deal with the issue of randomness dependence across layers.
We genuinely hope that this high-level sketch can (1) give readers a clear overview of the proof
without the necessity of going to the appendix, and (2) appreciate our proof and understand why it
is necessarily long.7
4 Basic Properties at Random Initialization
In this section we derive basic properties of the RNN when the weight matrices W;A;B are all at
random initialization . The corresponding precise statements and proofs are in Appendix B.
The ﬁrst one says that the forward propagation neither explodes or vanishes, that is,
1
2khi;`k2;kgi;`k2O(L): (4.1)
7For instance, proving gradient norm lower bound in Theorem 3 for a single neuron k2[m]is easy, but
how to apply concentration across neurons? Crucially, due to the recurrent structure these quantities are never
independent, so we have to build necessary probabilistic tools to tackle this. If one is willing to ignore such
subtleties, then our sketched proof is sufﬁciently short and gives a good overview.
6