On the Convergence Rate of
Training Recurrent Neural Networks
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.eduYuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.eduZhao Song
UT-Austin
zhaos@utexas.edu
Abstract
How can local-search methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) avoid
bad local minima in training multi-layer neural networks? Why can they ﬁt ran-
dom labels even given non-convex and non-smooth architectures? Most existing
theory only covers networks with one hidden layer, so can we go deeper?
In this paper, we focus on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) which are multi-layer
networks widely used in natural language processing. They are harder to analyze
than feedforward neural networks, because the same recurrent unit is repeatedly
applied across the entire time horizon of length L, which is analogous to feedfor-
ward networks of depth L. We show when the number of neurons is sufﬁciently
large, meaning polynomial in the training data size and in L, then SGD is capa-
ble of minimizing the regression loss in the linear convergence rate. This gives
theoretical evidence of how RNNs can memorize data.
More importantly, in this paper we build general toolkits to analyze multi-layer
networks with ReLU activations. For instance, we prove why ReLU activations
can prevent exponential gradient explosion or vanishing, and build a perturbation
theory to analyze ﬁrst-order approximation of multi-layer networks.
1 Introduction
Neural networks have been one of the most powerful tools in machine learning over the past a few
decades. The multi-layer structure of neural network gives it supreme power in expressibility and
learning performance. However, it raises complexity concerns: the training objective is generally
non-convex andnon-smooth . In practice, local-search algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) are capable of ﬁnding global optima, at least on the training data [19, 59]. How SGD avoids
local minima for such objectives remains an open theoretical question since Goodfellow et al. [19].
In recent years, there have been a number of theoretical results aiming at a better understanding of
this phenomenon. Many of them focus on two-layer (thus one-hidden-layer) neural networks and
assume that the inputs are random Gaussian or sufﬁciently close to Gaussian [7, 15, 18, 32, 37, 50,
55, 60, 61]. Some study deep neural networks but assuming the activation function is linear [5, 6, 22].
Some study the convex task of training essentially only the last layer of the network [13].
More recently, Safran and Shamir [43] provided evidence that, even when inputs are standard Gaus-
sians, two-layer neural networks can indeed have spurious local minima, and suggested that over-
parameterization (i.e., increasing the number of neurons) may be the key in avoiding spurious local
minima. Li and Liang [31] showed that, for two-layer networks with the cross-entropy loss, in
the over-parametrization regime, gradient descent (GD) is capable of ﬁnding nearly-global optimal
solutions on the training data. This result was later extended to the `2loss by Du et al. [16].
In this paper, we show GD and SGD are capable of training multi-layer neural networks (with ReLU
activation) to global minima on any non-degenerate training data set. Furthermore, the running time
Full version and future updates can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12065 .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.