from high-dimensional data. To this end, we make another
contribution and propose to construct the symmetric function
using subspaces which have a long history in modeling visual
data [ 16–19]. This differs in large from previous studies
where the symmetric function is realized through a form of
pooling ( e.g., averaging as in [ 20]).
As a motivating example, we compare and contrast the
state-of-the-art prototypical networks [ 20] against our pro-
posed subspace method using the CUB dataset [ 21]. To
this end, for the universal feature extractor, we used the
ResNet-34 trained on ImageNet [ 22]. We considered four
FSL problems with various shots (two to ﬁve to be speciﬁc)
and report the accuracy of the prototypical networks and
our subspace method in Fig. 1. As will detail out shortly,
in prototypical networks, one constructs low-shot classiﬁers
by averaging all the samples within each class. Aside from
being a natural choice, averaging is supported by 1.In [23],
it is shown that all symmetric functions over a set Xcan be
written as ρ(/summationtext
x∈Xφ(x))for suitable transformations ρand
φ.2.In [11], authors note that the average of samples within
a class is highly correlated with the parameters of classiﬁers
learned by the softmax, hence one hopes that averaging re-
ﬂects the true parameters of a class in FSL as well. Neverthe-
less, we observe that our subspace solution consistently and
comfortably outperforms the prototypical networks. This
compelling result along our thorough set of experiments on
supervised and semi-supervised FSL (see for example Ta-
ble1and5) suggest that in few-shot regimes, there exists
better ways to build classiﬁers from limited observations
with subspace-based ones being our recommendation.
Contributions. In summary, we make the following con-
tributions in this work:
i.Few-shot learning solutions are formulated within a
framework of generating dynamic classiﬁers.
ii.We propose an extension of existing dynamic clas-
siﬁers by using subspaces. We rely on a well-
established concept stating that a second-order
method generalizes better for classiﬁcation tasks.
iii.We also introduce a discriminative formulation where
maximum discrimination between subspaces is en-
couraged during training. This solution boosts the
performance even further.
iv.We show that our method can make use of unlabeled
data and hence it lends itself to the problem of semi-
supervised few-shot learning and transductive setting.
The robustness of such a variant is assessed in our
experiments.2. Related Work
In this section, we review the literature on few-shot learn-
ing and subspace methods for classiﬁcation tasks. Few-
shot learning was originally introduced to imitate the human
learning ability. Some of the early works use generative mod-
els and similarity learning to capture the variation within
parts and geometric conﬁgurations of objects [ 3,15,24].
These works use hand-crafted features to perform few-shot
classiﬁcation. Constellation model proposed in [ 15] takes
into account the object parts for inference. The geometric
structure of these parts helps discriminate between different
objects. Furthermore, Torralba et al. [24] exploit similar
features on visual objects but the model does not exploit the
geometric structure. Another non-deep solution is the work
by Lake et al. [3] which uses a set of primitives (strokes) to
model few-shot classiﬁcation. The above few-shot classiﬁca-
tion methods are not trained end-to-end and the given tasks
are non-episodic.
The deep learning has been very successful in learning
discriminative features from images. Santoro et al. [25] and
Vinyals et al. [4] attempted to solve few-shot classiﬁcation
with end-to-end deep neural networks. In majority of cases,
the network, trained from episodes, aims to infer the under-
lying discriminative model of speciﬁc tasks from limited
data. Meta-learning can also be used to obtain fast adaptive
networks. A prominent idea is to learn initial values for the
parameters (weights) of the neural network. With proper ini-
tialization, one can expect the network to adapt to different
tasks using backpropagation from limited samples. Sachin et
al. [8] uses long-short term memory (LSTM) to embed the
gradients w.r.t. a given task to train the network. MAML [ 7]
does not use LSTM to encode the gradients but it can still
perform meta-learning, usually with a better performance.
As an extension, MAML++ [ 26] uses an importance scheme
to weigh the loss during the gradient updates. MetaNets [ 27]
is another fast adaptive network with a mix of so-called fast
and ﬁxed weights. The fast weights change through back-
propagation while the ﬁxed-weights do not change. Thus,
one can see this method as an optimization applied to se-
lected weights only.
FSL based on metric-learning is the closest direction to
our work. Matching networks [ 4] and Siamese networks [ 13]
learn sample-wise metric, meaning that distances to samples
are used to determine the label of the query. In prototypical
networks [ 20], Snell et al. extended the idea from samples
to class-wise metric. The descriptors from all the samples
of a speciﬁc class are grouped and considered as the class
prototypes. The prototypes are subsequently used for in-
ference. Learning a non-linear relationship between class
representations and queries can be modeled by neural net-
works as shown for example in Relation Networks [ 14]. The
underlying metric is learnt to preserve small distances be-
tween feature vectors sharing the same class label. Qiao et
24137