!
(a)!
(b)!"
!#
(c)
!
(d)
Figure 2: Various classiﬁers for few-shot classiﬁcation. (a) Matching networks create pairwise classiﬁers. (b) Prototypical
networks create mean classiﬁers based on the sample in the same class. (c) Relation networks produce non-linear classiﬁers.
(d) Our proposed method creates classiﬁers using subspaces.
al. [11] observed that the activation of a network is corre-
lated with weights of its classiﬁer (ﬁnal layer) and advocates
that prototype made of the activation is sufﬁcient for classiﬁ-
cation. Other works use feature attention modules [ 28,29]
to modulate features for few-shot learning [ 30,31].
Several recent works target few-shot semi-supervised
learning (FS-SSL). Garcia et al. [32] exploit graph neural
networks for semi-supervised setting where unlabeled data
is connected with the labeled data via Graph Neural Net-
works (GNN). Then, the features extracted from GNN are
employed to classify the query. Another protocol for FS-SSL
proposed by Ren et al. [33] shows that unlabeled images help
samples from the support set to increase the performance
of few-shot classiﬁcation. The method proposed in [ 33]
is based on the prototypical networks [ 20] with prototypes
reﬁned by the use of unlabeled images.
3. Problem Setting
We start by deﬁning the terminology used in few-shot
learning. A few of samples are trained for every iteration
in meta-learning fashion. To obtain a trained model, so-
called episodes are used to sample the data. An episode
Ticonsists of two sets, the support set Sand the query
setQ. This learning paradigm depicts how machine can
improve their ability given fragmented data in each iter-
ation. Speciﬁcally, the deep embeddings learn with lim-
ited amount of labels and inputs per episode. This learn-
ing paradigm is well-known as N-wayK-shot classiﬁca-
tion ( e.g., 20-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot). We introduce
our notations for the ( N-way,K-shot) few-shot learning.
Each episode or task Tiis composed of the support set
S={(x1,1,c1,1),(x1,2,c1,2),···,(xN,K,cN,K)}and the
query set Q={q1,···,qN×M}, wherexi,jdenotes the
j-th sample from class iandci,j∈{1,···,N}. In the semi-
supervised setting, there exist additionally an unlabeled set
R={r1,..,rU}within an episode.
A related problem is semi-supervised few-shot learn-ing where unlabeled data is provided to the model. In the
literature, various conﬁgurations are considered for semi-
supervised few-shot learning e.g., [32–34]. In this work, we
follow the challenging protocol in [ 33] where the so-called
distractors are introduced. Thus, an episode includes the
support set S, query set Q, and unlabeled setR. The support
(labeled) Sand query Qsets are conﬁgured as in few-shot
learning. Additionally, an unlabeled set Ris provided to
assist the classiﬁcation task within an episode. In the un-
labeled set, there are samples from two different sources:
the support classes and the distractor classes. As the name
implies, samples from distractor classes are irrelevant to the
classiﬁcation task and represent classes outside the support
set.
4. Proposed Method
4.1. Preliminary
We consider a few-shot learning problem in two stages:
the feature extractor and the dynamic classiﬁer. Let fΘ:
X →RDbe a mapping from the input space Xto aD-
dimensional representation realized by a neural network
andXc={xc,1,···,xc,K}be a class-speciﬁc set. We
formulate the problem of few-shot learning as generating
dynamic classiﬁers. To this end, the ﬁnal layer of a neural
network along the softmax layer implements:
p(c|q) =exp(W⊤
cfΘ(q))/summationtext
c′exp(W⊤
c′fΘ(q))=exp(dc(q))/summationtext
c′exp(dc′(q)),(1)
whereWcis a weight of class c. Then, the problem of FSL
can be understood as how Wcan be generated once a new
task is provided. To showcase this setup, we discuss the pair-
wise classiﬁer, the prototype, and the non-linear classiﬁer
below.
Pair-Wise Classiﬁer. It is possible to build a classiﬁer di-
rectly from samples by calculating the similarity between
them as shown in Fig. 2(a). One seminal work using this
34138