Adaptive Subspaces for Few-Shot Learning
Christian Simon†,§Piotr Koniusz†,§Richard Nock†,‡,§Mehrtash Harandi♣,§
†The Australian National University,♣Monash University,
‡The University of Sydney,§Data61-CSIRO
ﬁrst.last@{anu.edu.au,monash.edu,data61.csiro.au }
Abstract
Object recognition requires a generalization capability
to avoid overﬁtting, especially when the samples are ex-
tremely few. Generalization from limited samples, usually
studied under the umbrella of meta-learning, equips learn-
ing techniques with the ability to adapt quickly in dynamical
environments and proves to be an essential aspect of lifelong
learning. In this paper, we provide a framework for few-shot
learning by introducing dynamic classiﬁers that are con-
structed from few samples. A subspace method is exploited
as the central block of a dynamic classiﬁer. We will empiri-
cally show that such modelling leads to robustness against
perturbations ( e.g., outliers) and yields competitive results
on the task of supervised and semi-supervised few-shot clas-
siﬁcation. We also develop a discriminative form which can
boost the accuracy even further. Our code is available at
https://github.com/chrysts/dsn_fewshot .
1. Introduction
Various studies show that many deep learning techniques
in computer vision, speech recognition and natural language
understanding, to name but a few, will fail to produce reli-
able models that generalize well if limited annotations are
available. Apart from the labor associated with annotating
data, precise annotation can become ill-posed in some cases.
One prime example of such a difﬁculty is object detection la-
beling which requires annotating bounding boxes of objects
as explained in [ 1]. In some other cases, labeling process
may require expert knowledge ( e.g. sign language recogni-
tion [ 2]).
In contrast to the current trend in deep learning, humans
can learn new objects from only a few examples. This in turn
provides humans with lifelong learning abilities. Inspired
by such learning abilities, several approaches are developed
to study learning from limited samples [ 3–12]. This type
of learning, known as Few-Shot Learning (FSL), has been
tackled by a diverse set of ideas, from embedding learning [ 4,
2 3 4 53538414447505356
38.445.4249.9552.7
40.547.1551.3754.15Prototype
Subspace
Number of ShotAccuracy (%)Figure 1: The accuracy of prototype and subspace classi-
ﬁers evaluated with few (2-5) images. The feature extractor
is ResNet-34 trained on the ImageNet. A prototype is an
average pooling of few images within the same class and a
subspace is the class speciﬁc basis vectors. The prototypes
and subspaces are constructed directly from the generated
features without additional learnable parameters.
13,14], to adaptation techniques [ 7,8] and even generative
models [ 3,15].
In this work, we ﬁrst formulate FSL as a two-stage learn-
ing paradigm, namely, 1.learning a universal feature ex-
tractor followed by 2.learning to generate a classiﬁer dy-
namically from limited data. We will demonstrate that many
state-of-the-art FSL techniques ﬁt nicely into such a learning
paradigm. Furthermore, we will show that viewing the FSL
as the above paradigm will be beneﬁcial and provide us with
tools to formalize FSL.
Once we establish the two-stage learning paradigm, we
will turn our attention to how one can reliably generate a
classiﬁer from limited data. Aside from limited annotation,
we will show that a requirement in many challenging FSL
problems is to learn the classiﬁer from high-dimensional data.
This ultimately boils down to learning a symmetric function1
1A symmetric function is a function that has the same value given the
arguments regardless of their order.
1
4136