Conv- 4/
ResNet
Input Images Backbone Dynamic ClassifierDiscriminative 
Subspace
Figure 3: The overall pipeline of our approach. The subspace classiﬁer replaces a classiﬁer with a single vector per class.
Discriminative method is then applied to maximize the margin between subspaces.
classiﬁer is Matching Networks [ 4]. The samples are embed-
ded through LSTMs and attention modules. However, this
method does not poses an invariance w.r.t. the order of input
images which affects the accuracy. The classiﬁer weight Wc
is substituted with a function g(·)(e.g. LSTMs) to encode
the samples. Then the class speciﬁc samples are summarized
and a cosine similarity used for prediction.
Prototype Classiﬁer. Based on the observation for few-shot
classiﬁcation in [ 11], the parameters from the last fully-
connected layer and prototypes correlate. Thus, the classiﬁer
is generated from the prototypes. By introducing a simple
multi-layer perceptron, the average of feature vectors from
the ﬁnal activation layer is used to perform few-shot classiﬁ-
cation. This observation is also conﬁrmed by prototypical
networks [ 20] that learn directly feature embeddings. Some
of the following works also use prototypes as dynamic clas-
siﬁers such as [ 35,36]. Thus, the Wcis substituted with
1
K/summationtext
xi∈XcfΘ(xi). Furthermore, this approach preserves
the symmetric property (invariance to order of images) be-
cause the average operation is performed to generate the
classiﬁer. The illustration is depicted in Fig. 2(b).
Non-Linear Binary Classiﬁer. This approach exploits the
non-linearity of the decision boundaries. Relational net-
works use a non-linear binary classiﬁer to calculate the simi-
larity as shown in Fig 2(c). Letz= (fΘ(xi),fΘ(q))and
M∈R2Dis the learnable classiﬁer (comparator). We can
redeﬁne Eq. 1asp(c|q) =σ(z⊤M), whereσis a non-
linear function ( e.g., sigmoid). Even though this classiﬁer
does not use a softmax function, it follows the principle of
a generating classiﬁer that learns a comparison of datapoint
pairs.
4.2. Subspaces for Few­Shot Classiﬁcation
We propose to model points by subspaces {Zi}N
i=1. Each
subspace Zihas a basis represented by RD×n∋Bi=
[b1,···,bn];n≤D, withB⊤
iBi=In. Our goal is to
learn the feature extractor Θto generate subspaces, ie., the
function in a way that the resulting space is suitable for
subspace classiﬁers.A basis for the subspace representing class ccan be ob-
tained by a matrix decomposition e.g., singular value de-
composition (SVD). We emphasize that more involved tech-
niques to obtain robust subspaces can potentially improve
the algorithm. Nevertheless, our goal is to assess whether
the concept of subspace modeling for few-shot learning is
well justiﬁed, thus we opt for truncated SVD in our imple-
mentation.
4.3. Subspace Classiﬁers
High-order information is preferred than low-order to
improve the capability of the classiﬁer. A subspace method
can form a robust classiﬁer. Below, we describe how to create
a subspace and classify based on it. A new set of samples
encoded by Θcan be expressed as ˜Xc= [fΘ,(xc,1)−
µc,···,fΘ(xc,K)−µc], whereµc=1
K/summationtext
xi∈XcfΘ(xi).
One of the classiﬁcation methods on a subspace is to ﬁnd the
closest distance between the datapoint to its projection onto
the subspace. To this end, a class-speciﬁc projection matrix
Pcis calculated from ˜Xc. Now a query qjcan be projected
ontoPcand the classiﬁcation based on the shortest distance
from the query to its projection onto Pc(in original space)
is performed. Our general subspace classiﬁer is deﬁned as:
dc(q) =−/ba∇dbl(I−Mc)(fΘ(q)−µc)/ba∇dbl2, (2)
whereMj=PcP⊤
candµccan be interpreted as the offset
between a point and the subspace.Thus, Pcis a truncated
matrix of a matrix Bcwith orthogonal basis for the lin-
ear subspace spanning Xc={fΘ(xi);yi=c}(hence,
B⊤
cBc=I).
We deﬁne the probability of the query assigned to class c
using a softmax function as:
pc,q=p(c|q) =exp/parenleftbig
dc(q)/parenrightbig
/summationtext
c′exp/parenleftbig
dc′(q)/parenrightbig. (3)
Now, we can minimize the negative log of Eq. 3and
updateΘ. To train the whole framework, backpropagation
through SVD is required which is available in modern deep
learning packages such as PyTorch [ 37]. Hereafter, we call
our proposed method as deep subspace networks (DSN).
44139