DouZero : Mastering DouDizhu with Self-Play Deep Reinforcement Learning
DMC can naturally leverage the action features to generalize
over unseen actions by taking as input the action features.
While it might have high execution complexity if the action
size is large, in most states of DouDizhu, only a subset of
the actions is legal, so that we do not need to iterate over all
the actions. Thus, DMC is overall an efﬁcient algorithm for
DouDizhu. While it is possible to introduce action features
into an actor-critic framework (e.g., by using a Q-network
as the critic), the classiﬁer-like actor will still suffer from
the large action space. Our preliminary experiments conﬁrm
that this strategy is not very effective (see Figure 7).
3.3. Comparison with Deep Q-Learning
The most popular value-based algorithm is Deep Q-
Learning (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015), which is a bootstrap-
ping method that updates the Q-value based on the Q-values
in the next step. While both DMC and DQN approximate
the Q-values, DMC has several advantages in DouDizhu.
First, the overestimation bias caused by approximating the
maximum action value in DQN is difﬁcult to control when
using function approximation (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993;
Hasselt, 2010) and becomes more pronounced with very
large action space (Zahavy et al., 2018). While some tech-
niques, such as double Q-learning (van Hasselt et al., 2016)
and experience replay (Lin, 1992), might alleviate this issue,
we ﬁnd in practice that DQN is very unstable and often
diverges in DouDizhu. Whereas, Monte-Carlo estimation
is not susceptible to bias since it directly approximates the
true values without bootstrapping (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
Second, DouDizhu is a task with long horizons and sparse
reward, i.e., the agent will need to go though a long chain of
states without feedback, and the only time a nonzero reward
is incurred is at the end of a game. This may slow down the
convergence of Q-learning because estimating the Q-value
in the current state needs to wait until the value in the next
state gets close to its true value (Szepesv ´ari, 2009; Beleznay
et al., 1999). Unlike DQN, the convergence of Monte-Carlo
estimation is not impacted by the episode length since it
directly approximates the true target values.
Third, it is inconvenient to efﬁciently implement DQN in
DouDizhu due to the large and variable action space. Specif-
ically, the max operation of DQN in every update step will
cause high computation cost since it requires iterating across
all the legal actions on a very costly deep Q-network. More-
over, the legal moves differ in different states, which makes
it inconvenient to do batch learning. As a result, we ﬁnd
DQN is too slow in terms of wall-clock time. While Monte-
Carlo methods might suffer from high variance (Sutton &
Barto, 2018), which means it might require more samples to
converge, it can be easily parallelized to generate thousands
of samples per second to alleviate the high variance issue
and accelerate training. We ﬁnd that the high variance ofDMC is greatly outweighed by the scalability it provides,
and DMC is very efﬁcient in wall-clock time.
4.DouZero System
In this section, we introduce DouZero system by ﬁrst de-
scribing the state/action representations and neural architec-
ture and then elaborating on how we parallelize DMC with
multiple processes to stabilize and accelerate training.
4.1. Card Representation and Neural Architecture
We encode each card combination with a one-hot 415
matrix (Figure 2). Since suits are irrelevant in DouDizhu,
we use each row to represent the number of cards of a
speciﬁc rank or joker. Figure 3 shows the architecture of the
Q-network. For the state, we extract several card matrices to
represent the hand cards, the union of the other players’ hand
cards and the most recent moves, and some one-hot vectors
to represent the number of cards of the other players and
the number of bombs played so far. Similarly, we use one
card matrix to encode the action. For the neural architecture,
LSTM is used to encode historical moves, and the output is
concatenated with the other state/action features. Finally, we
use six layers of MLP with a hidden size of 512 to produce
Q-values. We provide more details in Appendix C.1.
4.2. Parallel Actors
We denote Landlord as L, the player that moves before the
Landlord as U, and the player that moves after the Landlord
as D. We parallelize DMC with multiple actor processes
and one learner process, summarized in Algorithm 1 and Al-
gorithm 2, respectively. The learner maintains three global
Q-networks for the three positions and updates the networks
with MSE loss to approximate the target values based on
the data provided by the actor processes. Each actor main-
tains three local Q-networks, which are synchronized with
the global networks periodically. The actor will repeat-
edly sample trajectories from the game engine and calculate
cumulative reward for each state-action pair. The commu-
nication of learner and actors are implemented with three
shared buffers. Each buffer is divided into several entries,
where each entry consists of several data instances.
5. Experiments
The experiments are designed to answer the following re-
search questions. RQ1: How does DouZero compare with
existing DouDizhu programs, such as rule-based strategies,
supervised learning, RL-based methods, and MCTS-based
solutions (Section 5.2)? RQ2: How will DouZero perform
if we consider bidding phase (Section 5.3)? RQ3: How efﬁ-
cient is the training of DouZero (Section 5.4)? RQ4: How
doesDouZero compare with bootstrapping and actor critic