Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 15 of 19
performance, and this is conﬁrmed through the reward observed in Figure 6c. Based on
this, in the following we assess the decisions made by the algorithm in relation to when to
apply MC and which are the technologies involved.
If we consider that the evaluation scenario has two LTE cells (C 1,1and C 1,2) and four
5G NR cells (C 2,1,C2,2, C2,3,C2,4), with Nmax=2,this means that the MC conﬁguration
can be done with ﬁve possible connection modes, namely no MC with LTE; no MC with NR;
MC with LTE-LTE; MC with LTE-NR and MC with NR-NR. Figure 7 presents the percentage
of time that the algorithm selected each one of these modes for the same 100 trajectories
studied in Section 4.4.1. It is observed that during around 56% of the time the algorithm
decided not to do MC and to connect instead to only one cell of LTE or one cell of 5G NR.
In contrast, during the remaining 44% of the time it decided to do MC, particularly being
the combination LTE-NR, the most used approach selected in around 38% of the time. This
is logic given that LTE cells have a bigger coverage area than the NR cells, but these have
more bandwidth. Therefore, this connection mode could be helpful at the time of fulﬁlling;
for example, the UE data rate requirements while the UE is moving. Given the statistics
presented in Figure 7 and after observing previously that the DQN-based solution performs
much better that the SINR-based one, the importance of deciding the correct connection
mode and the multi-connectivity conﬁguration when required is clear.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 20 
 
 Figure 6. (a) SINR evolution of the LTE and NR cells in the analyzed period; ( b) evolution of 𝛽௠,௡ 
in the detected cells by the UE during the analyzed period and ( c) reward in the analyzed period. 
4.4.2. Statistics on the MC Configuration 
As explained previously, the goal of the pr oposed algorithm was to find the MC con-
figuration that maximizes the reward under any experienced conditions by the UE. If we 
look at the evolution of 𝛽௠,௡ in the detected cells by the UE during the analyzed period 
in Figure 6b we see that at some partic ular moments the DQN-based algorithm decided 
to send all the user traffic through a single cell. This means that during these moments, 
the algorithm decided that, based on the curre nt state, not doing MC would result in a 
better performance, and this is confirmed through the reward observed in Figure 6c. Based on this, in the following we assess the decisions made by the algorithm in relation 
to when to apply MC and which are the technologies involved. 
If we consider that the evaluati on scenario has two LTE cells (C
1,1 and C 1,2) and four 
5G NR cells (C 2,1, C2,2, C 2,3, C2,4), with 𝑁௠௔௫ =2 , this means that the MC configuration can 
be done with five possible connection modes, namely no MC with LTE; no MC with NR; 
MC with LTE-LTE; MC with LTE-NR and MC with NR-NR. Figure 7 presents the percentage 
of time that the algorithm selected each one of these modes for the same 100 trajectories 
studied in Section 4.4.1. It is observed that during around 56% of the time the algorithm 
decided not to do MC and to connect instead to only one cell of LTE or one cell of 5G NR. 
In contrast, during the remaining 44% of the ti me it decided to do MC, particularly being 
the combination LTE-NR, the most used approach selected in around 38% of the time. 
This is logic given that LTE cells have a bigge r coverage area than the NR cells, but these 
have more bandwidth. Therefore, this connect ion mode could be helpful at the time of 
fulfilling; for example, the UE data rate requirements while the UE is moving. Given the 
statistics presented in Figure 7 and after ob serving previously that the DQN-based solu-
tion performs much better that the SINR-based  one, the importance of deciding the correct 
connection mode and the multi-connectivity configuration when required is clear. 
 
Figure 7. Statistics of connection modes for all moments of evaluation given 100 studied trajectories. 
4.5. Performance for Different Fixed Positions 
In the context of 5G, it is also pertinent to analyze situations in which the users/de-
vices remain stationary at fixed positions, since some services have this characteristic (e.g., 
Fixed Wireless Access, smart cities with sensors or cameras at lamp posts). We carried out an evaluation performance of the DQN-based strategy considering the same scenario ex-
plained in Section 4.1 but this time the eval uation UE remained in a fixed position. In 
order to explore a variety of si tuations, we studied the performance of the UE for 400 s in 
19 × 19 = 361 different positions all around th e 500 × 500 m scenario, selected from a grid 
of locations in steps of 25m in both horizontal and vertical directions. We compared the results against the optimal and SINR-based strategies. Figure 8 shows the CDF of the in-
stantaneous values of throughput ( T
u) and reward for all the considered positions. It is 52.3
4.4 5.337.9
0.1
0102030405060
no MC
(only LTE)no MC
(only NR)MC (LTE-
LTE)MC (LTE-
NR)MC (NR-
NR)%
Connection Modes
Figure 7. Statistics of connection modes for all moments of evaluation given 100 studied trajectories.
4.5. Performance for Different Fixed Positions
In the context of 5G, it is also pertinent to analyze situations in which the users/devices
remain stationary at ﬁxed positions, since some services have this characteristic (e.g., Fixed
Wireless Access, smart cities with sensors or cameras at lamp posts). We carried out
an evaluation performance of the DQN-based strategy considering the same scenario
explained in Section 4.1 but this time the evaluation UE remained in a ﬁxed position. In
order to explore a variety of situations, we studied the performance of the UE for 400 s
in 1919 = 361 different positions all around the 500 500 m scenario, selected from a
grid of locations in steps of 25m in both horizontal and vertical directions. We compared
the results against the optimal and SINR-based strategies. Figure 8 shows the CDF of the
instantaneous values of throughput ( Tu) and reward for all the considered positions. It is
shown that, like in the evaluation with trajectories, the performance for ﬁxed positions is
close to the optimum one and clearly outperforms the SINR-based strategy. In fact, when
analyzing some particular ﬁxed positions, the DQN-based strategy is able to outperform
the reward of the SINR-based one in up to 65%.