Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 3 of 19
of RAT for all users, and advises on the actual amount of radio resources that every user
may utilize on each technology. The problem is formulated analytically, and a solution
based on the weighted max-min algorithm is proposed. In [ 17] the problem of trafﬁc split
between the master and the secondary eNB in LTE with dual connectivity is modelled as a
Constrained Markov Decision Process, and a solution based on the Lagrangian approach is
proposed. Similarly, [ 18] considers a scenario with 5G-LTE multi-connectivity, and makes
use of Lagrangian Dual Decomposition to determine the fraction of trafﬁc transmitted
through each cell that maximizes the goodput, whereas [ 19] formulates a PDCP split bearer
decision problem that decides whether and how to split the trafﬁc across multiple cells
in order to meet the bandwidth requirements of user services and proposes a heuristic
solution to solve the problem.
This paper addresses the trafﬁc split multi-connectivity problem in multi-RAT scenar-
ios. The target is to determine a policy to optimally distribute the trafﬁc of a UE across the
different RATs and cells by fulﬁlling the QoS requirements while minimizing the resource
consumption of the UE and ensuring that no overload situations arise in the involved cells.
The novelty of the paper with respect to prior works dealing with trafﬁc split [ 16–19]
is the use of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), and in particular the Deep Q-Network
(DQN) technique [ 20], in order to learn the trafﬁc split policy to be applied on a per UE
basis so that the amount of bandwidth used by a UE is minimized while at the same time
providing the required bit rate and avoiding overload situations in the involved cells. To
the authors’ best knowledge, the use of DQN has not been considered by other researchers
in the context of trafﬁc split for MC. Instead, previous works have considered different
algorithmic solutions and different optimization targets, such as linear programming for
ensuring fairness in [ 16], Lagrangian multipliers for minimizing delay in [ 17], Lagrangian
Dual Decomposition for optimizing goodput in [ 18] or a heuristic algorithm for maximizing
the number of served UEs in [ 19]. Following the trend of applying machine learning for
different problems in the RAN [ 21] and for different applications [ 22], the motivation to
consider DRL in MC is that DRL techniques are useful for optimizing dynamic decision-
making problems in the absence of an accurate mathematical model of the operational
environment. Moreover, thanks to their capability of generalizing from past experience,
DRL techniques are efﬁcient in problems that depend on a large number of input variables
and in which both the inputs and the decision-making outputs can take a large range of
possible values, as it is the case of the MC problem considered here.
Based on a ﬁrst version of the DQN model presented in our recent work [ 23] and
further evolved in [ 24], this paper signiﬁcantly extends these works by presenting the de-
tailed formulation and algorithmic solution of the DQN model, the architectural framework
based on the open RAN (O-RAN) architecture [ 25] for supporting the proposed solution,
and by providing a much more exhaustive performance assessment of the algorithm con-
sidering different evaluation conditions. The O-RAN based framework for supporting the
implementation of the proposed approach constitutes another novelty of the paper with
respect to previous works.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the system model,
formulates the considered multi-connectivity problem and presents the O-RAN-based
architectural framework. Section 3 presents the proposed DQN-based solution. Different
performance results are provided in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 summarises the conclusions.
2. Multi-Connectivity Model Formulation
2.1. Problem Deﬁnition
Let us consider a heterogeneous RAN where different UEs with multi-connectivity
capabilities are camping. A given u-th UE considers Mdifferent RATs and Ndifferent cells
per RAT as candidates for the multi-connectivity. Then, let us denote as Au= {Cm,n} the set
of candidate cells detected by the u-th UE, where Cm,ndenotes the n-th cell of the m-th RAT
with n= 1, . . .,Nand m= 1, . . .,M.It is worth mentioning that, due to the mobility of
the UE, the speciﬁc detected cells in a given RAT may change with time. In this respect,