Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 17 of 19
95th percentile of 12.5%. This reﬂects the close to optimum behavior obtained with the
proposed approach.
4.6. Performance Evaluation in Scenarios with Multiple MC-Capable UEs
This section considers the performance of the DQN-based solution when there are
multiple MC-capable UEs coexisting in the same evaluation environment and applying the
learnt DQN-based policy.
The study consisted of ﬁve different simulations, each one with a distinct number
of MC-capable UEs, ranging from 5 to 25, all of them with a Ru= 25 Mb/s. During the
simulation time each UE moved following a different trajectory and generated trafﬁc during
the whole evaluation time, equal to 400 s. The background trafﬁc had a generation rate
of 0.2 sessions/s and an exponentially distributed session duration with an average 120s,
resulting in an average of 24 background UEs during a simulation.
The results presented in Figure 10 were obtained by averaging the performance for
the different UEs in each evaluation with the SINR-based strategy and with the proposed
DQN-based strategy. Figure 10a depicts the performance of our solution in terms of reward.
It can be seen that the gain of DQN-based strategy with respect to SINR-based strategy
increases from 11.2% for 5 UEs up to 31.7% for 25 UEs.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 20 
 
 Considering the results for all the different fi xed positions, it was seen that the error 
of the DQN-based approach with respect to the optimum was, on average, 3.76%, the 5th 
percentile was 0.08% and the 95th percentile was 13.3%. Similarly, considering all the re-sults obtained with the 100 trajectories of Sect ion 4.4 and the fixed positions of Section 4.5, 
the average error was 3.9% and the distribution provides a 5th percentile of 0.09% and a 
95th percentile of 12.5%. This reflects the close to optimum behavior obtained with the 
proposed approach. 
4.6. Performance Evaluation in Scen arios with Multiple MC-Capable UEs 
This section considers the performance of the DQN-based solution when there are 
multiple MC-capable UEs coexisting in the same evaluation envi ronment and applying 
the learnt DQN-based policy. 
The study consisted of five different simulations, each one with a distinct number of 
MC-capable UEs, ranging from 5 to 25, all of them with a R
u = 25 Mb/s. During the simu-
lation time each UE moved following a different trajectory and generated traffic during 
the whole evaluation time, equal to 400 s. The background traffic had a generation rate of 
0.2 sessions/s and an exponentially distributed session duration with an average 120s, re-sulting in an average of 24 background UEs during a simulation. 
The results presented in Figure 10 were obtained by averaging the performance for 
the different UEs in each evaluation with the SINR-based strategy and with the proposed 
DQN-based strategy. Figure 10a depicts the pe rformance of our solution in terms of re-
ward. It can be seen that the gain of DQN-based strategy with respect to SINR-based strat-egy increases from 11.2% for 5 UEs up to 31.7% for 25 UEs. 
Regarding the throughput performance, a similar assessment was done and the re-
sults are presented in Figure 10b. They show that the proposed method outperforms the 
SINR-based approach for all the considered nu mbers of users., with a gain of around 33% 
for the case with 25 UEs. Notice how by applying our solution it tends to keep the obtained throughput very close to the requirement of R
u = 25 Mb/s. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 10. (a) Average reward values as a function of the number of MC-capable UEs; ( b) average 
throughput values as a function of  the number of MC-capable UEs. 
5. Conclusions and Future Work 
This paper proposes the use of Deep Q-Ne twork for splitting the traffic of a UE 
among cells when using multi-connectivity depending on the current traffic and radio conditions experienced by the UE in the invo lved cells. The proposed strategy was evalu-
ated and compared against the optimum case and against a classical SINR-based approach 
in different evaluation scenarios, involving UEs following trajectories and stationary UEs. 
Results show the capability of the DQN agent to learn a quasi-optimal policy, providing 
a reward that on average is only 3.9% lower than the reward of the optimum strategy. It was also seen that the DQN-based approach  clearly outperforms the SINR-based ap-
proach with reward differences that can be up  to 50% for certain trajectories. In turn, for 0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
5 1 01 52 02 5Average Reward
Number of MC-capable UEsSINR-based startegy
DQN-based strategy
141516171819202122232425
5 1 01 52 02 5Average Throughput  Mb/s
Number of MC-capable UEsSINR-based startegy
DQN-based strategy
Figure 10. (a) Average reward values as a function of the number of MC-capable UEs; ( b) average
throughput values as a function of the number of MC-capable UEs.
Regarding the throughput performance, a similar assessment was done and the results
are presented in Figure 10b. They show that the proposed method outperforms the SINR-
based approach for all the considered numbers of users., with a gain of around 33% for
the case with 25 UEs. Notice how by applying our solution it tends to keep the obtained
throughput very close to the requirement of Ru= 25 Mb/s.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
This paper proposes the use of Deep Q-Network for splitting the trafﬁc of a UE among
cells when using multi-connectivity depending on the current trafﬁc and radio conditions
experienced by the UE in the involved cells. The proposed strategy was evaluated and
compared against the optimum case and against a classical SINR-based approach in differ-
ent evaluation scenarios, involving UEs following trajectories and stationary UEs. Results
show the capability of the DQN agent to learn a quasi-optimal policy, providing a reward
that on average is only 3.9% lower than the reward of the optimum strategy. It was also
seen that the DQN-based approach clearly outperforms the SINR-based approach with
reward differences that can be up to 50% for certain trajectories. In turn, for the case of
ﬁxed positions, results show that the DQN-based strategy can achieve throughput gains
of up to 166%with respect to the SINR-based strategy at certain times. The statistics re-
garding the different connection modes used by the DQN strategy conﬁrm the capability