Citation: Hernández-Carlón, J.J.;
Pérez-Romero, J.; Sallent, O.; Vilà, I.;
Casadevall, F. A Deep
Q-Network-Based Algorithm for
Multi-Connectivity Optimization in
Heterogeneous Cellular-Networks.
Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179. https://
doi.org/10.3390/s22166179
Academic Editor: Leopoldo
Angrisani
Received: 1 July 2022
Accepted: 16 August 2022
Published: 18 August 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
A Deep Q-Network-Based Algorithm for Multi-Connectivity
Optimization in Heterogeneous Cellular-Networks†
Juan Jes ús Hern ández-Carl ón *, Jordi P érez-Romero
 , Oriol Sallent, Irene Vil àand Ferran Casadevall
Signal Theory and Communications Department, Universitat Polit ècnica de Catalunya (UPC),
08034 Barcelona, Spain
*Correspondence: juan.jesus.hernandez@upc.edu
†This work is an extended version of the conference paper Hern ández-Carl ón, J.J.; P érez-Romero, J.; Sallent, O.;
Vilà, I.; Casadevall, F. A Deep Q Network-Based Multi-connectivity Algorithm for Heterogeneous 4G/5G
Cellular Systems. In Proceedings of the 18th IFIP International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Applications and Innovations (AIAI 2022), Crete, Greece, 17–20 June 2022.
Abstract: The use of multi-connectivity has become a useful tool to manage the trafﬁc in hetero-
geneous cellular network deployments, since it allows a device to be simultaneously connected to
multiple cells. The proper exploitation of this technique requires to adequately conﬁgure the trafﬁc
sent through each cell depending on the experienced conditions. This motivates this work, which
tackles the problem of how to optimally split the trafﬁc among the cells when the multi-connectivity
feature is used. To this end, the paper proposes the use of a deep reinforcement learning solution
based on a Deep Q-Network (DQN) in order to determine the amount of trafﬁc of a device that needs
to be delivered through each cell, making the decision as a function of the current trafﬁc and radio
conditions. The obtained results show a near-optimal performance of the DQN-based solution with
an average difference of only 3.9% in terms of reward with respect to the optimum strategy. Moreover,
the solution clearly outperforms a reference scheme based on Signal to Interference Noise Ratio
(SINR) with differences of up to 50% in terms of reward and up to 166% in terms of throughput for
certain situations. Overall, the presented results show the promising performance of the DQN-based
approach that establishes a basis for further research in the topic of multi-connectivity and for the
application of this type of techniques in other problems of the radio access network.
Keywords: multi-connectivity; deep learning; Deep Q-Network; heterogeneous networks; cellular
networks; 5G NR; LTE; O-RAN
1. Introduction
With the ongoing increase of data trafﬁc as well as the emergence of new services
with high speed and reliability requirements, Mobile Network Operators (MNO) are
actively trialing and deploying ﬁfth generation (5G) networks in an effort to support new
vertical-driven use cases and enhanced user experiences [ 1]. 5G New Radio (5G NR)
deployments are progressively introduced on top of existing legacy technologies, such as
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), leading to heterogeneous deployments with multiple radio
access technologies (RATs), different cell types, such as macrocells, indoor and outdoor
small cells, and operating in a wide range of spectrum bands (e.g., sub-6 GHz bands
used by all RATs and millimeter wave (mmW) bands used by 5G New Radio). Network
densiﬁcation has been a mainstay of LTE networks, and the need for small cells will be even
more critical in 5G and beyond systems due to operation in higher spectrum bands and
the need to support trafﬁc densities that are two to three orders of magnitude higher than
in LTE [ 2]. The general industry consensus is that 5G will drive hyperdense deployments
with site densities in excess of 150 sites/km2in urban and selected indoor scenarios [3].
In this context, multi-connectivity (MC) has emerged as a key technology for sup-
porting simultaneous access via LTE and 5G networks [ 4], and is also expected to play
Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22166179 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors