Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 4 of 19
it is assumed that the Ncandidate cells of a RAT correspond to the best Ncells detected
by the UE at a certain time based on measurements averaged during a time window of
duration DTs.
Through the use of multi-connectivity, the trafﬁc of the u-th UE is split across multiple
RATs/cells of the set Au. It is assumed that, at a certain time, the UE can be simultaneously
connected to a maximum of Nmaxcells among the MNcandidates. The multi-connectivity
conﬁguration of the u-th UE can be expressed as the MNmatrix Bu= {bm,n}, where
bm,n2[0, 1] deﬁnes the fraction of total trafﬁc of the u-th UE that is delivered through the
n-th cell of the m-th RAT. Then, the objective is to ﬁnd the optimal conﬁguration Bu= {bm,n}
to be applied in a time window of DTthat allows ensuring the Quality of Service (QoS)
requirements with minimum resource consumption and avoiding overload situations in
the different RATs/cells. In this respect, it is assumed that the QoS requirement of the user
uis expressed in terms of a required bit rate Ru(b/s) to be provided.
To formalize the problem, let us denote as Tu(Bu) the total throughput or bit rate ob-
tained by user uduring the last time window period DTas a result of the multi-connectivity
conﬁguration Bu. Let us also denote am,n(bm,n) as the number of physical resources in the
m-th cell and n-th RAT assigned to the u-th UE to transmit the trafﬁc corresponding to
fraction bm,n. Assuming LTE and 5G NR-based RATs, the physical resources correspond to
the Physical Resource Blocks (PRBs), each one deﬁned as a set of 12 contiguous subcarriers
in an OFDMA access [ 3]. Then, considering that bm,nis the bandwidth of one PRB in the
m-th cell and n-th RAT, the bandwidth allocated to the user uin this RAT, denoted as
g(bm,n), is given by:
g(bm,n)=am,n(bm,n)bm,n (1)
In addition, the total fraction of occupied PRBs in a RAT/cell accounting for all the
UEs connected to that cell is denoted as rm,n(bm,n).
With all the above, the considered problem to be solved for the u-th UE is formally
deﬁned
Bu=arg min
Bu"
1
wmaxM
å
m=1N
å
n=1g(bm,n)#
s.t.Tu(Bu)Ru,rm,n(bm,n)rmax8m,nM
å
m=1N
å
n=1bm,n=1 (2)
where wmax is the maximum possible bandwidth to be assigned to the user uand
rmax2[0, 1] is the maximum threshold established to avoid overload situations in a
cell. Then, the problem in Equation (2) intends to ﬁnd the multi-connectivity conﬁguration
Buthat minimizes the fraction of total bandwidth allocated to the u-th UE while at the same
time ensuring that the provided throughput is above the required bit rate, i.e., Tu(Bu)Ru
and that the total fraction of occupied PRBs in the involved RATs/cells is lower than a
threshold rmax. It is worth mentioning that in the problem of Equation (2) the effects of
mobility, propagation and interference are implicitly captured in the term g(bm,n). Specif-
ically, as the UE moves, its propagation and interference conditions with respect to the
different cells changes and, therefore, the involved cells modify the amount of bandwidth
to be allocated to the UE so that the trafﬁc fraction bm,ncan be transmitted.
2.2. Proposed O-RAN Based System Architecture for MC Conﬁguration
In order to enforce in the network, the multi-connectivity conﬁguration Buobtained
as a result of the above problem, this paper proposes the system architecture depicted in
Figure 1. It is based on the O-RAN Alliance reference architecture [ 25], which comple-
ments 3GPP 5G standards with a foundation of virtualized network elements, white-box
hardware and standardized interfaces that fully embrace the core principles of openness
and intelligence. One of the principal characteristics of O-RAN architecture is the RAN
disaggregation, which splits a 5G NR base station (gNB) into different functional units,
namely a Central Unit (CU), a Distributed Unit (DU), and a Radio Unit (RU) (called O-CU,
O-DU, and O-RU in O-RAN speciﬁcations). The O-CU can be further split into two logical
components, one for the Control Plane (CP), and one for the User Plane (UP). The O-RAN