Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 5 of 19
architecture also considers the use of LTE technology with so-called O-eNB nodes. The
O-CU hosts the upper layers of the radio interface protocol stack. These include the PDCP
layer that splits the trafﬁc in case of multi-connectivity, in addition to the Radio Resource
Control (RRC) and the Service Data Adaptation Protocol (SDAP) layers for control plane
and user plane, respectively, that are on top of PDCP . In turn the O-DU hosts the lower
layers of the protocol stack, namely the Radio Link Control (RLC), the Medium Access Con-
trol (MAC), which hosts the scheduler in charge of allocating the PRBs to the different UEs,
and the upper parts of the Physical (PHY) layer (e.g., channel coding, modulation). Finally,
the O-RU hosts the lower parts of the PHY layer (e.g., Inverse Fast Fourier Transformation
(IFFT) for Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) transmission) and
the Radio Frequency (RF) functions.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 20 
 
  
Figure 1. O-RAN-based architectural components for supporting the MC configuration. 
3. DQN-Based Solution 
To address the problem defined by (2) a large number of variables must be consid-
ered, such as the propagation and interference  conditions experienced by the UE in the 
links with the different cells/RATs, the existi ng load in each cell, and the QoS require-
ments, among others. Additionally, there is al so a dependence of the behavior of the MAC 
layer in each cell/RAT that determines the am ount of resources allocated to the UE. How-
ever, since the MC controller operates on to p of the different RATs, in general does not 
have a precise model of how these resource a llocation techniques work to determine the 
value of 𝛾൫𝛽 ௠,௡൯ and its impact on the QoS metrics. Then, given the complexity and the 
multiplicity of inputs to the multi-connectivity problem, DRL techniques are considered 
as solid candidates for approaching it. Particularly, this paper relies on the DQN algo-rithm, which is a model-free and value-based DRL algorithm that considers discrete ac-
tion spaces. This algorithm has been already successfully applied to other problems in the 
RAN, such as capacity sharing in [28], resour ce allocation in hete rogeneous networks in 
[29], and spectrum sharing in 4G/5G networks in [30]. 
Other more sophisticated techniques, such  as Double DQN (DDQN) or Deep Deter-
ministic Policy Gradients (DDPG), could be considered to overcome the overestimation 
of the Q values in DQN. A previous work of the authors in the area of capacity sharing 
[31], where DQN was compared against DDQ N and DDPG, suggested retaining DQN for 
this work. While no significant differences in terms of performance would be expected, 
practicality considerations such as the speed of the training process, and the number of 
hyperparameters to configure, may favor DQN. 
In the proposed approach, learning is a dynamic process carried out by the DQN 
agent located at the MC controller, which ma kes decisions on the multi-connectivity con-
figurations for the different UEs. The agent operates in discrete times with granularity 
equal to the time window duration ΔT. These discrete times are denoted as t, t + 1, …, t + 
k, … At time t, the DQN selects an action a(t) that contains the MC configuration to be 
applied for a given UE in the next time window. The action selection is based on the cur-
rent state at time t, denoted as s(t), and on the decision-making policy available at this 
time. Then, as a result of applying the selected MC configuration, a reward signal r(t + 1) 
is provided to the DQN agent at the end of th e time window. This reward signal measures 
how good or bad was the last performed action a(t) according to the considered optimi-
zation criteria and, in consequence, this ob tained signal is used to improve the decision-
making policy. The different components of this process are detailed in the following. 
Figure 1. O-RAN-based architectural components for supporting the MC conﬁguration.
The multi-connectivity situation illustrated in Figure 1 considers the downlink trafﬁc
transmitted to a UE served by two cells of 5G NR RAT m= 1. The cell n= 1 is at the MN
while the cell n= 2 is at the SN. The multi-connectivity conﬁguration for the different users is
determined by an MC controller, which can be hosted at the near-real time RAN Intelligent
Controller (near-RT RIC) of the O-RAN architecture. The near-RT RIC is deployed at the
edge of the network, is able to operate control loops with a periodicity between 10 ms and
1 s, and it can interact with the DUs and CUs in the RAN. A relevant characteristic of the
near-RT RIC is that it supports the execution of third-party applications, referred to as
xApps [26]. Then, the MC controller can be implemented as one of these xApps.
The inputs of the MC controller are different measurements (further explained in next
section) from the RAT/cells, as shown in Figure 1. These measurements can be sent to
the near-RT RIC through the E2 interface. At the near-RT RIC, they are sent to the xApp
MC controller where they are collected and processed in order to be adapted to the format
required by the DQN agent that constitutes the core of the MC controller, as is explained
in Section 3. The output of the MC controller is the conﬁguration Bu= {bm,n} with the
weights bm,nto be conﬁgured at the PDCP layer of the MN, which resides in the O-CU.
This conﬁguration can be established via the E2 interface that supports enabling, disabling
or modifying the dual connectivity process [ 27]. Based on this conﬁguration, the PDCP
splits the trafﬁc between the MN and the SN, and delivers the part of the trafﬁc of the SN
via the Xn interface that interconnects the MN and the SN. Then, the MAC scheduler at
each O-DU allocates the necessary amount of bandwidth resources g(bm,n)to the UE to
transmit the fraction of trafﬁc bm,ncorresponding to the cell. The speciﬁc design of the