Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 6 of 19
MAC scheduler is out of the scope of this work, but in general it considers aspects such as
the instantaneous propagation and interference conditions observed by the UE, the QoS
requirements, the amount of UEs in the cell, etc.
3. DQN-Based Solution
To address the problem deﬁned by (2) a large number of variables must be considered,
such as the propagation and interference conditions experienced by the UE in the links
with the different cells/RATs, the existing load in each cell, and the QoS requirements,
among others. Additionally, there is also a dependence of the behavior of the MAC layer in
each cell/RAT that determines the amount of resources allocated to the UE. However, since
the MC controller operates on top of the different RATs, in general does not have a precise
model of how these resource allocation techniques work to determine the value of g(bm,n)
and its impact on the QoS metrics. Then, given the complexity and the multiplicity of inputs
to the multi-connectivity problem, DRL techniques are considered as solid candidates for
approaching it. Particularly, this paper relies on the DQN algorithm, which is a model-free
and value-based DRL algorithm that considers discrete action spaces. This algorithm has
been already successfully applied to other problems in the RAN, such as capacity sharing
in [28], resource allocation in heterogeneous networks in [ 29], and spectrum sharing in
4G/5G networks in [30].
Other more sophisticated techniques, such as Double DQN (DDQN) or Deep Deter-
ministic Policy Gradients (DDPG), could be considered to overcome the overestimation
of the Q values in DQN. A previous work of the authors in the area of capacity shar-
ing [ 31], where DQN was compared against DDQN and DDPG, suggested retaining DQN
for this work. While no signiﬁcant differences in terms of performance would be expected,
practicality considerations such as the speed of the training process, and the number of
hyperparameters to conﬁgure, may favor DQN.
In the proposed approach, learning is a dynamic process carried out by the DQN agent
located at the MC controller, which makes decisions on the multi-connectivity conﬁgura-
tions for the different UEs. The agent operates in discrete times with granularity equal to
the time window duration DT. These discrete times are denoted as t,t+ 1,. . .,t+k,. . .At
time t, the DQN selects an action a(t)that contains the MC conﬁguration to be applied for
a given UE in the next time window. The action selection is based on the current state at
time t, denoted as s(t), and on the decision-making policy available at this time. Then, as a
result of applying the selected MC conﬁguration, a reward signal r(t+ 1) is provided to the
DQN agent at the end of the time window. This reward signal measures how good or bad
was the last performed action a(t)according to the considered optimization criteria and,
in consequence, this obtained signal is used to improve the decision-making policy. The
different components of this process are detailed in the following.
3.1. State, Action and Reward Speciﬁcation
The state s(t)is a vector that includes the following components for a given u-th UE:
 Requirement of the u-th UE: Ru.
 Spectral efﬁciency per RAT/cell { Sm,n} of the u-th UE.
 Current conﬁguration Bu= {bm,n}, which corresponds to the conﬁguration applied at
time t-1 to the u-th UE.
 Fraction of occupied bandwidth resources by the u-th UE in each RAT/cell { g(bm,n)}.
 Fraction of total occupied bandwidth resources in each RAT/cell { rm,n(bm,n)}.
All the values Sm,n,g(bm,n)andrm,n(bm,n) are average values measured during the
last time window of duration DT, i.e., between discrete times t-1 and t. Notice that the state
has a total of 1 + 4 NMcomponents.
Each action a(t)2Arepresents a matrix Bu= {bm,n} that corresponds to the MC
conﬁguration to be applied during the next time window DT. The action space Aincludes
all the possible MC conﬁgurations, and is deﬁned considering that the possible bm,nvalues
are discretized with granularity Dband that the aggregate of all bm,nvalues in matrix