Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 2 of 19
a key role in further network evolutions towards the sixth generation (6G). The central
idea behind the MC concept is that User Equipment (UE) has connectivity with different
nodes of the Radio Access Network (RAN) at the same time, e.g., eNodeBs (eNB) operating
with LTE and/or gNodeBs (gNB) operating with 5G NR [ 5]. There is one master node
(MN) responsible for the radio-access control plane and one, or in the general case multiple,
secondary node(s) (SN), that provide additional user-plane links. In this way, the UE can
be provided with radio resources from distinct eNBs/gNBs, which has beneﬁts in terms
of additional capacity for better supporting the data rate and reliability requirements of
5G and beyond systems. At the same time, this brings the challenge of properly managing
the MC operation through the conﬁguration of the trafﬁc sent through each node. This
allows exploiting those situations where MC is more beneﬁcial in front of other situations
in which MC may not be the best option depending on the load in the involved nodes or
the propagation conditions experienced by the UE.
In the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), MC is speciﬁed through the Multi-
Radio Dual Connectivity (MR-DC) feature deﬁned in [ 6] that considers different options
depending on the technology used by the MN and by the SN, and on the core network
technology (i.e., 5G core or Evolved Packet Core (EPC)). The operation of MR-DC is built
upon the use of three different types of radio bearers [ 6], namely the Master Cell Group
(MCG) bearers in which data is transmitted through the MN, the Secondary Cell Group
(SCG) bearers in which data is transmitted through the SN, and the Split bearers, in which
data is split between the SN and the MN at the Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP)
layer of the radio interface protocol stack. The MR-DC feature between LTE and 5G is
widely used nowadays in the current 5G Non-StandAlone (NSA) deployments that have
enabled a quick introduction of 5G NR making use of the EPC core network of the legacy
LTE systems [5].
The interest in MC is also reﬂected in some 3GPP Release 17 study items that have
addressed the MR-DC with multiple cells operating in different bands. One example
is [7], which considers up to four bands in LTE and two bands in 5G NR, one for the sub-
6GHz Frequency Range 1 (FR1) and the other for the mmWave Frequency Range 2 (FR2) .
Moreover, several works have also recently considered the use of MC in contexts that are
relevant for future beyond 5G and 6G systems, such as the communication over mmWave
and THz frequency bands [ 8], the multi-connectivity between a base station and other UEs
acting as relays [ 9], and hybrid satellite and terrestrial networks [ 10], in which for example
the joint use of a reconﬁgurable intelligent surface and a base station are used to strengthen
satellite signals in [11].
From an algorithmic perspective, the literature has considered different problems in
relation to MC, such as resource allocation [ 12,13], cell and RAT selection [ 14,15], and trafﬁc
split [ 16–19]. Concerning resource allocation, a Smart Aggregated RAT Access (SARA)
strategy is proposed in [ 12] for joint RAT selection and resource allocation in a scenario
with cellular base stations and Wi-Fi access points. The solution makes use of a Semi
Markov Decision Process (SMDP)-based hierarchical decision framework (HDF). In [ 13]
the optimization problem of resource allocation in a MC scenario with 5G and LTE is
formulated. Then, a solution based on two heuristic algorithms is proposed, namely a base
station selection algorithm performed by the UE and a resource block allocation algorithm
executed by the base station.
The problem of secondary base station selection in MC with 5G/LTE is addressed
in [14], which presents different algorithms aimed at improving robustness and perfor-
mance while minimizing the energy consumption. In turn, [ 15] considers an LTE/WiFi
scenario and proposes a network switching strategy based on a Markov Decision Process
and a value iteration algorithm to determine the set of RATs that a user is connected to in
each handover window.
The problem of trafﬁc split between different RATs is considered in [ 16] focusing
on an LTE/Wi-Fi scenario. The paper assumes a heterogeneous network controlled by
a single coordinating node that collects relevant information, decides on the best choice