Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 13 of 19
turn, if we analyze the reward of the 100 trajectories and obtain the average for all of them,
the DQN-based approach outperforms the SINR-based approach in around 13.1% but the
improvement can be as big as 50% in certain trajectories (e.g., trajectory 95). This main
advantage of the DQN-based strategy with respect to the classical SINR-based strategy
is due to smartly splitting the trafﬁc of the UE among the cells to avoid overload and
enhance the obtained bit rate. From an implementation perspective, while the SINR-based
approach can be implemented relying on handover procedures, the DQN approach requires
the support of the MC feature and that the base stations handling the involved cells are
interconnected through the Xn interface in case of 5G NR or the X2 interface in case of LTE.
Both requirements are now commonplace in live 4G/5G networks, which rely on the MC
feature for supporting the widely used 5G NSA operation.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 20 
 
 4.4. Performance Evaluation of the DQN-Based Strategy 
4.4.1. Performance for Different Trajectories 
In order to assess the benefits brought by the proposed DQN-based MC strategy, this 
subsection compares the performance obtained  by the proposed approach against the two 
reference strategies mentioned before, the optimum strategy , and the SINR-based strategy . 
To conduct this evaluation, the DQN-based MC strategy makes use of the policy learnt 
after completing the training process explained in Section 4.2. This policy is applied to the 
simulation of a UE of interest following 100 different straight trajectories of duration 400 s with different starting points and directions covering the entire evaluation scenario area. 
In each time window, the MC configuration according to the policy is applied and the 
resulting reward and throughput is measured. The same evaluation is executed when ap-
plying the two other reference strategies with the same trajectories. 
Figure 4 shows the average reward obtained for each one of the trajectories with all 
the considered strategies. It is observed th at the DQN-based strategy achieves a perfor-
mance very close to the optimum one in all the studied cases, with differences less than 
1% in some of the trajectories, which confir ms the good behavior of the proposed ap-
proach. In turn, if we analyze the reward of the 100 trajectories and obtain the average for 
all of them, the DQN-based approach outper forms the SINR-based approach in around 
13.1% but the improvement can be as big as 50% in certain trajectories (e.g., trajectory 95). 
This main advantage of the DQN-based strategy with respect to the classical SINR-based 
strategy is due to smartly splitting the traffic of the UE among the cells to avoid overload 
and enhance the obtained bit rate. From an implementation perspective, while the SINR-
based approach can be implemented relying on handover procedures, the DQN approach 
requires the support of the MC feature and that the base stations handling the involved 
cells are interconnected through the Xn interface in case of 5G NR or the X2  interface in 
case of LTE.  Both requirements are now commonplace in live 4G/5G networks, which rely 
on the MC feature for supporting the widely used 5G NSA operation. 
 
Figure 4. Average reward for different trajectories.  
Regarding comparison with the optimum strategy, the error obtained with the DQN-
based approach was computed as the percentage  of difference between the reward of both 
strategies. The average of this error for all th e trajectories was 4.32%. Similarly, the 5th 
percentile of the error was 0.35% and the 95th percentile was 7.94%. This reflects that the 
DQN-based approach achieves a performance quite close to the optimum but without having to exhaustively search for all the possible MC configurations. 
In order to assess the throughput performanc e, Figure 5 shows plots for each strategy 
of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the instantaneous throughput ( T
u) values 
obtained by the UE of interest with all the co nsidered trajectories. Again, it is observed 
that the DQN-based strategy achieves a close performance to the optimum strategy and clearly outperforms the SINR-based strategy. In particular, with the DQN-based approach 0.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.95
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100Average Reward
Number of TrajectoryOptimum Strategy SINR-based Strategy  DQN-based Stategy
Figure 4. Average reward for different trajectories.
Regarding comparison with the optimum strategy, the error obtained with the DQN-
based approach was computed as the percentage of difference between the reward of both
strategies. The average of this error for all the trajectories was 4.32%. Similarly, the 5th
percentile of the error was 0.35% and the 95th percentile was 7.94%. This reﬂects that the
DQN-based approach achieves a performance quite close to the optimum but without
having to exhaustively search for all the possible MC conﬁgurations.
In order to assess the throughput performance, Figure 5 shows plots for each strategy
of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the instantaneous throughput ( Tu) values
obtained by the UE of interest with all the considered trajectories. Again, it is observed
that the DQN-based strategy achieves a close performance to the optimum strategy and
clearly outperforms the SINR-based strategy. In particular, with the DQN-based approach
the UE throughput achieved 90% of the time is higher or equal to 37 Mb/s, while with
the SINR-based approach this value is only 18 Mb/s. Similarly, the DQN-based approach
is able to provide the throughput of 50 Mb/s during around 50% of the time, while the
SINR-based approach only provides it 35% of the time.
Aiming to further assess the behavior of the DQN-based strategy, we carried out a
more detailed analysis focusing on a speciﬁc trajectory of a given UE starting in the point
[X1= 485, Y 1= 181] and following a straight trajectory at 1 m/s up to the point [X 2= 85,
Y2= 181]. For this speciﬁc trajectory, the SINR-based average reward was 0.634 while for
the DQN approach this average reward rose to 0.835 which represents a gain of around
31%. Figure 6 presents a more speciﬁc and detailed analysis of this trajectory during a
period of 25 s between the points (X 1= 285, Y 1= 181) and (X 2= 260, Y 2= 181). In particular,
Figure 6a represents the evolution of the SINR experienced by the UE in the LTE and 5G
NR cells during this period. Since one of the NR cells has a higher SINR value, this will
be the selected cell with the SINR-based strategy during the whole analyzed period. In