Sensors 2022 ,22, 6179 12 of 19
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 20 
 
 The training is executed until reaching the maximum number of training steps Max 
Number Of Training Steps = 106. To illustrate how the trained policy evolves when in-
creasing the number of training steps, we ob tained the learnt policy every 2500 training 
steps of the training process. Then, this polic y was applied to an evaluation scenario in 
which an illustrative MC-capable UE follows the blue trajectory in Figure 2, starting from 
point [X 1 = 50, Y 1 = 300] and following a straight trajectory at 1 m/s up to the point [X 2 = 
450, Y 2 = 300]. As a result, we measured the av erage reward obtained when applying the 
policy along this trajectory. Figure 3 presents the evolution of this average reward for the 
policies learnt every 2500 training steps. 
The results show that at the beginning the average reward increases significantly, 
meaning that the training process is able to progressively learn better policies. Then, the reward tends to stabilize at around 40 × 10
4 training steps, which gives an indication of 
the number of training steps needed to learn the policy. After this time, the reward fluc-
tuations are only around 2%, which reflects the stability of the algorithm. 
 
Figure 3. Evolution of the average reward as a function of the training steps. 
4.3. Benchmarking Strategies 
Aiming to evaluate the performance of the policy obtained with our proposed DQN-
based method against different strategies, two reference approaches were considered: 
Optimum strategy:  for a given UE, based on the set of candidate cells Au = {Cm,n} and 
𝑁௠௔௫ values, this strategy performs an exhaus tive search process among all possible MC 
configurations at each time step and obtains the MC configuration that provides the high-
est reward. It is worth mentioning that it would not be a practica l strategy for its imple-
mentation in real scenarios, mainly due to the large execution time for assessing all the 
possible MC configurations, so it is just co nsidered as an upper bound of the DQN algo-
rithm performance. 
SINR-based strategy : in this strategy, at every time step all the traffic of the UE is 
served by the cell with the highest SINR value.  This strategy reflects the classical approach 
of cellular systems in which the UE is served only by one cell, which is the one that pro-
vides the best quality (i.e., th e highest SINR value). This criterion is considered for exam-
ple in the specification [34] for the cell sele ction procedure, as well as in the measurement 
report triggering criteria of [35] to determine when one cell becomes better than another 
one, so that this can be used when deciding a handover. In addition, different works have also considered an SINR-based criterion for de termining the cell a UE is connected to in a 
cellular system, such as [36,37]. It is worth mentioning that the SINR-based strategy can 
be implemented making use of handover procedures for changing the cell that the UE is connected to. 
  0.550.60.650.70.750.8
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0Average Reward
Training Steps (x104)
Figure 3. Evolution of the average reward as a function of the training steps.
4.3. Benchmarking Strategies
Aiming to evaluate the performance of the policy obtained with our proposed DQN-
based method against different strategies, two reference approaches were considered:
Optimum strategy: for a given UE, based on the set of candidate cells Au= {Cm,n}
and Nmaxvalues, this strategy performs an exhaustive search process among all possible
MC conﬁgurations at each time step and obtains the MC conﬁguration that provides the
highest reward. It is worth mentioning that it would not be a practical strategy for its
implementation in real scenarios, mainly due to the large execution time for assessing all
the possible MC conﬁgurations, so it is just considered as an upper bound of the DQN
algorithm performance.
SINR-based strategy : in this strategy, at every time step all the trafﬁc of the UE is
served by the cell with the highest SINR value. This strategy reﬂects the classical approach
of cellular systems in which the UE is served only by one cell, which is the one that provides
the best quality (i.e., the highest SINR value). This criterion is considered for example
in the speciﬁcation [ 34] for the cell selection procedure, as well as in the measurement
report triggering criteria of [ 35] to determine when one cell becomes better than another
one, so that this can be used when deciding a handover. In addition, different works have
also considered an SINR-based criterion for determining the cell a UE is connected to in a
cellular system, such as [ 36,37]. It is worth mentioning that the SINR-based strategy can
be implemented making use of handover procedures for changing the cell that the UE is
connected to.
4.4. Performance Evaluation of the DQN-Based Strategy
4.4.1. Performance for Different Trajectories
In order to assess the beneﬁts brought by the proposed DQN-based MC strategy, this
subsection compares the performance obtained by the proposed approach against the two
reference strategies mentioned before, the optimum strategy , and the SINR-based strategy .
To conduct this evaluation, the DQN-based MC strategy makes use of the policy learnt
after completing the training process explained in Section 4.2. This policy is applied to
the simulation of a UE of interest following 100 different straight trajectories of duration
400 s with different starting points and directions covering the entire evaluation scenario
area. In each time window, the MC conﬁguration according to the policy is applied and
the resulting reward and throughput is measured. The same evaluation is executed when
applying the two other reference strategies with the same trajectories.
Figure 4 shows the average reward obtained for each one of the trajectories with all the
considered strategies. It is observed that the DQN-based strategy achieves a performance
very close to the optimum one in all the studied cases, with differences less than 1% in
some of the trajectories, which conﬁrms the good behavior of the proposed approach. In