A Tutorial on Bayesian Networks for Psychopathology Researchers
Giovanni Briganti1, 2, Marco Scutari3, and Richard J. McNally1
1Department of Psychology, Harvard University
2Laboratoire de Psychologie Médicale et Addictologie, Université libre de Bruxelles
3Istituto Dalle Molle di Studi sull ’Intelligenza Artificiale (IDSIA), Lugano, Switzerland
Abstract
Bayesian Networks are probabilistic graphical models that represent conditional independence relationships
among variables as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where edges can be interpreted as causal effects con-
necting one causal symptom to an effect symptom. These models can help overcome one of the key limita-tions of partial correlation networks whose edges are undirected. This tutorial aims to introduce Bayesian
Networks to identify admissible causal relationships in cross-sectional data, as well as how to estimate these
models in R through three algorithm families with an empirical example data set of depressive symptoms.
In addition, we discuss common problems and questions related to Bayesian networks. We recommend
Bayesian networks be investigated to gain causal insight in psychological data.
Translational Abstract
In the last decade, the network framework for the study of mental disorders has emerged as a new way
of investigating mental disorders as issuing from interactions among their constituent symptoms.
Network analysis is the statistical aspect of this framework, as researchers use nodes (symptoms) andedges (connections between symptoms) to model disorders: Usually, network structures encode pairwise
interactions among symptoms. In this study, we introduce Bayesian networks, models that can identify
admissible causal relationships in cross-sectional data, as well as a tutorial for applied researchers on
how to estimate those models in R. In addition, we discuss common problems and questions related to
Bayesian network models.
Keywords: Bayesian networks, directed acyclic graphs, network modeling, causal inference, tutorial
The last decade has seen the emergence of a new framework
for the study of psychopathology: network theory, which con-ceptualizes an episode of disorder as issuing from interactionsamong its constituent symptoms ( Borsboom, 2017 ;Borsboom
& Cramer, 2013 ). Network theory comes with a set of statistical
techniques called network analysis ,w h e r et h e networks that
represent interactions among symptoms are composed of nodes
(the symptoms themselves) and edges (connections among
symptoms). In contrast to social networks, whose nodes(persons) and edges (e.g., friendships) are observable, psycho-
pathology networks require statistical estimation to discern theunobservable connections between symptoms. Most networkstructures in the psychopathology ﬁeld encode pairwise interac-
tions among symptoms ( Epskamp & Fried, 2018 ), and use a
general class of models called pairwise Markov random ﬁelds.
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs), also called partial correla-
tion networks, are the most common way of estimating network
structures in many areas of psychopathology, such as posttrau-
matic stress disorder ( Fried et al., 2018 ;McNally et al., 2015 );
depression ( Briganti et al., 2021 ;Fried et al., 2016 ) and bipolar
disorders ( Curtiss et al., 2019 ). Other pairwise Markov random
ﬁelds include Ising models to estimate pairwise interactions from
binary data ( Briganti & Linkowski, 2020 ;Ising, 1925 ;Kruis &
Maris, 2016 ;van Borkulo et al., 2014 ) and mixed graphical mod-
els to deal with mixed data ( Haslbeck & Fried, 2017 ;Haslbeck &
Waldorp, 2016 ). However, the causal interpretation of these mod-
els is limited: because their edges are undirected , it is impossible
to tell whether symptom X is more likely to cause orbe caused by
symptom Y because edges have no direction and thus cannot
encode this information. Furthermore, assuming a partial correla-
tion network when the underlying model contains directed edges
can lead to spurious causal connections.
We can overcome these problems with the help of Bayesian
networks (BNs), which are derived from the principles of causalGiovanni Briganti
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4038-3363
Giovanni Briganti served as lead for the conceptualization, original draft
preparation and writing - review and editing. Marco Scutari and Richard J.McNally contributed equally to writing - review and editing.
The data and the code accompanying this tutorial are available in our
repository on the Open Science Framework ( https://osf.io/fne9m/ ), with
information related to the package versions used to perform the different
analyses.
We thank Sacha Epskamp and Lourens Waldorp for their very insightful
comments that allowed our article to greatly improve during the review
process.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Giovanni
Briganti, Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 1232 William
James Hall, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 02138-2044, United
States. Email: giovanni.briganti@hotmail.com
1Psychological Methods
©2022 American Psychological Association
ISSN: 1082-989X https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000479This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.