Equivalence Classes
Although a factorization of the probability distribution of Xis
uniquely identi ﬁed by a DAG, a DAG is not uniquely identi ﬁed by
a factorization of the probability distribution. For instance, pat-terns of edges like v
j!vi!vk,vj vi vkandvj vi!vk
lead to equivalent probability distributions (see Appendix ).
Hence, several edges in a DAG can be reversed without chang-
ing the conditional (in)dependence relationships in X. In other
words, if no new v-structure (or cycle) is created, we are just pro-
ducing equivalent DAG representations of the same set of condi-
tional (in)dependence relationships. All such DAGs are then partof an equivalence class that is uniquely identi ﬁed by the undir-
ected graph underlying these DAGs and by the v-structures. Thedirection of other edges is either uniquely identi ﬁed because one
of two directions would introduce a new v-structure or a cycle
(these are sometimes called compelled edges), or completely unde-termined. This results into a completed partially directed graph(Castelletti et al., 2018 ;Chickering, 2002a ).
Probability Distributions for Bayesian Networks
In this section, we introduce the most common probability dis-
tributions used in BNs as well as their limitations.
The three most common probability distributions for BNs are
discrete, ordinal, Gaussian, and conditional linear Gaussian ( Scu-
tari & Denis, 2021 ). These probability distributions satisfy the fol-
lowing requirements: First, the structure of the BN should be
learned ef ﬁciently from data by using statistical tests or goodness-
of-ﬁt measures; second, the BN should be ﬂexible, that is, distribu-
tional assumptions should not be too strict; third, the BN shouldbe easy to query to perform inference.
Discrete and Ordinal Bayesian Networks
In discrete BNs, local distributions of XijPXiare composed of
conditional probability tables for each node given all other parent
nodes, that is, the con ﬁguration of values of its parents ( Spirtes &
Meek, 1995 ). Learning the structure of BNs from discrete varia-
bles is particularly useful in the case of psychological data becausemost measurement tools are scored on Likert scales. Althoughusing discrete variables is a helpful solution so that dependencies
need not be linear, there may be some loss of information, particu-
larly in the case of ordinal variables (such with Likert scales) thatwill be treated as categorical, because the ordinality of data is lost,as shown in the related domain of GGMs ( Isvoranu & Epskamp,
2021 ). Moreover, to deal with this problem, many applied
researchers treat Likert data as continuous in estimating network
models ( Briganti et al., 2018 ,2019 ). This is why investigators
have tested how well one can estimate BNs from ordinal data ( Cui
et al., 2016 ;Luo et al., 2020 ;Musella, 2013 ;Tsagris et al., 2018 ).
Gaussian Bayesian Networks
Gaussian BNs (which are different from Bayesian GGMs) fol-
low a multivariate normal distribution with mean land a var-
iance-covariance matrixP,X/C24Nl;PðÞ , with a precision matrix
Xcomputed as the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix
X¼P/C01.The partial correlation coef ﬁcients qij, which model the residual
correlation between two nodes after controlling all other nodes, arecomputed from the precision matrix as q
ij¼/C0Xij=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
XiiXjjp
where
Xijis the element of X.I fviandvjare d-separated in the DAG (or
in the case of violation of the faithfulness assumption), the absence
of an edge vi!vjin the DAG between the two nodes by de ﬁnition
implies the conditional independence ( qij¼0) between the two
variables XiandXjgiven all subsets of the remaining variables (we
refer the reader to The Inductive Causation Algorithm section to
have a better understanding on why going through all subsets of
variables is necessary). From this, it follows that most edges of aGaussian BN belong to a subspace of a GGM (a partial correlation
network), except speci ﬁc independence relationships, such as a col-
lider structure. On the other hand, cycles can be represented in aGGM but not a Gaussian BN.
As for the local distributions, X
ijPXiare linear regression
models with PXiacting as regressors. This assumes that all
dependencies are linear ( Grzegorczyk, 2010 ), a requisite for the
distribution of Xto be multivariate normal. This may be advanta-
geous in modeling Likert scales, but only if these scales aredesigned so that the items on the scale increase in linear incre-
ments (that is, Item 2 implies twice the intensity of Item 1, Item 3
implies three times the intensity of Item 1, and so forth). Whenthis is not the case, the numbering of the items on the Likert scaleleads the BN to incorrectly interpret the items as equidistant from
each other and the resulting estimates of the q
ijwill be biased.
Gaussian BNs have two main limitations. First, few real-world
multivariate data sets follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution
(the same applies to partial correlation networks since the proba-
bility distribution is the same). Second, computing partial correla-tions can be challenging in data sets with a large number of
variables because of singularities, that is, perfect linear relation-
ships between two variables ( Lin et al., 2014 ). Although exact lin-
ear correspondence rarely occurs, relationships that are almost
singular may result in numerical precision issues and may make
BNs dif ﬁcult and time-consuming to learn.
Conditional Linear Gaussian Bayesian Networks
Conditional linear gaussian BNs contain both discrete and con-
tinuous nodes and subsume both Discrete BNs and Gaussian BNs.
In terms of local distributions, discrete nodes have conditionalprobability tables, whereas continuous nodes have a set of linear
regression models, one for each con ﬁguration of the discrete
parents, and with the continuous children as regressors ( Cowell,
2005 ). In such networks, continuous nodes cannot be parents of
discrete nodes, which is a strong limitation for treating mixed
data: only a given set of edges can exist in the DAG, which is animportant limitation on what models can be encoded by the net-
work structure.
Structure Learning of Bayesian Networks
Structure learning algorithms learn the structure of BNs from
data, possibly integrating external expert knowledge if available.Constraint-based algorithms use statistical tests to learn conditional
independence relationships (the constraints themselves); score-
based algorithms rank candidate DAGs based on some goodness-of-ﬁt criterion; hybrid algorithms use conditional independenceBAYESIAN NETWORKS 5This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.