Finally, we plot the averaged network with qgraph.
qgraph(avgnet1, layout= “circle ”) # this plots
the network with qgraph
The resulting network can be visualized in Figure 3 .
Other Constraint-Based Algorithms
Other well-known constraint-based algorithms include the
grow-shrink (GS) algorithm ( Margaritis, 2003 ) and the incremen-
tal association (IAMB) sets of algorithms ( Tsamardinos et al.,
2003 ), which ﬁrst learn the Markov blanket for each node in the
network to reduce the number of tests required by the IC algo-rithm. The initial network is assumed not to have any edges.
BNgs,- gs(data) # this performs the GS algorithm
BNiamb ,- iamb(data) # this performs the IAMB algorithm
Score-Based Algorithms
Score-based structure learning algorithms assign a score to each
candidate BN. Network scores focus on the DAG as a whole (asopposed to individual constraints) and are goodness-of- ﬁt statistics
that assess how well the DAG mirrors the dependence structure inthe data ( Scutari & Denis, 2021 ). Two methods for scoring are the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and posterior probabilitiesfrom ﬂat priors ( Daly et al., 2011 ;Friedman & Koller, 2003 ;Gei-
ger & Heckerman, 2002 ;Goudie & Mukherjee, 2016 ;Grzegorc-
zyk & Husmeier, 2008 ;Heckerman & Geiger, 1995 ;Kuipers etal., 2018b ;Madigan et al., 1995 ;Pensar et al., 2020 ). Score-based
algorithms are typically applications of heuristic search algo-
rithms, which are not guaranteed to return the highest-scoringDAG. Exact search algorithms, which do provide this guarantee,are markedly slower than heuristic algorithms and are not feasiblefor many practical applications ( Cussens, 2012 ;Koivisto & Sood,
2004 ;Scanagatta et al., 2015 ;Suzuki, 2017 ). Hence, we will not
consider them further.
The Hill-Climbing Algorithm
The Hill-Climbing (HC) algorithm ( Russell & Norvig, 2002 )i s
a greedy search algorithm that explores DAGs by single-edge
additions, removals, and reversals. First, the algorithm chooses an
initial candidate network structure G(it chooses by default the
empty DAG) and computes its score ScoreðGÞ. Second, it sets
maxscore¼ScoreðGÞ.4Third, the algorithm computes the score of
the modi ﬁed networksG/C3obtained by every possible edge addi-
tion, deletion or reversal that does not result in a cyclic network. IfanyG
/C3hasScoreðG/C3Þ>ScoreðGÞ, the new score is updated in
maxscore¼ScoreðG/C3ÞandG/C3becomes the new candidate net-
work. Finally, the algorithm returns the ﬁnal network when no G/C3
has a higher score than G.
BNhc,- hc(data) # this performs the HC algorithmFigure 3
A BN Learned Through the PC Algorithm (Left) Compared With a Regularized Partial Correlation Network (Right)
Note. Edge thickness and color saturation denote the edge weight. See the online article for the color version of this ﬁgure.
4maxscore represents the maximum score computed from a network
structure; the goal of the algorithm is to ﬁnd a modi ﬁed network structure
that will have a higher score than maxscore , then updates maxscore as it
goes, until it ﬁnds the highest score possible.8 BRIGANTI, SCUTARI, AND M CNALLYThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.