reasoning ( Pearl, 2009 ;Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018 ). That is, they
can ascertain both the direction and the magnitude of causal
effects ( Maathuis et al., 2018 ). BNs are de ﬁn e db ya directed
acyclic graph (DAG) and by the joint probability distribution
of the variables under investigation. The role of the DAG is toexpress the conditional independence relationships between the
variables (nodes) by using graphical separation (Koller &
Friedman, 2009 ;Lauritzen, 1996 ;Pearl, 1988 ;Scutari & Denis,
2021 ). In other words, if two variables are separated in the
DAG by some other variables, they are independent in proba-
bility conditional on (that is, after controlling for) those other
variables. Hence, the role of the probability distribution is toexpress the magnitude of the causal effects linking the variablesthat are not graphically separated. Because BNs contain only
directed edges, they are ideal for modeling the admissible
causal relationships in observational data, thereby complement-ing insights provided by partial correlation networks. BNsshould not be confused with pairwise Markov random ﬁelds
estimated with Bayesian methods: These have been recently
introduced in the network psychopathology literature in bothmethodological and applied research ( Briganti et al., 2020 ;Wil-
liams & Mulder, 2020a ,2020b ). Using BNs for rigorous causal
inference requires several strong assumptions ( Maathuis et al.,
2018 ), such as the existence of a DAG underlying the data; suf-
ﬁciency , that is, all the causes of a given variable are measured
(which means that there are no latent variables and there is no
selection bias); and faithfulness ,t h a ti s ,a l lt h ev a r i a b l e st h a t
are connected in a given way in the network are probabilisti-cally dependent. To augment probabilistic inference with causal
meaning the faithfulness and suf ﬁciency assumptions need to
be further strengthened into causal faithfulness and causal suf ﬁ-
ciency, which will be discussed in more detail (see StructureLearning and Assumption Needed for Structure Learning sec-
tions). These assumptions of having an underlying DAG and
causal suf ﬁciency are dif ﬁcult to verify in psychological data:
For instance, we do not know whether symptoms from a check-
list or psychometric measure or structured diagnostic interview
assessing a mental disorder interact as a DAG except in veryspeci ﬁc cases, such as the relationship between a traumatic
event (the cause) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
symptoms ( McNally et al., 2017 ). In most cases, such as
depression, we do not know whether a given symptom unilater-ally in ﬂuences another (as in a DAG), whether two symptoms
mutually in ﬂuence each other (as in a partial correlation net-
work), or whether there is one or more latent variables causing
symptoms (as within the latent variable framework). The faith-fulness assumption will likely be violated in a data set wherethe data generating process is such that A!B;B!C;A!C,
as the causal relationships are counterbalanced ( Andersen,
2013 ;Cartwright & McMullin, 1984 ).
The insights that BNs can bring to the ﬁeld of network psycho-
pathology can be helpful in various situations, such as perform-
ing inference on the network structure based on its estimates.
Edge weights are used, for instance, to identify the most central(i.e., interconnected) nodes in a network ( Elliott et al., 2019 ):
Summing edge weights (strength centrality) or estimating the
shared variance R
2(predictability) are the two most common
ways of gauging the importance of symptoms ( Boccaletti et al.,2006 ;Haslbeck & Fried, 2017 ). Central symptoms are highly
connected, with many connections or several strong ones. If such
symptoms are the source of activation that maintains an episode
of disorder, then successfully reducing their severity ought tocause a bene ﬁcial therapeutic cascade resulting in recovery from
illness. Accordingly, they would be ideal therapeutic targets.
Unfortunately, because the edges in partial correlation networks
are undirected, it is impossible to tell whether a high-centrality
symptom is the source of activation or the recipient of activation.Only if it is the source does it make sense to consider it a high-
priority target for clinical intervention. Yet because they have of-
ten been theorized as potential targets for clinical intervention,centrality estimates are de ﬁned to operate on undirected net-
works and thus do not take edge directions into consideration. In
other words, they do not ascertain whether central symptomscause orare caused by many symptoms in the network; if a
symptom is well-connected because it is highly controllable
(that is, caused by several symptoms connected to it), acting on
it is unlikely to affect other symptoms. Because interpreting net-
work structures is an important part of any network study, com-plementing the study of interaction among symptoms with
further causal insight is essential.
Only a handful of studies have applied BNs in psychopathol-
ogy research. These studies have included dissociation ( Cernis
et al., 2021 ), self-harm ( Hinze et al., 2021 ), paranoia ( Bird et
al., 2019 ), psychosis ( Kuipers et al., 2019 ;Moffa et al., 2017 ),
obsessive –compulsive disorder ( Jones et al., 2018 ;McNally et
al., 2017 ), bipolar disorder ( McNally et al., 2021 ), rumination
(Bernstein et al., 2017 ), depression ( Briganti et al., 2021 ),
PTSD ( McNally et al., 2017 ), and alexithymia ( Briganti et al.,
2020 ). In these studies, BNs illuminated potential causal rela-
tions among symptoms in cross-sectional data sets. However,the authors often varied in their computational methods,
thereby underscoring the need for an accessible tutorial refer-
ence for researchers keen to apply BNs to study mental disor-ders. The present work aims to ﬁll this gap by introducing BNs,
by providing key commands in the R environment for statistical
computing ( R Core Team, 2020 ) to estimate BNs from data,
and by addressing the main strengths and limitations of BNs in
psychopathology.
This tutorial builds on previous empirical studies that applied the
two main approaches for estimating BNs: constraint-based algo-
rithms ( Briganti et al., 2020 ,2021) and score-based ( McNally et al.,
2017,2017;Moffa et al., 2017 ). This tutorial complements these
applied works by offering a principled introduction to BNs and on
how to interpret them in psychological data.
This article is structured as follows. First, we will introduce
BNs and their main theoretical properties. We will then outlineboth constraint-based and score-based structure learning algo-
rithms as well as their implementation in R, illustrating them
with data and code. Finally, we will discuss the interpretation of
BNs in observational studies as well as answer common ques-
tions researchers may have about BNs. More extended exposi-tion on these topics appear in specialized textbooks ( Koller &
Friedman, 2009
;Neapolitan, 2004 ;Pearl, 2009 ;Scutari & Denis,
2021 ) and in an accessible trade book for the general reader
(Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018 ).2 BRIGANTI, SCUTARI, AND M CNALLYThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.