Tests for Conditional Independence
Two random variables XandYare conditionally independent
given a third random variable Zif, given knowledge of Z, knowl-
edge of whether Xoccurs provides no information on the likeli-
hood of Yoccurring, and knowledge of whether Yoccurs provides
no information on the likelihood of Xoccurring ( Dawid, 1979 ).
Testing for conditional independence is a necessary step for con-straint-based algorithms because conditional independence rela-tionships themselves constitute the constraint. We hereby citethree default conditional independence test in bnlearn; furtherdetails appear in comprehensive reviews of the topic ( Edwards,
2012 ). The asymptotic v
2mutual information test is the default
for categorical and mixed variables: It is an information-theoreticdistance measure related to the deviance of the tested models andproportional to the log-likelihood ratio (the two differ by a factor),with the degrees of freedom equal to the number of free parame-ters in the two models (under the assumption that all parameterscan be estimated). The Hotelling ’s exact test is the default for con-
tinuous variables: it is the multivariate version of the Student ’st
for testing the null hypothesis that the correlation is null. TheJonckheere-Terpstra test is the default for ordinal variables: it is atrend test that generalizes the Wilcoxon test (which only toleratesone ordinal variable compared to a binary factor) to two ordinalvariables. A comprehensive review of methods to test for condi-
tional independence exceeds the scope of this tutorial, but appears
in the bnlearn manual ( Scutari, 2010 ).
The Inductive Causation Algorithm
The inductive causation (IC) algorithm ( Pearl & Verma, 1991 )
was the ﬁrst and simplest structure learning constraint-based algo-
rithm. Although more modern algorithms are preferable for practi-cal applications, all evolved from IC and thus share the samefundamental steps; hence we will describe IC in detail for illustra-tive purposes.
The algorithm starts from a complete graph in which each vari-
able is connected to all other variables by an undirected edge.First, for each pair of variables Aand BinX, the algorithm
searches for a set S
ABsuch that AandBare independent given
SABand such that AandBare not part of it ( A;B=2S AB). Edges
between all such pair of variables are removed. The algorithmcomposesS
ABstarting from a list of no variables (with an empty
SAB) then each single variable other than AandBinX, then with
a combination of other variables, until all combinations have beentried to remove the edge. Because of this, algorithms derived from
the IC have one weakness: the complexity in the number of nodes
in a graph ( Li et al., 2019 ). Second, for each pair of variables that
are not connected by an edge but are both connected to a commonneighbor C, the algorithm checks whether C2S
AB:i fC=2S AB,
then the direction of edge A/C0Cbecomes A!Cand that of edge
C/C0Bbecomes C B. Third, the direction of the edges that are
still undirected is set following two rules: if Ais adjacent to Band
there is a strictly directed path from AtoB(that is, all edges in the
path are directed), then A/C0Bbecomes A!B;i fAandBare not
adjacent but A!CandC/C0B, then C/C0Bbecomes C!B. This
step ends the algorithm which then returns the completed partiallydirected graph in which only those edge directions that can beuniquely identi ﬁed from the data are represented.The IC algorithm is implemented by the Peter and Clark (PC)
algorithm ( Spirtes et al., 1993 ), which starts from a saturated net-
work and then performs tests that gradually increase the number ofconditioning nodes. Constraint based algorithms treat BNs as per-fect maps,
3that is
A??PBjC)A??GBjC:
This is assumption is also called faithfulness, and it is analogous
to causal faithfulness from a purely probabilistic perspective. Thisassumption cannot be empirically veri ﬁed. However, the assump-
tion has the advantage of not requiring a strictly positive PXðÞto
have uniquely de ﬁned Markov blankets.
In the R package bnlearn Version 4.7 ( Scutari, 2010 ), the PC
algorithm is implemented in the pc.stable() function. To plot thegraph in a consistent fashion with all other network analyses inpsychological literature, we use the qgraph package Version 1.9(Epskamp et al., 2012 ).
First, we load the necessary packages, that is, bnlearn and
qgraph.
library( “bnlearn ”) # this loads the bnlearn package
library( “qgraph ”) # this loads the qgraph package
Second, we perform the PC algorithm to learn the structure of
the BN.
BNpc,- pc.stable(data) # this performs the algorithm
qgraph(BNpc) # this plots the network
Third, we obtain a stable BN.
BST,- boot.strength(data, # this includes the data set
R = 200, # this sets the number of boots
algorithm = “pc.stable ”) # this sets the algorithm
# note that boot.strength is likely to give warnings
Fourth, we include the edges that appear in 85% of networks
and whose direction appears in more than 50% of networks, and
we compute the averaged network.
bst1,- BST[BST$strength .0.85 & # this sets the strength
BST$direction .0.5,] # this sets the minimum
direction
avgnet1 ,- averaged.network(BST,
threshold = 0.85) ## compute the average
network
3The probabilistic independence of AandBgiven Cis true if and only
if the graphical independence of AandBis true.BAYESIAN NETWORKS 7This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.