Furthermore, to defend a causal interpretation of a BN we need to
satisfy three assumptions. First, each variable Xiis conditionally inde-
pendent of its direct and indirect effects and from other variables givenits direct causes: this is known as the causal Markov assumption.
Second, there is a DAG faithful to the probability distribution of X
such that the dependencies arising from d-separations in the DAG arethe only ones in the probability distribution. The faithfulness assump-tion for causal inference implies that any population produced by theDAG has the same conditional independence relationships obtained byapplying d-separation to it. However, this assumption can be chal-lenged by selection bias; that is, the population can be “unfaithful ”to
the DAG. When estimating DAGs representing the causal relation-ships among symptoms of mental disorders or psychological con-structs, the population could be unfaithful to the DAG if it wereestimated from a speci ﬁc subsample. For example, a network structure
of depressive symptoms in manic patients will show different condi-tional independence relationships than a network structure estimatedfrom unipolar depressive patients. For further details concerning selec-tion bias in network psychopathology, we refer to more complete over-views of the topic ( De Ron et al., 2019 ;McNally, 2021 ).
Third, there must be no latent variable that acts as a confounding
factor thus introducing spurious dependencies among the observed var-iables, which translate to spurious arcs in the BN A confounding vari-able A is such that, in a path A!B!C,A!C:t h i si sa l s ok n o w n
as a backdoor path from AtoC. In psychological data sets, confound-
ing variables are an important issue since in many cases all relevantvariables are not measured or included in a model. This assumptionalso concerns many studies designed from a latent variable point ofview whereby items or symptoms presumptively re ﬂect unobserved
factors that cause their emergence and covariance. A possible solutionto help overcome this issue is eliminating topological overlap amongnodes ( Fried & Cramer, 2017 ). That is, we can create composite varia-
bles to ensure that items tapping the same construct do not appear asindividual, near-synonymous nodes. Hence, each node would consti-tute a composite variable representing a domain. This has been donewith both gaussian graphical models and BNs ( Briganti et al., 2019 ,
2020;Briganti & Linkowski, 2019 ). Another way of reducing the
number of network components is by using the goldbricker method inthe networktools package ( Jones, 2017 ) that identi ﬁes colinear network
components (that is, topologically overlapping items).
These assumptions are dif ﬁcult to verify in real-world settings,
and the best solution to tackle them is by using blocking in a care-fully planned experimental design to screen out confounding fac-tors via randomization, which severs any incoming causal linkbetween the randomized variables and possible exogenous effects,but it is never applied to cross-sectional network studies. In thebest-case scenario, scienti ﬁc experiments can identify a small set
of BNs that plausibly ﬁt the data from a causal point of view.
What Kind of Data Are Needed for Learning?
The data used to learn the structure of a BN and to estimate its pa-
rameters are a key driver of the quality of the models we can obtain.
For structure learning, it is important that we have enough data to
rank networks accurately using scores and to ensure that the condi-tional independence tests we use to assess constraints have suf ﬁciently
low rates of Type-I and Type-II errors. The ability of structure learn-ing algorithms to recover from errors (that is, incorrectly including orexcluding edges in the DAG) is limited, which makes it important tolimit the possibility of such errors occurring. For parameter learning,
it is important to have enough data to detect the effect of the parents
of each child and to estimate them with suf ﬁcient precision. In both
cases, we may draw from existing literature on power and sample size
calculations for linear and logistic regressions ( Demidenko, 2007 ;
Dupont & Plummer, 1998 ). When the sign of the effect associated
with each edge is important, we may complement traditional power
calculations by assessing Type-S errors ( Gelman & Carlin, 2014 ). In
both cases, it is important to remember that both structure and param-eter learning operate at the level of the local distributions X
ijPXi:
we only need a sample size large enough to handle the most complex
of them. If we assume that the network we are estimating is sparse, so
that all nodes have a limited number of parents (say, less than 5), thent h es a m p l es i z er e q u i r e dt ol e a r naB Nd o e sn o tn e c e s s a r i l ys c a l ew i t h
the number of variables.
The number of variables will still determine the computational
speed of estimating the model. Different structure learning algorithmswill entail different trade-offs between speed and accuracy ( Scutari et
al., 2018 ). However, in general the complexity of most structure
learning is quadratic in the number of variables if we assume that the
network we are trying to learn is sparse. In other words, heuristic
score-based algorithms with compute O(N2) network scores, andconstraint-based algorithms will perform O(N2) conditional inde-
pendence tests. If we do not assume the sparsity of the network, then
the complexity becomes larger O(eN) making it dif ﬁcult to perform
learning in the ﬁrst place. Similar considerations pertain to parameter
learning: If nodes have few parents, then local distributions will havefew parameters and it is possible to estimate them ef ﬁciently.
Interestingly, the increase in the number of network scores or
conditional independence tests evaluated during structure learning
does not increase the likelihood of errors, as the literature on mul-tiple error adjusting would suggest. It is widely recognized that all
structure learning algorithms in this paper are empirically self-
adjusting for multiplicity, even though no theoretical characteriza-
tion of this phenomenon is available in the literature.
The quality of the data is also important. For instance, it is pos-
sible to learn BNs from incomplete data (that is, not all values areobserved for all variables in all observations) by incorporating ex-
pectation-maximization and other classic statistical techniques in
structure and parameter learning ( Scutari, 2020 ). It is also possible
to learn BNs from the heterogeneous data that arise from trials in
which observations are collected under different conditions orwith different protocols ( Azzimonti et al., 2020 ). However, han-
dling such issues requires additional assumptions on how the data
deviate from the aforementioned assumptions and it reduces powerin both structure and parameter learning.
Bayesian Networks or Pairwise Markov Random
Fields?
Empirical researchers may ask whether it is better to perform a net-
work analysis using BNs or pairwise Markov random ﬁelds, and how
to compare the results from each approach. The difference between
t h et w om o d e l sf r o mt h ee x a m p l ed a t as e ti ss h o w ni n Figure 3 .
Although pairwise Markov random ﬁelds allow for studying the
interplay among different symptoms, and identify the most intercon-
nected symptoms ( Haslbeck & Fried, 2017 ), they cannot distinguish
whether the interconnected symptoms are more likely to cause or becaused by surrounding variables: BNs can identify which causal10 BRIGANTI, SCUTARI, AND M CNALLYThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.