Other Score-Based Algorithms
Three well-known score-based algorithms include the greedy
equivalence search ( Chickering, 2002b ), a HC algorithm over equiv-
alence classes instead of graphs (which minimizes the search space),
the tabu search ( Glover, 1990 ), a modi ﬁed HC algorithm that does
not stop at the ﬁrst DAG for which every possible edge addition, de-
letion, or reversal does not improve the score, but further explores
the space of DAGs to ﬁnd a better DAG; and genetic algorithms
(inspired by evolutionary biology) that perturb (mutation) and com-
bine (crossover) features through several generations of structures
while retaining those yielding better scores ( Davis, 1991 ).
BNtabu ,- tabu(data) # this performs the Tabu
algorithm.
Hybrid Algorithms
Hybrid algorithms combine the two previous classes of con-
straint-based and score-based algorithms: They are the state of the
art for many problems ( Scutari & Denis, 2021 ). They work by
learning some conditional independence constraints to reduce the
number of candidate networks prior to ﬁnding the network that
maximizes a given score function ( Kuipers et al., 2018a ;Tsamar-
dinos et al., 2006 ).
The sparse candidate algorithm ( Friedman et al., 2013 )w a st h e ﬁrst
example of this approach in the literature. It is an iterative algorithm
that restricts the parents of each variable to belong to a small subset of
candidates. First, in a network G, the algorithm restricts the candidate
parents for a node Xi2Xto the parents of XiinGin a set Ci. Second,
the algorithm ﬁnds the network structure G/C3that maximizes ScoreðG/C3Þ
among the networks in which the parents of each node Xiare included
in the corresponding set Ci, then sets the new network G/C3¼G.A f t e r
the steps are repeated, the algorithm returns the graph G.
The sparse candidate algorithm is implemented in the rsmax2()
function, which performs the step of restricting and maximizing only
once as further steps rarely yield better DAGs ( Friedman et al.,
2013).BNrs,- rsmax2(data) # this computes the rsmax2
algorithm.
Common Issues to Consider When Learning BNs
Choice of Algorithm
Which approach should psychopathologists choose to learn the
structure of a BN? The number of possible con ﬁgurations of algo-
rithms, scores, conditional independence tests, and all the tuningparameters that accompany them is indeed overwhelming. A compre-hensive simulation study showed that there were no systematic differ-ences in performance or sensitivity to error in real-world data whencomparing the three classes of learning algorithms ( S c u t a r ie ta l . ,
2018). If we consider individual algorithms, none consistently outper-
forms the others discussed here. This is also the case in our ownexample data set: The three classes of algorithms retrieve very similarstructures, albeit with some differences in edge directions (see Figure
4). Another comprehensive comparison of different structure learning
algorithms showed that choosing an algorithm also depends on itsreliability and resilience, and that synthetic performance may overesti-mate real-world performance ( Constantinou et al., 2021 ).
Although researchers should clearly present the algorithm cho-
sen for structure learning and report the stable network structures,we recommend that they also perform the two other classes ofstructure learning algorithms as robustness checks. This would dis-close the edge directions that vary among algorithms.
Assumptions Needed for Causal Inference
BNs whose DAGs are in the same equivalence class are probabilis-
tically indistinguishable: It is impossible to choose one over the otherfrom data without resorting to additional expert knowledge. Therefore,inferring causal relationships from observational data should be donevery carefully: The causal effects whose direction is supported by thedata are those that correspond to edges with a de ﬁned direction in the
completed partial DAG for the equivalence class.
Figure 4
BNs Learned With the Constraint-Based PC Algorithm (Left), the Score-Based HC Algorithm (Middle), and the Hybrid RS Algorithm
(Right)
BAYESIAN NETWORKS 9This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.