Bayesian Networks
Definition
BNs are de ﬁned as the combination of a network structure, spe-
ciﬁcally a DAG, and a probability distribution. The DAG provides
a high-level abstraction useful for qualitative reasoning in the con-text of exploratory analysis and for testing hypotheses about howsymptoms relate to one another. The probability distributions ofthe symptoms quantify those relationships in terms of their magni-tude and direction.
Directed Acyclic Graphs
The network structure of a BN is a mathematical object G¼
ðV;AÞconsisting of a set of nodes V = v 1;v2;...;vNfg (where N
is the number of nodes) and of a set of edges or arcs A¼
v1;v2ðÞ ;v2;v3ðÞ ;.../C8/C9that represent all connections between
two nodes. Given V, a graph is uniquely identi ﬁed by A. In the
case of a DAG, the edges can only be directed, that is,
ðvi;vjÞ6¼ðvj;viÞ,vi!vj, with the assumption that two nodes are
only connected by one edge. In each edge vi!vj,viis called the
“parent ”node and vjis called the “child ”node. DAGs are also
acyclic: They do not contain any loops, that is, edges from a node
to itself vi!vi; or any cycle, that is, sequences of edges that start
and end on the same node, such as vi!vj! ...!vk!vi. The
primary role of the DAG in a BN is to express the set of condi-
tional independence of relationships among variables (that is, vari-ables that do not cause each other).
Markov Blankets
The DAG of a BN is an independence map of the probability
distribution of the variables Xi, which are represented in the net-
works by the nodes vi; retrieving such a map means determining
which nodes are conditionally (in)dependent. This is achieved byusing d-separation, which de ﬁnes graphical separation for DAGs
and provides a way to algorithmically determine whether twonodes in a network are (in)dependent or conditionally (in)depend-
ent (Geiger et al., 1990 ). Formally, two nodes v
iandvjared-sepa-
rated by a conditioning set of nodes Sif conditioning on all
members ofSblock all paths (sequence of nodes and edges with
vias starting node and vjas ending node, that do not necessarily
follow the direction indicated by edges) between viandvj. A col-
lider does not generate an unconditional association between the
variables that determine it ( Greenland et al., 1999 ;Pearl, 1988 ). In
Figure 1 , three examples of a basic three-node DAG are illus-
trated, as well as how they differ in conditional independences.
The setSthat makes a node viindependent of all other nodes in
Gis known as the Markov blanket of vi. By the Markov property,
the Markov blanket includes a node ’s parents, children, and
spouses, that is, children ’s other parents. The Markov blanket is
useful in investigating a target node of interest while ignoring therest of the BN; all nodes outside of the Markov blanket are inde-pendent from the node of interest after controlling for those in theMarkov blanket itself.The Markov Property
If two nodes are not connected by an edge in a BN, then they
are either independent or conditionally independent given someother nodes: this is called the local Markov property ( Korb &
Nicholson, 2010 ;Lauritzen, 1996 ). The global Markov property is
a stronger version of the local property and generalizes it to sets ofvariables: any two subsets of variables are conditionally independ-ent given a separating subset ( Föllmer, 1980 ;Lauritzen, 1996 ).
Graphical separation implies probabilistic independence
1
vi??Gvjjvk)vi??Pvjjvk
(where??Gmeans graphical separation and ??Pprobabilistic inde-
pendence), making the network itself a clear representation of theconditional independence relationships between nodes. For this rea-son, the DAG is called an independence map of the variables.
The Markov property makes it possible to write
2
PrðX;HÞ¼YN
i¼1Pr X ijPXi;HXi/C0/C1
;
decomposing the larger model PrðX;HÞinto a set of smaller mod-
elsPr X ijPXi;HXi/C0/C1, one for each variable Xiconditional on its
parents PXiin the DAG ( Korb & Nicholson, 2010 ),HandHXi
denote the parameters of the respective models. These smaller
models are individually much simpler than PrðX;HÞ; and they are
topical, in the sense that they focus on a single variable and itsrelations with variables that surround it in the DAG. This factori-zation follows from the Markov property of BNs, and it is onlypossible because of the absence of loops and cycles in the graph.Figure 2 represents a toy example Bayesian Network of four nodes
from speci ﬁc manic symptoms from the Young Mania Rating
Scale ( Young et al., 1978 ), and an example of how a probability
distribution in a DAG is factorized ( Briganti et al., 2021 ).
Figure 2 also shows a fundamental type of relationship in a BN,
represented by the three nodes increased energy, language-thoughtdisorder, and speech disorder. Both increased energy and lan-guage-thought disorder have an edge pointing to speech disorderand they are not adjacent, that is, they do not share an edge withone another. This pattern of edges is commonly known as a v-structure, or a collider, and it is one of the building blocks of BNs.In a collider ( A!C B), four conditional independences are
found: A and C are dependent, B and C are dependent, A and B
are independent, and A and B are dependent conditional on C.
This means that two independent variables, A and B, can becomedependent when one conditions on C, because observing the com-mon consequences of two independent causes can modify theirprobability ( Pearl, 2009 ). The two causes ( AandB) are therefore
negatively partially correlated (if they are both positive or bothnegative), which is counterintuitive; conditioning on the common
1If two nodes viand vjare separated in the graph, then their
probabilities are also independent.
2The joint probability of the set of variables Xand its parameters is
equal to the product of probabilities of each of the smaller models
Pr X ijPXi;HXi/C0/C1
for each variable Xigiven its parents PXiand its
parameters HXi.BAYESIAN NETWORKS 3This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.