Alternatively to planning, policy gradient algorithms (PG) directly learn an optimal policy by applying
gradient steps towards better performance [ 25]. Due to its scalability, ease of implementation, and
adaptability to many different settings such as model-free and continuous state-action spaces [ 13,24],
PG has become the workhorse of RL. Although regularization techniques such as max-entropy [ 7] or
Tsallis [ 15] have shown robust behavior without impairing computational cost, they only account for
adversarial reward [ 2,6,3]. Differently, robust PG formulations (RPG) formulations aim to address
uncertainty to reward andtransition functions.
Despite their ability to propel robust behavior, RPG methods that target robust optimal policies are
still rare in the RL literature. The global convergence of RPG established in [ 16,30] already ensures
global convergence of our proposed algorithm, but motivates a practical method for estimating the
gradients. Indeed, [ 16,30] occult the estimation part, as they assume full access to the policy gradient.
Alternatively, the inner loop solution proposed in [ 30][Sec. 4.1] requires solving convex optimization
problems to find the worst model, which represents a larger time complexity of O(S4Alogϵ−1)for
(s, a)-rectangular, or O(S4A3logϵ−1)fors-rectangular uncertainty sets. These worst kernel and
reward models are needed to compute RPG using the policy gradient theorem [ 26]. Other approaches
that elicit an expression for RPG rely on a specific type of uncertainty set such as reward uncertainty
with known kernel [ 3,5],r-contaminated kernel with known reward [ 32], or (s, a)-rectangular
uncertainty [16], whereas we aim to tackle more general robust MDPs.
In this work, we introduce an RPG method for both sand(s, a)-rectangular ball-constrained un-
certainty sets, with similar complexity as non-robust PG. Our approach provides a closed-form
expression of RPG without relying on an oracle while applying to the most common robust MDPs.
To this end, we derive the worst reward and transition functions, thus revealing the adversarial nature
of the corresponding uncertainty set. Surprisingly, we also find that the worst kernel is a rank-one
perturbation of the nominal kernel. Leveraging this rank-one perturbation enables us to derive a
robust occupation measure. We concurrently propose an alternative definition of the robust Q-value
together with an efficient way to estimate it. Combining these results enables us to obtain RPG in
closed form. Our resulting RPG update requires O(S2Alogϵ−1)computations, thus showing similar
time complexity as non-robust PG.
To summarize our contributions: (i)We establish the worst reward and transition models in closed-
form; (ii)We show that the worst-case transition function is a rank-one perturbation of the nominal;
(iii)We introduce alternative robust Q-values that can be evaluated through efficient Bellman recursion
while retrieving the robust value function; (iv)We establish an expression of RPG that can be
estimated with similar time complexity as non-robust PG. Experiments show that our RPG speeds up
state-of-the-art robust PG updates by 2 orders of magnitude.
2 Related work
Although some previous works use gradient methods to learn robust policies, they seek empirical
robustness to adversarial behavior rather than robust MDP solutions [ 21,29,4]. In that sense, our
study differs from adversarial RL as we explicitly optimize the max-min objective to find a robust
optimal policy. Accordingly, the risk-averse approach focuses on the internal uncertainty due to the
stochasticity of the system, whereas robust RL addresses the external uncertainty of the system’s
dynamics. As a result, common risk-averse objectives can be reformulated as robust problems with
specific uncertainty sets [27].
Previous studies that did aim to derive robust policy-based methods are [ 3,32,30]. These are
summarized in Table 1, which also displays the complexity of existing approaches. [ 3] established
RPG for s-rectangular reward-robust MDPs, i.e., robust MDPs with uncertain reward but given
kernel. Although it applies to general norms, their result does not account for transition perturbation.
Differently, in [ 32], the authors introduced RPG for r-contaminated MDPs, i.e., robust MDPs with
uncertainty set U:={R0}×[(1−r)P0+r∆S ×A
S]. Although it has similar complexity as non-robust
PG, by construction, their setting is limited to (s, a)-rectangularity with known reward and mixed
transition. As such, the proof techniques in [ 32] are tailor-made to the r-contamination framework
and do not apply to more general robust MDPs. In fact, we remark that the r-contamination setting is
equivalent to the action robustness approach introduced in [ 29], which emphasizes its limitation to
action perturbation. Differently, our RPG holds whenever the worst kernel is a rank-one perturbation
of the nominal transition function (see Lemma 4.4).
2