Policy Gradient for Rectangular Robust Markov
Decision Processes
Navdeep Kumar∗
TechnionEsther Derman
MILA, Université de Montréal
Matthieu Geist
Goodle DeepmindKfir Levy
TechnionShie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA Research
Abstract
Policy gradient methods have become a standard for training reinforcement learning
agents in a scalable and efficient manner. However, they do not account for
transition uncertainty, whereas learning robust policies can be computationally
expensive. In this paper, we introduce robust policy gradient (RPG), a policy-
based method that efficiently solves rectangular robust Markov decision processes
(MDPs). We provide a closed-form expression for the worst occupation measure.
Incidentally, we find that the worst kernel is a rank-one perturbation of the nominal.
Combining the worst occupation measure with a robust Q-value estimation yields
an explicit form of the robust gradient. Our resulting RPG can be estimated from
data with the same time complexity as its non-robust equivalent. Hence, it relieves
the computational burden of convex optimization problems required for training
robust policies by current policy gradient approaches.
1 Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) provide an analytical framework to solve sequential decision-
making problems and seek the best performance in a fixed environment. Since the resulting policy can
be highly sensitive to parameter values [ 18], the robust MDP setting alternatively maximizes return
under the worst scenario, thus yielding robustness to uncertain environments [ 20,12]. In practice,
the robust MDP paradigm quantifies the level of uncertainty through a set Udetermining the possible
range of model perturbations. Then, a policy is said to be robust-optimal if it reaches maximal perfor-
mance under the most adversarial model within the uncertainty set. Developing efficient solvers for
robust MDPs is of great interest, as it can lead to behavior policies with generalization guarantees [ 34].
If not computationally expensive, robust MDPs can be strongly NP-hard [ 33]. Thus, to preserve
tractability, we commonly assume that Uis convex and s-rectangular, i.e.,U=×s∈SUs[20,12,33].
Well established in the robust reinforcement learning (RL) literature [ 8,3,9,10,28], the latter as-
sumption means that the overall uncertainty should be designed independently for each state. Further
simplification may consider (s, a)-rectangular uncertainty sets of the form U=×(s,a)∈XU(s,a), albeit
this naturally leads to more conservative strategies. In any case, planning in robust MDPs can be com-
putationally costly, as it involves successive max-min problems [9, 1, 33]. To address this issue, the
works [ 3,14] have established an equivalence between robustness and regularization in RL in order to
derive efficient robust planning methods for sand(s, a)-rectangular robust MDPs. Indeed, it appears
that resorting to proper regularization instead of solving a minimization problem can yield robust
behavior without requiring the polynomial time complexity of convex optimization problems [3].
∗Contact author navdeepkumar@campus.technion.ac.il
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).