where Qπ
U:=Qπ
(Pπ
U,Rπ
U)is the Q-value associated with the worst-case model, and dπ
U:=dπ
Pπ
Uthe
occupation measure of the worst transition kernel. In fact, for the uncertainty sets we focus on in
this work, the worst Q-value Qπ
Uretrieves the common definition of robust Q-value [ 20,28] (see
the appendix for a detailed discussion). Therefore, for conciseness and with a slight abuse, we
shall designate Qπ
Uby the robust Q-value, and dπ
Uby the robust visitation frequency. The remaining
question is how to compute these quantities and in particular, can we efficiently find the worst
parameters (Pπ
U, Rπ
U)? The following part of our study aims to address these questions.
Given an uncertainty set U, let first define the normalized and balanced robust value function as:
uπ
U(s) :=sign(vπ
U(s)−ωq(vπ
U))∥vπ
U(s)−ωq(vπ
U)∥q−1
κq(vπ
U)q−1. (2)
By construction, it has zero mean and unit norm, i.e.,⟨uπ
U,1⟩S= 0 and∥uπ
U∥p= 1. In fact, as
stated in the result below, uπ
Uis the gradient of the q-variance function, and correlates with the
(unnormalized, unbalanced) robust value function according to the same q-variance.
Proposition 4.1. For any policy π∈Πandℓp-ball rectangular uncertainty set, the following holds:
uπ
U=∇vκq(v)
v=vπ
U,
⟨uπ
U, vπ
U⟩=κq(vπ
U).
4.1 Worst Kernel and Reward
In the following results, we explicit the relationship between the nominal and the worst-case model
for(s, a)ands-rectangular ℓp-balls. We will then leverage this relationship to compute the robust
Q-values and the robust occupation measure, both necessary for RPG.
Theorem 4.2 ((s, a)-rectangular case) .Given uncertainty set U=Usa
pand any policy π∈Π, the
worst model is related to the nominal one through:
Rπ
U(s, a) =R0(s, a)−αs,a and Pπ
U(·|s, a) =P0(·|s, a)−βs,auπ
U.
Based on Thm. 4.2, it follows that in the (s, a)-rectangular case, the worst reward function is
independent of the employed policy. As we establish in Thm. 4.3 below, this no longer applies under
s-rectangularity. In either case, the worst kernel is policy-dependent, discouraging the system to
move toward high-rewarding states and directing it to low-rewarding ones instead. Surprisingly, the
vector penalty uπ
U∈RSadditionally illustrates that the worst kernel is a rank-one perturbation of the
nominal. Indeed, considering the stochastic matrix induced by any policy π∈Π, we have
[Pπ
U−Pπ
0](s′|s) =− X
a∈Aβs,aπs(a)!
uπ
U(s′),∀s∈ S,
so that the perturbation matrix Pπ
U−Pπ
0is of rank one. In the sequel, we will leverage this finding to
compute the robust visitation frequency.
Theorem 4.3 (s-rectangular case) .Given uncertainty set U=Us
pand any policy π∈Π, the worst
model is related to the nominal one through:
Rπ
U(s, a) =R0(s, a)−αsπs(a)
∥πs∥qq−1
and Pπ
U(·|s, a) =P0(·|s, a)−βsuπ
Uπs(a)
∥πs∥qq−1
.
Similarly to the (s, a)-case, the adversarial kernel is a rank-one perturbation of the nominal. Yet, an
extra dependence on the policy through the coefficient
πs(a)
∥πs∥qq−1
appears in the s-case, affecting
both the worst reward and the worst kernel. Intuitively, it means that the worst model cannot be
chosen independently for each action, but must instead depend on the agent’s policy. This further
explains why optimal policies can all be stochastic in s-rectangular robust MDPs [33].
Thms. 4.2 and 4.3 enable us to derive the worst MDP model in closed form with time complexity
O(S2Alogϵ−1), up to logarithmic factors (please see the appendix for a detailed discussion). It thus
holds the same complexity as non-robust value iteration, since we additionally need to compute the
value function to derive its corresponding regularizer [ 3,14]. On the other hand, if we employ convex
optimization using value methods instead, obtaining the worst model requires a time complexity
ofO(S4Alogϵ−1)in the (s, a)-rectangular case, and O(S4A3logϵ−1)in the s-rectangular case
[30][Sec. 4.1].
6