G.2 s-rectangular case
Generalization to s-rectangular balls of a general norm is not straightforward and may not be possible
for all types of norms. The crucial property of the ℓp-norm exploited in our rank-one perturbation
proof is ’decoupling’, that is, for all x∈RA×S, there must exist k, l, m ∈R+such that
∥x∥k
p=X
a∈A∥xa∥l
m.
This holds in the ℓpcase with k=l=m=p. Further analysis of this setting is left for future work.
G.3 Generalization to metrics and divergences
Generalizing RPG to distance or divergence-based uncertainty sets is also not obvious. Our RPG
method, in particular the robust occupation measure, crucially relies on the rank-one perturbation
characterization of the worst kernel, which might not apply for example with KL-ball constraints. We
leave this analysis for future work.
H Experiments
Parameters. All the nominal transition kernels and reward functions are generated randomly. The
number of states and the number of actions are varied. Discount factor γ= 0.9, reward noise radius
αs,a, αs= 0.1, transition noise kernel βs,a, βs=0.01
SA.
Hardware Experiments are done on the machine with the following configuration: Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-6700 CPU @3.40GHZ, size:3598MHz, capacity 4GHz, width 64 bits, memory size 64 GiB.
Software and codes All the experiments were done in Python using numpy, matplotlib. All codes
and results are available at https://github.com/navdtech/rpg.
Procedure and Results. All the experiments were repeated 100 times, except for Linear Programming
(LP) cases as LP methods were very time-consuming. In LP methods, experiments were repeated
5 times except for the case ( S= 500 , A= 100 ) which was done only once. As this case was
prohibitively expensive. Standard deviation in all cases was less than 10%, and typically 1−2%.
This conveniently illustrates the superiority of our methods over LP methods.
Observations
•Scalability of our methods. Note that our methods scale very well with large state-action
space. It takes a (small) constant times the time required by non-robust MDPs. On the other
hand, LP methods explode. Both observations confirm the theoretical time complexity.
•sa-case vs scase in LP methods. We see s-case outperforms sa-case for small state-action
spaces via LP methods. This is opposite to the theoretical time complexity of s-case which
expensive than sa-case. We believe this is due to the internal implementation issues. Note
that computing the robust value function is the most expensive step which requires evaluation
of the robust Bellman operator. In sacase, one evaluation requires solving SALP programs
withSvariables each, while for s-case, it is SLP programs with SAvariables each. To
solve LP, scipy.linprog is used, we believe it does some parallelization for large LPs. Hence,
we observe less cost for sa-case. However, we observe that the cost of s-case increases
much faster than s-case, and eventually under-performing than sa-case.
H.1 RPG by LP
We compute RPG using LP in the following steps:
1.(Robust Value Iteration) Approximately compute the robust value function vπ
Uusing the
iterates vn+1:=Tπ
Uvn. Evaluation of robust Bellman operator Tπ
Uis done via LPs as
described below. This is the most expensive step as it requires evaluating robust Bellman
operators O(log(ϵ−1))times, and each evaluation requires many LPs.
24