Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
Available  online  at  www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
jo ur nal home  p  ag  e:  www.intl.elsevierhealth.com/journals/dema
Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial
intelligence in  dentistry
Jasmin Grischkea,∗, Lars  Johannsmeierb,  Lukas  Eicha,
Leif
 Grigaa,  Sami  Haddadinb
aRobokind  Robotics  for  Mankind  Foundation,  Appelstrasse  30,  30167  Hannover,  Germany
bChair  of  Robotics  Science  and  Systems  Intelligence  and  Munich  School  of  Robotics  and  Machine  Intelligence,
Heßstraße 134,  80797  München,  Germany
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article history:
Received  29  October  2019
Received  in  revised  form
18 March  2020
Accepted  19  March  2020
Available  online  xxx
Keywords:Machine learning
Artiﬁcial  intelligence
RobotRoboticsDentistryDental robots
Dentronicsa  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
Objectives.  This  paper  provides  an  overview  of  existing  applications  and  concepts  of  robotic
systems and artiﬁcial intelligence  in  dentistry.  This  review  aims  to  provide  the  commu-
nity with  novel  inputs  and  argues  for  an  increased  utilization  of  these  recent  technological
developments, referred  to  as  Dentronics,  in  order  to  advance  dentistry.
Methods. First,  background  on  developments  in  robotics,  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  and
machine learning  (ML)  are  reviewed  that  may  enable  novel  assistive  applications  in  den-
tistry (Sec  A).  Second,  a  systematic  technology  review  that  evaluates  existing  state-of-the-art
applications in  AI,  ML  and  robotics  in  the  context  of  dentistry  is  presented  (Sec  B).
Results. A systematic literature  research  in  pubmed  yielded  in  a  total  of  558  results.  41  studies
related to  ML,  53  studies  related  to  AI  and  49  original  research  papers  on  robotics  application
in dentistry  were  included.  ML  and  AI  have  been  applied  in  dental  research  to  analyze  large
amounts of  data  to  eventually  support  dental  decision  making,  diagnosis,  prognosis  and
treatment planning  with  the  help  of  data-driven  analysis  algorithms  based  on  machine
learning. So far, only  few  robotic  applications  have  made  it  to  reality,  mostly  restricted  to
pilot use cases.
Signiﬁcance. The  authors  believe  that  dentistry  can  greatly  beneﬁt  from  the  current  rise  of
digital human-centered  automation  and  be  transformed  towards  a  new  robotic,  ML  and  AI-
enabled era.  In  the  future,  Dentronics  will  enhance  reliability,  reproducibility,  accuracy  and
efﬁciency in  dentistry  through  the  democratized  use  of  modern  dental  technologies,  such
as medical  robot  systems  and  specialized  artiﬁcial  intelligence.  Dentronics  will  increase
our understanding of disease  pathogenesis,  improve  risk-assessment-strategies,  diagnosis,
disease prediction and  ﬁnally  lead  to  better  treatment  outcomes.
©
 2020  The  Academy  of  Dental  Materials.  Published  by  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.
∗Corresponding  author .
E-mail address: grischke.jasmin@robokind.de  (J.  Grischke).1.  Objectives
Various types  of  robots  are  already  part  of  our  everyday  life,
they  support  production  in  industrial  applications,  cut  our
grass  and  clean  our  ﬂoors  [1].  The  current  generation  of
human-safe robots  is  ﬁnally  able  to  work  directly  with  human
co-workers, assist  them  and  relieve  them  of  tedious  and  labo-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021
0109-5641/©  2020  The  Academy  of  Dental  Materials.  Published  by  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.