Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  7
dummies. “Hanako”,  the  SIMROID  is  standing  165  cm  tall.  It
comes  with  a  metal  skeleton  and  vinyl  chloride-based  gum
pattern  of  skin.  “Hanako”  is  an  interesting  contribution  to  edu-
cation in  dentistry  as  the  SIMROID  is  imitating  a  human  in
its actions  and  expressions.  It  can  verbally  express  pain,  roll
its  eyes,  blink,  shake  its  head  in  pain,  perform  movements  of
jaw, tongue, elbow and  wrist.  Furthermore,  it  can  even  simu-
late
 a  vomiting  reﬂex  with  a  uvula  sensor,  and  also  simulate
functions  to  induce  bleeding  and  saliva  ﬂow  [114] .  Tanzawa
et al.  introduced  a  medical  emergency  robot  with  the  aim  to
help dental students  to  get  familiar  with  emergency  situations
[115] . Another  robotic educational equipment  described  in  the
literature
 is  the  ROBOTUTOR.  This  tool  was  developed  as  an
alternative to  a  clinician  to  demonstrate  tooth-cleaning  tech-
niques to  patients.  It  is  a  robotic  device  to  train  and  show
brushing  techniques.  A  study  among  patients  showed  that
the ROBOTUTOR  was  the  most  attractive  method  (according  to
patient  evaluation)  for  dental  health  care  education  compared
to other methods (clinician  or  video  audio  tutorial).  However,
it was  less  effective  than  the  clinician  [116] .  A  haptic-based
tooth drilling  simulator  was  introduced  for  dental  education
with  an  implemented  collision  detection  system  to  give  force
sensation  to  the  user  and  make  the  virtual  reality  (VR)  experi-
ence more  realistic  [15].  A  study  found  best  learning  of  dental
basic  motor  skills  in  trainees  receiving  a  combination  of  VR
training with haptic feedback and human  instructor  verbal
feedback
 [117] .  Other  studies  investigated  the  use  of  VR  and
haptic devices  for  training  of  dental  implant  placement  or
oral anesthesia  [118,119] .  VR  laboratories  with  haptic  devices
become  more  and  more  part  of  the  regular  curricula  in  dental
education and have  been  found  to  improve  student’s  learn-
ing  efﬁciency  and  effect  [117,120,121] .  A  review  of  different  VR
systems  in  dental  education  can  be  found  in  [122] .
Additionally, a  study  investigated  the  learning  experience
of pre-clinical  dental  students  using  3D  printed  teeth  designed
with  realistic  pulpe  cavities  and  simulated  caries  decays  [123] .
3.2.1.3.  Tooth  preparation.  Preparation  of  a  tooth  for  crowns
and bridges  is  a  routine  task  for  the  dentist,  although  even
after  years  of  practical  experience  it  is  still  challenging.  The
challenge is  to  reduce  the  tooth  sufﬁciently  to  create  space
for the  prosthetic  rehabilitation  with  a  minimum  of  dam-
age to  sound  tooth  structure.  The  idea  of  a  robotic  arm  used
for  tooth  preparation  or  preparation  support  for  the  den-
tist  seems  tempting  and  sensible.  A  mechatronic  system  to
support the  dentist  in  drilling  has  been  tested  in  vitro  and
showed  good  results,  however,  it  has  not  yet  been  validated
in a  clinical  setting.  The  dentist‘s  position  accuracy  was  53%
better with  the  mechatronic  system  [124]  than  without  it.
Yuan  et  al.  described  a  robotic  tooth  preparation  system  [125] )
with the  following  hardware  components:  (1)  an  intraoral
3D  scanner  (TRIOS,  3Shape  A/S,  Copenhagen,  Denmark)  to
obtain the  3D  data  of  the  patient’s  target  tooth,  adjacent  teeth,
opposing teeth  and  the  teeth  ﬁxture;  (2)  a  computer-aided
design (CAD)/computer-aided manufacturing  (CAM)  software
for  designing  the  target  preparation  shape  and  generating  a
3D  motion  path  of  the  laser;  (3)  an  effective  low-heat  laser
suitable for  hard  tissue  preparation;  (4)  a  6  DoF  robot  arm;
(5) a  tooth  ﬁxture  connecting  the  robotic  device  with  the
target  tooth  and  protecting  the  adjacent  teeth  from  laser  cut-ting,  designed  using  Solidworks  software  (Dassault  Systèmes
SOLIDWORKS  Corporation,  Waltham,  MA,  USA).  Moreover,
other tooth  preparation  devices  were  tested  for  their  accu-
racy. A  system  with  micro  robots,  controlling  a  picosecond
laser  showed  a  preparation  accuracy  that  met  clinical  needs,
the error  was  about  (0.089  ±  0.026)  mm  [126,127] .  Another
tooth  preparation  system  for  veneers  with  a  rotating  dia-
mond  instrument  mounted  on  a  robotic  arm  was  compared
to (human-)  hand crown prep  [128]  and  showed  better  results
than the  tooth  preparation  carried  out  by  the  dentist.  The  aver-
age  repeatability  of  the  system  was  about  40  /H9262m  [125,129] .
3.2.1.4.  Testing  of  toothbrushes.  The  efﬁciency  of  tooth-
brushes and  their  abrasiveness  towards  enamel  may  be  tested
with  highest  repeatability  and  comparability  by  using  robotic
systems. For  example,  an  in  vitro  study  [130]  with  a  six-axis
robot  compared  the  efﬁciency  of  two  different  tooth  brushes
with clinical hand brushing and in  vitro  robotic  brushing.
Results
 showed  that  robotic  brushing  of  teeth  is  an  alterna-
tive  for  plaque  removal  studies  and  may  even  replace  clinical
studies [130] .
3.2.1.5.  Root  canal  treatment  and  plaque  removal.  Root  canal
treatment is  a  procedure  which  is  based  on  high  accuracy.
Usually,  a  dentist  specialized  in  endodontics  works  using  mag-
niﬁcation to assure adequate view of  the  root  canal.  Nelson
et
 al.  published  the  idea  of  a  robotic  system  for  assistance
during  root  canal  treatment.  The  so-called  “vending  machine”
was supposed  to  supply  the  dentist  with  the  necessary  root
canal  instruments  during  treatment  [131]  in  order  to  reduce
deﬂection from the  operating  site.  A  recent  study  proposed  the
application of  micro-robots  with  catalytic-ability  to  destroy
bioﬁlms within  the  root  canal  and  tested  the  system  In  vitro.
Furthermore, the  authors  discussed  the  use  of  these  systems
for  other  applications  such  as  prevention  of  tooth  decay  or
peri-implant infection  [131,132] .
3.2.1.6. Orthodontics  and  jaw  movement.  A  novel  system  that
generates the  dental  arch  form  has  been  developed.  The  sys-
tem can be  used  to  bend  orthodontic  wires  [133] .  Edinger
described  a  robot  for  the  dental  ofﬁce  for  the  ﬁrst  time  in
1991, later  he  described  a  robotic  system  to  reproduce  condy-
lar  movements  [134,135] .  Virtual  articulators  are  one  of  the
technological bases  necessary  to  fully  rethink  and  digital-
ize dental  workﬂows.  They  enable  simulation  of  occlusal
changes in  the  digital  world  and  may  be  strongly  empowered
by  AI  in  the  future  to  e.g.  simulate  use  of  dental  materi-
als  patient-individually  or  simulate  treatment  outcomes  of
implant placement  or  maxilla-facial  surgeries  [136] .
3.2.1.7.  Material  testing.  Robotic  dental  wear  and  mastication
simulators are  proposed  to  test  tooth  ﬁlling  materials  [137]  or
dental implant materials  [138,139] .  One  of  the  systems  was
driven  by  a  robot  with  6  DoF  [140,141] .  In  another  study  dental
impression materials  were  tested  with  the  help  of  a  robotic
arm  [142] .
3.2.1.8.  Tooth  arrangement  for  full  dentures.  Robotic  assis-
tance may  also  be  helpful  in  supporting  the  dental  technician
[143] .  A  novel  system  that  generates  the  dental  arch  has  been