Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  3
Fig.  1  –  Vision  of  possible  robots  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  service  network  to  support  future  dentistry.
sensors  in  every  joint  and  the  resulting  inherently  or  actively
compliant  and  reﬂexive  joints  [26].
Next generation industrial  systems,  in  particular  the  medi-
cal
 domain  has  been  a  driving  factor  in  developing  novel  robot
platforms such  as  the  research  system  DLR  MIRO  [27,28]  or  the
commercially very  successful  da  Vinci  system  [29].  The  latter  is
utilized  worldwide  by  many  large  clinics  for  minimally  inva-
sive surgeries  such  as  prostatectomies,  cardiac  valve  repair
and  gynecologic  procedures.  Much  research  in  this  area  has
also been  done  on  continuum  robots  [30]  that  may  be  bet-
ter  suited  for  a  number  of  tasks  related  to  minimally-invasive
surgery. An  overview  of  research  and  system  design  in  the
medical  domain  can  be  found  in  Ref.  [31].
In  recent  years  the  development  of  collaborative  and  safe
robots has  accelerated  signiﬁcantly  with  robotic  systems
which  enable  fenceless  operation.  With  commercially  avail-
able  collaborative  robots  such  as  Universal  Robot  systems
(Universal Robot,  Odense,  Denmark),  the  Rethink  Robotics
(Rethink  Robotics  GmbH,  Rheinböllen,  Germany)  systems  Bax-
ter  and  Sawyer  [32,33]  and  the  KUKA  iiwa  and  iisy  platforms
(KUKA AG,  Augsburg,  Germany),  robots  became  sensitive.  Just
recently,  these  developments  have  come  with  the  Franka
Emika Panda  (Franka  Emika  GmbH,  Munich,  Germany)  robot
to  a  point  where  the  tactile  perception  of  the  robot  enables
new  applications  and  the  systems  started  to  become  afford-
able, yet  at  the  highest  capability,  an  important  factor  when
considering  the  overall  acceptance  of  collaborative  robots.
2.1.1.2. Control.  The  controller  of  a  robot  determines  how  its
joints  are  actuated  depending  on  sensory  input  and  is  there-
fore directly  related  to  the  way  it  is  explicitly  or  implicitlyinteracting  with  the  environment.  The  application  of  robotic
systems  in  a  dental  scenario  requires  the  capability  of  sensi-
tive physical interaction  without  causing  any  form  of  harm  to
the
 environment  or  the  system  itself.  In  robotics,  impedance
control [34]  became  an  essential  framework  that  still  serves
as the  basis  for  many  modern  control  systems  fulﬁlling  this
requirement.  It  enables  robots  to  safely  interact  with  the  envi-
ronment in  a  similar  manner  as  humans  do  by  mimicking  the
compliant  human  motor  control  behavior.  This  stands  in  vast
contrast to  classical  position-controlled  industrial  robots  used
at  assembly  lines  and  in  segregated  workspaces  from  humans.
Also of  major  importance  for  the  foundation  of  modern  robot
control  is  the  operational  space  formulation  developed  in  Ref.
[35] that  fundamentally  changed  the  way  a  robot  task  is  seen
and deﬁned.
More  recent  research  on  the  topic  of  control  for  collabora-
tive  robots,  especially  also  in  case  of  kinematic  redundancy,
can be  found  in  Refs.  [36–38] .
2.1.1.3.  Safety.  Human  safety  is  among  the  most  important
aspects in a  human–robot  co-working  scenario.  Especially
in  the  last  decade  there  has  been  extensive  research  [39]
about  this  topic  in  order  to  determine  requirements  of  safe
robots  and  studies  regarding  injuries  which  resulted  in  the
development of  novel  design  paradigms  that  aim  to  make
modern robots  inherently  safe.  In  particular,  some  works  [40]
address safety  issues  and  led  to  new  safety  standards  such
as ISO  13482-3  (safety  of  machinery  –  functional  safety  of
safety-related electrical,  electronic  and  programmable  elec-
tronic  control  systems).  Within  the  soft  robotics  paradigm
joint  torque  sensors  with  suitable  disturbance  observers  are