Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
6  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
Fig. 2 – The  technological  advance  of  a  system  may  be  described  using  the  technological  readiness  level  (TRL1-9)  introduced
by Mankins  in  1995  [94].
ical  readiness  have  been  made,  issues  such  as  high  costs  and
inherent  complexity  of  the  techniques  and  hardware  utilized
are still  to  be  overcome.  For  example,  a  six-axis  robotic  arm
was  proposed  to  assist  a  surgeon  in  an  orthognathic  surgery,
based  on  3D  data  from  a  CT,  positioning  is  to  be  planned  by
the surgeon  preoperatively.  During  the  operation  the  robot  is
proposed  to  register  patient  movements  by  real-time  tracking.
Orthognathic surgery  was  performed  in  a  preliminary  exper-
iment with  a  jawbone  skull  phantom  [108] .  However,  Woo
et al. found that before automated  orthognathic  surgery  can
be
 tested  in  human  studies  the  available  software  needs  to  be
optimized  and  safety  of  the  hardware  augmented  [108] .
A pilot  phantom  study  concluded  that  implant  placement
with  a  six-axis  robotic  arm  can  improve  accuracy  of  the
operation in  zygomatic  implant  placement.  The  authors  rec-
ommended to  implement  force  feedback  by  adding  a  haptic
device  to  the  presented  system  in  future  research  [107] .
A surgical  robotic  application  which  has  made  it  to  real-
ity  is  an  invasive  robotic  assistant  for  dental  implantology.  It
was permitted  for  operative  use  by  the  FDA  (Food  and  Drug
Administration) in  March  2017.  The  product  is  called  Yomi  and
is produced by  Neocis  (Neocis  Inc.,  Miami,  USA).  Based  on  3D-
data  from a  CT  the  dentist  plans  the  implant  position.  During
surgery  the  robotic  arm  drills  the  hole  in  the  jawbone  and
places the  implant  according  to  the  planning  while  the  dentist
can  follow  the  position  of  the  burr  in  real-time,  owing  to  the
software, which  allows  the  dentist  to  adjust  placement  posi-
tion of  the  implant  intraoperatively.  Also,  in  2017,  in  China,  a
robot  implanted  two  implants  in  a  human  fully  autonomously
observed by  a  dentist  who  did  not  intervene  in  the  process.
This  case  was  published  in  the  China  Morning  Post  and  the
robot  was  developed  by  the  Fourth  Military  Medical  Univer-
sity’s Stomatological  Hospital  and  Beihang  University.  A  study
on a  robotic  system  for  guided  implant  placement  initially
tested the  robustness,  usability  and  safety  of  a  new  methodwhich  has  been  integrated  into  a  navigation  system,  called
RoboDent,  for  dental  implant  surgery  with  45  patient  datasets
[109] .
Studies  found  real-time  tracking  to  be  one  of  the  key  ele-
ments  to  be  addressed  in  order  to  create  a  system  capable  of
performing implant  surgery  in  patients  [110] .  Robotic  implan-
tology  was  also  proposed  to  enable  drilling  of  complex  forms
of dental  implants  and  by  that  enhance  ﬂexibility  in  prosthetic
rehabilitation in  patients  with  reduced  bone  supply  [111] .
Other studies describe robot-assisted implant  placement  [12]
or  phantom  experiments  for  dental  implant  placement  with
the  help  of  industrial  robot  systems  (MELFA  RV-3S,  Mitsubishi
Electric Corporation,  Tokyo,  Japan).  Those  industrial  robots
have  six  degrees  of  freedom  (DOF),  a  position  repeatability  of
±0.02 mm  and  showed  an  error  of  1.42  ±  0.70  mm  [104] .
Human-related factors  (such  as  reduced  concentration,
trembling,  distraction  or  reduced  vision)  affect  the  accuracy
and safety  in  maxillofacial  surgery.  A  study  proposed  an
autonomous  surgical  system  aiming  to  conduct  maxillofa-
cial surgeries  under  the  assistance  and  surveillance  of  the
surgeon. A  navigation  module  and  a  robot  were  seamlessly
integrated into  this  system  and  a  drilling  experiment  was
conducted  on ﬁve  3D  printed  mandible  models  to  test  the
pose  detecting  capability  and  evaluate  the  operational  perfor-
mance. The  experiment  showed  that  this  system  was  able  to
successfully  guide  the  robot  ﬁnishing  the  operation  regardless
of the  mandible  position  [112] .
3.2.1.2. Robotic  education.  The  idea  of  a  dental  training
robot  was  ﬁrst  described  in  1969  [113] .  The  application  of
a  humanoid  in  dental  education  was  tested  in  2017.  A
humanoid, a  full-body  patient  simulation  system  (SIMROID),
was  tested  in  a  study  among  dental  students  to  ﬁnd  out
whether  a  robotic  patient  was  more  realistic  for  the  students
to familiarize  with  real  patients  [16]  than  the  usually  used