Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
2  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
rious routine  tasks  [2,3] .  At  the  same  time,  they  show  a  high
degree  of  performance  and  are  becoming  economically  more
relevant.  In  the  near  future,  this  will  lead  to  the  introduction
of robots  to  various  new  application  areas,  in  particular  as
co-workers not  only  in  the  industrial  sector  but  also  in  the
public  domain  in  the  form  of  smart  assistants  [4,5] .  One  of
such promising areas may be  dentistry  since  it  provides  mani-
fold
 opportunities  for  assistive  work  and  automation  of  simple
routine  tasks,  supporting  dental  staff  while  improving  quality
of work  and  care.  However,  there  are  still  major  challenges  and
limitations that need  to  be  overcome  [6].
In the next  decades more and  more  manual  work  will
be
 automated  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  technologi-
cal progress.  A  study  from  Oxford  University  describes  the
susceptibility of  jobs  being  computerized  and  found  dental
assistant  and  dental  hygienist  to  be  at  elevated  risk,  however
dentists were  scored  with  a  low  susceptibility  [7].  We  agree
with  this  assessment  since  robotics  and  ML  will  likely  not
replace dentists  but  complement  their  expertise  and  support
them in  order  to  reach  a  new  level  of  accuracy,  better  patient
experience and  treatment  success.  Already  in  1967  Jenkins
described  a  robot  dental  secretary  and  today  more  and  more
robot  application  scenarios  have  made  it  to  reality  [8].  Improv-
ing healthcare  quality  and  efﬁciency  is  demanding  since
the  processes  in  place  have  not  yet  been  properly  standard-
ized. Consequently, researchers and  practitioners  increasingly
advocate
 digital  process  redesign  as  a  valuable  way  to  reduce
practice variation  and  improve  the  overall  quality  of  health
care [9–11] .
By  making  use  of  smart  robot  technology  in  dental  ofﬁces,
e.g. as  assistants  to  the  dentist,  the  current  technological
infrastructure  could  be  augmented  in  many  beneﬁcial  ways.
Among  the  most  motivating  factors  may  actually  be  human
factors, i.e.  the  potential  mental  and  physical  overload  of
human assistants  after  long  hours  of  work  that  requires  con-
stant  focus  or  the  lack  of  ergonomic  work  environments.  This
may lead  to  further  problems  such  as  decrease  of  hygiene  and
mistakes during medical exams, disease diagnosis  or  treat-
ment
 planning.  In  addition,  general  negligence  with  regard
to  daily  routine  tasks  (e.g.  rinsing  of  dental  chair  waterpipes,
cleaning of  surfaces  and  instruments  in  the  dental  ofﬁce)  is
possible.  Since  robot  assistants  do  not  tire  and  are  able  to
repeat their  workﬂows  indeﬁnitely,  human  resources  could  be
freed  for  other  tasks  that  robots  are  not  able  to  do,  such  as
direct social  interaction  with  patients  or  other  work  with  high
cognitive  requirements.
Beyond  the  use  of  robots  in  dental  assistance  more  invasive
use cases,  such  as  autonomous  implant  placement  [12]  even-
tually combined  with  complex  3D-navigation  [13,14]  or  tooth
preparation  procedures  have  been  reported  in  the  literature.
Another area  of  interest  is  the  use  of  robot  technology  in
dental  education.  Universities  train  their  students  with  the
help of  advanced  simulation  and  haptic  device  interaction  or
even  full-body  robotic  patients  [15]  to  improve  fundamentally
important  skills  for  future  dentists  prior  to  real  patient  contact
[16–19] .
As  it  is  with  many  technologies  that  are  introduced  into  a
new environment,  various  obstacles  of  very  different  nature
may occur.  One  such  hurdle  is  the  fact  that  technolog-
ical developments  for  medical  applications  are  extremelycostly and  the  necessary  technological  advances  have  only
recently  been  introduced  into  industrial  and  assistive  robotics.
Recently  however,  modern  robot  technology  has  developed
rapidly, and  even  medical  robots  have  been  applied  in  some
clinical areas  as  well  as  in  the  ﬁeld  of  dentistry  [20].  Another
important  aspect  may  be  the  unknown  patient  compliance
and acceptance  among dental professionals [21].  A  study
among
 patients  found  that  female  participants  are  less
motivated  to  undergo  robotic  medical  treatments  compared
to male  participants,  irrespective  of  gender,  willingness  to
undergo robotic  supported  medical  interventions  decreases
with the invasiveness of  the  procedure  [21].
The
 possibilities  of  future  combinations  of  robotics  and
dentistry are  manifold.  The  most  immediate  one  is  obviously
to create  a  working  implementation  that  adheres  to  all  nec-
essary  requirements  such  as  human  safety,  human-centered
interaction, human–robot  communication,  reliable  and  intu-
itive  to  use  manipulation  skills,  which  can  be  employed  on  a
large scale  with  speciﬁc  initial  use-cases  [6].  Building  on  this
thought we  outline  the  technological  advances  that  have  been
made which  enable  the  utilization  of  robotic  support  in  den-
tistry.  Furthermore,  we  motivate  this  step  by  describing  the
opportunities  that  emerge  from  a  combination  of  robotics,
artiﬁcial intelligence,  machine  learning  and  dentistry  (Fig.  1).
In  the  following,  we  refer  to  this  combination  as  Dentronics  as
described in our previous work [6,22]  and  deﬁned  below.
2.  Section  A
2.1.  Background  on  developments  in  robotics,  artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI)  and  machine  learning  (ML)
The  authors  present  their  expert  knowledge  to  point  out
recent advances  in  interactive  force  sensitive  robotics  and
related  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  methods  and  data  driven
machine learning (ML) relevant for  dentistry  in  order  to  pro-
vide
 the  dental  community  with  an  overview  of  the  current
state-of-the-art  enabler  technologies  in  Dentronics.
2.1.1. Interactive  force-sensitive  robotics
There  are  several  enabler  technologies  in  robotics,  AI  and  ML
that  may  contribute  to  the  development  of  novel  method-
ologies  in  dentistry.  In  the  following,  we  review  these
technologies with  regard  to  the  vision  of  Dentronics  shown  in
Fig.  1.  In  this  review  we  distinguish  in  the  context  of  robotics
between mechatronics,  control,  safety  and  human–robot
interaction.  Furthermore,  we  review  AI  technologies  used  in
robotic applications  essential  to  Dentronics,  speciﬁcally  also
ML  technologies  and  algorithms  currently  used  in  Dentistry.
2.1.1.1.  Mechatronics.  The  development  of  the  mechatronic
components of  robots  has  long  been  an  incremental  process
that  only  seventeen  years  ago  started  to  yield  ﬁrst  light-weight
robot  designs  that  would  many  years  later  on  convincingly
demonstrate the  feasibility  of  human–robot  collaboration  [23].
This  design  principle  has  been  extended  and  further  devel-
oped  [24,25] .  The  most  distinguishing  factor  of  these  systems
beyond their  lightweight  design  is  their  use  of  joint  torque