Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  9
technology to  be  used  in  dental  applications  and  only  a  minor-
ity  of  the  published  studies  reported  prototype  systems  in  the
operational  area  (TRL  7).  Throughout  the  literature  authors
claim that  robotic  systems  enhance  reliability,  reproducibil-
ity and  accuracy  in  their  test  applications.  Despite  this,  the
amount  of  research  done  in  this  ﬁeld  is  still  limited  due  to
lack of  available and  accessible  systems  in  recent  years.  How-
ever,
 as  shown  in  Sec  B  such  systems  are  becoming  reality  and
this  challenge  may  be  overcome  in  the  next  years.
Another reason  why  robotics  is  still  a  ﬁeld  of  low  interest  in
dentistry may  be  the  lack  of  expert  knowledge  to  program  and
control those  systems  as a non-professional.  Consequently,
research
 in  this  domain  still  relies  on  efﬁcient  collabora-
tion between  engineers  and  dentists.  This  may  change  in
the near  future  as  the  robotics  community  researches  novel
programming  paradigms  and  interaction  methodologies  in
order to  make  communication  between  robots  and  humans
as  intuitive  as  possible,  see  Sec.  A.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  AI
methods to autonomously plan  tasks  and  reason  about  the
environment may  further  reduce  the  effort  on  the  user-side
when using  a  robot.
Studies  on  ML  in  dentistry  can  be  found  back  to  2016  and
since  then  have  become  more  and  more  popular.  However,
only few  studies  on  ML  are  published  in  dental  journals  so  far.
Still,  the  potential  of  this  special  research  ﬁeld  is  undeniable
and future research may  lead  to  new  opportunities  such  as
openly
 available  data  and  easy-to-use  ML  tools.  These  may  be
used to  enhance  and  personalize  diagnosis,  prognosis,  deci-
sion making  and  treatment  planning  in  dentistry  in  the  future
[8].
The studies reviewed  in  this  paper  show  how  manifold
Dentronics  can  help  both  clinicians  and  scientists  to  improve
work  chains,  e.g.  in  forensic  science,  here  the  use  of  Dentron-
ics has  been  reviewed  in  Ref.  [188]  and  the  authors  came  to  the
conclusion that  digitalization  including  robot  technology  is  a
helpful  tool  for  human  identiﬁcation.  For  clinical  scientist  the
idea of  having  a  swarm  of  micro-robots  to  destroy  bioﬁlms  is
tempting, considering the impact of bioﬁlms in  oral  diseases
such
 as  caries,  periodontitis,  mucositis  or  peri-implantitis.
Especially,  peri-implantitis  is  a  growing  threat  owing  to  the
rising number  of  implants  placed  every  year  [189,190] .
Unfortunately,  most  interdisciplinary  research  combining
engineering and  dentistry  in  the  ﬁeld  of  Dentronics  focuses  on
implantology,  although  the  invasive  character  of  this  applica-
tion may  impair  acceptance  of  this  technology  among  patients
and  dentists.  Hence,  these  most  invasive  applications  are  lit-
tle  suitable  as  forerunners.  Therefore,  research  in  the  ﬁeld  of
assistive robotics  seems  to  be  more  promising  to  facilitate  the
introduction of  this  new  robotic  enabled  era.  Also,  research  on
educational  robotics  in  university  environments  seems  to  be  a
promising initiator  to  introduce  Dentronics  and  take  the  ﬁrst
hurdle  towards  acceptance  of  robots  among  future  dentists
[191] .
Another  important  point  is  to  mention  the  effort  that  is
required  of  dentists  and  dental  assistants  in  order  to  learn  to
work with  these  new  technologies.  Older  generations  may  be
more  used  to  familiar  tools  and  are  rather  skeptical  to  adapt.
However, new  generations  of  dentists  can  be  considered  digi-
tal natives  and  their  experience  might  lead  them  to  use  digital
tools more  naturally.  Moreover,  in  light  of  the  expected  devel-opments in  robotics,  AI  and  ML,  future  generations  may  even
be  considered  “robonatives”  as  deﬁned  here  [192] .
All  robot  applications  presented  in  this  review  from  robot
assistants to  tooth  preparation  tools  over  material  testing  or
arrangement of  teeth  in  dentures  have  an  inherent  potential
to  advance  dentistry  far  beyond  digitalization  and  into  a  new
world where digitalization reaches out  to  manipulate  our  real
world.
 However,  the  overall  technological  readiness  is  still  low,
and  more  effort  and  research  need  to  be  done  in  order  to  create
a value  to  the  ﬁeld  of  Dentronics.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are
numerous approaches  in  the  research  community  to  explore
the potentials and  challenges of  integrating  robotics,  AI  and
ML
 into  dentistry,  thus  the  speed  of  innovation  in  this  novel
ﬁeld should  increase  in  the  next  years.
5.  Conclusion
Dentistry  is  moving  forward  towards  a  new  era  of  data-driven
and robot-assisted medicine.  However,  the  latest  step  changes
in modern  robot  technology,  ML  and  AI  have  not  yet  been  fully
introduced  to  dental  research  nor  have  they  reached  tech-
nological readiness  and  cost-efﬁciency  to  enter  the  dental
market.  Educational  systems  have  already  made  it  to  real-
ity. Robot dental  assistants  and  other  applications  e.g.  oral
surgery,  tooth  arrangement,  orthodontics  or  material  testing
are  promising  though  most  critical  challenges  for  Dentronics
besides the high  costs  and  difﬁcult  operability  of  the  systems
are  the  still  rather  basic  sensory  and  manipulation  capabilities
of the  robotic  systems  and  lack  of  learning  abilities.  More-
over,  increased  intuitiveness  of  the  systems  combined  with
broad educational efforts and  introduction  of  affordable  sys-
tems are  key  challenges  that  need  to  be  overcome  to  truly
introduce  Dentronics.  ML  will  push  forward  diagnostic  mea-
sures, ease  treatment  planning,  reduce  treatment  errors  and
ultimately  increase  effectiveness  of  the  overall  health  sys-
tem. Though, today use  of  ML  is  still  restricted  to  pilot  use
cases and  narrowly  deﬁned  research  questions.  More  ﬂexible
systems with  broader  application  areas  are  needed  to  reach
valuable, human-level-performance.  Future  dentists  need  to
be  familiarized  with  Dentronics  including  digital  and  real-
world human–robot  interaction  skills.
Funding
No  funding  apart  from  the  authors  institutions  was  available
for  this  study.
r e  f  e  r  e  n  c  e  s
[1]  Rus  D.  The  robots  are  coming.  https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-06-16/robots-arecoming
[08.10.19].
[2] Haddadin  S,  Suppa  M,  Fuchs  S,  Bodenmüller  T,
Albu-Schäffer A,  Hirzinger  G.  Konzepte  für  den
Roboterassistenten der  Zukunft  –  towards  the  robotic
co-worker. at  –  Automatisierungstechnik  2010;58:695–708.
[3] Chandrasekaran  B,  Conrad  JM.  Human–robot  collaboration:
a survey.  SoutheastCon  2015;2015:1–8.