Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 2 of 16
kickstarting the ﬁrst industrial revolution in Britain at the beginning of the 18th century [ 5].
The steam engine allowed the production of goods and services to be mechanized for the
ﬁrst time deriving social change as people became increasingly urbanized [ 5]. Products
like textiles, iron rail transport, coal among others became common in the ﬁrst industrial
revolution. On the other hand, the second industrial revolution started with the expansion
of electricity steel industries and petroleum industries and other scientiﬁc achievements
that led to mass production [6,7].
Around the 1950s, the third industrial revolution began with the inventions of comput-
ers and digital technology allowing the manufacturing sector to be automated. However,
the inventions of the third industrial revolution came fourth with disruptions in various
industries which include banking, energy, and communications. Ooi et al. [7] argued that
despite the disruptions, the technologies opened some doors in areas of space research
and biotechnology opening opportunities for many people who were affected by the dis-
ruptions. Various scholars such as Schwab [ 6], Ooi et al. [ 7] (2018), Radziwill [ 8] 2018
believe that we are currently in the 4IR or Industry 4.0 also known as the fourth industrial
revolution. The three industrial revolutions became the basis or the foundation of Industry
4.0 which was deﬁned by Schwab [6] as:
“The blurring of boundaries between the physical, digital, and biological worlds. It
is also viewed as the fusion of advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), robotics, the
Internet of things (IoT), 3D printing, genetic engineering, quantum computing, and
other technologies Industry 4.0 is the collective force behind various products that are
fast becoming indispensable to modern life through the application of AI and machine
learning. Products like the GPS systems that suggest the fastest route to a destination,
the ability of Facebook to recognize human faces as well as your face and tag a person in a
friend’s photo”.
Nations all over the world are preparing and make serious plans for the impact of this
revolution on humanity, economies and even businesses and the literature of the inﬂuence
of Industry 4.0 on society through the l is developing, this area has not been deeply
researched especially the impact of AI on poverty reduction, infrastructure development
and the general attainment of the SDGs [ 8–10]. All the previous industrial revolutions led
society to go: “through painful processes of adaptation, for example from rural, largely
agricultural societies, to urban, industrial societies, and then to post-industrial societies
dealing with the loss of traditional industries and sources of employment” [ 2]. At the same
scholars argue that the impact of the 4IR on society will result not only in the loss of jobs
but a marginal shift in how public and private goods and services are delivered [3,11].
Smith [ 12] in a study getting value from artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture, stated
that AI is beginning to live up to its promises of delivering real value due to the availability
of relevant data, computational ability, and algorithms. Smith [ 12] also argued that AI
applications can help to improve productivity in farming by improving the detection of
diseases and the precision of measurements about what is happening on the farm. Eli-
Chukwu [ 13] in another study indicated that the usefulness of AI applications has been
evident in the agricultural sector. In the study, Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated that AI plays critical
role to solve some of the challenges affecting the agricultural sector especially the ability
of farmers to maximize yields. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to investigate the
inﬂuence of AI on the attainment of SDGs with a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal
one, industry, innovation, and infrastructure development goal 9, in emerging economies.
The Industry 4.0 the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Industry 4.0 is unique when it is compared to other previous Industrial Revolutions [ 1].
According to Schwab [ 6], Industry 4.0 has dramatic differences from the other three indus-
trial revolutions due to the scale, scope, complexity, and its transformation, which will be
unique to all other revolutions. Schwab [ 6] argued that the revolution will be something
humankind has never experienced before because it is not just an extension of the previous
industrial revolution, but it is a new distinct revolution [6,10]. The ﬁrst notable difference