Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 4 of 16
by a machine [ 8,20]. On the other hand, Haenlein and Kaplan [ 21] stated that “although
it is difﬁcult to pinpoint the roots of AI, however, it is possible to trace back to the 1940s,
speciﬁcally 1942, when the American Science Fiction writer Isaac Asimov published his
short story Run around. The plot of Run around a story about a robot developed by
engineers. The word “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” was then ofﬁcially coined in 1956 Marvin
Minsky and John McCarthy one of the computer scientists at Stanford”.
The term artiﬁcial intelligence is explained as:
“The investigation of intelligent problem-solving behaviour and the creation of intelligent
computer systems. In other words, AI describes the work processes of machines that
would require intelligence if performed by humans” [20].
As outlined by Wisskirchen et al. [ 20] AI has two kinds which are weak AI and
strong AI. With weak AI “the computer is merely an instrument for investigating cognitive
processes the computer simulates intelligence”. Strong AI, on the other hand, entails
“the processes where computers are intellectual, self-learning processes. Computers can
understand through the right software/programming and can optimize their behavior
based on their former behaviour and their experience” [ 20]. Strong AI includes automatic
networking with other machines, which leads to a dramatic scaling effect [ 22]. The most
notable economic disciplines of AI are deep learning, robotization, dematerialization, the
gig economy and autonomous driving cars among others [20].
Benko and Sik L ányi [ 23] insinuates that even though AI has been studied for decades
but it is still one of the most elusive subjects in computer science because the subject
is large and nebulous. It is believed that AI ranges from machines that can think to
search algorithms used to play board games. In other words, it is insinuated that AI has
applications in nearly all ways humans use computers in society. AI is used in subtler ways
which include examining purchase histories as well as inﬂuencing marketing decisions [ 23].
According to Buchanan [ 22] robots have always been part of the public’s perception of
intelligent computers, but early robotics efforts had more to do with mechanical engineering
than with intelligent control. However, through the power of AI robots are becoming
more powerful vehicles for the testing idea across the world about intelligent behaviour.
However, it has been argued that AI is not just about robots. It is also about understanding
the nature of intelligent thought and action using computers as experimental devices [ 22].
2.2. The Theoretical Deﬁnitions of Poverty
Poverty over the years has been deﬁned with a bias towards monetary aspects, how-
ever, with time scholars are beginning to shift the deﬁnition of poverty to multidimensional
issues like political participation and social exclusion showing that poverty is a multidi-
mensional phenomenon [ 24] (Davis and Sanchez-Martinez, 2014). This means that poverty
is not a direct result of one factor but a combination of factors. As a result, the United Na-
tions (UN) deﬁned poverty in two aspects which are absolute poverty and overall poverty.
Absolute poverty is deﬁned as a condition where people are deprived of basic human
needs like food, health, shelter, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, education, and
information [ 25,26]. As a result, poverty is because of many factors, not only income [ 26].
Overall poverty is deﬁned as a condition where people are not able to have access to
income and other productive resources. Overall poverty is characterized but not limited
“to hunger and malnutrition, ill-health, inability to access education, a rise in morbidity
and mortality from illness, shortage of housing, unsafe environments, social exclusion and
discrimination” [ 24]. Overall poverty also “involves a lack of participation in decision
making in civil, social and cultural life” [27].
The UN also came up with another deﬁnition of poverty, the multidimensional poverty
index [ 26]. The deﬁnition by the UN in 2010 involves many issues such as education, health,
standards of living and many other variables. In 2013, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation
(JRF) deﬁned poverty as a condition where people’s material resources are not enough to
satisfy the minimum needs with social participation is included [ 26,28] (Mhlanga, 2020b,
Mhlanga, and Ndhlovu). The World Bank stressed much on consumption and income