Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 12 of 16
education is through the social enterprise Eneza Education where AI is used in tutoring
millions of rural students in Kenya, Ghana, and C ôte d’Ivoire. In this way, AI is helping a
lot in the achievement of quality education [ 49]. This also enables education to be inclusive
and equitable creating and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all [ 49,53]. Just
like Mhlanga and Moloi [ 18], Chua and Valencia, [ 54] documented the importance of AI
in education during the lockdown necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Chua and
Valencia, [ 54] found out that AI will play a signiﬁcant role in education especially during
the COVID-19 pandemic even though they argued that it will be difﬁcult for AI to replace
humans in administrating education.3.6. AI and Digital Financial inclusion.
Digital ﬁnancial inclusion is viewed as a way of reaching out to the households who
are not ﬁnancially active, that is those who are not able to enjoy formal ﬁnancial services
that are designed to meet their needs [ 8,55]. Mhlanga, [ 8] argued that people who are
excluded from the formal ﬁnancial sector are women, youth, and the poor especially those
staying in rural areas. Strusani and Houngbonon [ 43] argued that the traditional ways
of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity are being subjected to technological
disruptions where AI is changing the cost of access to products and services, changing how
information is gathered, how products are made as well as how people interact. Strusani
and Houngbonon [ 43] went on to argue that the challenges associated with development are
increasingly becoming intertwined with technology where the goals of ending poverty and
boosting shared prosperity are becoming critically dependent on harnessing the power of
technologies like AI and at the same time looking for ways to minimize the risks associated
with these technologies.
It has been established that in emerging markets countries are beginning to use
basic AI to come up with solutions to critical challenges of development especially in the
provision of ﬁnancial services to underserved and unserved population [ 43]. The massive
progress in basic machine learning algorithms and the growth in the number of technology
users made it possible for emerging markets to use AI solutions like credit scoring and
targeted advertising. Some early examples of AI being delivered in ﬁnancial markets
include the MoMo Kash in Cote d’Ivoire, M-Kajy in Madagascar, M-Shwari in East Africa,
and Ant Financial in East Asia. M-Shwari made use of machine learning to come up with a
prediction of the probability of default of potential borrowers making it possible for small
loans to be delivered to 21 million Kenyans by the end of 2017.
Better data processing, a massive increase in access to credit is making AI drive inno-
vation in ﬁnancial services through relying on non-traditional data like mobile phone call
records, mobile money transactions data, text messages and address books. Another im-
portant aspect of AI is that it reduces information asymmetry in contexts where borrowers
lack credit history like ﬁrst-time borrowers and the unbanked. In addition, AI is making
ﬁnancial services more affordable due to the automation of credit scoring which is one
of the processes that was devoted to human resource in traditional ﬁnancial institutions.
Through machine learning algorithms, a large amount of mobile phone data can be parsed
in delivering instantaneous credit scores to users in emerging economies. The scoring
algorithm improves once the user is offered a loan by absorbing credit history data. Branch
one of the ﬁntech companies is one example where this approach is being used through
offering microloans to ﬁrst-time borrowers and customers without banking accounts in
countries like Kenya, Nigeria, India, and Mexico.
In Africa, the popularity of digital ﬁnancial inclusion increased when M-Pesa become
one of the success stories in the payment innovations that started in Kenya [ 56]. M-Pesa is
a mobile banking service lunched in 2007 by Safaricom the largest mobile phone operator
in Kenya that allows users to store and transfer money through their mobile phones. In
Asian countries like China digital ﬁnancial inclusion is viewed as more than payment
innovations which include digital investment, payments, and investment [ 56,57]. The
importance of digital ﬁnance is its ability to utilize information communication technology
(ICT) in increasing the scale and use of ﬁnancial service by the poor and those excluded
from the formal ﬁnancial market [ 8,58]. The coming in of ICT and AI allowed ﬁnancial