Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 7 of 16
ture and behaviour of the underserved communities for them to save them successfully.
How et al. [ 40] believed that applying AI on legacy data is critical to assist ﬁnancial service
providers to anticipate how prospective customers respond when they are approached with
products. The study by How et al. [ 40] found out that a key factor in poverty reduction is ﬁ-
nancial inclusion powered by AI, but it has been discovered that ﬁnancial service providers
who do not know about computer programming to implement AI projects continue to
experience challenges.
3. Research Methodology
The study used secondary research to investigate the inﬂuence of AI on the attainment
of SDGs with a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal one, industry, innovation, and
infrastructure development goal 9, in emerging economies. To analyze the impact of AI
on the attainment of the SDGs objectively the study used unobtrusive research techniques.
Elo et al. [ 41] deﬁned unobtrusive research as the methods of data collection where the re-
searcher does not interfere with the subjects under investigation. This is mainly because the
methods are not obtrusive [ 42]. The study made use of content analysis which is the study
recorded information in texts, media, or physical items. In other words, content analysis is
a research technique used in the determination of the availability of certain words, themes,
or concepts within some given qualitative data text or data. The content analysis allowed
the study to quantify and analyze the presence, meanings and relationships of such certain
words, themes, or concepts that acted as the basis for the arguments and conclusion of
the study. Secondary sources of data like governments reports, international statistics,
media articles, peer-reviewed journal articles, books were critically reviewed to inform the
discussions in the paper. The main limitation of the current study is the fact that some of the
ofﬁcial complex hard data and peer-reviewed journal articles and books on the inﬂuence
of AI on poverty, innovation, infrastructure development and sustainable development is
still developing. However, the author tried to utilize the available information that was
published by scholars, private organizations, and governments through various organiza-
tions. The advantage of content analysis is its non-invasive nature when analyzing a social
phenomenon [ 42]. Content analysis is used in speciﬁcally three different approaches which
include the conventional, directed, and summative. According to Elo et al. [ 41], the three
approaches help in the interpretation of meaning from the content of text data permitting
them to conform to the naturalistic paradigm. The current study was mainly premised
on the summative content analysis involves the counting and comparisons of keywords
and interpret the context in the keywords or content, followed by the interpretation of the
underlying context [42].
3.1. Discussion of the Impact of AI on Poverty, Innovation, and Infrastructure Development
AI technologies can play a central role in the achievement of the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals (SDGs). This study is assessing the impact of AI on poverty, which is goal
one of the Sustainable development goals, end poverty in all its manifestations and goal 9
Industry, innovation, and infrastructure development.
3.2. The Role of AI in Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure Development
One of the critical components of economic growth and development is an investment
in infrastructure and innovation [ 43]. It is estimated that over half of the world’s population
is living in cities, making infrastructure development and innovation in mass transport
and renewable energy very critical [ 44]. Conde and Twinn, [ 44] went on to argue that
the massive growth in the population in cities also makes the growth of new industries,
the growth of information and communication technologies (ICT) and AI very critical.
The other stubborn fact is that more than 4 billion people do not have internet access and
over 90 per cent of these people are found in the developing world [ 45]. The only way to
bridge this digital divide is to make sure that there is massive infrastructure development,
a massive increase in access to information and knowledge as well as fostering innovation