Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 3 of 16
of Industry 4.0 to other past revolutions is the production of information where people
can come up with new information as well as generating new knowledge in the mining
of information [6,10] This is enhanced by the possibilities available for many people to be
connected by mobile gadgets with strong processing power, storage capacity, and unlimited
access to knowledge [ 14,15]. In a way, the continuous data accumulation and analysis is
permitting the intelligence of machines to improve.
The other issue which makes Industry 4.0 to be unique from other industrial revolu-
tions is the fact that Industry 4.0 is not just massive advances in technology but it will also
come with a transformation of the existing relationships in the production process [ 16,17].
Industry 4.0 is also allowing the manufacturing sector to be in the class of the information
age through permitting communication at all the stages of production. Some scholars also
believe that Industry 4.0 is coming up with new economic formations in various sectors of
the economy such as the sharing economy where services like transport, toys, basketballs
are being shared [15,18].
On the other hand, some researchers believe that Industry 4.0 will result in more
inequality due to its threat of disrupting labour markets. It is argued that the continuous
growth in automation, robots and computers will take the jobs of workers in many indus-
tries with the most worrying factor being the increased danger of the disappearance of
low-skill/low-pay jobs which will cause a lot of challenges for the poor which will lead to a
rise in social tensions [ 10,19]. However, Schwab, [ 6] argued that in its strict sense, the issue
of inequality is not unique to Industry 4.0, in history, all other previous revolutions always
started with huge inequality followed by periods of political and institutional change.
However, the most worrying fact is that in Industry 4.0 it is not only the movement of
labour from one sector of the economy to another but the existence of robots and com-
puters that will replace human capital in short, taking the jobs of people [ 1,6]. The other
aspects the technological revolution will have an impact on are issues related to material or
ideological changes caused by the introduction of new devices or new systems which will
have an impact on reshaping the culture of humankind. Figure 1 below explains the four
industrial revolutions from the ﬁrst to the current revolution.
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
industrial revolutions due to the scale, scop e, complexity, and its transformation, which 
will be unique to all other revolutions. Schwab [6] argued that the revolution will be some-
thing humankind has never experienced before because it is not just an extension of the 
previous industrial revolution, but it is a new distinct revolution [6,10]. The first notable difference of Industry 4.0 to other past revo lutions is the production of information where 
people can come up with new information as well as generating new knowledge in the 
mining of information [6,10] This is enhanced by the possibilities available for many peo-
ple to be connected by mobile gadgets with strong processing power, storage capacity, 
and unlimited access to knowledge [14,15]. In  a way, the continuous data accumulation 
and analysis is permitting the intelligence of machines to improve. 
The other issue which makes Industry 4.0 to be unique from other industrial revolu-
tions is the fact that Industry 4.0 is not just massive advances in technology but it will also 
come with a transformation of the existing re lationships in the produc tion process [16,17]. 
Industry 4.0 is also allowing the manufacturing sector to be in the class of the information 
age through permitting communication at all the stages of production. Some scholars also 
believe that Industry 4.0 is coming up with new economic formations in various sectors 
of the economy such as the sharing economy wh ere services like transport, toys, basket-
balls are being shared [15,18]. 
On the other hand, some researchers believe that Industry 4.0 will result in more in-
equality due to its threat of disrupting labour  markets. It is argued that the continuous 
growth in automation, robots and computers will take the jobs of workers in many indus-
tries with the most worrying factor being the increased danger of the disappearance of low-skill/low-pay jobs which will cause a lot of challenges for the poor which will lead to 
a rise in social tensions [10, 19]. However, Schwab, [6] argued that in its strict sense, the 
issue of inequality is not unique to Industry 4.0, in history, all other previous revolutions 
always started with huge inequality followed by periods of political and institutional 
change. However, the most worrying fact is that in Industry 4.0 it is not only the move-ment of labour from one sector of the econom y to another but the existence of robots and 
computers that will replace human capital in sh ort, taking the jobs of people [1,6]. The 
other aspects the technological revolution will have an impact on are issues related to material or ideological changes caused by th e introduction of new devices or new systems 
which will have an impact on reshaping the culture of humankind. Figure 1 below ex-
plains the four industrial revolutions fr om the first to the current revolution. 
 
Figure 1. The Four Industrial Revolutions. Source: [9,20]. 
The four industrial revolutions are clearly shown in the diagram above from the first 
industrial revolution to the last  industrial revolution of today. The first industrial revolu-
tion started towards the end of the 18th century followed by the second industrial revo-
lution which happened between 1870 and 1914. In the early 1970s, the third industrial 
revolution happened. The fourth industrial revolution is happening today with various 
technologies that are driving it such as AI, robotics, blockchain, distributed ledger tech-
nology among several other technologies. 
Figure 1. The Four Industrial Revolutions. Source: [9,20].
The four industrial revolutions are clearly shown in the diagram above from the ﬁrst
industrial revolution to the last industrial revolution of today. The ﬁrst industrial revolution
started towards the end of the 18th century followed by the second industrial revolution
which happened between 1870 and 1914. In the early 1970s, the third industrial revolution
happened. The fourth industrial revolution is happening today with various technologies
that are driving it such as AI, robotics, blockchain, distributed ledger technology among
several other technologies.
2. Literature Review
2.1. A Brief History and Deﬁnition of AI
The Idea behind the subject of AI began in 1955 with John McCarthy who assumed
that all the aspects of learning and the notable domains of intelligence can be simulated