Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 10 of 16
UN to tackle poverty among other global problems using AI [ 48]. QCRI also developed the
AI for Digital Response (AIDR) platform, which analyses data during disasters, such as
the hurricanes like Hurricane Dorian. These analyses help a lot to map the areas where
help is needed the most and the level of effort needed to respond to a disaster [ 48]. The
QCRI also work directly with relief organizations in the development of technologies used
in the analysis of big data in times of disaster in a way to analyze the conditions for the
allocation of resources [ 48]. With machine learning, the QCRI is producing poverty maps
by utilizing anonymous advertising data from Facebook [ 48]. In India, there was the use of
machine learning on value-added tax data to improve the targeting of ﬁrms for audits. AI
application was also used in predicting travel demands after the hurricane in India and to
assess where food insecurity will mostly occur to improve target interventions.
3.4. The Impact of AI on Agriculture in Rural Areas
The deﬁnition of poverty as highlighted before is a multifaceted phenomenon in other
words poverty is multidimensional. It manifests itself in lack of income, lack of education
and sometimes lack of social assistance and even food insecurity [ 49]. This mostly affects
rural areas where most of the poor people reside. According to the World Bank, agriculture
is the source of livelihood in areas where poverty is more prevalent [ 51]. Strusani and
Houngbonon [ 43] reported that AI application can address the various challenges that are
faced by the people at the bottom of the income distribution especially the bottom 40%.
Even though most of the poor people cannot purchase AI-enabled equipment, it has been
argued that these people can directly beneﬁt from AI through AI service solutions through
their mobile devices. The practical example is the machine learning application, Nuru that
was used in the agricultural sector in Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania. This application
was used in farms in the identiﬁcation of leaf damage in photos taken by farmers that were
sent to authorities to assist in monitoring the presence of one of the evasive pests that have
been threatening the revenue of farms and food security across East Africa.
The other importance of AI is the fact that the data generated from mobile phones can
be highly correlated with the ﬁnancial status, education level as well as health status. This
can allow mobile applications to deliver microlending, the establishment of personalized
tutoring, the diagnosis of health and medication advice. The critical use of AI applications
is the removal of literacy barriers among the poorest individuals through AI speech recog-
nition and speech to text functionalities, especially when accessing text-based applications.
In most rural areas that are far from the urban areas AI through image recognition can be
used in the assessment of microinsurance claims of farmers. All these AI application among
the farmers help to improve productivity which will allow them to improve their revenue
and to become food secure. The Decentralized AI Alliance in 2020 also reported that AI can
address the problem of poverty through improving farming soil cultivation for growing
crops and the rearing of animals as a way of providing food and other important products.
Through AI applications robots can now help farmers to harvest crops and predicting the
best ways for farmers to grow different crops [49].
Schmidt [ 50] also stated that using robotics, AI is becoming an important variable in
solving world hunger. Schmidt [ 50] believes that there is progress being made by corpo-
rations and university programs such as Google and Stanford University’s Sustainability
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab. These organizations are coming forth with AI programs
in agriculture which are doing a lot to improve farming, helping in the identiﬁcation of
diseases, prediction of crop yields and location of areas prone to scarcity. One example
where AI is being applied is through FarmView programme created by researchers from
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) to help farmers to grow more food using the same
number of crops. This effort is being applied to come up with rapid solutions to the critical
problem of paid rise in population. It is estimated that by the year 2050, approximately
9.8 billion people will live on the planet, and this will increase food scarcity making this
topic very critical. However, the availability of AI will help to improve farming methods
sensing and robotics technologies to improve plant breeding and crop management [ 50].