Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 13 of 16
inclusion to become digital and to allow groups of vulnerable people to be able to access
ﬁnance [ 59]. Mhlanga, [ 8] agree with Wang and He, [ 56] that for business to be the
activity to be successful when it is done with people at the bottom of the pyramid, radical
innovations such as the use of AI is one of the requirements. The application of AI in
digital ﬁnancial inclusion makes it different from traditional ﬁnancial inclusion because
with digital ﬁnancial inclusion, there is a massive reduction in transaction costs, especially
in the rural areas because of lower marginal costs since with digital ﬁnancial inclusion
service provider necessarily do not need to have physical outlets [ 56]. The use of T AI and
various ICT tools overcomes the major problem of traditional ﬁnancial inclusion which is
information asymmetry [8,60].
Various online services and products provide a vast amount of information to cus-
tomers which could not be accessible without the use of digital services [ 8]. Peric, [ 61]
stated that the beneﬁts of digital ﬁnancial inclusion access to formal ﬁnancial services by
the poor people who were ﬁnancially excluded, the other beneﬁt is that digital ﬁnancial
inclusion helps to preserve the disposable incomes of the households because digital ﬁnan-
cial services and products are usually offered at a lower cost to the customer and the service
provider. The use of AI also allows customers to be able to transact in irregular small
amounts to assist them to manage their uneven incomes [ 8,62]. The other beneﬁt of digital
ﬁnancial services is that it helps to reduce the risks of loss, theft, and other ﬁnancial crimes
posed by cash-based transactions [ 8,63]. Digital ﬁnancial inclusion promotes economic
empowerment by allowing the accumulation of assets for women, the youth, and the rural
people which increases their economic participation [8,64].
4. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
Industry 4.0 is gaining a lot of attention particularly on its potential impact on hu-
manity and the potential it has in changing how human beings live, work and how the
economies work as well as how we are governed. This study investigated the inﬂuence of
Industry 4.0 particularly AI on the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
with a direct focus on poverty reduction, industry, innovation, and infrastructure develop-
ment in emerging economies. The study used content analysis and the results indicated that
AI has a strong inﬂuence on the attainment of SDGs particularly poverty reduction in areas
of relevant data collection through poverty maps, its ability to revolutionize agriculture,
education, as well as the ﬁnancial sector through digital ﬁnancial inclusion. The study
also found out that AI is equipping researchers to use satellite images to map poverty, to
identify the regions where poverty is more concentrated. These initiatives are assisting
in the identiﬁcation of the number of poor people and the regions where these people
are located making the poverty reduction initiatives more successful. Researchers are
also using various robotics and AI programs like the “Google and Stanford University’s
Sustainability and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab”, to come up with AI programs in agriculture
that are helping to improve farming, through effective diseases detection, prediction of crop
yields, and location of areas prone to a scarcity. In education, AI is improving education
through various methods which include adapted learning techniques using computer
algorithms to encourage interaction with the leaner among several other notable signs of
progress in the sector. AI is also enabling massive infrastructure development, increase in
access to information and knowledge as well as fostering innovation and entrepreneurship.
The other aspect where AI is doing a lot is the improvement of the certainty and reliability
of infrastructures like the transport sector making economic growth and development
possible since one of the critical components of economic growth and development is
an investment in infrastructure and innovation. Therefore, the study recommends that
Governments in emerging economies, development institutions and other organizations
that are striving in the achievement of the SDGs do invest more in AI as well as adopting
and scaling up its use as it presents unlimited beneﬁts.
The main limitation of the current study is the fact that some of the ofﬁcial complex
hard data and peer-reviewed journal articles and books on the inﬂuence of AI on poverty,