Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 9 of 16
density of trafﬁc on the road and then through the power of AI the trafﬁc lights will be
altered based on real-time road congestion. The other example is Alibaba one of China’s
e-commerce companies introduced the City Brain to try and improve efﬁciency and reduce
road congestion through utilizing data from trafﬁc lights, closed-circuit television (CCTV)
camera as well as video recognition to suggest trafﬁc ﬂow management. The other case
study is of the two Chinees companies China Post and Deppon Express that are in logistics,
they are using AI driving technology from Fabu to introduce autonomous trucks on
Chinee’s roads. These trucks were tested, and they become successful on level 4 autonomy
which implies that they can operate on selected conditions without human input.
Drones are also another classical example of the application of AI especially in places
where there is no infrastructure like Sub-Saharan Africa where drones are being used in
healthcare. Rwanda is one of the countries where the commercial drone was launched
for commercial drone delivery service. Drones are used to ﬂy medical supplies such as
blood. One example is An American start-up Zipline which partnered with the government
of Rwanda to lunch the ﬁrst commercial drone delivery service, ﬂying medical supplies
faster than road transport. The other example that was given is the China start-up Sichuan
Tengden Technology which developed a drone with the capacity to carry 20 tons of cargo
and it can ﬂy up to 7500 km. Apart from drones, many countries are developing smart
airports that are making use of intelligent navigation systems with the ability to do facial
recognition and big data analysis for a paperless and more efﬁcient experience.
3.3. Poverty Mapping and Poverty Data Collection
The World Bank estimates that 736 million people live in extreme poverty worldwide,
and half of them are in just ﬁve countries which are India, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Ethiopia, and Bangladesh. The World Bank and the UN in their ﬁght against
poverty rely heavily on research and data to measure progress towards this goal [ 48].
Strusani and Houngbonon [ 43] in their study indicated that AI technologies are coming
up with new and efﬁcient ways of monitoring and evaluating development interventions
that are meant to target the poor and those in need. One of the problems that affect
emerging economies is the fact that they lack the data which is critical to ﬁne-tuning the
development interventions [ 43] (Strusani and Houngbonon, 2019b). AI is now coming in
with the capacity to make use of unstructured data such as images, texts as well as audio o
come up with the information required to improve the various outcomes of development.
The Decentralized AI Alliance in 2020 reported that the impossibility to collect data is
a consequence of poverty itself. The organization went on to report that the location of
the people that are in poverty or need is a fundamental variable that needs to be taken
seriously in the objective to end poverty in all its forms everywhere [ 49]. It is believed that
countries are not collecting as much data and scaling up traditional household surveys to
identify the number of poor people and the regions where these people are located. This
is also worsened by the fact that traditional household surveys are expensive to many
nations [49].
However, AI can assist to change this. A recent study by a team at Stanford University
is using satellite images to provide an alternative to map poverty [ 50]. The study focused
on ﬁve Africana countries namely, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi and Rwanda social
scientists and computer expert came up with the idea of using high-power satellites to
detect poverty through an analysis of their images. In a way to corroborate the predictions
from the study, the researchers used accurate survey data [ 50]. In a way to effectively map
poverty, AI can combine high-resolution satellite imagery with powerful machine learning
algorithms and predict how rich or poor speciﬁc locations around the world are. AI can
help to effectively provide information like the distance from the nearest water sources,
the nearest urban market or where the agricultural ﬁelds are, and many other important
variables used when measuring poverty [49].
The Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI), which is part of Hamad Bin Khalifa
University, is also collaborating with several organizations such as the World Bank and