Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 8 of 16
and entrepreneurship powered by AI [ 45]. It is also believed that 2.3 billion people the
world over cannot access basic sanitation due to infrastructure constraints which cut
business productivity in many low-income African countries by approximately 40% [ 46].
The United Nations also reported that approximately 2.6 billion people in developing
nations do not have access to constant electricity and the renewable energy sectors currently
employ more than 2.3 million people which is predicted to rise to 20 million by 2030 [ 47].
The other serious problem that manifests because of the lack of proper infrastructure is that
barely 30 per cent of agricultural products in developing countries went through industrial
processing as compared to 98% in high-income countries [46,47]
According to Conde and Twinn, [ 44] AI is now changing the world economy and it
is estimated that advances in AI could add approximately 13 trillion to global economic
output by 2030. In the transport sector, the global market for transport-related AI tech-
nologies reached $1.2 to 1.4 billion and it is estimated to grow to 3.1 and 3.5 billion by
2023 which is a 12 to 14.5 growth from 2017 to 2023 [ 44]. Various AI interventions can be
applied to various sectors to improve the infrastructure, for instance, the transport sector,
agriculture which can transform these sectors towards the attainment of the SDGs. The
World Bank stated that the applications of AI in the transport sector go beyond driverless
vehicles but can solve various problems related to safety for drivers and pedestrians. Road
trafﬁc accidents are one of the health hazards especially in developing countries Conde
and Twinn, [ 44] (2019) reported that road trafﬁc-related deaths reached 1.35 million in 2016
up from 1.25 million in 2013 and most of the accidents happened in low-income nations.
Some of the reasons given are inadequate infrastructure, poor roads, and vehicles without
modern safety equipment as well as human error.
One of the reports by Conde and Twinn, [ 44] reported stated that in the European
Union (EU) human error, speeding, distraction, and drunk driving contributes to more than
90 per cent of all the accidents on roads. In 2017 alone approximately 25,000 people lost
their lives in these accidents in the EU. Research is pointing to the fact that the application of
AI through autonomous vehicles can help to reduce trafﬁc accidents by approximately 90%
by 2050 in some developed nations. The ﬁrst attempt by Tesla at an autonomous vehicle
reduced accident rates by 40 per cent the moment self-driving technologies were activated.
It is a fact that though autonomous vehicles will bring some beneﬁts, the deployment in
emerging markets will take a long time, but some researchers project that there will be
1 driverless car in every 4 cars in 2030.
The other aspect where AI is doing a lot is the improvement of the certainty and
reliability of infrastructure, especially in the transport sector. The World Bank reported
that one enabler of the safe and efﬁcient movement of goods and people the ability to be
able to forecast arrival and departure times. Companies such as Uber and Lyft are using
AI applications in different ways to offer the much-needed reliability pickup and drop-off
times for their routes. So, these AI applications can be applied to improve the quality of
public transport solutions globally. One example is Via a company in New York city in
America which is giving licenses to its technology to the New York City Department of
Education to come up with designs of smart bus routes which will provide transparency
on pickups and drop-offs. AI is also playing a crucial role in maintaining the environment,
for instance, in the transport sector AI technology can reduce the number of inefﬁcient
trips at sea and on the road through the optimization of routes to improve fuel efﬁciency
and reduction of greenhouse gases emissions. It was estimated that the world over 23% of
total energy-related carbon dioxide emissions. One of the eco-friendly AI application is
well known as truck platooning which is a technique that can successfully connect several
trucks wirelessly to a lead truck permitting them to operate much closer to each other
safely, realizing fuel efﬁciency.
In emerging markets, we have several case studies where AI is being used to improve
industries and infrastructure. Many cities in the world are using AI to assist solve trafﬁc
ﬂow challenges. In India, a city called Bengaluru Siemens mobility came up with a
monitoring system that makes use of AI through trafﬁc cameras to detect and calculate the