Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 11 of 16
Researchers are busy collecting a lot of information using drones, robots, and stationary sen-
sors to increase yields of drought and heat resistant crops that can thrive in famine-stricken
nations [ 49,50]. Through AI technology researchers and machine learning technologies
data is analyzed to determine what factors yield more sorghum [49,50].
Another example of where AI is helping a lot in agriculture is through industry
PlantMD. PlantMD is an application created by high school students Shaza Mehdi and Nile
Ravanell in Georgia United States of America. This application allows a farmer to detect
plant diseases [ 50]. This application was built using Google’s TensorFlow, an open-source
machine learning library [ 50]. The PlantMD application was inﬂuenced by Nuru one of the
applications built by a research team at Penn State University Pennsylvania called Plant
Village alongside the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. The application (Nuru)
as highlighted before was created to combat disease and pest susceptibility in cassava,
one of the crops that feed half a billion Africans daily [ 49,50]. Farmers had difﬁculties
in inspecting and managing every crop. As a result of the availability of AI, machine
learning is now used to increase efﬁciency in the process of disease and pest control. “A
machine learning model was trained using thousands of classiﬁed cassava images and
the model was turned into an application where farmers can send images of their crop
and receive information which gives them the ability to identify diseases with options
available to manage the diseases” [ 49]. In this way, AI is assisting African agriculture to be
sustainable which can help agriculture to feed the people. Similarly, Stanford University is
utilizing machine learning to understand and predict crop yields in soybeans. Moreover,
it is believed that machine learning can also assist in discovering places in developing
and underdeveloped nations with food insecurity issues through satellite technology. The
next section is outlining how AI can help in the education sector. All these developments
are supported by various scholars who investigated the importance of AI in growth and
development of economies for instance, Vincent et al. [ 34] argued that the world population
is expected to increase to 2 billion in 2050, while the arable area is expected to grow by
only 5%. As a result, smart and efﬁcient farming techniques powered by AI and machine
learning are necessary to improve agriculture productivity. Eli-Chukwu [ 13] in another
study also indicated that the application of AI has been evident in the agricultural sector.
In the study where AI plays critical roles in solving some of the challenges affecting the
agricultural sector in their endeavor to maximize yields. For instance, ensuring that there
are proper soil treatment, disease, and pest infestation control, ensuring that big data
requirements are solved, problems of low output can also be addressed, and knowledge
gap between farmers and technology can be reduced.
3.5. The Impact of AI on Education
Poverty is usually associated with the inability of households to have formal educa-
tion. The World Bank estimates that about 39% of the world poorest do not have formal
education. Aspects that hinder access to education for many households is purely the
cost factor and capacity of the institutions of higher learning. Many institutions have a
prescribed number of people they can accommodate [ 52]. AI can assist in raising the levels
of education for the poor children the various methods which include adapted learning
techniques using computer algorithms to encourage interaction with the learner as well as
coming up with an education that is tailor-made for the needs of each learner [ 49]. Using
AI, it is highly possible to discover the speciﬁc learning need s of each learner and be able
to satisfy these requirements using various methods of learning. In other unique circum-
stances, intelligent chat boards are used as tutors breaking the money barrier to education
to pupils who come from poor areas which will help to address access issues ﬁnally be able
to address inequality at the same time. One study by Mhlanga and Moloi [ 18] revealed that
technology related to Industry 4.0 helped a lot during the COVID-19 social distancing for
learners to be able to move on with education even during the lockdown. The study also
found that technology can even increase access to education especially online education
where space is not a limiting factor. One of the education projects where AI is assisting in