Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 6 of 16
be an epitome of the shift in how farming is practiced today. The study also highlighted
that farming solutions that are AI-powered, on many occasions, enable a farmer to do more
with less, which enhances the quality, also ensuring that farmers will go to markets very
fast that enhancing quick GTM (go-to-market strategy) strategy for crops.
Again Vincent et al. [ 34] argued that the world population is expected to increase
to 2 billion in 2050, while the arable area is expected to grow by only 5%. As a result,
smart and efﬁcient farming techniques powered by AI and machine learning are necessary
to improve agriculture productivity. The study also highlighted that the suitability of
agricultural land is among several critical tools that drive agricultural development. As a
result, AI performs a big role in agriculture an alternative in the collection and processing of
information through wireless sensor networks. The availability of wireless sensor networks
is also allowing the development of low-cost sensor devices with the Internet of Things
(IoT) with the power of being appropriate tools for automation and decision making in
agriculture. Vincent et al. [ 34] believe that integrating sensor networks with AI systems
Like neural networks and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) can help assess the appropriate
land for agricultural purposes.
Eli-Chukwu [ 13] in another study indicated that the application of AI has been evident
in the agricultural sector. In the study, Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated that AI plays critical roles to
solve some of the challenges affecting the agricultural sector in their endeavor to maximize
yields. Some challenges affecting the agricultural sector where AI can play a critical role is
to ensure that there are proper soil treatment, disease, and pest infestation control, ensuring
that big data requirements are solved, problems of low output can also be addressed, and
knowledge gap between farmers and technology can be reduced. Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated
that AI can help to solve some of these challenges in agriculture due to its ﬂexibility, high
performance, accuracy, and cost-effectiveness.
Zavadskaya [ 35] investigated the application of AI ﬁnance particularly issues to do
with portfolio management, bankruptcy prediction, credit rating, exchange rate prediction
and trading. The main idea objective of the study was the stock market prediction, and
whether Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) as proxies for AI, could offer an investor more
accurate forecasting result. Zavadskaya [ 35] discovered that ANN performed well in the
prediction of results for investors compared to many models. The study also discovered
that combining AI with the concept of big data, Google Trends search as a measure of
market sentiment is valuable in the modelling of returns. Cossy-Gantner et al. [ 36] also
stated that the ﬁeld of AI has been developing in the last 60 years and various applications
of AI have been utilized in high-income countries and their use in poor countries is still
a huge challenge. Cossy-Gantner et al. [ 36] went on to argue that even though AI still
has problems in its application in low-income countries it is present huge promises in the
transformation of healthcare in poor nations.
Kliestik et al. [ 37] also empirically examined the fourth industrial revolution manufactur-
ing systems with data collected from various companies such as Deloitte, McKinsey among
others at the same time Peters et al. [ 38] carried an empirical study to evaluate and analyze
sustainable Industry 4.0. The study made use of data collected from various companies just
like Kliestik et al. [ 37] and all the studies did find the importance of AI. Just like Kliestik
et al. [ 37] and Peters et al. [ 38]. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] discovered that urban innovation through
AI is growing smart cities where urban locations are being enabled by the community , tech-
nology, and policy to influence productivity, innovation, sustainability, good governance,
and good planning powered by AI. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] also found out that research on AI
from the perspective of smart cities is still emerging and more researchers are focusing on
AI technologies, algorithms, and their prospective applications. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] also
discovered that there is limited research on the risks of the utilization of AI and the future
disruptions of AI on cities has not been investigated fully .
How et al. [ 40] also came up with a study to assess the no-coding human-centric
AI-based approach in the analysis or prediction of the intentions of the ﬁnancial products
offered. How et al. [ 40] found that ﬁnancial service providers must understand the na-