63 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65 
1 3
might assume the device will provide warnings in danger -
ous circumstances when it does not actually possess that 
feature [2 ].
These examples are only a small fraction of the types of 
ethical issues and challenges circulating around AI [13, 14]. 
Yet its usage continues to expand. Thus, passively waiting, 
in the belief that ethical problems will somehow disappear 
or magically resolve themselves, is not a viable option. We 
must, instead, be deliberative and proactive in creating not 
just good AI applications, but ethically sound practices and 
policies surrounding these applications.
3  Attempts to address AI’s ethical 
challenges
Many initiatives have arisen to address the ethical chal-
lenges emerging in relation to AI technology. This includes 
the drafting of AI ethics documents by a variety of stake-
holders, including academic institutions, government agen-
cies, NGOs, and industry. The Montreal Declaration, for 
example, is largely an initiative from an academic institu-
tion and focuses on the responsible development of AI [8 ]. 
The professional organization IEEE [16] has drafted a report 
on the ethics of intelligent systems and is in the process of 
developing a series of technical standards for such systems. 
Many companies are highlighting, through press releases 
or other documents, which ethical issues, such as fairness 
and transparency, they deem to be important (e.g., Google 
[9], Deloitte [6 ]). A sizeable collection of AI ethics is being 
produced around the globe, which has even led to topical 
analyses of such documents (e.g., [12, 17]). Whether these 
documents are generating tangible change, including in 
terms of new regulations or industry practices, is unclear.
The emergence of organizations such as the Partnership 
on AI and AI now, and conferences such as ACM FAccT 
with a mission tied to AI ethics-related issues is a relatively 
recent occurrence. Funding agencies, such as the National 
Science Foundation (NSF [ 25]), are supporting efforts to 
examine Fairness, Ethics, Accountability, and Transparency 
(FEAT) in computing fields. This can be taken as evidence 
of the seriousness that AI ethics should warrant.
Even if these attempts are trying to move the needle in 
terms of addressing AI’s ethical challenges, the fundamen-
tal root of the problem remains: that of human fallibility 
and other related human shortcomings, and how they shape 
the design and use of technology. While it is doubtful that 
most people are intentionally designing AI to be malicious 
in nature or want their systems to deliver biased outputs, the 
fact remains that they are not consistently being asked to 
look in the mirror to identify their own biases and the values 
that they are building into the technology.4  Fostering a professional mindset
As is illustrated by the above discussion, many individuals and 
organizations are proposing remedies to the ethical challenges 
resulting from AI, but solutions (technical or otherwise) are 
hard to identify and implement. Yet a key piece of the puzzle is 
enabling developers to understand that the technology they are 
building is intertwined with ethical dimensions, and that, as 
developers, they have a vital role and responsibility to engage 
with ethical considerations. The first aim in establishing an 
authentic professional mindset is related to cultivating moral 
sensitivity; in other words, they need the ability to recognize 
that professional, including “technical”, decision-making is 
intertwined with ethical considerations. The view that technol-
ogy is “value neutral” hides and obscures the reality that ethi-
cal issues are fundamentally embedded in the selection, design, 
deployment, and use of technology. For example, building a 
dating app that only offers a binary option for a user’s gender 
is a value-laden choice by the app’s creator. When you then 
integrate AI to identify the user’s best match, you are thus con-
structing a system that has bias woven throughout its design.
A second related point is how those in the AI community 
view their professional responsibilities. Oftentimes, develop-
ers believe (a view sometimes reinforced through the STEM 
curriculum and in other ways) that ethics is someone else’s 
problem. They may think something like “We deal with the 
technology; let the lawyers or ethicists resolve the ethical 
concerns.” However, when making choices during the design 
process, those choices not only have ethical ramifications but 
they reflect the designer’s ethical values (e.g., whether to err 
on the side of a false positive or a false negative with medi-
cal imaging or evaluating recidivism). Such choices not only 
shape the technology, but they end up shaping individual lives 
and society more generally.
Taking the example of medicine, physicians may promise 
to uphold the Hippocratic Oath. While a professional oath is 
not a panacea, it can serve as a statement of and a commitment 
to a social contract between a profession and the public. Even 
if physicians do not literally voice the pledge, the Hippocratic 
Oath is a reminder of their ethical obligation to improve the 
health of the public. When AI provides similar benefits, and 
harms, to the public, what should we expect in terms of the 
ethical responsibilities of those who develop the technology? 
Should their responsibilities be anything less? A key step is 
enabling AI developers and the broader computing community 
to more fully understand what those responsibilities are.