62 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65
1 3
are only necessary but not sufficient conditions for fixing 
them. Addressing these and other ethical concerns requires 
starting with the root of the problem (i.e., people). Tackling 
the problem head-on requires educating ourselves at the 
beginning stages of our interaction with AI–irrespective of 
whether we are developers, first learning about AI, or users, 
just starting to interact with AI. The opportunity to learn 
about how data are used to train AI, about the applications 
that the AI can enable, etc., should be available to any person 
that interacts at any stage with AI. If we focus just on those 
designing AI technology, there is tremendous potential to 
shape what developers are learning and encourage them to 
embrace the crucial message that ethics is intertwined with 
the entire design process (before, during, and after). Moreo-
ver, ethics should not be a slapped-on component after-the-
fact, a standalone lesson, or a second thought. It is integral 
at every stage when learning about AI. When we teach the 
mathematical derivations of a linear regression function for 
supervised learning in AI, we can also mention the use of 
disparate impact as a metric to evaluate fairness of the output 
in the hopes that we move closer to a result that is “correct” 
and “fairer”.
The underlying hypothesis we propose is thus based on 
the belief that a key measure for potentially adjusting to 
a world that is rapidly evolving due, in part to an increas-
ing reliance on AI, is to revisit the instruction that future 
generations of developers (e.g., students) are receiving on 
AI-related topics. This is especially important given that 
they may have a direct role in reshaping society as develop-
ers-in-training or future adopters of AI technology. In this 
thought piece, our focus is on the rising need to prepare 
emerging developers, and working professionals as well, 
with the skills needed to grapple with the complex and 
multifaceted ethical challenges emerging from the growing 
infusion of AI in our day-to-day activities. The educational 
community, broadly defined, needs to renew its emphasis on 
nurturing the ability to recognize and engage with ethical 
issues emerging in relation to AI. Many essential topics are 
in this space, including the ethical design of AI algorithms, 
mitigating the risks of AI outcomes, and improving data 
acquisition and other research practices. Vague concepts of 
fairness and bias, separated from context or without under -
standing that people are more than just data or inputs, are not 
helpful. Within this realm, we highlight recent approaches 
to AI ethics education, especially as they pertain to current 
societal concerns.
2  Emerging ethical challenges in AI
AI technology is filtering into our personal and profes-
sional lives in countless ways, and not all of its impacts are 
positive. For instance, AI holds a lot of promise in terms of how it could alter the healthcare landscape. Some claim 
that AI algorithms could potentially read medical images 
more quickly than a radiologist could (e.g., [27]). Yet algo-
rithmic bias and other ethical challenges must be overcome 
to prevent harm to patients. It has already been found, for 
example, that an AI system used for recommending fol-
low-on healthcare services failed black patients by refer -
ring them at a lower rate than their white counterparts even 
when both groups had a similar diagnosis [26].
Over the past few years, governments and other entities 
have had a surge of interest in facial recognition. Yet the 
technology is drawing much scrutiny in part because it is 
far less reliable when used to identify people who are not 
white males. In addition, the increasing loss of privacy 
due to facial recognition is a real worry. During protests 
sparked by the death of George Floyd, the US govern-
ment allegedly used facial recognition to identify protest-
ers [19]. Recently, the use of facial recognition software in 
Detroit resulted in a Black man being falsely arrested for 
a crime he did not commit [1 ]. Even though the specific 
manner in which it might be used is difficult to discern, 
AI, including facial recognition, might come to play a key 
role in China’s social credit scoring system [4 ], a system 
which many find to be ethically problematic. Responses 
to the use of facial recognition technology include calls 
from civil liberty groups to regulate this AI tool, along 
with recent announcements by a number of tech companies 
that they will purportedly no longer offer their technology 
to police departments [10]. Yet many thorny ethical issues 
still need to be resolved.
The contribution of AI to privacy erosion is also intensi-
fying with the advent of tools such as Clearview AI, which 
can in principle search Internet sources for all of a person’s 
online photos [7 ]. And given that much of our information is 
freely available for anyone to scrub when we post it online, 
without the typical safeguards found in physical infrastruc-
tures, it is profoundly difficult to even discern who is using 
such tools and for which purposes.
Trust in AI technology is another crucial and timely 
ethical issue. Going back to the aforementioned medical 
imaging example, if an AI algorithm proves itself “trust-
worthy”, not only could it complement human judgment, 
it could become an eventual replacement for that judg-
ment. This could perhaps even extend to cover cases the 
algorithm was not designed to handle (somewhat akin to 
the practice of “off-label” use of medical products). Or, in 
a different scenario, during a conversation with a therapy 
chatbot, the person may begin to trust it and think the 
technology can provide guidance for circumstances that 
go beyond the bounds of its programming. Another impor -
tant facet of (over)trust is that users might believe AI can 
mitigate harm when it does not have the capacity to do 
so. For instance, a person wearing a robotic exoskeleton