64 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65
1 3
5  AI ethics instruction
Imparting lessons regarding what is means to be a pro-
fessional and what one’s associated ethical responsibili-
ties are can ideally be achieved through both formal and 
informal education. Yet at the present time, AI ethics 
education has not fully taken root within the computing 
curriculum (e.g., [22]). According to Brundage et al. [3 ], 
“Educational efforts might be beneficial in highlighting the 
risks of malicious applications to AI researchers”. In this 
regard, education can foster a professional mindset for the 
next generations of AI developers. Of course, if ethics is 
already taught within the engineering or computing cur -
riculum, this requires evaluating and potentially rethink -
ing how it’s done—because either it is not working or not 
pervasive enough to impact a change in mindset.
Some attempts to incorporate ethics into the curriculum 
involve a focus on increasing students’ familiarity with 
professional codes of ethics. While an important step, it 
is not sufficient. Skeptics may point out that just because 
one is aware of a code, it does not necessarily mean that it 
will influence behavior; for example, according to a study 
by McNamara et al. [23], introducing students to the ACM 
code of ethics did not seem to have a tangible impact on 
decision-making.
While AI is not the specific target, the Mozilla Foun-
dation [24] is supporting the development of ethics peda-
gogy in order to try to reshape the computer science cur -
riculum. Funding from the Mozilla program has enabled 
a team at Georgia Tech, including one of the authors of 
this editorial, to create an autonomous vehicle role-play -
ing scenario for undergraduate CS courses. The scenario 
places students in different roles, including ones that are 
“technical” such as a computer scientist and ones that are 
“non-technical” such as an active transportation advocate. 
The students, representing different stakeholders, are sup-
posed to work as a committee to advise a hypothetical city 
on whether to permit a fictional company to test a self-
driving bus fleet in the city’s downtown area. We hope 
that this kind of approach can foster students’ moral sen-
sitivity and enable them to appreciate a broader range of 
perspectives. Yet it is clear that educational efforts must 
continue to move beyond drop-in modules or single ethics 
courses [11].
Guided by the aim of nurturing a professional mindset 
in those who are part of the AI community, we propose 
three elements that could help familiarize students with 
the emerging ethical challenges of AI:
1. Teaching the ethical design of AI algorithms; this should 
include but not be limited to “FEAT” considerations. 
Learning about the importance of participatory design could also be an important lesson. For example, the new 
AI ethics course in the online Master of Science in Com-
puter Science program at Georgia Tech, taught by one 
of the authors of this editorial, has the potential to train 
a huge generation of AI developers to think through the 
ethical design of their algorithms (Howard [15]).
2. Incorporating fundamental concepts of data science and 
the ethics of data acquisition; using real-world data sets 
that requires students to address privacy, fairness, and 
legal issues while developing AI solutions.
3. Offering ethics-related lessons in multiple ways and at 
multiple times; “ethics across the curriculum” is a model 
for putting this into practice (e.g., [20]), but the general 
notion is regularly reinforcing the significance of ethics, 
including in “technical” courses.
A related point is the importance of having interdisci-
plinary teams who create AI ethics content and potentially 
teach it. The challenges emerging in relation to AI cross 
over disciplinary lines and are too complex for any single 
type of expertise to handle. Insights from lawyers, sociolo-
gists, policy scholars, philosophers, and others along with 
scientists and engineers can be especially valuable when 
determining how to educate students about AI ethics. This 
hopefully will attune students to AI’s ethical challenges and 
encourage them to have the willingness to engage with those 
challenges seriously. Another key facet of AI ethics edu-
cation is cultivating critical thinking and ethical reasoning 
skills in students that are transferable across different profes -
sional contexts. While there are debates about the value of 
including ethical theory in professional ethics courses (an 
issue we will not seek to resolve here), such courses should 
nurture reason and reflection; they are vital components of 
the professional mindset.
6  The future of AI ethics
AI is changing our lives in ways that are difficult to antici-
pate and understand. If the technology is going to be directed 
in a more socially responsible way, it is time to dedicate time 
and attention to AI ethics education. Not only is it important 
for the computing community to more resolutely embrace 
ethics as a part of its core identity, but from a practical per -
spective, jobs are starting to emerge in the realm of AI ethics 
(e.g., [5 ]). Lewis [21 ] suggests that some companies may 
consider having a chief artificial intelligence ethics officer. 
One hopes that this is part of a sincere effort toward taking 
ethics more seriously rather than an exercise in “ethics wash-
ing” [18]. A pathway towards increasing that likelihood is 
making sure that ethics has a central place in AI educational 
efforts.