Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020-00002-7
OPINION PAPER
Emerging challenges in AI and the need for AI ethics education
Jason Borenstein1 · Ayanna Howard2
Received: 15 July 2020 / Accepted: 23 July 2020 / Published online: 6 October 2020 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is reshaping the world in profound ways; some of its impacts are certainly beneficial but wide-
spread and lasting harms can result from the technology as well. The integration of AI into various aspects of human life 
is underway, and the complex ethical concerns emerging from the design, deployment, and use of the technology serves 
as a reminder that it is time to revisit what future developers and designers, along with professionals, are learning when it 
comes to AI. It is of paramount importance to train future members of the AI community, and other stakeholders as well, 
to reflect on the ways in which AI might impact people’s lives and to embrace their responsibilities to enhance its benefits 
while mitigating its potential harms. This could occur in part through the fuller and more systematic inclusion of AI ethics 
into the curriculum. In this paper, we briefly describe different approaches to AI ethics and offer a set of recommendations 
related to AI ethics pedagogy.
Keywords AI ethics · Artificial intelligence · Design ethics · Ethics education · Professional responsibility
1 Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is becoming pervasive. The 
technology is reaching into so many facets of our lives that 
we have no choice but to confront its impacts. The creation 
and deployment of AI is changing our lives and communi-
ties in countless ways. These changes are often difficult to 
understand and anticipate, and are only accelerating due to 
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Although AI provides 
observable benefits, the collection, use, and abuse of data 
used to train and feed into AI, as well as the algorithm itself, 
may expose people to risks that they were not even aware 
existed. Employers can monitor workplace performance and 
behavior in covert and unexpected ways. And a potential 
employee might be turned down for a job because of the 
information an automated tool collects while scraping the 
person’s social media profile. A local government might use facial recognition to identify each and every individual that 
passes through a public area. It was not that long ago that 
such scenarios would seem farfetched. But now we see a 
rise in the use of these tools by industry, government, and 
even academic institutions as they deploy AI algorithms to 
make decisions that alter our lives in direct, and potentially 
detrimental, ways. The frequently voiced justification for the 
use of such AI tools is that they are “better” than a human 
decision-maker. Should not an algorithm be fair and free 
of human biases? After all, it shouldn’t be burdened with 
the biases derived from our lived experiences, right? Then 
again, an algorithm is made by humans, and humans make 
mistakes, including during the designing, programming, 
calibrating, and evaluating of the algorithm’s performance. 
Therein lies a key problem: how can fallible humans design 
AI that effectively lives up to its promised benefits while 
ensuring its outcomes aren’t biased or otherwise harmful? 
Complicating matters is how do imperfect humans even go 
about defining “fairness”? It is a messy task, especially con-
sidering that the concept has numerous candidate definitions 
and what counts as “fair” can fundamentally shift over time.
At times, AI is intensifying societal ills, and it would 
be misleading to imply that a single, simple solution is on 
the horizon. Fix the bias in the data. Fix the bias within the 
algorithms. Fix the bias in the outputs. All of these practices 
may get us closer to mitigating part of the problem; but these  * Jason Borenstein 
 borenstein@gatech.edu
1 Center for Ethics and Technology, School of Public 
Policy and Office of Graduate Studies, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
2 Linda J. and Mark C. Smith Professor and Chair, School 
of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, USA