[38] Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, Wouter Van Gansbeke, Marc Proesmans, Dengxin
Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Multi-task learning for dense prediction tasks: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2021.
[39] Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland V ollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for
benchmarking machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747 , 2017.
[40] Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi-task reinforcement learning with
soft modularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13661 , 2020.
[41] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06782 , 2020.
[42] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and
Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement
learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
[43] Amir R Zamir, Alexander Sax, William Shen, Leonidas J Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio
Savarese. Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3712–3722, 2018.
[44] Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. A survey on multi-task learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , 2021.
Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a)Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
contributions and scope? [Yes] See Sec. 3.2 for the convergence analysis, Fig. 1 for
the challenges faced by previous methods, and Sec. 5 for empirical evaluation of these
challenges and the advantage of CAGrad.
(b)Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Sec. 6. Currently we mainly
focus on optimizing the average loss, which could be replaced by other main objectives.
(c)Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [N/A] Our
method does not have potential negative societal impacts.
(d)Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes]
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a)Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [Yes] The assump-
tions are stated in Thm. 3.2.
(b)Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [Yes] The complete proof is
included in Appendix A.3.
3. If you ran experiments...
(a)Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] We mention
most of the details to reproduce the result in Sec. 5 and provide the rest of details of
each experiment in Appendix.B. The code comes with the supplementary material.
(b)Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [Yes] See Appendix.B and Sec. 5.
(c)Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
ments multiple times)? [Yes] For each experiment except for the toy (since there is no
stochasticity), we run over multiple ( ≥3) seeds.
(d)Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g.,
type of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] We explicitly compare the
computational efficiency in Fig. 5. More details on the resources are provided in the
corresponding sections in Appendix.B.
4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
12