2.2 Prior Attempts and Convergence Issues
Several methods have been proposed to manipulate the task gradients to form a new update vector
and have shown improved performance on MTL. Sener et al. apply the multiple-gradient descent
algorithm (MGDA) [ 6] for MTL, which directly optimizes towards the Pareto set [ 30]. Chen et al.
dynamically re-weight each Liusing a pre-defined heuristic [ 3]. More recently, PCGrad identifies
conflicting gradients as the motivation behind manipulating the gradients and projects each task
gradient to the normal plane of others to reduce the conflict [ 41]. While all these methods have
shown success at improving the learning performance of MTL, they manipulate the gradient without
respecting the original objective (1). Therefore, these methods could in principle converge to any
point in the Pareto set (See Fig. 1 and Sec. 3.2). We provide the detailed algorithms of MGDA and
PCGrad in Appendix A.1 and A.2, and a visualization of the update vector by each method in Fig. 2.
3 Method
We introduce our main algorithm, Conflict-Averse Gradient descent in Sec. 3.1, and then show
theoretical analysis in Sec. 3.2.
3.1 Conflict-Averse Gradient Descent
Assume we update θbyθ′←θ−αd, where αis a step size and dan update vector. We want
to choose dto decrease not only the average loss L0, but also every individual loss. To do so, we
consider the minimum decrease rate across the losses,
R(θ, d) = max
i∈[K]1
α(Li(θ−αd)−Li(θ))
≈ − min
i∈[K]⟨gi, d⟩, (2)
where we use the first-order Taylor approximation assuming αis small. If R(θ, d)<0, it means
that all losses are decreased with the update given a sufficiently small α. Therefore, R(θ, d)can be
regarded as a measurement of conflict among objectives.
With the above measurement, our algorithm finds an update vector that minimizes such conflict to
mitigate the optimization challenge while still converging to an optimum of the main objective L0(θ).
To this end, we introduce Conflict-Averse Gradient descent (CAGrad), which on each optimization
step determines the update dby solving the following optimization problem:
max
d∈Rmmin
i∈[K]⟨gi, d⟩s.t.∥d−g0∥ ≤c∥g0∥, (3)
Here, c∈[0,1)is a pre-specified hyper-parameter that controls the convergence rate (See Sec. 3.2).
The optimization problem (3)looks for the best update vector within a local ball centered at the
averaged gradient g0, which also minimizes the conflict in losses measured by (2). Since we focus on
MTL and choose the average loss as the main objective, g0is the average gradient. However, CAGrad
also applies when g0is the gradient of some other user-specified objective. We leave exploring this
possibility as a future direction.
Dual Objective The optimization problem (3)involves decision variable dthat has the same
dimension as the number of parameters in θ, which could be millions for a deep neural network.
It is not practical to directly solve for don every optimization step. However, the dual problem of
Eq.(3), as we will derive in the following, only involves solving for a decision variable w∈RK,
which can be efficiently found using standard optimization libraries [ 7]. Specifically, first note
thatmini⟨gi, d⟩= min w∈W⟨P
iwigi, d⟩, where w= (w1, . . . , w K)∈RKandWdenotes the
probability simplex, i.e. W={w:P
iwi= 1 andwi≥0}. Denote gw=P
iwigiand
ϕ=c2∥g0∥2. The Lagrangian of the objective in Eq. (3) is
max
d∈Rmmin
λ≥0,w∈Wg⊤
wd−λ(∥g0−d∥2−ϕ)/2.
Since the objective for dis concave with linear constraints, by switching the min andmax , we reach
the dual form without changing the solution by Slater’s condition:
min
λ≥0,w∈Wmax
d∈Rmg⊤
wd−λ∥g0−d∥2/2 +λϕ/2.
3