Figure 1: The optimization challenges faced by gradient descent (GD) and existing gradient manipu-
lation methods like the multiple gradient descent algorithm (MGDA) [6] and PCGrad [41]. MGDA,
PCGrad and CAGrad are applied on top of the Adam optimizer [ 16]. For each methods, we repeat
3 runs of optimization from different initial points (labeled with •). Each optimization trajectory
is colored from red to yellow. GD with Adam gets stuck on two of the initial points because the
gradient of one task overshadows that of the other task, causing the algorithm to jump back and forth
between the walls of a steep valley without making progress along the floor of the valley. MGDA and
PCGrad stop optimization as soon as they reach the Pareto set.
To address this problem, previous work either adaptively re-weights the objectives of each task based
on heuristics [ 3,15] or seeks a better update vector [ 30,41] by manipulating the task gradients.
However, existing work often lacks convergence guarantees or only provably converges to any
point on the Pareto set of the objectives. This means the final convergence point of these methods
may largely depend on the initial model parameters. As a result, it is possible that these methods
over-optimize one objective while overlooking the others (See Fig. 1).
Motivated by the limitation of current methods, we introduce Conflict-Averse Gradient descent
(CAGrad), which reduces the conflict among gradients and still provably converges to a minimum
of the average loss. The idea of CAGrad is simple: it looks for an update vector that maximizes the
worst local improvement of any objective in a neighborhood of the average gradient. In this way,
CAGrad automatically balances different objectives and smoothly converges to an optimal point of
the average loss. Specifically, we show that vanilla gradient descent (GD) and the multiple gradient
descent algorithm (MGDA) are special cases of CAGrad (See Sec. 3.1). We demonstrate that CAGrad
can improve over prior state-of-the-art gradient manipulation methods on a series of challenging
multi-task supervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement learning problems.
2 Background
In this section, we first introduce the problem setup of multi-task learning (MTL). Then we analyze
the optimization challenge of MTL and discuss the limitation of prior gradient manipulation methods.
2.1 Multi-task Learning and its Challenge
In multi-task learning (MTL), we are given K≥2different tasks, each of which is associated with
a loss function Li(θ)for a shared set of parameters θ. The goal is to find an optimal θ∈Rmthat
achieves low losses across all tasks. In practice, a standard objective for MTL is minimizing the
average loss over all tasks:
θ∗= arg min
θ∈Rm(
L0(θ)≜1
KKX
i=1Li(θ))
. (1)
Unfortunately, directly optimizing (1)using gradient descent may significantly compromise the
optimization of individual losses in practice. A major source of this phenomenon is known as the
conflicting gradients [41].
Optimization Challenge: Conflicting Gradients Denote by gi=∇Li(θ)the gradient of task i,
andg0=∇L0(θ) =1
KPK
igithe averaged gradient. With learning rate α∈R+,θ←θ−αg0is
the steepest descent update that appears to be the most natural update to follow when optimizing (1).
However, g0may conflict with individual gradients, i.e. ∃i,⟨gi, g0⟩<0. When this conflict is large,
following g0will decrease the performance on task i. As observed by [ 41] and illustrated in Fig. 1,
when θis near a steep “valley", where a specific task’s gradient dominates the update, manipulating
the direction and magnitude of g0often leads to better optimization.
2