Conflict-Averse Gradient Descent
for Multi-task Learning
†Bo Liu,†Xingchao Liu,‡Xiaojie Jin,†,§Peter Stone,†Qiang Liu
†The University of Texas at Austin,§Sony AI,‡Bytedance Research
{bliu,xcliu,pstone,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu, xjjin0731@gmail.com
Abstract
The goal of multi-task learning is to enable more efficient learning than single
task learning by sharing model structures for a diverse set of tasks. A standard
multi-task learning objective is to minimize the average loss across all tasks. While
straightforward, using this objective often results in much worse final performance
for each task than learning them independently. A major challenge in optimizing
a multi-task model is the conflicting gradients , where gradients of different task
objectives are not well aligned so that following the average gradient direction can
be detrimental to specific tasks’ performance. Previous work has proposed several
heuristics to manipulate the task gradients for mitigating this problem. But most of
them lack convergence guarantee and/or could converge to any Pareto-stationary
point. In this paper, we introduce Conflict-Averse Gradient descent (CAGrad)
which minimizes the average loss function, while leveraging the worst local im-
provement of individual tasks to regularize the algorithm trajectory. CAGrad
balances the objectives automatically and still provably converges to a minimum
over the average loss. It includes the regular gradient descent (GD) and the multiple
gradient descent algorithm (MGDA) in the multi-objective optimization (MOO)
literature as special cases. On a series of challenging multi-task supervised learn-
ing and reinforcement learning tasks, CAGrad achieves improved performance
over prior state-of-the-art multi-objective gradient manipulation methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/Cranial-XIX/CAGrad .
1 Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) refers to learning a single model that can tackle multiple different
tasks [ 11,28,44,38]. By sharing parameters across tasks, MTL methods learn more efficiently with
an overall smaller model size compared to learning with separate models [ 38,40,25]. Moreover, it
has been shown that MTL could in principle improve the quality of the learned representation and
therefore benefit individual tasks [ 35,43,34]. For example, an early MTL result by [ 2] demonstrated
that training a neural network to recognize doors could be improved by simultaneously training it to
recognize doorknobs.
However, learning multiple tasks simultaneously can be a challenging optimization problem because it
involves multiple objectives [ 38]. The most popular MTL objective in practice is the average loss over
all tasks. Even when this average loss is exactly the true objective (as opposed to only caring about
a single task as in the door/doorknob example), directly optimizing the average loss could lead to
undesirable performance, e.g. the optimizer struggles to make progress so the learning performance
significantly deteriorates. A known cause of this phenomenon is the conflicting gradients [41]:
gradients from different tasks 1) may have varying scales with the largest gradient dominating the
update, and 2) may point in different directions so that directly optimizing the average loss can be
quite detrimental to a specific task’s performance.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).