Restricted Boltzmann Machine and Deep Belief Network: Tutorial and Survey 12
Figure 2. The structures of (a) a conditional Boltzmann machine and (b) an interpolating conditional restricted Boltzmann machine.
Note that each arrow in this ﬁgure represents a set of links.
weights and biases of RBM, the additional links are learned
by gradient descent using the above gradients. Algorithm 2
can be used for training CRBM if learning the added links
is also included in the algorithm.
Interpolating CRBM (ICRBM) (Mohamed & Hinton,
2010) is an improvement over the CRBM where some links
have been added from visible variables in the future. Figure
2 depicts the structure of ICRBM. Its training and formula-
tion are similar but we do not cover its theory in this paper
for the sake of brevity. Note that CRBM has been used in
various time-series applications such as action recognition
(Taylor et al., 2007) and acoustics (Mohamed & Hinton,
2010).
6. Deep Belief Network
6.1. Stacking RBM Models
We can train a neural network using RBM training (Hin-
ton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2006). Train-
ing a neural network using RBM training can result in very
good initialization of weights for training network using
backpropagation. Before the development of ReLU (Glo-
rot et al., 2011) and dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), mul-
tilayer perceptron networks could not become deep for the
problem of vanishing gradients. This was because randominitial weights were not suitable enough for starting opti-
mization in backpropagation, especially in deep networks.
Therefore, a method was proposed for pre-training neu-
ral networks which initializes network to a suitable set of
weights and then the pre-trained weights are ﬁne-tuned us-
ing backpropagation (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hin-
ton et al., 2006).
A neural network consists of several layers. Let `denote
the number of layers, where the ﬁrst layer gets the input
data, and let p`be the number of neurons in the `-th layer.
By convention, we have p1=d. We can consider every two
successive layers as one RBM. This is shown in Fig. 3. We
start from the ﬁrst pair of layers as an RBM and we intro-
duce training dataset fxi2Rdgn
i=1as the visible variable
fvign
i=1of the ﬁrst pair of layers. We train the weights and
biases of this ﬁrst layer as an RBM using Algorithm 2. Af-
ter training this RBM, we generate np 2-dimensional hid-
den variables using Gibbs sampling in Algorithm 1. Now,
we consider the hidden variables of the ﬁrst RBM as the
visible variables for the second RBM (the second pair of
layers). Again, this RBM is trained by Algorithm 2 and,
then, hidden variables are generated using Gibbs sampling
in Algorithm 1. This procedure is repeated until all pairs
of layers are trained using RBM training. This layer-wise
training of neural network has a greedy approach (Bengio