To appear as a part of an upcoming textbook on dimensionality reduction and manifold learning.
Restricted Boltzmann Machine and Deep Belief Network: Tutorial and Survey
Benyamin Ghojogh BGHOJOGH @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Ali Ghodsi ALI.GHODSI @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science & David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science,
Data Analytics Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Fakhri Karray KARRAY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Centre for Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Mark Crowley MCROWLEY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
This is a tutorial and survey paper on Boltz-
mann Machine (BM), Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chine (RBM), and Deep Belief Network (DBN).
We start with the required background on prob-
abilistic graphical models, Markov random ﬁeld,
Gibbs sampling, statistical physics, Ising model,
and the Hopﬁeld network. Then, we intro-
duce the structures of BM and RBM. The con-
ditional distributions of visible and hidden vari-
ables, Gibbs sampling in RBM for generating
variables, training BM and RBM by maximum
likelihood estimation, and contrastive divergence
are explained. Then, we discuss different possi-
ble discrete and continuous distributions for the
variables. We introduce conditional RBM and
how it is trained. Finally, we explain deep be-
lief network as a stack of RBM models. This
paper on Boltzmann machines can be useful in
various ﬁelds including data science, statistics,
neural computation, and statistical physics.
1. Introduction
Centuries ago, the Boltzmann distribution (Boltzmann,
1868), also called the Gibbs distribution (Gibbs, 1902),
was proposed. This energy-based distribution was foundto be useful for modeling the physical systems statisti-
cally (Huang, 1987). One of these systems was the Ising
model which modeled interacting particles with binary
spins (Lenz, 1920; Ising, 1925). Later, the Ising model
was found to be able to be a neural network (Little, 1974).
Hence, Hopﬁeld network was proposed which modeled an
Ising model in a network for modeling memory (Hopﬁeld,
1982). Inspired by the Hopﬁeld network (Little, 1974;
Hopﬁeld, 1982), which was itself inspired by the physi-
cal Ising model (Lenz, 1920; Ising, 1925), Hinton et. al.
proposed Boltzmann Machine (BM) and Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine (RBM) (Hinton & Sejnowski, 1983; Ack-
ley et al., 1985). These models are energy-based models
(LeCun et al., 2006) and the names come from the Boltz-
mann distribution (Boltzmann, 1868; Gibbs, 1902) used in
these models. A BM has weighted links between two lay-
ers of neurons as well as links between neurons of every
layer. RBM restricts these links to not have links between
neurons of a layer. BM and RBM take one of the layers
as the layer of data and the other layer as a representation
or embedding of data. BM and RBM are special cases of
the Ising model whose weights (coupling parameters) are
learned. BM and RBM are also special cases of the Hop-
ﬁeld network whose weights are learned by maximum like-
lihood estimation rather than the Hebbian learning method
(Hebb, 1949) which is used in the Hopﬁeld network.
The Hebbian learning method, used in the Hopﬁeld net-
work, was very weak and could not generalize well to un-
seen data. Therefore, backpropagation (Rumelhart et al.,
1986) was proposed for training neural networks. Back-
propagation was gradient descent plus the chain rule tech-arXiv:2107.12521v2  [cs.LG]  6 Aug 2022