Restricted Boltzmann Machine and Deep Belief Network: Tutorial and Survey 2
nique. However, researchers found out soon that neural
networks cannot get deep in their number of layers. This is
because, in deep networks, gradients become very small in
the initial layers after many chain rules from the last layers
of network. This problem was called vanishing gradients.
This problem of networks plus the glory of theory in ker-
nel support vector machines (Boser et al., 1992) resulted in
the winter of neural networks in the last years of previous
century until around 2006.
During the winter of neural networks, Hinton tried to save
neural networks from being forgotten in the history of ma-
chine learning. So, he returned to his previously pro-
posed RBM and proposed a learning method for RBM with
the help of some other researchers including Max Welling
(Hinton, 2002; Welling et al., 2004). They proposed train-
ing the weights of BM and RBM using maximum likeli-
hood estimation. BM and RBM can be seen as genera-
tive models where new values for neurons can be gener-
ated using Gibbs sampling (Geman & Geman, 1984). Hin-
ton noticed RBM because he knew that the set of weights
between every two layers of a neural network is an RBM.
It was in the year 2006 (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006;
Hinton et al., 2006) that he thought it is possible to train a
network in a greedy way1(Bengio et al., 2007) where the
weights of every layer of network is trained using RBM
training. This stack of RBM models with a greedy algo-
rithm for training was named Deep Belief Network (DBN)
(Hinton et al., 2006; Hinton, 2009). DBN allowed the net-
works to become deep by preparing a good initialization of
weights (using RBM training) for backpropagation. This
good starting point for backpropagation optimization did
not face the problem of vanishing gradients anymore. Since
the breakthrough in 2006 (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006),
the winter of neural networks started to end gradually be-
cause the networks could get deep to become more nonlin-
ear and handle more nonlinear data.
DBN was used in different applications including speech
recognition (Mohamed et al., 2009; Mohamed & Hinton,
2010; Mohamed et al., 2011) and action recognition (Tay-
lor et al., 2007). Hinton was very excited about the success
of RBM and was thinking that the future of neural networks
belongs to DBN. However, two important techniques were
proposed, which were the ReLU activation function (Glo-
rot et al., 2011) and the dropout technique (Srivastava et al.,
2014). These two regularization methods prevented over-
ﬁtting (Ghojogh & Crowley, 2019) and resolved vanishing
gradients even without RBM pre-training. Hence, back-
propagation could be used alone if the new regularization
methods were utilized. The success of neural networks was
1A greedy algorithm makes every decision based on the most
beneﬁt at the current step and does not care about the ﬁnal out-
come at the ﬁnal step. This greedy approach hopes that the ﬁnal
step will obtain a good result by small best steps based on their
current beneﬁts.found out more (LeCun et al., 2015) by its various applica-
tions, for example in image recognition (Karpathy & Fei-
Fei, 2015).
This is a tutorial and survey paper on BM, RBM, and DBN.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. We brieﬂy review
the required background on probabilistic graphical models,
Markov random ﬁeld, Gibbs sampling, statistical physics,
Ising model, and the Hopﬁeld network in Section 2. The
structure of BM and RBM, Gibbs sampling in RBM, train-
ing RBM by maximum likelihood estimation, contrastive
divergence, and training BM are explained in Section 3.
Then, we introduce different cases of states for units in
RBM in Section 4. Conditional RBM and DBN are ex-
plained in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper.
Required Background for the Reader
This paper assumes that the reader has general knowledge
of calculus, probability, linear algebra, and basics of opti-
mization. The required background on statistical physics is
explained in the paper.
2. Background
2.1. Probabilistic Graphical Model and Markov
Random Field
A Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM) is a graph-based
representation of a complex distribution in a possibly high
dimensional space (Koller & Friedman, 2009). In other
words, PGM is a combination of graph theory and prob-
ability theory. In a PGM, the random variables are rep-
resented by nodes or vertices. There exist edges between
two variables which have interaction with one another in
terms of probability. Different conditional probabilities can
be represented by a PGM. There exist two types of PGM
which are Markov network (also called Markov random
ﬁeld) and Bayesian network (Koller & Friedman, 2009).
In the Markov network and Bayesian network, the edges
of graph are undirected and directed, respectively. BM and
RBM are Markov networks (Markov random ﬁeld) because
their links are undirected (Hinton, 2007).
2.2. Gibbs Sampling
Gibbs sampling, ﬁrstly proposed by (Geman & Geman,
1984), draws samples from a d-dimensional multivari-
ate distribution P(X)usingdconditional distributions
(Bishop, 2006). This sampling algorithm assumes that the
conditional distributions of every dimension of data condi-
tioned on the rest of coordinates are simple to draw samples
from.
In Gibbs sampling, we desire to sample from a multivariate
distribution P(X)whereX2Rd. Consider the notation
Rd3x:= [x1;x2;:::;xd]>. We start from a random d-
dimensional vector in the range of data. Then, we sample