6 Zhifeng Zhang, Tao Wang, Yang Chen, and Jie Lan
Fig. 3. The training result of T2ACO.
Fig. 4. The compared result with T2ACO.
result.
From Fig. 4, it is obvious that the T2IACO has a better
tracking performance than T2ACO, and it proved that up-
dating global pheromone do can improve the performance
of algorithm. In order to illustrate IACO has a better per-
formance than classical algorithm BP for design of fuzzy
logic system. The compared result shows as Fig. 5.
From Fig. 5, we can see intelligence IACO has a bet-
ter performance than classical tradition BP algorithm.
Thereby, it is proved that IACO can overcome the
shortcomings of traditional algorithms and have a high-
efﬁciency.
In this paper, we also design type-1 TSK fuzzy logic
system based on IACO (T1IACO) and ACO (T1ACO), re-
spectively. And compared with A2-C1 type interval TSK
fuzzy logic system based on IACO (T2IACO) and ACO
(T2ACO), respectively. We set the same epochs of iter-
ation 2000, and the same values for the same parameters
Fig. 5. The result of compared with BP.
Fig. 6. The result of compared with T1IACO.
in IACO and ACO, the same structure fuzzy logic system,
that is to say, the Gauss type membership function, sin-
gle point fuzziﬁcation and product inference are adopted,
when design of type-1 TSK fuzzy logic system. The result
of compared with T1IACO shows in Fig. 6.
From Fig. 6, it shows that the tracking performance of
T2IACO is better than T1IACO, on the one hand, it indi-
cates that A2-C1 type interval TSK fuzzy logic system has
a better performance than type-1 fuzzy logic system, for
some complex problem, A2-C1 type interval TSK fuzzy
logic system has more accuracy than type-1 TSK fuzzy
logic system, on the other hand, it also indicates that the
proposed IACO can be used to design type-1 TSK fuzzy
logic system. ACO is also used to design type-1 fuzzy
logic system, and the compare between A2-C1 type inter-
val TSK fuzzy logic system based on ACO (T2ACO) and
type-1 TSK fuzzy logic system based on ACO (T1ACO)
is also performed in this part, the comparison of result as
Fig. 7.
It obvious that the T2ACO has a better tracking perfor-