International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems 17(X) (2019) 1-9
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12555-017-0451-1ISSN:1598-6446 eISSN:2005-4092
http://www.springer.com/12555
Design of type-2 Fuzzy Logic Systems Based on Improved Ant Colony
Optimization
Zhifeng Zhang, Tao Wang*, Yang Chen, and Jie Lan
Abstract: An Improved Ant Colony Optimization (IACO) is proposed to design A2-C1 type fuzzy logic system
(FLS) in the paper. The design includes parameters adjustment and rules selection, and the performance of the intel-
ligent fuzzy system, which can be improved by choosing the most optimal parameters and reducing the redundant
rules. In order to verify the feasibility of the proposed algorithm, the intelligence fuzzy logic systems based on the
algorithms are applied to predict the Mackey-Glass chaos time series. The simulations show that both the IACO and
ACO have better tracking performances. The results compared with classical algorithm BP ( back-propagation de-
sign) shows the tracking performance of IACO is more precise, the result compared with ACO shows that either the
training result or the testing result, the tracking performance of IACO is better, and IACO has a faster convergence
rate than ACO, the results compared with the Intelligent type-1 fuzzy logic systems show that both the A2-C1 type
FLS based on IACO and ACO have better tracking performance than type-1 fuzzy logic system.
Keywords: Ant colony optimization, A2-C1 type fuzzy logic system, improved ant colony optimization, neural
network.
1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, fuzzy logic system is applied into a variety
of ﬁelds. Professor L. A. Zadeh proposed the conception
of fuzzy set ﬁrst time [1], from that time on, fuzzy logic
system attracts a large number of scholars to research. Al-
though, fuzzy logic systems have some advantages, but
there are several shortcomings, the main shortcomings are
that it is too difﬁcult to obtain the optimal parameters and
rule explosion. Recent years, it has been a research hot
spot that adopting intelligent algorithms to design of fuzzy
logic system, respectively. Lian et al. optimized the radial
basis function neural network based on QPSO, and the re-
sult was better than BP algorithm and least square method
[2]. Zhai et al. combined the QPSO with the non single
point interval type-2 fuzzy logic system and used to design
of image noise ﬁlter, the result was better than traditional
non fuzzy methods [ 3]. Yazdi combined GA with fuzzy
logic system, and it was applied to the optimization of off
center braced frame system, compared with the structure
optimized only by GA, the effect was more remarkable
[4]. Juang et al. combined ant colony optimization with
fuzzy cluster to design fuzzy logic system, and used for
nonlinear plant tracking control, compared with PSO and
GA, the results were more better [ 5]. In addition, Juang
Manuscript received July 29, 2017; revised May 17, 2018; accepted September 15, 2018. Recommended by Associate Editor Myung Geun
Chun under the direction of Editor Euntai Kim. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61374113),
and by Liaoning Province College Basic Scientiﬁc Research Business Funding Project (JL201615410),Liaoning Province Natural Science
Foundation Guidance Project (No. 20180550056).
Zhifeng Zhang, Tao Wang, Yang Chen, and Jie Lan are with College of Science, Liaoning University of Technology, Jinzhou 121001, China
(e-mails: zhifeng_zz@sina.com, lxywt@lnut.edu.cn, lxychenyang@lnut.edu.cn, lxylj@lnut.edu.cn).
* Corresponding author.also adopted cooperative continuous ant colony optimiza-
tion to design fuzzy logic system, and used for water bath
temperature control system, compared with QPSO and
GA, the results were more precise [6]. Oscar Castillo et al.
adopted ACO and PSO to design fuzzy logic controller for
robotic autonomous systems, compared with GA, it can
get a better result [7].
Ant colony optimization was proposed by Italy scholar
Dorigo, which is a new bionic evolutionary algorithm [8].
Ant colony optimization was used to solve optimal com-
bination problem. Juang et al. used ACO to adjust the
parameters of fuzzy logic system, and successfully used
for the control of the ball and beam balance system, com-
pared with other traditional methods, the performances
were more precise, but the authors assigned an ant colony
system to each parameter, therefore, the process was too
complex for those fuzzy logic system with much param-
eters to adjusted [ 9]. Castillo et al. combined several
ant colony optimization including ant colony system, ant
colony system based on ranking, elite ant colony system
and the max-min ant colony system to optimize the mem-
bership functions of fuzzy logic system, perform rule se-
lection and parameters adjustment, and achieved better re-
sults, but increase the complexity of the algorithm and
it need too much time [ 10]. Olivas et al. combined ant
c⃝ICROS, KIEE and Springer 2019