Journal of Machine Learning Research 21 (2020) 1-33 Submitted 3/18; Revised 7/19; Published 1/20
Target Propagation in Recurrent Neural Networks
Nikolay Manchev nikolay.manchev@kcl.ac.uk
Department of Informatics
King's College London
London, WC2B 4BG, UK
Michael Spratling michael.spratling@kcl.ac.uk
Department of Informatics
King's College London
London, WC2B 4BG, UK
Editor: Yoshua Bengio
Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks have been widely used to process sequence data, but have
long been criticized for their biological implausibility and training diculties related to
vanishing and exploding gradients. This paper presents a novel algorithm for training
recurrent networks, target propagation through time (TPTT), that outperforms standard
backpropagation through time (BPTT) on four out of the ve problems used for testing.
The proposed algorithm is initially tested and compared to BPTT on four synthetic time
lag tasks, and its performance is also measured using the sequential MNIST data set. In
addition, as TPTT uses target propagation, it allows for discrete nonlinearities and could
potentially mitigate the credit assignment problem in more complex recurrent architectures.
Keywords: recurrent neural networks, target propagation, biological plausibility
1. Introduction
A Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) represents a type of articial neural network adapted
to sequence data, which can model temporal events by retaining a state that spans a context
window of specied length. It has been demonstrated that RNNs can successfully address
a wide range of problems in the areas of speech recognition (Graves 2012, Heigold et al.
2015), image captioning (Xu et al. 2015, Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2017), text classication
(Liu et al. 2016, Yogatama et al. 2017), word prediction (Mikolov et al. 2013), sentiment
analysis (Timmaraju and Khanna 2015), mapping sentences and images (Socher et al. 2014),
language modelling (De Mulder et al. 2015) and others.
A diagram of a Simple Recurrent Network (SRN) (Jordan 1989, Elman 1990) is given
in Figure 1a. The network receives as input a sequence of data points fx1;x2;:::;xNgand
produces a sequence of output values fy1;y2;:::;yNg. The input and output values can be
binary or real-valued vectors, depending on the problem the network is designed to solve.
The SRN can compute an output value at each time step, or it can produce a single value
at its nal step: in the latter case the output is a single data point.
The state of the network at time tis given by
c
2020 Nikolay Manchev and Michael Spratling.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v21/18-141.html .