Target Propagation in Recurrent Neural Networks
weights of the network. When the context window increases, learning speed for the early
time steps decreases as the gradients get closer to zero. Lee et al. (2015) discuss an extreme
case where the error signal becomes discrete: its derivatives are zero almost everywhere
and innite where the function changes discretely. A backpropagation-trained network
cannot properly operate in this regime, but target propagation can handle such discrete non-
linearities, and it can indeed learn using discrete transmissions between units (LeCun 1986).
This property can help with making the model more biologically plausible by implementing
spike coding (discrete binary units) instead of coding of analogue variables by ring rate,
which seems biologically improbable, especially in the context of fast cortical computations
(Maas 1997).
Finally, in contrast to BPTT, TPTT does not require precisely clocked changes between
the forward and feedback regimes. The computational dependency between the two phases
is suciently relaxed to allow them to run in an arbitrary order. In fact, they could
potentially run in parallel.
2.3. Related Work
An attempt to use target propagation in a recurrent setting was previously presented by
Wiseman et al. (2017). The authors, however, nd the results \disappointing", with the pre-
sented algorithm underperforming in comparison to BPTT on the two real-world language
modelling data sets (Penn Tree Bank and Text8). It should be noted, that the target prop-
agation variant of Wiseman et al. (2017) is based on a constraint in the form of C(^ht;ht)
added to the loss, where ^htis a predicted hidden state at time tandCis anL2 type
penalty. In contrast to the work of Wiseman et al. (2017), this paper demonstrates that
Target propagation through time, as outlined in Section 2, generally outperforms BPTT-
trained recurrent networks.
Another idea closely related to the target propagation approach adopted in TPTT are
synthetic gradients (Czarnecki et al. 2017; Jaderberg et al. 2017). The concept of synthetic
gradients is similar to target propagation in the sense that the synaptic weights update
process does not have a strict dependency on a backpropagated global error signal.
The dierent layers of the network are individually updated, but instead of providing
local targets and updating the network parameters to bring the activation values close to
the targets, the network uses local models to approximate the true error gradients directly.
Under this scheme, the model Mtfor network layer tis trained by minimising the error
between the predicted gradient ^tand the gradient estimated by the synthetic model in the
next layer ^t+1. This process is repeated for all upstream layers until the nal layer of the
network, where the target gradient can be computed directly from the global error E. This
training method allows individual segments of the network to be update asynchronously,
resulting in an architecture known as Decoupled Neural Interfaces (DNIs).
The DNI architecture gives rise to a group of interesting properties. By removing the
sequential backpropagation of error signals through the network, DNI provides a method
where the network can be updated asynchronously. The constraint that a layer has to wait
until a full forward pass and a backward pass up to the said layer must be completed before
the layer is updated is substantially relaxed. Using synthetic gradients the decoupled layers
9