Target Propagation in Recurrent Neural Networks
network (although this is not a fair comparison provided that the number of parameters of
the TPTT network is greater by one order of magnitude).
4. Discussion and Future Work
This work presented target propagation through time : a dierence target propagation-based
algorithm for learning in recurrent neural networks. It was demonstrated that TPTT per-
forms generally better when compared to backpropagation, can be combined with other
techniques that look to reduce the impact of vanishing/exploding gradients, and provides
an advantage in training deeper recurrent networks. The experiments provide solid evi-
dence that the introduction of target propagation-based updates for the transition matrix
provides clear advantage not only on the sequence length but also in terms of convergence
speed. The paper also introduced a training scheme where the Wxhupdates are computed
to minimize the distance between the output of the hidden layer and the local target (i.e.
see TPTT hxin Appendix A), thus avoiding the chain rule through Whh. This variant of the
network, where the updates for both WhhandWxhare based on local targets, performed
even better in terms of depth, although it lagged slightly behind on speed of convergence.
Both target propagation variants, however, were signicantly quicker to converge compared
to BPTT.
In addition, there is evidence that in certain aspects TPTT is more biologically plau-
sible compared to Back-Propagation Through Time. This is in agreement with the widely
accepted idea that incorporation of additional neuro-biological mechanisms results in en-
hanced computational abilities (Hassabis et al. 2017; Spoerer et al. 2017; Lotter et al.
2016). Indeed, the feedback connections in the building blocks of TPTT mimic the layout
of a neuron with functionally distinct apical and basal dendrites. This neuro-biologically
inspired mechanism is the main driver that helps TPTT to outperform other BPTT-based
approaches, as it was experimentally conrmed.
Another factor that supports the more biologically plausible nature of TPTT is that
this training mechanism is better suited to handle discrete error signals. It has been shown
by Lee et al. (2015) that target propagation can be used in networks with discretized
transmission between units, and it would be interesting to see if TPTT can be adapted for
recurrent networks with discretized layers. This is, however left to future work.
A question that remains open is the impact of orthogonal initialisation on biological
plausibility. The literature on biological plausibility of initialisation tricks is unusually
scarce. The decision to use orthogonal initialisation was driven by the preference to keep
the BPTT and TPTT network architectures as close as possible, so that the impact of
architecture-related dierences on the learning performance can be conned to the dierence
between the BPTT and TPTT learning algorithms. It is worth noting that Lee et al. (2015)
also use orthogonal initialisation in their presentation of dierence target propagation . One
could speculate that it is in theory possible to have a separate biological process that aligns
the weights before the actual learning commences. An example to illustrate this idea could
be the work presented in Bengio et al. (2016), where a feedforward pass is used to obtain
initialization for a deep Boltzmann machine. In a more general case it could be argued that
careful initialisation can be considered a form of pre-training. Furthermore Hena et al.
(2016) demonstrate that dierent types of initialisation are more or less eective for dierent
23