Manchev and Spratling
contrast to Roelfsema and Holtmaat's model, where the gating values are always in f0;1g
and the sign of the change is controlled via neuromodulation, the feedback connections in
TPTT pass real-valued information to the targeted synapses. This allows the sign of the
locally computed error to drive individual synapses towards long-term potentiation (LTP)
or long-term depression (LTD).
Assuming that the feedback pathways provide the information required to assign credit
or blame allows TPTT to potentially present a more biologically plausible solution to the
credit assignment problem. As mentioned in Section 1.2, the common approach to credit
assignment in backpropagation-based settings is to use weight transport to explicitly cal-
culate updates for the synaptic weights at earlier time steps. TPTT avoids this non-local
transmission of information by optimising towards locally set targets. One could argue
that the process of setting of the local target can be viewed as a form of weight transport,
however, an argument could be put forward about the feedback connections in the human
brain being plastic. In this case a more biologically plausible model is a neuron where all
incoming synaptic weights are adaptable (Luo et al. 2017). There is, on the other hand,
sucient evidence that the necessity for updates to Vhhandchmight be circumvented by
using the random feedback alignment technique suggested by Lillicrap et al. (2016). This
could potentially completely remove the requirement for computing gradients and updating
the local targets during the feedback phase, although Luo et al. (2017) show that adaptable
feedback outperforms feedback-alignment.
As mentioned in Section 1.2, this weight transport resolution provided by TPTT is
not applicable to SRNNs, as the unrolled network is a temporally indexed version of the
same neuron. It was indicated, however, that target propagation can indeed bring benets
in terms of biological plausibility to recurrent networks comprising multiple neurons with
long-range connections. A specic example of such a network could be drawn from the
information processing mechanism in the human visual system. It has been suggested that
this mechanism employs an underlying recurrent circuit (Drewes et al. 2016, Lamme and
Roelfsema 2000), and there is signicant evidence that the ventral visual pathway is a
complex recurrent network (Kravitz et al. 2013). It has been shown that in primates the
primary visual cortex (V1) links not only to the secondary visual cortex (V2), but also to
visual areas 3 and 4 (V3, V4), and the middle temporal visual area (MT) (see Van Essen
et al. 1986, Nakamura et al. 1993, and Maunsell and van Essen 1983). Based on the
assumption that in the human ventral system V2 sends information to V4, which is then
send back to V1, and that V4 sends forwards information to the inferior temporal cortex
(IT), which is again recurrently connected to V2, Chang et al. (2017) present a simplied
RNN model in the form of V1-V2-V4-IT, with V1 receiving recurrent connections from V2,
V4, and IT. Unfolding such a network in time, for processing dynamic visual signals, would
now entail the repetition of interconnected groups of neurons. In this setting the credit
assignment problem reappears in the form of within-the-group weight transport. This can
be mitigated by target propagation, however, the need for complex temporal indexing still
pertains as group level targets would not be received for a number of time steps. It appears
that the storage of temporally indexed data is not a constraint that TPTT, in its present
form, can resolve.
Another objection mentioned in Section 1.2 is related to the use of continuous values.
By denition, backpropagation uses the error gradients to apply corrections to the synaptic
8