Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
20 
 neutral, or expressed with different strength/intensity levels, e.g., 1 to 5 
stars as used by most review sits on the Web. When an opinion is on the 
entity itself as a whole, the special as pect GENERAL is used to denote it. 
Here, ei and aij together represent the opinion target.  
Some important remarks about this definition are in order: 
1. In this definition, we purposely use subscripts to emphasize that the five 
pieces of information in the quintuple must correspond to one another. 
That is, the opinion sijkl must be given by opinion holder hk about aspect 
aij of entity ei at time tl. Any mismatch is an error.  
2. The five components are essential. Missing any of them is problematic 
in general. For example, if we do not have the time component, we will 
not be able to analyze opinions on an entity according to time, which is often very important in practice because an opinion two years ago and 
an opinion yesterday is not the same. Without opinion holder is also 
problematic. For example, in the sentence “ the mayor is loved by the 
people in the city, but he has been criticized by the state government, ” 
the two opinion holders, “ people in the city ” and “ state government, ” are 
clearly important for applications.  
3. The definition covers most but not all possible facets of the semantic 
meaning of an opinion, which can be  arbitrarily complex. For example, 
it does not cover the situation in “ The view finder and the lens are too 
close ,” which expresses an opinion on the distance of two parts. It also 
does not cover the context of the opinion, e g., “ This car is too small for 
a tall person ,” which does not say the car is too small for everyone. 
“Tall person” is the context here. Note also that in the original definition of entity, it is a hierarchy of parts,  sub-parts, and so on. Every part can 
have its set of attributes. Due to the simplification, the quintuple 
representation can result in information loss. For example, “ink” is a 
part/component of a printer. In a printer review, one wrote “ The ink of 
this printer is expensive .” This does not say that the printer is expensive 
(which indicates the aspect price ). If one does not care about any 
attribute of the ink, this sentence just gives a negative opinion to the ink, 
which is an aspect of the printer entity. However, if one also wants to 
study opinions about different aspects of the ink, e.g., price and quality, 
the ink needs to be treated as a separate entity. Then, the quintuple 
representation still applies, but the part-of relationship needs to be saved. Of course, conceptually we can  also expand the representation of 
opinion target using a nested relation. Despite the limitations, the 
definition does cover the essential information of an opinion which is 
sufficient for most applications. As we mentioned above, too complex a 
definition can make the problem extremely difficult to solve.