Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
7 
 CHAPTER 1 
Sentiment Analysis: A Fascinating 
Problem  
 
Sentiment analysis, also called opinion mining , is the field of study that 
analyzes people’s opinions, sentiments, evaluations, appraisals, attitudes, 
and emotions towards entities such as products, services, organizations, 
individuals, issues, events, topics, and their attributes. It represents a large 
problem space. There are also many names and slightly different tasks, e.g., 
sentiment analysis , opinion mining , opinion extraction , sentiment mining , 
subjectivity analysis , affect analysis , emotion analysis , review mining , etc. 
However, they are now all under the umbrella of sentiment analysis or 
opinion mining. While in industry, the term sentiment analysis  is more 
commonly used, but in academia both sentiment analysis  and opinion mining  
are frequently employed. They basically  represent the same field of study. 
The term sentiment analysis  perhaps first appeared in (Nasukawa and Yi, 
2003), and the term opinion mining  first appeared in (Dave, Lawrence and 
Pennock, 2003). However, the research on sentiments  and opinions  appeared 
earlier (Das and Chen, 2001; Morinaga et al., 2002; Pang, Lee and 
Vaithyanathan, 2002; Tong, 2001; Turney, 2002; Wiebe, 2000). In this 
book, we use the terms sentiment analysis  and opinion mining  
interchangeably. To simplify the presentation, throughout this book we will 
use the term opinion  to denote opinion, sentiment, evaluation, appraisal, 
attitude, and emotion. However, these concepts are not equivalent. We will 
distinguish them when needed. The meaning of opinion itself is still very 
broad. Sentiment analysis and opinion mining mainly focuses on opinions 
which express or imply positive or negative sentiments.  
Although linguistics and natural language processing (NLP) have a long 
history, little research had been done about people’s opinions and sentiments 
before the year 2000. Since then, the field has become a very active research 
area. There are several reasons for this. First, it has a wide arrange of 
applications, almost in every domain. The industry surrounding sentiment 
analysis has also flourished due to  the proliferation of commercial 
applications. This provides a strong  motivation for research. Second, it 
offers many challenging research problems, which had never been studied before. This book will systematically define and discuss these problems, and 
describe the current state-of-the-art techniques for solving them. Third, for