Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
133 
 pieces of their internal data to de tect fake reviewers and reviews.  
Finally, Wu et al. (2010) also proposed an unsupervised method to detect 
fake reviews based on a distortion criterion (not on reviewers’ behaviors as 
the above methods). The idea is that fake reviews will distort the overall 
popularity ranking for a collection of entities. That is, deleting a set of 
reviews chosen at random should not overly disrupt the ranked list of 
entities, while deleting fake reviews should significantly alter or distort the 
ranking of entities to reveal the “true" ranking. This distortion can be 
measured by comparing popularity rankings before and after deletion using 
rank correlation. 
10.3.2 Spam Detection Using Review Graph  
In (Wang et al., 2011), a graph-based method was proposed for detecting 
spam in store or merchant reviews. Such reviews describe purchase 
experiences and evaluations of stores. This study was based on a snapshot of 
all reviews from resellerratings.com, which were crawled on Oct. 6th, 2010. 
After removing stores with no reviews, there were 343603 reviewers who 
wrote 408470 reviews about 14561 stores. 
Although one can borrow some ideas from product review spammer 
detection, their clues are insufficient for the store review context. For 
example, it is suspicious for a person to post multiple reviews to the same 
product, but it can be normal for a person to post more than one review to 
the same store due to multiple purchasing experiences. Also, it can be 
normal to have near-duplicate reviews from one reviewer for multiple stores 
because unlike different products, different stores basically provide the same 
type of services. Therefore, featur es or clues proposed in existing 
approaches to detecting fake product reviews and reviewers are not all 
appropriate for detecting spammers of store reviews. Thus, there is a need to 
look for a more sophisticated and complementary framework.  
This paper used a heterogeneous review graph with three types of nodes, i.e., 
reviewers, reviews and stores, to capture their relationships and to model 
spamming clues. A reviewer node has a link to each review that he/she wrote. A review node has an edge to a store node if the review is about that 
store. A store is connected to a reviewer  via this reviewer’s review about the 
store. Each node is also attached with  a set of features. For example, a store 
node has features about its  average rating, its number of reviews, etc. Based 
on the review graph, three concepts are defined and computed, i.e. the 
trustiness of reviewers, the honesty of reviews, and the reliability of stores. 
A reviewer is more trustworthy if he /she has written more honesty reviews;