Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
54 
 then applied to classify Romanian sentences into subjective and objective 
classes. The precision was not bad, but the recall was poor. Second, they 
derived a subjectivity-annotated corpus in the new language using a 
manually translated parallel corpus. They first automatically classified 
English sentences in the corpus into subjective and objective classes using 
some existing tools, and then projected the subjectivity class labels to the 
Romanian sentences in the parallel cor pus using the available sentence-level 
alignment in the parallel corpus. A subjectivity classifier based on 
supervised learning was then built in Romanian to classify Romanian 
sentences. In this case, the result was better than the first approach. 
However, it should be noted that the translation of the parallel corpus was 
done manually.  
In (Banea et al., 2008), three sets of  experiments were reported. First, a 
labeled corpus in the source language (English) was automatically translated 
into the target language (Romanian). The subjectivity labels in the source 
language were then mapped to the translated version in the target language. 
Second, the source language text was automatically labeled for subjectivity 
and then translated into the target la nguage. In both cases, the translated 
version with subjectivity labels in the target language was used to train a 
subjectivity classifier in the target language. Third, the target language was translated into the source language, and then a subjectivity classification tool 
was used to classify the automatically translated source language text. After 
classification, the labels were mapped back into the target language. The 
resulting labeled corpus was then used to train a subjectivity classifier in the 
target language. The final classificati on results were quite similar for the 
three strategies.  
In (Banea, Mihalcea and Wiebe, 2010 ), extensive experiments for cross-
language sentence level subjectivity classification were conducted by 
translating from a labeled English corpus to 5 other languages. First, it was 
shown that using the translated corpus for training worked reasonably well 
consistently for all 5 languages. Combining the translated versions in different languages with the original English version to form a single 
training corpus can also improve the original English subjectivity 
classification itself. Second, the paper demonstrated that by combining the 
predictions made by monolingual classifiers using majority vote, it was able 
to generate a high precision sentence-level subjectivity classifier.  
The technique in (Bautin, Vijayarenu and Skiena, 2008) also translated 
documents in the target language to English and used a English lexicon-
based method to determine the sentiment orientation for each sentence 
containing an entity. This paper actually worked at the aspect level. The 
sentiment classification method was similar to that in (Hu and Liu, 2004).  
In (Kim, Li and Lee, 2010), a concept called the multi-lingual comparability