Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
138 
 if the quality of reviewer r2 is at least as high as that of reviewer r1.  
Co-citation consistency hypothesis : People are consistent in how they trust 
other people. So if two reviewers r1 and r2 are trusted by the same third 
reviewer r3, then their quality should be similar. 
Link consistency hypothesis : If two people are connected in the social 
network ( r1 trusts r2, or r2 trusts r1, or both), then their review quality 
should be similar.  
These hypotheses were enforced as re gularizing constraints and added into 
the text-based linear regression model to solve the review quality prediction 
problem. For experiments, the authors used the data from Ciao 
(www.ciao.co.uk), which is a community review Web site. In Ciao, people 
not only write reviews for products and services, but also rate the reviews written by others. Furthermore, people can add members to their network of 
trusted members or “Circle of Trust”, if they find these members’ reviews 
consistently interesting and helpful. Clearly, this technique will not be 
applicable to Web sites which do not ha ve a trust social network in place.  
11.2 Other Methods  
In (O'Mahony and Smyth, 2009), a clas sification approach was proposed to 
classify helpful and non-helpful reviews. Many features were used:  
Reputation features : the mean (R1) and standard deviation (R2) of review 
helpfulness over all reviews authored by the reviewer, the percentage of 
reviews authored by the reviewer which have received a minimum of T 
feedbacks (R3), etc.    
Content features : review length (C1), the rati o of uppercase to lowercase 
characters in the review text (C3), etc.  
Social features : the number of reviews authored  by the reviewer (SL1), the 
mean (SL2) and standard deviation (SL3) of the number of reviews 
authored by all reviewers, etc.  
Sentiment features : the rating score of the review  (ST1), and the mean (ST5) 
and standard deviation (ST6) of the sc ores assigned by the reviewer over 
all reviews authored by the reviewer, etc.   
In (Liu et al., 2007), the problem wa s also formulated as a two-class 
classification problem. However, they argued that using the helpfulness votes as the ground truth may not be a ppropriate because of three biases: (1) 
vote imbalance (a very large percentage of votes are helpful votes); (2) early 
bird bias (early reviews tend to get more votes); (3) 
winner circle bias 
(when some reviews get many votes they are ranked high at the review sites