Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
52 
 “Can anyone tell me where I can find a good Nokia phone ?” clearly has no 
opinion about any particular phone. However, “ Can anyone tell me how to 
fix this lousy Nokia phone ?” has a negative opinion about the Nokia phone. 
To my knowledge, there is no study on this problem. I believe that for more 
accurate sentiment analysis, we need to  handle different types of sentences 
differently. Much furthe r research is needed in this direction.  
4.4 Dealing with Sarcastic Sentences  
Sarcasm is a sophisticated form of sp eech act in which the speakers or the 
writers say or write the opposite of what they mean. Sarcasm has been studied in linguistics, psychology and cognitive science (Gibbs and Colston, 
2007; Gibbs, 1986; Kreuz and Caucci, 2007; Kreuz and Glucksberg, 1989; 
Utsumi, 2000)). In the context of sentim ent analysis, it means that when one 
says something positive he/she actually means negative, and vice versa. 
Sarcasm is very difficult to deal with. Some initial work has been done in 
(González-Ibáñez, Muresan and Wacholder, 2011; Tsur, Davidov and 
Rappoport, 2010). Based on my own experiences, sarcastic sentences are not 
very common in reviews of products and services, but they are very frequent 
in online discussions and commentaries about politics.   
In (Tsur, Davidov and Rappoport, 2010), a semi-supervised learning 
approach was proposed to identify sarcasms. It used a small set of labeled sentences (seeds), but did not use unlabeled examples. Instead, it expanded 
the seed set automatically through We b search. The authors posited that 
sarcastic sentences frequently co-occur in texts with other sarcastic 
sentences. An automated web search using each sentence in the seed training 
set as a query was performed. The system then collected up to 50 search 
engine snippets for each seed example and added the collected sentences to 
the training set. This enriched training set was then used for learning and 
classification. For learning, it used two types of features, pattern-based 
features and punctuation-based featur es. A pattern is simply an ordered 
sequence of high frequency words. Two criteria were also designed to 
remove too general and too specific patterns. These patterns are similar to 
sequential patterns in data mining (Liu, 2006 and 2011). Punctuation-based 
features include the number of “!”, “?” and quotes, and the number of capitalized/all capital words in the sentence. For classification, a kNN-based 
method was employed. This work, however, did not perform sentiment 
classification. It only separated sa rcastic and non-sarcastic sentences.  
The work of González-Ibáñez, Muresan and Wacholder (2011) studied the 
problem in the context of sentiment analysis using Twitter data, i.e., to