Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
98 
 McCallum and Pereira, 2001).  
The problem of adapting a general lexicon to a new one for domain specific 
expression level sentiment classification was studied in (Choi and Cardie, 
2009). Their technique adapted the word-level polarities of a general-
purpose sentiment lexicon for a particular domain by utilizing the 
expression-level polarities in the domai n, and in return, the adapted word-
level polarities were used to improve the expression-level polarities. The 
word-level and the expression-level polarity relationships were modeled as a 
set of constraints and the problem was solved using integer linear 
programming. This work assumed that there was a given general-purpose 
polarity lexicon L, and a polarity classification algorithm f(el, L) that can 
determine the polarity of the opinion expression el based on the words in el 
and L. Jijkoun, Rijke and Weerkamp (2010) proposed a related method to 
adapt a general sentiment lexicon to a topic specific one as well.  
Du et al. (2010) studied the problem of adapting the sentiment lexicon from 
one domain (not a general-purpose lexicon) to another domain. As input, the 
algorithm assumes the availability of a set of in-domain sentiment-labeled 
documents, a set of sentiment words from these in-domain documents, and a 
set of out-of-domain documents. The task was to make the in-domain 
sentiment lexicon adapted for the out-of-domain documents. Two ideas were 
used in the study. First, a document should be positive (or negative) if it 
contains many positive (or negative) words, and a word should be positive 
(or negative) if it appears in many positive (or negative) documents. These 
are mutual reinforcement relationships. Second, even though the two 
domains may be under different distributions, it is possible to identify a common part between them (e.g. the same word has the same orientation). 
The sentiment lexicon adaption was solved using the information bottleneck 
framework. The same problem was also solved in (Du and Tan, 2009).  
On a slightly different topic, Wiebe and Mihalcea (2006) investigated the 
possibility of assigning subjectivity labels to word senses based on a corpus. 
Two studies were conducted. The first study investigated the agreement 
between annotators who manually assigned labels subjective , objective , or 
both to WordNet senses. The second study evaluated a method for automatic 
assignment of subjectivity labels/scores to word senses. The method was 
based on distributional similarity (Lin, 1998). Their work showed that 
subjectivity is a property that can be a ssociated with word senses, and word 
sense disambiguation can directly benefit from subjectivity annotations. A 
subsequent work was reported in (Akkaya, Wiebe and Mihalcea, 2009). Su 
and Markert (2008) also studied the problem and performed a case study for 
subjectivity recognition. In (Su and Mark ert, 2010), they fu rther investigated 
this problem and applied it in a cross-lingual environment.