Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
15 
 the natural language text, which is often called unstructured data , I take a 
structured approach to writing this book. The next chapter will formally 
define the problem, which allows us to  see a structure of the problem. From 
the definition, we will see the key tasks of sentiment analysis. In the 
subsequent chapters, existing techniques for performing the tasks are 
described. Due to my research, consulting, and start-up experiences, the 
book not only discusses key research concepts but also looks at the 
technology from an application point of view in order to help practitioners in 
the field. However, I must apologize that when I talk about industrial 
systems, I cannot reveal the names of companies or their systems, partially 
because of my consulting/business agre ements and partially because of the 
fact that the sentiment analysis market moves rapidly and the companies that I know of may have changed or improved their algorithms when you read 
this book. I do not want to create problems for them and for me.    
Although I try to cover all major ideas and techniques in this book, it has 
become an impossible task. In the past  decade, a huge number of research 
papers (probably more than 1000) have been published on the topic. 
Although most papers appeared in NLP conferences and journals, many 
papers have also been published in data mining, Web mining, machine 
learning, information retrieval, e-commerce, management sciences, and 
many other fields. It is thus almost impossible to write a book that covers the 
ideas in every published paper. I am sorry if your good ideas or techniques 
are overlooked. However, a major advantage of publishing this book in the 
synthesis lecture series of Morgan & Claypool is that the authors can always 
add new or updated materials to the book because the printing is on demand. So if you find that some important ideas are not discussed, please do not 
hesitate to let me know and I will be very happy to include.  
Finally, background knowledge in the following areas will be very helpful in 
reading this book: natural language processing (Indurkhya and Damerau, 
2010; Manning and Schutze, 1999), machine learning (Bishop, 2006; 
Mitchell, 1997), data mining (Liu, 2006 and 2011), and information retrieval 
(Manning, Raghavan and Schutze, 2008).