Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
16 
 CHAPTER 2 
The Problem of Sentiment Analysis  
 
In this chapter, we define an abstraction of the sentiment analysis or opinion 
mining problem. From a research point of view, this abstraction gives us a 
statement of the problem and enables us to see a rich set of inter-related sub-
problems which make up the sentiment analysis problem. It is often said that 
if we cannot structure a problem, we probably do not understand the problem. The objective of the definitions is thus to abstract a structure from 
the complex and intimidating unstructured natural language text. They also 
serve as a common framework to unify various existing research directions, 
and to enable researchers to design more robust and accurate solution 
techniques by expl oiting the inter-rela tionships of the sub-problems. From a 
practical application point of view, the definitions let practitioners see what 
sub-problems need to be solved in a practical system, how they are related, 
and what output should be produced.  
Unlike factual information, opinions and sentiments have an important 
characteristic, namely, they are subjective. It is thus important to examine a 
collection of opinions from many people rather than only a single opinion 
from one person because such an opinion represents only the subjective view 
of that single person, which is usually not sufficient for application. Due to a large collection of opinions on the Web, some form of summary of opinions 
is needed (Hu and Liu, 2004). The problem definitions state what kind of 
summary may be desired. Along with the problem definitions, the chapter 
will also discuss several related concepts such as subjectivity and emotion. 
Note that throughout this chapter and also the whole book, I mainly use 
reviews and sentences from reviews as examples to introduce ideas and to 
define key concepts, but the ideas and the resulting definitions are general 
and applicable to all forms of formal and informal opinion text such as news 
articles, tweets (Twitter postings), fo rum discussions, blogs, and Facebook 
postings. Since product reviews are highly focused and opinion rich, they 
allow us to see different issues mo re clearly than from other forms of 
opinion text. Conceptually, there is no difference between them. The 
differences are mainly superficial and in  the degree of difficulty in dealing 
with them. For example, Twitter postings (tweets) are short (at most 140 
characters) and informal, and use many Internet slangs and emoticons. 
Twitter postings are, in fact, easier to analyze due to the length limit because