Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
60 
 The lexicon-based approach can avoid some of the issues (Ding, Liu and Yu, 
2008; Hu and Liu, 2004), and has been shown to perform quite well in a 
large number of domains. Such methods are typically unsupervised. They 
use a sentiment lexicon (which contains a list of sentiment words, phrases, 
and idioms), composite expressions, rules of opinions (Section 5.2), and 
(possibly) the sentence parse tree to determine the sentiment orientation on 
each aspect in a sentence. They also consider sentiment shifters , but-clauses  
(see below) and many other constructs which may affect sentiments. Of 
course, the lexicon-based approach also has its own shortcomings, which we 
will discuss later. An extension of this method to handling comparative 
sentences will be discussed in Section 8.2. Below, we introduce one simple 
lexicon-based method to give a flavor of this approach. The method is from (Ding, Liu and Yu, 2008) and it has four steps. Here, we assume that entities 
and aspects are known. Their extraction will be discussed in Section 5.3.  
1. Mark sentiment words and phrases : For each sentence that contains 
one or more aspects, this step mark s all sentiment words and phrases in 
the sentence. Each positive word is assigned the sentiment score of +1 
and each negative word is assigned the sentiment score of 1. For 
example, we have the sentence, “ The voice quality of this phone is not 
good, but the battery life is long. ” After this step, the sentence becomes 
“The voice quality  of this phone is not  good  [+1], but the  battery life is 
long” because “good” is a positive sentiment word (the aspects in the 
sentence are italicized). Note that “long” here is not a sentiment word as 
it does not indicate a positive or negative sentiment by itself in general, 
but we can infer its sentiment in this context shortly. In fact, “long” can 
be regarded as a context-dependent sentiment word, which we will discuss in Chapter 6. In the next section, we will see some other 
expressions that can give or imply positive or negative sentiments.  
2. Apply sentiment shifters: Sentiment shifters (also called valence 
shifters  in (Polanyi and Zaenen, 2004)) are words and phrases that can 
change sentiment orientations. There are several types of such shifters. 
Negation words like not, never , none , nobody , nowhere , neither , and 
cannot  are the most common type. This step turns our sentence into “The 
voice quality  of this phone is not good [-1], but the battery life  is long” 
due to the negation word “not.” We will discuss several other types of 
sentiment shifters in the next section. Note that not every appearance of a 
sentiment shifter changes the sentiment orientation, e.g., “not only … but also.” Such cases need to be dealt with care. That is, such special uses 
and patterns need to be identified beforehand.  
3. Handle but-clauses : Words or phrases that indicate contrary  need 
special handling because they often change sentiment orientations too.