Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
85 
 Here we first discuss a specific problem of named entity extraction in the 
sentiment analysis context. In a typical sentiment analysis application, the 
user usually wants to find opinions about some competing entities, e.g., 
competing products or brands. However,  he/she often can only provide a few 
names because there are so many different brands and models. Even for the 
same entity, Web users may write the entity in many different ways. For 
example, “Motorola” may be written as “Moto” or “Mot.” It is thus 
important for a system to automatically discover them from the corpus (e.g., 
reviews, blogs and forum discussions). The main requirement of this 
extraction is that the extracted entities must be of the same type as the 
entities provided by the user (e.g., phone brands and models).  
In (Li et al., 2010), Li et al. formulated the problem as a set expansion 
problem  (Ghahramani and Heller, 2006; Pantel et al., 2009). The problem is 
stated as follows: Given a set Q of seed entities of a particular class C, and a 
set D of candidate entities, we wish to determine which of the entities in D 
belong to C. That is, we “grow” the class C based on the set of seed 
examples Q. Although this is a classification problem, in practice, the 
problem is often solved as a ranking problem, i.e., to rank the entities in D 
based on their likelihoods of belonging to C.  
The classic methods for solving this problem in NLP are based on 
distributional similarity (Lee, 1999; Pantel et al., 2009). The approach works 
by comparing the similarity of the surround words of each candidate entity 
with those of the seed entities and then ranking the candidate entities based 
on the similarity values. In (Li et al., 2010), it was shown that this approach 
was inaccurate. Learning from positive and unlabeled examples (PU learning) using the S-EM algorithm (L iu et al., 2002) was considerably 
better. To apply PU learning, the given seeds were used to automatically 
extract sentences that contain one or more of the seeds. The surrounding 
words of each seed in these sentences served as the context of the seed. The 
rest of the sentences were treated as unlabeled examples. Experimental 
results indicated that S-EM outperformed the machine learning technique 
Bayesian Sets  (Ghahramani and Heller, 2006),  which also outperformed the 
distributional similarity measure significantly.  
About opinion holder extraction in the context of sentiment analysis, several 
researchers have investigated it. Th e extraction was mainly done in news 
articles. Kim and Hovy (2004) consid ered person and organization as the 
only possible opinion  holders, and used a named entity tagger to identify 
them. Choi, Breck and Cardie (2006) used conditional random fields (CRF) 
for extraction. To train CRF, they used features such as surrounding words, 
part-of-speech of surrounding words, grammatical roles, sentiment words, 
etc. In (Kim and Hovy, 2006), the method first generates all possible holder