Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
59 
 evaluates the phone as a whole, i.e., the GENERAL aspect of the entity 
represented by “this phone.” Bear in  mind whenever we talk about an 
aspect, we must know which entity it belongs to. In our discussion below, 
we often omit the entity just for simplicity of presentation. 
2. Aspect sentiment classification : This task determines whether the 
opinions on different aspects are positive, negative, or neutral. In the first 
example above, the opinion on the “voice quality” aspect is positive. In 
the second, the opinion on the aspect GENERAL is also positive.   
Note that it is possible that in an application the opinion targets are given 
because the user is only interested in  these particular targets (e.g., the BMW 
and Ford brands). In that case, we do not need to perform entity or aspect 
extraction, but only to determine the sentiments on the targets.  
5.1 Aspect Sentiment Classification 
We study the second task first, i.e., determining the orientation of sentiment 
expressed on each aspect in a sentence . There are two main approaches, i.e., 
the supervised learning approach and the lexicon-based approach.  
For the supervised learning approach, the learning based methods used for 
sentence-level and clause-level sentiment classification discussed in Chapter 
4 are applicable. In (Wei and Gulla, 2010), a hierarchical classification 
model was also proposed. However, the key issue is how to determine the scope of each sentiment expression, i.e., whether it covers the aspect of 
interest in the sentence. The current main approach is to use parsing to 
determine the dependency and the other relevant information. For example, 
in (Jiang et al., 2011), a dependency parser was used to generate a set of 
aspect dependent features for classification. A related approach was also 
used in (Boiy and Moens, 2009), which weights each feature based on the 
position of the feature relative to the target aspect in the parse tree. For 
comparative sentences, “than” or other related words can be used to segment 
a sentence (Ding, Liu and Zhang, 2009; Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008).  
Supervised learning is dependent on the training data. As we discussed in 
Section 3.4, a model or classifier trained from labeled data in one domain 
often performs poorly in another domain. Although domain adaptation (or 
transfer learning) has been studie d by researchers (Section 3.4), the 
technology is still far from mature, and the current methods are also mainly 
used for document level sentiment clas sification as documents are long and 
contain more features for classification than individual sentences or clauses. 
Thus, supervised learning has difficulty to scale up to a large number of 
application domains.