Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
72 
 extraction problem. Many algorithms based on supervised learning have 
been proposed in the past for information extraction (Hobbs and Riloff, 
2010; Mooney and Bunescu, 2005; Sarawagi, 2008). The most dominant 
methods are based on sequential learning  (or sequential labeling ). Since 
these are supervised techniques, th ey need manually labeled data for 
training. That is, one needs to manually annotate aspects and non-aspects in 
a corpus. The current state-of-the-art sequential learning methods are Hidden 
Markov  Models  (HMM) (Rabiner, 1989) and Conditional Random Fields  
(CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum and Pereira, 2001). Jin and Ho (2009) applied a 
lexicalized HMM model to learn patterns to extract aspects and opinion 
expressions. Jakob and Gurevych (Jakob and Gurevych, 2010) used CRF. 
They trained CRF on review sentences from different domains for a more domain independent extraction. A set of domain independent features were 
also used, e.g. tokens, POS tags, syntactic dependency, word distance, and 
opinion sentences. Li et al (2010) integrated two CRF variations, i.e., Skip-
CRF and Tree-CRF, to extract aspects and also opinions. Unlike the original 
CRF, which can only use word sequences in learning, Skip-CRF and Tree-
CRF enable CRF to exploit structure features. CRF was also used in (Choi 
and Cardie, 2010). Liu, Hu and Cheng (2005) and Jindal and Liu (2006b) 
used sequential pattern rules. These rules are mined based on sequential 
pattern mining considering labels (or classes).  
One can also use other supervised methods. For example, the method in 
(Kobayashi, Inui and Matsumoto, 2007) first finds candidate aspect and 
opinion word pairs using a dependency tree, and then employs a tree-
structured classification method to lear n and to classify the candidate pairs 
as being an aspect and evaluation rela tion or not. Aspects are extracted from 
the highest scored pairs. The features used in learning include contextual 
clues, statistical co-occurrence clues, among others. Yu et al. (2011) used a 
partially supervised learning method called one-class SVM (Manevitz and 
Yousef, 2002) to extract aspects. Using one-class SVM, one only needs to 
label some positive examples, which ar e aspects, but not non-aspects. In 
their case, they only extracted aspects from Pros and Cons of review format 
2 as in (Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005). They also clustered those synonym 
aspects and ranked aspects based on their frequency and their contributions 
to the overall review rating of reviews. Ghani et al. (2006) used both 
traditional supervised learning and semi-supervised learning for aspect extraction. Kovelamudi et al., (2011) used a supervised method but also 
exploited some relevant information from Wikipedia.