Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
27 
 less work has been done on implicit opinions (Zhang and Liu, 2011b).  In a 
slightly different direction, (Greene and Resnik, 2009) studied the influence 
of syntactic choices on perceptions of implicit sentiment. For example, for 
the same story, different headlines can imply different sentiments.  
2.4 Subjectivity and Emotion  
There are two important concepts that are closely related to sentiment and opinion, i.e., subjectivity  and emotion .  
Definition (sentence subjectivity): An objective sentence presents some 
factual information about the world, while a subjective sentence  
expresses some personal feelings, views, or beliefs.  
An example objective sentence is “ iPhone is an Apple product .” An example 
subjective sentence is “ I like iPhone .” Subjective expressions come in many 
forms, e.g., opinions, allegations, desires, beliefs, suspicions, and 
speculations (Riloff, Patwardhan and Wiebe, 2006; Wiebe, 2000). There is 
some confusion among researchers to equate subjectivity  with opinionated . 
By opinionated , we mean that a document or sentence expresses or implies a 
positive or negative sentiment. The two concepts are not equivalent, 
although they have a large intersection. The task of determining whether a 
sentence is subjective or objective is called subjectivity classification  (Wiebe 
and Riloff, 2005) (see Chapter 4). Here, we should note the following:  
 A subjective sentence may not express any sentiment. For example, “ I 
think that he went home ” is a subjective sentence, but does not express 
any sentiment. Sentence (5) in Example 4 is also subjective but it does 
not give a positive or negative sentiment about anything.  
 Objective sentences can imply opinions or sentiments due to desirable 
and undesirable facts (Zhang and Liu, 2011b). For example, the following two sentences which state some facts clearly imply negative 
sentiments (which are implicit opinions ) about their respective products 
because the facts are undesirable:  
“The earphone broke in two days .” 
“I brought the mattress a week ago and a valley has formed ” 
Apart from explicit opinion bearing subjective expressions, many other 
types of subjectivity have also been studied although not as extensive, e.g., 
affect, judgment, appreciation, specul ation, hedge, perspective, arguing, 
agreement and disagreement, political  stances (Alm, 2008; Ganter and 
Strube, 2009; Greene and Resnik, 2009; Hardisty, Boyd-Graber and Resnik, 
2010; Lin et al., 2006; Medlock and Briscoe, 2007; Mukherjee and Liu,