Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
121 
 To determine whether an opinionated document expresses a positive, 
negative or mixed opinion, a second classifier is constructed. The training 
data are reviews from review sites containing review ratings (e.g., 
rateitall.com). A low rating indicates a negative opinion while a high rating 
indicates a positive opinion. Using positive and negative reviews as training 
data, a sentiment classifier is built to classify each document as expressing a 
positive, negative, or mixed opinion.  
There are also other approaches to opinion retrieval in TREC evaluations. 
The readers are encouraged to read the papers at the TREC Web site 
(http://trec.nist.gov/). For a summary of TREC evaluations, please refer to 
the overview paper of 2006 TREC bl og track (Ounis et al., 2006), the 
overview paper of 2007 TREC blog track (Macdonald, Ounis and Soboroff, 2007), and the overview paper of 2008 TREC blog track (Ounis, Macdonald 
and Soboroff, 2008). Below, we discuss research published in other forums.  
In (Eguchi and Lavrenko, 2006), Eguchi and Lavrenko proposed a sentiment 
retrieval technique based on generative language modeling. In their 
approach, the user needs to provide a set of query terms representing a 
particular topic of interest, and also sentiment polarity (orientation) interest, 
which is represented either as a set of seed sentiment words or a particular 
sentiment orientation (positive or negative). One main advance of their work 
is that they combined sentiment relevance models and topic relevance 
models with model parameters estimated from the training data, considering 
the topic dependence of the sentimen t. They showed that the explicit 
modeling of dependency between topic and sentiment produced better 
retrieval results than treating them independently. A similar approach was also proposed by Huang and Croft (2009), which scored the relevance of a 
document using a topic reliance model and an opinion relevance model. 
Both these works took a linear combination of topic relevance and sentiment 
relevance for final ranking. In (Zhang and Ye, 2008), the authors used the 
product of the two relevance scores. The relevance formulation is also based 
on language modeling.  
In (Na et al., 2009), a lexicon-based approach was proposed for opinion 
retrieval. They also attempted to deal with the domain dependent lexicon 
construction issue. A relevant feedback style learning for generating query-
specific sentiment lexicon was proposed, which made use of a set of top-
ranked documents in response to a query.  
Liu, Li and Liu (2009) explored various lexical and sentiment features and 
different learning algorithms for identifying opinionated blogs. They also 
presented results for the strategy that combines both the opinion analysis and 
the retrieval components for retrieving relevant and opinionated blogs.