Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
110 
 CHAPTER 8 
Analysis of Comparative Opinions  
 
Apart from directly expressing positive or negative opinions about an entity 
and its aspects, one can also express op inions by comparing similar entities. 
Such opinions are called comparative opinions  (Jindal and Liu, 2006a; 
Jindal and Liu, 2006b). Comparative opinions are related to but are also 
different from regular opinions. They not only have different semantic meanings but also have different syntactic forms. For example, a typical 
regular opinion sentence is “ The voice quality of this phone is amazing ,” and 
a typical comparative opinion sentence is “ The voice quality of Nokia phones 
is better than that of iPhones .” This comparative sentence does not say that 
any phone’s voice quality is good or bad, but simply compares them. Due to 
this difference, comparative opinions require different analysis techniques. 
Like regular sentences, comparative sentences can be opinionated or not-
opinionated. The comparative sentence above is opinionated because it 
explicitly expresses a comparative sentiment of its author, while the sentence 
“iPhone is 1 inch wider than a normal Nokia phone ” expresses no sentiment. 
In this chapter, we first define the problem and then present some existing 
methods for solving it. We should also note that there are in fact two main 
types of opinions that are based on comparisons: comparative opinions  and 
superlative opinions . In English, they are usually expressed using the 
comparative or superlative  forms of adjectives or adverbs, but not always. 
However, in this chapter, we study them together and just call them 
comparative opinions in general because their semantic meanings and 
handling methods are similar.  
8.1 Problem Definitions  
A comparative sentence expresses a relation based on similarities or differences of more than one entity. There are several types of comparisons. They can be grouped into two main categories: gradable comparison  and 
non-gradable comparison  (Jindal and Liu, 2006a; Kennedy, 2005).  
Gradable comparison: Such a comparison expresses an ordering 
relationship of entities being compared. It has three sub-types:  
1. Non-equal gradable comparison : It expresses a relation of the type