Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
19 
 Each part or sub-part also has its own set of attributes.  
Example 1:  A particular model of camera is an entity, e.g., Canon G12. It 
has a set of attributes, e.g., picture quality , size, and weight , and a set of 
parts, e.g., lens, viewfinder , and battery . Battery  also has its own set of 
attributes, e.g., battery life  and battery weight . A topic can be an entity 
too, e.g., tax increase , with its parts  “tax increase for the poor ,” “tax 
increase for the middle class ” and “ tax increase for the rich .” 
This definition essentially describes a hierarchical decomposition of entity 
based on the part-of  relation. The root node is the name of the entity, e.g., 
Canon G12 in the above review. All the other nodes are parts and sub-parts, 
etc. An opinion can be expressed on any node and any attribute of the node.  
Example 2:  In our example review above, sentence (2) expresses a positive 
opinion about the entity Canon G12 camera as a whole. Sentence (3) 
expresses a positive opinion on the attribute of picture quality of the 
camera. Clearly, one can also express opinions about parts or components 
of the camera.  
This entity as a hierarchy of any number  of levels needs a nested relation to 
represent it, which is often too complex for applications. The main reason is 
that since NLP is a very difficult task, recognizing parts and attributes of an 
entity at different levels of details is extremely hard. Most applications also 
do not need such a complex analysis. Th us, we simplify the hierarchy to two 
levels and use the term aspects  to denote both parts and attributes. In the 
simplified tree, the root node is still the entity itself, but the second level 
(also the leaf level) nodes are different aspects of the entity. This simplified 
framework is what is typically used in practical sentiment analysis systems.  
Note that in the research literature, entities are also called objects , and 
aspects are also called features (as in product features). However, features 
here can confuse with features used in machine learning, where a feature 
means a data attribute. To avoid confusion, aspects have become more 
popular in recent years. Note that some researchers also use the terms facets , 
attributes and topics , and in specific applications, entities and aspects may 
also be called other names based on the application domain conventions.  
After decomposing the opinion target, we can redefine an opinion (Hu and 
Liu, 2004; Liu, 2010). 
Definition (opinion) : An opinion  is a quintuple,  
(ei, aij, sijkl, hk, tl),  
where ei is the name of an entity, aij is an aspect of ei, sijkl is the sentiment 
on aspect aij of entity ei, hk is the opinion holder, and tl is the time when 
the opinion is expressed by hk. The sentiment sijkl is positive, negative, or