Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
74 
 aspects. The reason is that LDA depends on topic distribution differences 
and word co-occurrences among documents to identify topics and word 
probability distribution in each topic. However, opinion documents such as 
reviews about a particular type of products are quite homogenous, meaning 
that every document talks about the same  aspects, which makes global topic 
models ineffective and are only effective for discovering entities (e.g., 
different brands or product names). The authors then proposed the 
multigrain topic models. The global model discovers entities while the local 
model discovers aspects using a few sentences (or a sliding text window) as 
a document. Here, each discovered aspect is a unigram language model, i.e., 
a multinomial distribution over words. Different words expressing the same 
or related facets are automatically gr ouped together under the same aspect. 
However, this technique does not separate aspects and sentiment words.  
Branavan et al. (2008) proposed a method which made use of the aspect 
descriptions as keyphrases in Pros and Cons of review format 1 to help 
finding aspects in the detailed review text. Their model consists of two parts. 
The first part clusters the keyphrases in Pros and Cons into some aspect 
categories based on distributional similarity. The second part builds a topic 
model modeling the topics or aspects in the review text. Their final graphical 
model models these two parts simultaneously. The two parts are integrated 
based on the idea that the model biases the assignment of hidden topics in 
the review text to be similar to the topics represented by the keyphrases in 
Pros and Cons of the review, but it also permits some words in the document 
to be drawn from other topics not represented by the keyphrases. This 
flexibility in the coupling allows the model to learn effectively in the presence of incomplete ke yphrases, while still encouraging the keyphrase 
clustering to cohere with the topics supported by the review text. However, 
this approach still does not separate aspects and sentiments.  
Lin and He (2009) proposed a joint topic-sentiment model by extending 
LDA, where aspect words and sentiment words were still not explicitly 
separated. Brody and Elhadad (2010) proposed to first identify aspects using 
topic models and then identify aspect-specific sentiment words by 
considering adjectives only. Li, Huang and Zhu (2010) proposed two joint 
models, Sentiment-LDA and Dependency-sentiment-LDA, to find aspects 
with positive and negative sentiments. It does not find aspects independently 
and it does not separate aspect words and sentiment words. Zhao et al. (Zhao 
et al., 2010) proposed the MaxEnt-LDA (a Maximum Entropy and LDA 
combination) hybrid model to jointly discover both aspect words and aspect-
specific opinion words, which can leverage syntactic features to help 
separate aspects and sentiment words. The joint modeling is achieved 
through an indicator variable  (also called a switch variable ) which is drawn