Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
107 
 In (Nishikawa et al., 2010b), a more sophisticated summarization technique 
was proposed, which generates a traditional text summary by selecting and 
ordering sentences taken from multip le reviews, considering both 
informativeness and readability of the final summary. The informativeness 
was defined as the sum of frequency of each aspect-sentiment pair. 
Readability was defined as the natural sequence of sentences, which was 
measured as the sum of the connectiv ity of all adjacent sentences in the 
sequence. The problem was then solved through optimization. In (Nishikawa 
et al., 2010a), the authors further studied this problem using an integer linear 
programming formulation. In (Ganesan, Zhai and Han, 2010), a graphical 
model based method was used to generate an abstractive summary of 
opinions. In (Yatani et al., 2011), adjective-noun pairs were extracted as a summary.  
7.3 Contrastive View Summarization 
Several researchers also studied the problem of summarizing opinions by finding contrastive viewpoints. For example, a reviewer may give a positive 
opinion about the voice quality of iPhone by saying “ The voice quality of 
iPhone is really good ,” but another reviewer may say the opposite, “ The 
voice quality of my iPhone is lousy .” Such pairs can give the reader a direct 
comparative view of different opinions.  
Kim and Zhai (2009) proposed and studied this problem. Given a positive 
sentence set and a negative sentence set, this work performed contrastive 
opinion summarization by extracting a set of k contrastive sentence pairs 
from the sets. A pair of opinionated sentences ( x, y) is called a contrastive 
sentence pair if sentence x and sentence y are about the same topic aspect, 
but have opposite sentiment orientations. The k chosen sentence pairs must 
also represent both the positive and negative sentence sets well. The authors 
formulated the summarization as an optimization problem and solved it 
based on several similarity functions.  
Paul, Zhai and Girju (2010) worked on this problem as well. Their algorithm 
generates a macro multi-view summary and a micro multi-view summary. A 
macro multi-view summary contains multiple sets of sentences, each 
representing a different opinion. A micro multi-view summary contains a set of pairs of contrastive sentences ( each pair consists of two sentences 
representing two different opinions). The algorithm works in two steps. In 
the first step, it uses a topic modeling approach to modeling and mining both 
topics (aspects) and sentiments. In  the second step, a random walk 
formulation (similar to PageRank (Page et al., 1999)) was proposed to score