Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
29 
 2.5 Author and Reader Standing Point  
We can look at an opinion from two perspectives, i.e., the author (opinion 
holder) who expresses the opinion, and the reader who reads the opinion. 
For example, one wrote “ The housing price has gone down , which is bad for 
the economy .” Clearly, this author talks about the negative impact of the 
dropping housing price on the economy. However, this sentence can be 
perceived in both ways by readers. For sellers, this is indeed negative, but 
for buyers, this could well be a piece of good news. As another example, one 
wrote “ I am so happy that Google share price shot up today .” If a reader 
sold his Google shares yesterday at a loss, he will not be very happy, but if 
the reader bought a lot of Google shares yesterday, he will almost certainly 
be as happy as the author of the sentence.  
I am not aware of any reported studies about this issue. In current research or 
applications, researchers ei ther ignore the issue or a ssume a standing point in 
their analysis. Usually, the opinion holders are assumed to be the consumers 
or the general public unless otherwise stated (e.g., the President of the 
United States). Product manufacturers or service providers’ opinions are 
considered advertisements if they are ma rked explicitly or fake opinions if 
they are not marked explicitly (e.g., mixed with opinions from consumers).   
2.6 Summary  
This chapter defined the concept of opinion in the context of sentiment 
analysis, the main tasks of sentiment analysis, and the framework of opinion 
summarization. Along with them, two relevant and important concepts of 
subjectivity and emotion were also introduced, which are highly related to 
but not equivalent to opinion. Existing studies about them have mostly 
focused on their intersections with opinion (although not always). However, 
we should realize that all these concepts and their definitions are rather 
fuzzy and subjective. For example, there is still not a set of emotions that all researchers agree. Opinion itself is a broad concept too. Sentiment analysis 
mainly deals with the evaluation type of opinions or opinions which imply 
positive or negative sentiments. I will not be surprised if you do not 
completely agree with everything in this chapter. The goal of this chapter is 
to give a reasonably precise definition of sentiment analysis and its related 
issues. I hope I have succeeded to some extent.