Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
105 
 reviews (Blair-Goldensohn et al., 2008). However, we should note that 
aspect-based summary does not have to be in this structured form. It can also 
be in the form of a text document based on the same idea. In the next 
section, we discuss othe r related researches.  
7.2 Improvements to Aspect-based 
Opinion Summarization 
Several improvements and refinements have been proposed by researchers 
for the basic aspect-based summary. Carenini, Ng and Pauls (2006) 
proposed to integrate aspect-based su mmarization with two traditional text 
summarization approaches of  factual documents, i.e., sentence selection (or 
extraction) and sentence generation. We discuss the integration with the 
sentence selection approach first. Their system first identifies aspect 
expressions from reviews of a particular entity (e.g., a product) using the 
method in (Hu and Liu, 2004). It then maps the aspect expressions to some 
given aspect categories organized as an ontology tree for the entity. These 
aspects in the tree are then scored based on their sentiment strength. Those 
sentences containing aspect expressions are also extracted. Each such sentence is then rated based on scores of aspects in the sentence. If multiple 
sentences have the same sentence rating, a traditional centroid based 
sentence selection method is used to break the tie (Radev et al., 2003). All 
relevant sentences are attached to their corresponding aspects in the 
ontology. The sentences for each aspect are then selected for the final 
summary based on sentence scores and aspect positions in the ontology tree. 
The integration with the sentence generation approach works similarly. First, 
a measure is used to score the aspe cts in the ontology based on their 
occurrence frequencies, sentiment strengths, and their positions in the 
ontology. An algorithm is also applied to select aspects in the ontology tree. 
Positive and negative sentiments are then computed for the aspects. Based on the selected aspects and their sentiments, a language generator generates 
the summary sentences which can be qualitative and quantitative. A user 
evaluation was carried out to assess the effectiveness of the two integration 
approaches. The results showed that they performed equally well, but for 
different reasons. The sentence selection method gave more varied 
languages and more details, while the sentence generation approach gives a 
better sentiment overview of the reviews.  
In (Tata and Di Eugenio, 2010), Tata and Eugenio produced an opinion 
summary of song reviews similar to that in (Hu and Liu, 2004), but for each 
aspect and each sentiment (postive or ngative) they first selected a