Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
80 
 was adopted to describe the relations. The dependency parser used was 
minipar (Lin, 2007).  
Some constraints were also imposed. Sentiment words were considered to be 
adjectives and aspects nouns or noun phrases. The dependency relations 
between sentiment words and aspects include mod, pnmod , subj, s, obj, obj2, 
and desc, while the relations for sentimen t words and aspects themselves 
contain only the conjunction relation conj. OA-Rel denotes the relations 
between sentiment words and aspects, OO-Rel between sentiment words 
themselves, and AA-Rel between aspects. Each relation in OA-Rel, OO-Rel, 
or AA-Rel is a triple POS( wi), R, POS( wj), where POS( wi) is the POS tag 
of word wi and R is one the dependency relations above.   
The extraction process uses a rule-b ased approach. For example, in “ Canon 
G3 produces great pictures ,” the adjective “great”  is parsed as depending on 
the noun “pictures”  through mod, formulated as an OA-Rel JJ, mod, NNS . 
If we know “great”  is a sentiment word and are given the rule “a noun on 
which a sentiment word directly depends through mod is taken as an aspect,” 
we can extract “pictures”  as an aspect. Similarly, if we know “pictures”  is an 
aspect, we can extract “great”  as an opinion word using a similar rule. The 
propagation performs four subtasks:  
1.  extracting aspects using sentiment words  
2.  extracting aspects using extracted aspects  
3.  extracting sentiment words using extracted aspects  
4.  extracting sentiment words using both given and extracted opinion 
words 
OA-Rels are used for tasks (1) and (3),  AA-Rels are used for task (2), and 
OO-Rels are used for task (4). Four types of rules are defined (shown in 
Table 5.1) respectively, for these four subtasks. In the table, o (or a) stands 
for the output (or extracted) sentiment word (or aspect). { O} (or { A}) is the 
set of known sentiment words (or aspe cts) either given or extracted. H 
means any word. POS(O(or A)) and O(or A)-Dep stand for the POS tag and 
dependency relation of the word O (or A) respectively. { JJ} and { NN} are 
sets of POS tags of potential sentiment words and aspects respectively. { JJ} 
contains JJ, JJR and JJS; {NN} contains NN and NNS. {MR} consists of 
dependency relations, which is the set { mod, pnmod , subj, s, obj, obj2, and 
desc}. {CONJ } contains conj only. The arrows mean dependency. For 
example, O  O-Dep  A means O depends on A through a relation O-
Dep. Specifically, R1i is employed to extract aspects ( a) using sentiment 
words ( O), R2i to extract opinion words ( o) using aspects ( A), R3i to extract 
aspects ( a) using extracted aspects ( Ai), and R4i to extract sentiment words 
(o) using known sentiment words ( Oi).