Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
22 
 expression  is an actual word or phrase that appears in the text indicating 
an aspect category.  
Each aspect category (or simply aspect) should also have a unique name in a 
particular application. The process of grouping aspect expressions into 
aspect categories (aspects) is called aspect categorization .   
Aspect expressions are usually nouns and noun phrases but can also be 
verbs, verb phrases, adje ctives, and adverbs. The following definitions are 
useful (Hu and Liu, 2004).  
Definition (explicit aspect expression ): Aspect expressions that are nouns 
and noun phrases are called explicit aspect expressions .  
For example, “picture quality” in “ The picture quality of this camera is 
great ” is an explicit aspect expression.  
Definition (implicit aspect expression ): Aspect expressions that are not 
nouns or noun phrases are called implicit aspect expressions .  
For example, “expensive” is an implicit aspect expression in “ This camera is 
expensive .” It implies the aspect price . Many implicit aspect expressions are 
adjectives and adverbs that are used to describe or qualify some specific 
aspects, e.g., expensive  (price), and reliably  (reliability). They can also be 
verb and verb phrases, e.g., “ I can install the software easily .” “Install” 
indicates the aspect installation . Implicit aspect expressions are not just 
adjectives, adverbs, verbs and verb phrases; they can also be very complex, 
e.g., “ This camera will not easily fit in a coat pocket .” Here, “fit in a coat 
pocket” indicates the aspect size (and/or shape ). 
The third component in the opinion definition is the sentiment. This task 
classifies whether the sentiment on the aspect is positive, negative or neutral. The fourth component and fifth components are opinion holder and time 
respectively. They also need to be extracted and categorized as for entities 
and aspects. Note that an opinion holder (Bethard et al., 2004; Choi et al., 
2005; Kim and Hovy, 2004) (also called opinion source in (Wiebe, Wilson 
and Cardie, 2005)) can be a person or organization who expressed an 
opinion. For product reviews and blogs, opinion holders are usually the 
authors of the postings. Opinion holders are more important for news articles 
as they often explicitly state the person or organization that holds an opinion. 
However, in some cases, identifying op inion holders can also be important 
in social media, e.g., identifying opinions from advertisers or people who 
quote advertisements of companies.   
Based on the above discussions, we can define a model of entity and a model 
of opinion document (Liu, 2006 and 2011).