Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
141 
 CHAPTER 12 
Concluding Remarks   
 
This book introduced the field of sentiment analysis and opinion mining and 
surveyed the current stat e-of-the-art. Due to many challenging research 
problems and a wide variety of practic al applications, the research in the 
field has been very active in recent years. It has spread from computer 
science to management science (Archak, Ghose and Ipeirotis, 2007; Chen 
and Xie, 2008; Das and Chen, 2007; Dellarocas, Zhang and Awad, 2007; 
Ghose, Ipeirotis and Sundararajan, 2007; Hu, Pavlou and Zhang, 2006; Park, 
Lee and Han, 2007) as opinions about pr oducts are closely related to profits.  
The book first defined the sentiment analysis problem, which provided a 
common framework to unify di fferent research directions  in the field. It then 
discussed the widely studied topic of document-level sentiment 
classification, which aims to determine whether an opinion document (e.g., a 
review) expresses a positive or negative sentiment. This was followed by the 
sentence-level subjectivity and sentiment classification, which determines 
whether a sentence is opinionated, and if  so, whether it carries a positive or 
negative opinion. The book then described aspect-based sentiment analysis 
which explored the full power of the problem definition and showed that 
sentiment analysis is a multi-faceted problem with many challenging sub-
problems. The existing techniques for dealing with them were discussed. 
After that, the book discussed the problem of sentiment lexicon generation. 
Two dominant approaches were covered. This was followed by the chapter 
on opinion summarization, which is a special form of multi-document 
summarization. However, it is also very different from the traditional multi-document summarization because opinion summarization can be done in a 
structured manner, which facilitates both qualitative and quantitative 
analysis, and visualization of opinions. Chapter 8 discussed the problem of 
analyzing comparative and superlative sentences. Such sentences represent a 
different type of evaluation from regular opinions which have been the focus 
of the current research. The topic of opinion search or retrieval was 
introduced in Chapter 9. Last but not least, we discussed opinion spam 
detection in Chapter 10 and assessing the quality of reviews in Chapter 11. 
Opinion spamming by writing fake reviews and posting bogus comments are 
increasingly becoming an important issue as more and more people are 
relying on the opinions on the Web for decision making. To ensure the trustworthiness of such opinions, co mbating opinion spamming is an urgent