Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
55 
 was introduced to evaluate multi-lingual subjectivity analysis systems. By 
multilingual comparability, they meant the level of agreement in the 
classification results of a pair of multilingual texts with an identical 
subjective meaning. Using a parallel corpus, they studied the agreement 
among the classification results of the source language and the target 
language using Cohen’s Kappa. For the target language classification, 
several existing translation based cross-language subjectivity classification 
methods were experimented. Their results showed that classifiers trained on 
corpora translated from English to th e target languages performed well for 
both subjectivity classification and multi-lingual comparability. 
In (Lu et al., 2011), a slightly different problem was attempted. The paper 
assumed that there was a certain amount of sentiment labeled data available for both the source and target languages, and there was also an unlabeled 
parallel corpus. Their method can simultaneously improve sentiment 
classification for both languages. The method is a maximum entropy-based 
EM algorithm which jointly learns two monolingual sentiment classifiers by 
treating the sentiment labels in the unlabeled parallel text as unobserved 
latent variables, and maximizing the regularized joint likelihood of the 
language-specific labeled data together with the inferred sentiment labels of 
the parallel text. In learning, it exploits the intuition that two sentences or 
documents that are parallel (i.e., translations of one another) should exhibit 
the same sentiment.  
4.6 Using Discourse Information for 
Sentiment Classification  
Most existing works on both the docu ment-level and the sentence-level 
sentiment classification do not use the discourse information either among 
sentences or among clauses in the same sentence. Sentiment annotation at 
the discourse level was studied in (Asher, Benamara and Mathieu, 2008; Somasundaran, Ruppenhofer and Wiebe, 2008). Asher, Benamara and 
Mathieu (2008) used five types of rhetorical relations: Contrast , Correction , 
Support , Result , and Continuation  with attached sentiment information for 
annotation. Somasundaran, Ruppenhofer and Wiebe (2008) proposed a 
concept called opinion frame . The components of opinion frames are 
opinions and the relationships between their targets.  
In (Somasundaran et al., 2009), Soma sundaran et al. performed sentiment 
classification based on the opinion frame annotation. The classification 
algorithm used was collective classification  (Bilgic, Namata and Getoor,