Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
126 
 media, public or private agencies and political organizations may employ 
people to post messages to secretly in fluence social media conversations and 
to spread lies and disinformation.  
In general, a spammer may work individually, or knowingly or unknowingly 
work as a member of a group (these ac tivities are often highly secretive).  
Individual spammers : In this case, a spammer does not work with anyone. 
He/she just writes fake reviews him/herself using a single user-id, e.g., the 
author of a book.  
Group spammers : There are two main sub- cases (Mukherjee, Liu and 
Glance, 2012; Mukherjee et al., 2011).  
 A group of spammers (persons) works in collusion to promote a target 
entity and/or to damage the reputation of another. The individual 
spammers in the group may or may not know each other.  
 A single person registers multiple user-ids and spam using these user-
ids. These multiple user-ids behave just like a group in collusion. This case is often called sock puppetting .  
Group spamming is highly damaging because due to the sheer number of 
members in a group, it can take total control of the sentiment on a product 
and completely mislead potential customers, especially at the beginning of 
a product launch. Although group spa mmers can also be seen as many 
individual spammers, group spamming has some special characteristics which can give them away as we will see in Section 10.4.  
We should also note that a spammer may work individually sometimes and 
as a member of a group some other times. A spammer may also be a genuine 
reviewer sometimes because he/she also  purchases products  as a consumer 
and may write reviews about them based on his/her true experiences. All 
these complicated situations make opinion spamming very difficult to detect.  
10.1.3 Types of Data, Features and Detection 
Three main types of data have been used for review spam detection:  
Review content : The actual text content of each review. From the content, 
we can extract linguistic features  such as word and POS n-grams and 
other syntactic and semantic clues for deceptions and lies. However, 
linguistic features may not be enough because one can fairly easily craft a 
fake review that is just like a genuine one. For example, one can write a 
fake positive review for a bad restaurant based on his true experience in a 
good restaurant.   
Meta-data about the review : The data such as the star rating given to each