Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
56 
 2007), which performs classification on a graph. The nodes are sentences (or 
other expressions) that need to be classified, and the links are relations. In 
the discourse context, they are sentim ents related discourse relations. These 
relations can be used to generate a set of relational features for learning. 
Each node itself also generates a set of local features. The relational features 
allow the classification of one node to affect the classification of other nodes 
in the collective classification scheme. In (Zhou et al., 2011), the discourse 
information within a single compound sentence was used to perform 
sentiment classification of the sentence. For example, the sentence 
“Although Fujimori was criticized by the international community, he was 
loved by the domestic population because people hated the corrupted ruling 
class ” is a positive sentence although it has more negative opinion words 
(see also Section 4.7). This paper used pattern mining to find discourse 
patterns for classification.  
In (Zirn et al., 2011), the authors proposed a method to classify discourse 
segments. Each segment expresses a single (positive or negative) opinion. 
Markov logic networks were used for classification which not only can 
utilize a sentiment lexicon but also the local/neighboring discourse context.  
4.7 Summary  
Sentence level subjectivity classification and sentiment classification goes 
further than document level sentiment classification as it moves closer to 
opinion targets and sentiments on the targets. It can be regarded as an 
intermediate  step in the overall sentiment analysis task. However, it still has 
several shortcomings for many real-life applications:  
 In most applications, the user needs to know additional details, i.e., what 
entities or aspects of entities are liked and disliked. As the document 
level, the sentence level analysis still does not do that.  
 Although one may say that if we know the opinion targets (e.g., entities 
and aspects, or topics), we can assign the sentiment orientation of a 
sentence to the targets in the sentence. However, this is insufficient:  
(1) Many complex sentences have different sentiments on different 
targets, e.g., “ Trying out Chrome because Firefox keeps crashing ” and 
“Apple is doing very well in this lousy economy .” In this latter 
sentence, even the clause level classification is insufficient. We need 
to go to the opinion target or the aspect level.    
(2) Although a sentence may have an overall positive or negative tone, 
some of its components may express opposite opinions. For example, 
some researchers regard the follow sentence as positive