Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
95 
 orientations. For example, for a speaker phone, if it is quiet, it is usually 
negative. However, for a car, if it is quiet, it is positive. The sentiment 
orientation of quiet  is domain or context dependent. The corpus-based 
approach below can help deal with this problem. 
6.2 Corpus-based Approach  
The corpus-based approach has been applied to two main scenarios: (1) 
given a seed list of known (often general-purpose) sentiment words, discover 
other sentiment words and their orientations from a domain corpus, and (2) 
adapt a general-purpose sentiment lexicon to a new one using a domain corpus for sentiment analysis applications in the domain. However, the issue 
is more complicated than just building a domain specific sentiment lexicon 
because in the same domain the same word can be positive in one context 
but negative in another. Below, we discuss some of the existing works that 
tried to deal with these problems. Note that although the corpus-based 
approach may also be used to build a general-purpose sentiment lexicon if a 
very large and very dive rse corpus is available, the dictionary-based 
approach is usually more effective for that because a dictionary has all 
words.  
One of the key and also early ideas was proposed by Hazivassiloglou and 
McKeown (1997). The authors used a corpus and some seed adjective sentiment words to find additional sentiment adjectives in the corpus. Their 
technique exploited a set of linguistic rules or conventions on connectives to 
identify more adjective sentiment words and their orientations from the 
corpus. One of the rules is about the conjunction AND, which says that 
conjoined adjectives usually have the same orientation. For example, in the 
sentence, “ This car is beautiful and spacious ,” if “beautiful” is known to be 
positive, it can be inferred that “spacious” is also positive. This is so because 
people usually express the same sentiment on both sides of a conjunction. 
The following sentence is not likely, “ This car is beautiful and difficult to 
drive. ” It is more acceptable if it is changed to “ This car is beautiful but 
difficult to drive. ” Rules were also designed fo r other connectives, i.e., OR, 
BUT, EITHER–OR, and NEITHE R–NOR. This idea is called sentiment 
consistency . In practice, it is not always consistent. Thus, a learning step was 
also applied to determine if two conjoined adjectives have the same or 
different orientations. First, a graph was formed with same- and different-
orientation links between adjectives. Clustering was then performed on the 
graph to produce two sets of words: positive and negative.  
Kanayama and Nasukawa (2006) extended the approach by introducing the