Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
115 
 generalization and specialization pro cess. Any words or phrases which 
match $C in a sentence are entities. Both (Jindal and Liu, 2006b) and 
(Yang and Ko, 2011) also extract compared entities. We will discuss 
them in Section 8.4. Other information extraction algorithms are applicable here as well.  
8.3 Identifying Preferred Entities  
Unlike regular opinions, it does not make much sense to perform sentiment 
classification to a comparative opinion sentence as a whole because such a 
sentence does not express a direct positive or negative opinion. Instead, it 
compares multiple entities by ranking the entities based on their shared 
aspects to give a comparative opinion . That is, it expresses a preference 
order of the entities using comparison. Since most comparative sentences 
compare two sets of entities, the anal ysis of an opinionated comparative 
sentence means to identify the preferred entity set. However, for application 
purposes, one may assign positive opinions to the aspects of the entities in 
the preferred set, and negative opinions to the aspects of the entities in the 
not preferred set. Note that like regular sentences, it is still meaningful to 
classify whether a comparative sentence expresses an opinion or not, but 
little research has been done on such classification. Below we only describe 
a method for identifying the preferred entity set.  
The method, proposed in (Ding, Liu and Zhang, 2009) and in 
(Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008), ba sically extends the lexicon-based 
approach to aspect based sentiment classification of regular opinions to 
comparative opinions. It thus needs a sentiment lexicon for comparative opinions. Similar to opinion words of the base type, we can divide 
comparative opinion words into two categories:   
1.  General-purpose comparative sentiment words : For Type 1 
comparatives, this category includes words like better , worse , etc., which 
often have domain independent positive or negative sentiments. In 
sentences involving such words, it is often easy to determine which entity 
set is preferred. In the case of Type 2 comparatives, formed by adding 
more , less, most , or least  before adjectives/adverbs, the preferred entity 
sets are determined by both words. The following rules are applied:  
Comparative Negative ::=  increasing_comparative N 
    | decreasing_comparative P   
Comparative Positive  ::=  increasing_comparative P  
  | decreasing_comparative N