Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
26 
 opinion  in the literature and it has two main sub-types (Liu, 2006 and 2011):  
Direct opinion : A direct opinion  refers to an opinion expressed directly 
on an entity or an entity aspect, e.g., “ The picture quality is great .” 
Indirect opinion : An indirect opinion is an opinion that is expressed 
indirectly on an entity or aspect of an entity based on its effects on 
some other entities. This sub-type often occurs in the medical domain. 
For example, the sentence “ After injection of the drug, my joints felt 
worse ” describes an undesirable effect of the drug on “my joints”, 
which indirectly gives a negative opinion or sentiment to the drug. In 
the case, the entity is the drug  and the aspect is the effect on joints .   
Much of the current research focuses on direct opinions. They are simpler 
to handle. Indirect opinions are often harder to deal with. For example, in 
the drug domain, one needs to k now whether some desirable and 
undesirable state is before or after using the drug. For example, the 
sentence “ Since  my joints were painful, my doctor put me on this drug ” 
does not express a sentiment or opinion on the drug because “painful 
joints” (which is negative) happened before using the drug.   
Comparative opinion : A comparative opinion  expresses a relation of 
similarities or differences between two or more entities and/or a 
preference of the opinion holder based on some shared aspects of the 
entities (Jindal and Liu, 2006a; Jinda l and Liu, 2006b). For example, the 
sentences, “ Coke tastes better than Pepsi ” and “ Coke tastes the best ” 
express two comparative opinions. A comparative opinion is usually 
expressed using the comparative or superlative  form of an adjective or 
adverb, although not always (e.g., prefer ). Comparative opinions also 
have many types. We will discuss and define them in Chapter 8.  
2.3.2 Explicit and Implicit Opinions 
Explicit opinion : An explicit opinion  is a subjective statement that gives a 
regular or comparative opinion, e.g.,  
  “ Coke tastes great ,” and  
  “ Coke tastes better than Pepsi .”  
Implicit (or implied) opinion : An implicit opinion  is an objective statement 
that implies a regular or comparative opinion. Such an objective 
statement usually expresses a desirable or undesirable fact, e.g., 
  “ I bought the mattress a week ago, and a valley has formed ,” and 
  “ The battery life of Nokia phones is longer than Samsung phones. ” 
Explicit opinions are easier to detect and to classify than implicit opinions. 
Much of the current research has focused on explicit opinions. Relatively