Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
111 
 greater or less than  that ranks a set of entities over another set of entities 
based on some of their shared aspects, e.g., “ Coke tastes better than 
Pepsi .” This type also includes preference, e.g., “ I prefer Coke to 
Pepsi .”  
2. Equative comparison : It expresses a relation of the type equal to  that 
states two or more entities are equal based on some of their shared 
aspects, e.g., “ Coke and Pepsi taste the same .” 
3. Superlative comparison : It expresses a relation of the type greater or 
less than all others  that ranks one entity over all others, e.g., “ Coke 
tastes the best among all soft drinks .” 
Non-gradable comparison:  Such a comparison expresses a relation of two 
or more entities but does not grade them . There are three main sub-types:  
1. Entity A is similar to or different from entity B based on some of their 
shared aspects, e.g., “ Coke tastes differently from Pepsi .” 
2. Entity A has aspect a1, and entity B has aspect a2 (a1 and a2 are usually 
substitutable), e.g., “ Desktop PCs use external speakers but laptops use 
internal speakers .” 
3. Entity A has aspect a, but entity B does not have, e.g., “ Nokia phones 
come with earphones, but iPhones do not. ” 
We only focus on gradable comparisons in this chapter. Non-gradable 
comparisons may also express opinions but they are often more subtle and 
difficult to recognize.  
In English, comparisons are usually expressed using comparative words  
(also called comparatives ) and superlative words  (also called superlatives ). 
Comparatives are formed by adding the suffix -er and superlatives are 
formed by adding the suffix -est to their base adjectives  and adverbs . For 
example, in “ The battery life of Nokia phones is longer than Motorola 
phones ,” “longer” is the comparative form  of the adjective “long.” “longer” 
(and “than”) here also indicates that this is a comparative sentence. In “ The 
battery life of Nokia phones is the longest ,” “longest”  is the superlative form 
of the adjective “long”, an d it indicates that this is a superlative sentence. 
We call this type of comparatives and superlatives Type 1 comparatives and 
superlatives . Note that for simplicity, we often use comparative  to mean 
both comparative  and superlative  if superlative is not explicitly stated.  
However, adjectives and adverbs with two syllables or more and not ending 
in y do not form comparatives or superlatives by adding - er or -est. Instead, 
more , most , less, and least  are used before such words, e.g., more beautiful . 
We call this type of comparatives and superlatives Type 2 comparatives  and 
superlatives . Both Type 1 and Type 2 are called regular comparatives and 
superlatives .