Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
51 
 to that in (Ding, Liu and Yu, 2008) except that the shortest path in the 
dependence tree was utilized to determ ine the orientation when there were 
conflicting sentiment words in a sentence, while (Ding, Liu and Yu, 2008) 
used words distance (see Section 5.1).  
In (Davidov, Tsur and Rappoport, 20 10), sentiment classification of Twitter 
postings (or tweets) was studied. Each tweet is basically a single sentence. 
The authors took a supervised learning  approach. Apart from the traditional 
features, the method also used hashtags, smileys, punctuations, and their 
frequent patterns. These features were shown to be quite effective.  
4.3 Dealing with Conditional Sentences  
Much of the existing research on senten ce-level subjectivity classification or 
sentiment classification focused on solving the general problem without 
considering that different types of sentences may need very different 
treatments. Narayanan, Liu and Choudhary (2009) argued that it is unlikely 
to have a one-technique-fit-all solution because different types of sentences 
express sentiments in very different ways. A divide-and-conquer approach 
may be needed, i.e., focused studies on different types of sentences. Their 
paper focused on conditional sentences, which have some unique 
characteristics that make it hard for a system to determine their sentiment 
orientations. 
Conditional sentences are sentences that describe implications or 
hypothetical situations and their consequences. Such a sentence typically 
contains two clauses: the condition cl ause and the consequent clause, that 
are dependent on each other. Their relationship has significant impact on 
whether the sentence expresses a positive or negative sentiment. A simple 
observation is that sentiment words (e.g., great , beautiful , bad) alone cannot 
distinguish an opinion sentence from a non-opinion one, e.g.,  “ If someone 
makes a reliable car, I will buy it ” and “ If your Nokia phone is not good, buy 
this Samsung phone .”. The first sentence expr esses no sentiment towards 
any particular car, although  “reliable ” is a positive sentiment word, but the 
second sentence is positive about the Samsung phone and it does not express 
an opinion about the Nokia phone (although the owner of the Nokia phone 
may be negative about it). Hence, a method for determining sentiments in non-conditional sentences will not work for conditional sentences.  A 
supervised learning approach was proposed to deal with the problem using a 
set of linguistic features, e.g., sentiment words/phrases and their locations, 
POS tags of sentiment words, tense patterns, conditional connectives, etc.   
Another type of difficult sentences is the question sentences. For example,