Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
33 
 Instead of using a standard machine learning method, researchers have also 
proposed several custom techniques specifically for sentiment classification, 
e.g., the score function in (Dave, Lawrence and Pennock, 2003) based on 
words in positive and negative reviews, and the aggregation method in 
(Tong, 2001) using manually compiled domain-specific words and phrases.  
A large number of papers have been published in the literature. Here, we 
introduce them briefly. In (Gamon, 2004), classification was performed on 
customer feedback data, which are usually short and noisy compared to 
reviews. In (Pang and Lee, 2004), the minimum cut algorithm working on a 
graph was employed to help sentiment classification. In (Mullen and Collier, 
2004; Xia and Zong, 2010), syntactic relations were used together with 
traditional features. In (Kennedy and Inkpen, 2006; Li et al., 2010), the 
contextual valence and sentiment shifte rs were employed for classification. 
In (Cui, Mittal and Datar, 2006), an evaluation was reported with several 
sentiment classification algorithms available at that time. In (Ng, Dasgupta 
and Arifin, 2006), the classification was done by using some linguistic knowledge sources. In (Abbasi, Chen and Salem, 2008), a genetic algorithm 
based feature selection was proposed for sentiment classification in different 
languages. In (Li, Zhang and Sindhwani, 2009), a non-negative matrix 
factorization method was proposed. In (Dasgupta and Ng, 2009; Li et al., 
2011; Zhou, Chen and Wang, 2010), semi-supervised learning and/or active Table 3.1.  Penn Treebank Part-Of-Speech (POS) tags  
Tag Description Tag Description 
CC Coordinating conjunction  PRP$  Possessive pronoun   
CD Cardinal number   RB Adverb   
DT Determiner RBR Adverb, comparative   
EX Existential  there    RBS Adverb, superlative   
FW Foreign word   RP   Particle   
IN Preposition or 
subordinating conjunction SYM Symbol   
JJ Adjective TO to   
JJR Adjective, comparative   UH   Interjection   
JJS Adjective, superlative   VB   Verb, base form   
LS List item marker   VBD Verb, past tense   
MD Modal   VBG  Verb, gerund  or present participle   
NN Noun, singular or mass   VBN  Verb, past participle   
NNS Noun, plural   VBP  Verb, non-3rd person singular 
present   
NNP Proper noun, singular   VBZ  Verb, 3rd person singular present   
NNPS Proper noun, plural   WDT Wh-determiner   
PDT Predeterminer   WP Wh-pronoun   
POS Possessive ending   WP$  Possessive wh-pronoun   
PRP Personal pronoun   WRB  Wh-adverb