Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
46 
 likely to be subjectivity indicators. However, words found this way had low 
precision and high recall. Then, the method in (Hatzivassiloglou and 
McKeown, 1997) and gradability in (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000) 
were applied to filter the wrong subjective expressions. We will discuss the 
method in (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997) in Section 6.2. 
Gradability is a semantic property that enables a word to appear in a 
comparative construct and to accept modifying expressions that act as 
intensifiers or diminishers . Gradable adjectives express properties in varying 
degrees of strength, relative to a norm either explicitly mentioned or 
implicitly supplied by the modified noun (for example, a small planet is 
usually much larger than a large house ). Gradable adjectives were found 
using a seed list of manually compiled adverbs and noun phrases (such as a 
little, exceedingly , somewhat , and very) that are frequently used as grading 
modifiers. Such gradable adjectives are good indicators of subjectivity.  
In (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003) Yu and Hatzivassiloglou performed 
subjectivity classifications using sentence similarity and a naïve Bayes 
classifier. The sentence similarity method is based on the assumption that 
subjective or opinion sentences are more similar to other opinion sentences 
than to factual sentences. They used the SIMFINDER system in 
(Hatzivassiloglou et al., 2001) to measure sentence similarity based on 
shared words, phrases, and WordNet syns ets. For naïve Bayes classification, 
they used features such as, words (u nigram), bigrams, trigrams, part of 
speech, the presence of sentiment words, the counts of the polarities (or 
orientations) of sequences of sentiment words (e.g., “++” for two 
consecutive positively oriented words), and the counts of parts of speech combined with sentiment information (e.g., “JJ+” for positive adjective), as 
well as features encoding the sentiment (if any) of the head verb, the main 
subject, and their immediate modifiers. This work also does sentiment 
classification to determine whether a subjective sentence is positive or 
negative, which we will discuss in the next section.  
One of the bottlenecks in applying supervised learning is the manual effort 
involved in annotating a large number of training examples. To save the 
manual labeling effort, a bootstrapping approach to label training data 
automatically was proposed in (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003). The algorithm 
works by first using two high precision classifiers (HP-Subj and HP-Obj) to 
automatically identify some subjective and objective sentences. The high-precision classifiers use lists of lexical items (single words or n-grams) that 
are good subjectivity clues. HP-Subj classifies a sentence as subjective if it 
contains two or more strong subjective clues. HP-Obj classifies a sentence as 
objective if there are no strong subjective clues. These classifiers will give 
very high precision but low recall. The extracted sentences are then added to