Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
47 
 the training data to learn patterns. The patterns (which form the subjectivity 
classifiers in the next iteration) are then used to automatically identify more 
subjective and objective sentences, which are then added to the training set, 
and the next iteration of the algorithm begins.  
For pattern learning, a set of syntactic templates are provided to restrict the 
kinds of patterns to be learned. Some example syntactic templates and 
example patterns are shown below.  
Syntactic template Example pattern 
<subj> passive-verb  <subj> was satisfied 
<subj> active-verb  <subj> complained 
active-verb <dobj>  endorsed <dobj> 
noun aux <dobj>  fact is <dobj> passive-verb prep <np>  was worried about <np> 
Wiebe and Riloff (2005) used so discovered patterns to generate a rule-based 
method to produce training data for subjectivity classification. The rule-
based subjective classifier classifies a sentence as subjective if it contains 
two or more strong subjective clues (otherwise, it does not label the 
sentence). In contrast, the rule-based objective classifier looks for the 
absence of clues: it classifies a sentence as objective if there are no strong 
subjective clues in the sentence, and several other conditions. The system 
also learns new patterns about objective sentences using the information 
extraction system AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996), which finds patterns based on 
some fixed syntactic templates. The data produced by the rule-based 
classifiers was used to train a naïve Bayes classifier. A related study was 
also reported in (Wiebe et al., 2004), which used a more comprehensive set of features or subjectivity clues for subjectivity classification.  
Riloff, Patwardhan and Wiebe (2006) studied relationships among different 
features. They defined subsumption relationships among unigrams, n-grams 
and lexico-syntactic patterns. If a feature is subsumed by another, the 
subsumed feature is not needed. This can remove many redundant features. 
In (Pang and Lee, 2004), a mincut-based algorithm was proposed to classify 
each sentence as being subjective or  objective. The algorithm works on a 
sentence graph of an opinion document, e.g., a review. The graph is first 
built based on local labeling consistencies (which produces an association 
score of two sentences) and individual  sentence subjectivity score computed 
based on the probability produced by a traditional classification method (which produces a score for each sentence). Local labeling consistency 
means that sentences close to each other are more likely to have the same 
class label (subjective or objective). Th e mincut approach is able to improve 
individual sentence based subjectivity classification because of the local