Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
70 
 individual terms and also their co-occurrences. The idea of this approach is 
clear. If the PMI value of a candidate aspect is too low, it may not be a 
component of the product because a and d do not co-occur frequently. The 
algorithm also distinguishes components/parts from attributes using 
WordNet’s is-a hierarchy (which enumerates different kinds of properties) 
and morphological cues (e.g., “-iness,” “-ity” suffixes).  
Blair-Goldensohn et al. (2008) refined the frequent noun and noun phrase 
approach by considering mainly those noun phrases that are in sentiment-
bearing sentences or in some syntactic patterns which indicate sentiments. 
Several filters were applied to remove unlikely aspects, e.g., dropping 
aspects which do not have sufficient mentions along-side known sentiment 
words. They also collapsed aspects at the word stem level, and ranked the 
discovered aspects by a manually tuned weighted sum of their frequency in 
sentiment-bearing sentences and the type  of sentiment phrases/patterns, with 
appearances in phrases carrying a grea ter weight. Using sentiment sentences 
is related to the approach in Section 5.3.2.   
A frequency-based approach was also taken in (Ku, Liang and Chen, 2006). 
The authors called the so discovered terms the major topics. Their method 
also made use of the TF-IDF scheme considering terms at the document 
level and at the paragraph level. Moghaddam and Ester (2010) augmented 
the frequency-based approach with an additional pattern-based filter to 
remove some non-aspect terms. Their work also predicted aspect ratings. 
Scaffidi et al. (2007) compared the frequency of extracted frequent nouns 
and noun phrases in a review corpus with their occurrence rates in a generic 
English corpus to identify true aspects.  
Zhu et al. (2009) proposed a method based on the Cvalue measure from 
(Frantzi, Ananiadou and Mima, 2000) for extracting multi-word aspects. The 
Cvalue method is also based on frequency, but it considers the frequency of 
multi-word term t, the length of t, and also other terms that contain t. 
However, Cvalue only helped find a set of candidates, which is then refined 
using a bootstrapping technique with a set of given seed aspects. The idea of 
refinement is based on each candidate’s co-occurrence with the seeds.  
Long, Zhang and Zhu (2010) extracted aspects (nouns) based on frequency 
and information distance. Their method  first finds the core aspect words 
using the frequency-based method. It then uses the information distance in 
(Cilibrasi and Vitanyi, 2007) to find other related words to an aspect, e.g., for aspect price , it may find “$” and “dollars”. All these words are then used 
to select reviews which discuss a particular aspect most.