Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
124 
 restaurant and post it as a fake review for a bad restaurant in order to 
promote it. There is no way to detect this fake review without considering 
information beyond the review text its elf simply because the same review 
cannot be both truthful and fake at the same time. 
This chapter uses consumer reviews as an example to study the problem. 
Little research has been done in the context of other forms of social media. 
10.1 Types of Spam and Spamming 
Three types of spam reviews were identified in (Jindal and Liu, 2008):  
Type 1 (fake reviews) : These are untruthful revi ews that are written not 
based on the reviewers’ genuine experiences of using the products or 
services, but are written with hidden motives. They often contain 
undeserving positive opinions about some target entities (products or 
services) in order to promote the entities and/or unjust or false negative 
opinions about some other entities in order to damage their reputations.  
Type 2 (reviews about brands only) : These reviews do not comment on the 
specific products or services that th ey are supposed to review, but only 
comment on the brands or the manufact urers of the products. Although 
they may be genuine, they  are considered as spam as they are not targeted 
at the specific products and are ofte n biased. For example, a review for a 
specific HP printer says “ I hate HP. I never buy any of their products ”.  
Type 3 (non-reviews) : These are not reviews. There are two main sub-
types: (1) advertisements and (2) other irrelevant texts containing no 
opinions (e.g., questions, answers, and random texts). Strictly speaking, 
they are not opinion spam as they do not give user opinions.  
It has been shown in (Jindal and Liu, 2008) that types 2 and 3 spam reviews 
are rare and relatively easy to detect us ing supervised learni ng. Even if they 
are not detected, it is not a major problem because human readers can easily 
spot them during reading. This chapter thus focuses on type 1, fake reviews.  
Fake reviews can be seen as a special  form of deception (Hancock et al., 
2007; Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009; Newman et al., 2003; Pennebaker et 
al., 2007; Vrij, 2008; Zhou, Shi and Zhang, 2008). However, traditional 
deceptions usually refer to lies about some facts or a person’s true feeling. 
Researchers have identified many deception signals in text. For example, studies have shown that when people lie they tend to detach themselves and 
like to use words such as you, 
she, he, they, rather than I, myself , mine , etc. 
Liars also use words related to certainty more frequently to hide “fake” or to 
emphasize “truth”. Fake reviews are different from lies in many aspects.