Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
75 
 from a multinomial distribution governed by a set of parameters. The 
indicator variable determines whether a word in sentence is an aspect word, 
an opinion word or a background word. Maximum Entropy was used to 
learn the parameters of the variable using labeled training data.  
A joint model was also proposed in (Sauper, Haghighi and Barzilay, 2011) 
which worked only on short snippets already extracted from reviews, e.g., 
“battery life is the best I’ve found. ” It combined topic modeling with a 
hidden Markov model (HMM), where the HMM models the sequence of 
words with types (aspect word, sentimen t word, or backgrou nd word). Their 
model is related to HMM-LDA proposed in (Griffiths et al., 2005), which 
also models the word sequence. Variations of the joint topic modeling 
approach were also taken in (Liu et al., 2007), (Lu and Zhai, 2008) and (Jo and Oh, 2011).  
In (Mukherjee and Liu, 2012), a semi-supervised joint model was proposed, 
which allows the user to provide some seed aspect terms for some 
topics/aspects in order to guide the in ference to produce aspect distributions 
that conform to the user’s need.  
Another line of work using topic modeling aimed to associate aspects with 
opinion/sentiment ratings, i.e., to predict aspect ratings based on joint 
modeling of aspects and ratings. Titov and McDonald (2008) proposed a 
model to discover aspects from reviews and also to extract textual evidence 
from reviews supporting each aspect rating. Lu, Zhai and Sundaresan (2009) 
defined the problem of rated aspect summarization of short comments from 
eBay.com. Their aspect extraction was based on a topic model called 
structured pLSA. This model can model the dependency structure of phrases in short comments. To predict the rating for each aspect in a comment, it 
combined the overall rating of the comment and the classification result of a 
learned classifier for the aspect based on all the comments. Wang et al. 
(2010) proposed a probabilistic rating regression model to assign ratings to 
aspects. Their method first uses some given seed aspects to find more aspect 
words using a heuristic bootstrapping method. It then predicts aspect ratings 
using the proposed probabilistic rating regression model, which is also a 
graphical model. The model makes use of review ratings and assumes that 
the overall rating of a review is a line ar combination of its aspect ratings. 
The model parameters are estimated using the Maximum Likelihood (ML) 
estimator and an EM style algorithm.  
A series of joint models were also proposed in (Lakkaraju et al., 2011) based 
on the composite topic model of HMM-LDA in (Griffiths et al., 2005), 
which considers both word sequence and word-bag. The models thus can 
capture both syntactic structures and semantic dependencies similar to that