Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
41 
 Xia and Zong (2011) found that across different domains, features of some 
types of part-of-speech (POS) tags are usually domain-dependent, while of 
some others are domain-free. Based on this observation, they proposed a 
POS-based ensemble model to integrate features with different types of POS 
tags to improve the classification performance. 
3.5 Cross-Language Sentiment 
Classification  
Cross-language sentiment classification means to perform sentiment 
classification of opinion documents in multiple languages. There are two main motivations for cross-language cl assification. First, researchers from 
different countries want to build sentiment analysis systems in their own 
languages. However, much of the res earch has been done in English. There 
are not many resources or tools in other languages that can be used to build 
good sentiment classifiers quickly in these languages. The natural question is whether it is possible to leverage the automated machine translation 
capability and existing sentiment analysis resources and tools available in 
English to help build sentiment analysis systems in other languages. The 
second motivation is that in many applications, companies want to know and 
compare consumer opinions about their products and services in different 
countries. If they have a sentiment analysis system in English, they want to 
quickly build sentiment analysis systems in other languages through translation.  
Several researchers have studied this problem. Much of the current work 
focuses on sentiment classification at the document level, and subjectivity 
and sentiment classification at the sentence level. Limited work has been 
done at the aspect level except that in (Guo et al., 2010). In this section, we focus on cross-language document-level sentiment classification. Section 4.5 
in the next chapter focuses on the sentence level.  
In (Wan, 2008), the author exploited sentiment resources in English to 
perform classification of Chinese review s. The first step of the algorithm 
translates each Chinese review into En glish using multiple translators, which 
produce different English versions. It then uses a lexicon-based approach to 
classify each translated English version. The lexicon consists of a set of 
positive terms, a set of negative terms, a set of negation terms, and a set of intensifiers. The algorithm then sums up the sentiment scores of the terms in 
the review considering negations and intensifiers. If the final score is less 
than 0, the review is negative, otherw ise positive. For the final classification 
of each review, it combines the scores of different translated versions using 
various ensemble methods, e.g., average, max, weighted average, voting,