Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
67 
 opposite directions, mixed polarity with dominant polarity of a pre-modifier 
is assigned to the phrase, e.g., POS(‘ beautiful ’) & NEG(‘ fight’) => 
POSneg(‘ beautiful fight ’). The rule of propagation is applied when a verb of 
“propagation” or “transfer” type is used in a phrase/clause and the sentiment 
of an argument that has prior neutral polarity needs to be determined, e.g., 
PROP-POS(“ to admire ”) & “ his behavior ” => POS(“ his behavior ”); “ Mr. 
X” & TRANS(“ supports ”) & NEG(“ crime business ”) => NEG(‘ Mr. X ’). The 
rules of domination are: (1) if polarities of a verb  and an object in a clause 
have opposite directions, the polarity of verb is prevailing (e.g., NEG(“ to 
deceive ”) & POS(“ hopes ”) => NEG(“ to deceive hopes ”)); (2) if a compound 
sentence joints clauses using the coordinate connector “ but”, the attitude 
features of the clause following after the conne ctor are dominant (e.g., 
‘NEG(“ It was hard to climb a mountain all night long” ), but POS(“ a 
magnificent view rewarded th e traveler at the morning” ).’ => POS(whole 
sentence)). The rule of neutralization is applied when a preposition-modifier 
or condition operator relates to a sentiment statement, e.g., “ despite ” & 
NEG(‘ worries ’) => NEUT(“ despite worries ”). The rule of intensification 
strengthens  or weakens a sentiment score (intensity),  e.g., 
Pos_score(“ happy ”) < Pos_score(“ extremely happy ”)). Additional related 
works can be found in (Choi and Cardie, 2008; Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 
2008; Min and Park, 2011; Nakagawa, Inui and Kurohashi, 2010; Nasukawa 
and Yi, 2003; Neviarouskaya, Prendinger and Ishizuka, 2009; Polanyi and 
Zaenen, 2004; Socher et al., 2011;  Yessenalina and Cardie, 2011).  
As we can see, some of the opinion rules have not been expressed with 
compositions, e.g., those involved in resource usages (rules 25–32). However, it is possible to express them to some extent using triples in 
(Zhang and Liu, 2011a). The desirable and undesirable facts or value ranges 
have not been included either (rules 21 –24). They are, in fact, not directly 
related to composition because they are essentially context or domain 
implicit sentiment terms, which need to be discovered in a domain corpus 
(Zhang and Liu, 2011b).  
5.3 Aspect Extraction 
We now turn to aspect extraction, whic h can also be seen as an information 
extraction task. However, in the context of sentiment analysis, some specific 
characteristics of the problem can facilitate the extraction. The key 
characteristic is that an opinion always has a target. The target is often the 
aspect or topic to be extracted from a sentence. Thus, it is important to 
recognize each opinion expression and its target from a sentence. However,