Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
30 
 CHAPTER 3 
Document Sentiment Classification 
 
Starting from this chapter, we discuss the current major research directions 
or topics and their core techniques. Sentiment classification is perhaps the 
most extensively studied topic (also see the survey (Pang and Lee, 2008)). It 
aims to classify an opinion document as expressing a positive or negative 
opinion or sentiment. The task is also commonly known as the document-
level sentiment classification because it considers the whole document as a 
basic information unit. A large majority of research papers on this topic 
classifies online reviews. We thus also define the problem in the review 
context, but the definition is also applicable to other similar contexts.  
Problem definition : Given an opinion document d evaluating an entity, 
determine the overall sentiment s of the opinion holder about the entity, 
i.e., determine s expressed on aspect GENERAL in the quintuple  
(_, GENERAL , s, _, _),  
where the entity e, opinion holder h, and time of opinion t are assumed 
known or irrelevant (do not care).  
There are two formulations based on the type of value that s takes. If s takes 
categorical values, e.g., positive and negative, then it is a classification 
problem. If s takes numeric values or ordinal scores within a given range, 
e.g., 1 to 5, the problem becomes regression.  
To ensure that the task is meaningful in practice, existing research makes the 
following implicit assumption (Liu, 2010):  
Assumption : Sentiment classification or regression assumes that the opinion 
document d (e.g., a product review) expresses opinions on a single entity 
e and contains opinions from a single opinion holder h.  
In practice, if an opinion document evaluates more than one entity, then the 
sentiments on the entities can be different. For example, the opinion holder 
may be positive about some entities and negative about others. Thus, it does 
not make practical sense to assign one sentiment orientation to the entire 
document in this case. It also does not make much sense if multiple opinion 
holders express opinions in a single document because their opinions can be 
different too.   
This assumption holds for reviews of products and services because each