Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
28 
 2012; Murakami and Raymond, 2010; Neviarouskaya, Prendinger and 
Ishizuka, 2010; Somasundaran and Wiebe, 2009). Many of them may also 
imply sentiments. 
Definition (emotion):  Emotions are our subjective feelings and thoughts.  
Emotions have been studied in multiple fields, e.g., psychology, philosophy, 
and sociology. The studies are very broad, from emotional responses of 
physiological reactions (e.g., heart rate changes, blood pressure, sweating 
and so on), facial expressions, gestures and postures to different types of 
subjective experiences of an individual’s state of mind. Scientists have 
categorized people’s emotions into some categories. However, there is still 
not a set of agreed basic emotions among researchers. Based on (Parrott, 
2001), people have six primary emotions, i.e., love, joy, surprise , anger , 
sadness , and fear, which can be sub-divided into many secondary and 
tertiary emotions. Each emotion can also have different intensities.  
Emotions are closely related to sentiments. The strength of a sentiment or 
opinion is typically linked to the intensity of certain emotions, e.g., joy and 
anger . Opinions that we study in sentiment analysis are mostly evaluations 
(although not always). According to consumer behavior research, 
evaluations can be broadly categorized into two types: rational evaluations  
and emotional evaluations  (Chaudhuri, 2006).  
Rational evaluation : Such evaluations are from rational reasoning, tangible 
beliefs, and utilitarian attitudes. For example, the following sentences 
express rational evaluations: “ The voice of this phone is clear ,” “This car 
is worth the price ,” and “ I am happy with this car .”  
Emotional evaluation : Such evaluations are from non-tangible and 
emotional responses to entities which go deep into people’s state of mind. 
For example, the following sentence s express emotional evaluations: “ I 
love iPhone ,” “I am so angry with their service people ” and “ This is the 
best car ever built. ” 
To make use of these two types of evaluations in practice, we can design 5 
sentiment ratings, emotional negative  (-2), rational negative  (-1), neutral  (0), 
rational positive  (+1), and emotional positive  (+2). In practice, neutral often 
means no opinion or sentiment expressed.  
Finally, we need to note that the concepts of emotion and opinion are clearly 
not equivalent. Rational opinions express no emotions, e.g., “ The voice of 
this phone is clear ”, and many emotional sentences express no 
opinion/sentiment on anything, e.g., “ I am so surprised to see you here ”. 
More importantly, emotions may not have targets, but just people’s internal 
feelings, e.g., “ I am so sad today .”