Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
13 
 are looking for a good car, get Toyota  Camry .” We will discuss such 
sentences in Chapter 4. 
3. Sarcastic sentences with or without sentiment words are hard to deal 
with, e.g., “ What a great car! It stopped working in two days. ” Sarcasms 
are not so common in consumer revi ews about products and services, 
but are very common in political discussions, which make political 
opinions hard to deal with. We will discuss such sentences in Chapter 4. 
4. Many sentences without sentiment words can also imply opinions. 
Many of these sentences are actually ob jective sentences that are used to 
express some factual information. Ag ain, there are many types of such 
sentences. Here we just give two examples. The sentence “ This washer 
uses a lot of water ” implies a negative sentiment about the washer since 
it uses a lot of resource (water). The sentence “ After sleeping on the 
mattress for two days, a valley has formed in the middle ” expresses a 
negative opinion about the mattress. This sentence is objective as it 
states a fact. All these sentences have no sentiment words.   
These issues all present major challenges . In fact, these are just some of the 
difficult problems. More will be discussed in Chapter 5.  
1.2.3 Natural Language Processing Issues  
Finally, we must not forget sentiment analysis is a NLP problem. It touches 
every aspect of NLP, e.g., coreference resolution, negation handling, and 
word sense disambiguation, which add more difficulties since these are not solved problems in NLP. However, it is also useful to realize that sentiment 
analysis is a highly restricted NLP problem because the system does not 
need to fully understand the semantics of each sentence or document but 
only needs to understand some aspects of it, i.e., positive or negative 
sentiments and their target entities or topics. In this sense, sentiment analysis 
offers a great platform for NLP researchers to make tangible progresses on 
all fronts of NLP with the potential of making a huge practical impact. In 
this book, I will describe the core problems and the current state-of-the-art 
algorithms. I hope to use this book to attract researchers from other areas of 
NLP to join force to make a concer ted effort to solve the problem.  
Prior to this book, there were a multi-author volume  “Computing Attitude 
and Affect in Text: Theory and Applications ” edited by  Shanahan, Qu, and 
Wiebe (2006), and also a survey article/book by Pang and Lee (2008). Both books have excellent contents. However, they were published relatively 
early in the development of the field. Since then, there have been significant 
advancements due to much more activ e research in the past 5 years.