Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
139 
 which help them get even more votes). Those lowly ranked reviews get few 
votes, but they may not be of low quality. The authors then divided reviews 
into 4 categories, “best review”, “good review”, “fair review”, and “bad 
review,” based on whether reviews discuss many aspects of the product 
and provide convincing opinions. Manual labeling was carried out to 
produce the gold-standard training and te sting data. In classification, they 
used SVM to perform binary classificat ion. Only the “bad review” category 
was regarded as the low quality class and all the other three categories were 
regarded as belonging to the high qua lity class. The features for learning 
were informativeness, subjectiveness, and  readability. Each of them 
contained a set of individual features.  
Tsur and Rappoport (2009) studied the helpfulness of book reviews using an 
unsupervised approach which is quite different from the above supervised 
methods. The method works in three steps. Given a collection of reviews, it first identifies a set of important terms in the reviews. These terms together 
form a vector representing a virtual optimal or core review. Then, each 
actual review is mapped or converted to this vector representation based on 
occurrences of the discovered important terms in the review. After that, each 
review is assigned a rank score based on the distance of the review to the 
virtual review (both are represented as vectors).  
In (Moghaddam, Jamali and Ester, 2012), a new problem of personalized 
review quality prediction for recommendation of helpful reviews was 
proposed. All of the above methods assume that the helpfulness of a review 
is the same for all users/readers, wh ich the authors argued is not true. To 
solve the new problem, they proposed several factorization models. These 
models are based on the assumption that the observed review ratings depend 
on some latent features of the reviews, reviewers, raters/users, and products. In essence, the paper treated the problem as a personalized recommendation 
problem. The proposed technique to solve the problem is quite involved. 
Some background knowledge about this form of recommendation can be 
found in Chapter 12 of the book (Liu, 2006 and 2011). 
All the above approaches rank reviews based on the computed helpfulness or 
quality scores. However, Tsaparas, Ntoulas and Terzi (2011) argued that 
these approaches do not consider an important fact that the top few high-
quality reviews may be highly redundant and repeating the same 
information. In their work, they proposed the problem of selecting a 
comprehensive and yet a small  set of high-quality reviews that cover many 
different aspects of the reviewed entity  and also different viewpoints of the 
reviews. They formulated the problem as a maximum coverage problem, and 
presented an algorithm to solve the problem. An earlier work in (Lappas and