Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
102 
 CHAPTER 7 
Opinion Summarization 
 
As discussed in Chapter 2, in most sentiment analysis applications, one 
needs to study opinions from many people because due to the subjective 
nature of opinions, looking at only the opinion from a single person is 
usually insufficient. Some form of summary is needed. Chapter 2 indicated 
that the opinion quintuple provides the basic information for an opinion summary. Such a summary is called an aspect-based summary  (or feature-
based summary ) and was proposed in (Hu and Liu, 2004; Liu, Hu and 
Cheng, 2005). Much of the opinion summarization research uses related 
ideas. This framework is also widely applied in industry. For example, the 
sentiment analysis systems of Micros oft Bing and Google Product Search 
use this form of summary. The output su mmary can be either in a structured 
form (see Section 7.1) or in an unstructu red form as a short text document.   
In general, opinion summarization can be seen as a form of multi-document 
text summarization . Text summarization has been studied extensively in 
NLP (Das, 2007). However, an opinion summary is quite different from a 
traditional single document or multi-document summary (of factual 
information) as an opinion summary is of ten centered on entities and aspects 
and sentiments about them, and also ha s a quantitative side, which are the 
essence of aspect-based opinion su mmary. Traditional single document 
summarization produces a short text from a long text by extracting some 
“important” sentences. Traditional multi-document summarization finds 
differences among documents and discards repeated information. Neither of 
them explicitly  captures different topics/entities and their aspects discussed 
in the document, nor do they have a quantitative side. The “importance” of a 
sentence in traditional text summarization is often defined operationally 
based on the summarization algorithms and measures used in each system. 
Opinion summarization, on the other hand, can be conceptually defined. The 
summaries are thus structured. Even for output summaries that are short text 
documents, there are still some e xplicit structures in them.  
7.1 Aspect-based Opinion 
Summarization