Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
50 
 sentiment lexicons in Chapter 6. The sentiment orientation of a sentence was 
determined by summing up the orientation scores of all sentiment words in 
the sentence. A positive word was given the sentiment score of +1 and a 
negative word was given the sentiment score of -1. Negation words and 
contrary words (e.g., but and however ) were also considered. In (Kim and 
Hovy, 2004), a similar approach was also used. Their method of compiling 
the sentiment lexicon was also similar. However, they determined the 
sentiment orientation of a sentence by multiplying the scores of the 
sentiment words in the sentence. Again, a positive word was given the 
sentiment score of +1 and a negative word was given the sentiment score of 
-1. The authors also experimented wi th two other methods of aggregating 
sentiment scores but they were inferior. In (Kim and Hovy, 2007; Kim and Hovy, 2004; Kim et al., 2006), supervised learning was used to identify 
several specific types of opinions. In (Nigam and Hurst, 2004), Nigam and 
Hurst applied a domain specific lexicon and a shallow NLP approach to 
assessing the sentence sentiment orientation. 
In (Gamon et al., 2005), a semi-supervised learning algorithm was used to 
learn from a small set of labeled sentences and a large set of unlabeled 
sentences. The learning algorithm was based on Expectation Maximization 
(EM) using the naive Bayes as the base classifier (Nigam et al., 2000). This 
work performed three-class classification, positive, negative, and “other" (no 
opinion or mixed opinion).  
In (McDonald et al., 2007), the author s presented a hierarchical sequence 
learning model similar to conditional  random fields (CRF) (Lafferty, 
McCallum and Pereira, 2001) to jointly learn and infer sentiment at both the sentence-level and the document-level. In the training data, each sentence 
was labeled with a sentiment, and each whole review was also labeled with a 
sentiment. They showed that learning both levels jointly improved accuracy 
for both levels of classification. In (Täckström and McDonald, 2011), a 
method was reported that learns from the document level labeling only but 
performs both sentence and document level sentiment classification. The 
method is thus partially supervised. In (Täckström and McDonald, 2011), a 
fully supervised model and a partially supervised model were integrated to 
perform multi-level sentiment classification.  
In (Hassan, Qazvinian and Radev, 2010), a method was proposed to identify 
attitudes about participants in online discussions. Since the paper was only interested in the discussion recipient, the algorithm only used sentence 
segments with second person pronouns. Its first step finds sentences with 
attitudes using supervised learning. The features were generated using 
Markov models. Its second step determines the orientation (positive or 
negative) of the attitudes, for which it used a lexicon-based method similar