Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
96 
 concepts of intra-sentential (within a sentence) and inter-sentential (between 
neighboring sentences) sentiment consistency, which they call coherency . 
The intra-sentential consistency is similar to the idea above. Inter-sentential 
consistency simply applies the idea to neighboring sentences. That is, the 
same sentiment orientation is usually expressed in consecutive sentences. 
Sentiment changes are indicated by adversative expressions such as but and 
however . Some criteria were also proposed to determine whether to add a 
word to the positive or negative lexicon. This study was based on Japanese 
text and was used to find domain dependent sentiment words and their 
orientations. Other related work includes those in (Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 
2006; Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 2007).  
Although finding domain specific sentiment words and their orientations are 
useful, it is insufficient in practice. Ding, Liu and Yu (2008) showed that 
many words in the same domain can have different orientations in different 
contexts. In fact, this phenomenon has been depicted by the basic rules of 
opinions in Section 5.2. For example, in the camera domain, the word “long” 
clearly expresses opposite opinions in the following two sentences: “ The 
battery life is  long” (positive) and “ It takes a long time to focus ” (negative). 
Such situations often occur with quantifiers, e.g., long, short , large , small , 
etc. However, it is not always. For example, in a car review, the sentence 
“This car is very quiet ” is positive, but the sentence “ The audio system in the 
car is very quiet ” is negative. Thus, finding domain-dependent sentiment 
words and their orientations is insufficient. The authors found that both the 
aspect and the sentiment expressing words were both important. They then 
proposed to use the pair ( aspect , sentiment_word ) as an opinion context , e.g., 
(“battery life”, “long”). Their method thus determines sentiment words and 
their orientations together with the aspects that they modify. In determining 
whether a pair is positive or negative, the above intra-sentential and inter-
sentential sentiment consistency rules about connectives are still applied. 
The work in (Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008) adopted the same context 
definition but used it for analyzing comparative sentences. Wu and Wen 
(2010) dealt with a similar problem in Chinese. However, they only focused 
on pairs in which the adjectives are quantifiers such as big, small , low and 
high. Their method is based on syntactic patterns as in (Turney, 2002), and 
also use the Web search hit counts to solve the problem. Lu et al. (2011) 
used the same context definition as well. Like that in (Ding, Liu and Yu, 2008), they assumed that the set of aspects was given. They formulated the 
problem of assigning each pair the positive or negative sentiment as an 
optimization problem with a number of constraints. The objective function 
and constraints were designed based on clues such as a general-purpose 
sentiment lexicon, the overall sentiment rating of each review, synonyms