Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
132 
 reviewer-id , brand-id , product-id , and a class. The class represents the 
sentiment of the reviewer on the product, positive , negative , or neutral  based 
on the review rating. In most review sites (e.g., amazon.com), each review 
has a rating between 1 (lowest) and 5 (highest) assigned by its reviewer. The 
rating of 4 or 5 is assigned positive, 3 neutral, and 1 or 2 negative. A 
discovered CAR rule could be that a reviewer gives all positive ratings to a 
particular brand of products. The method in (Jindal, Liu and Lim, 2010) 
finds four types of unexpected rules based on four unexpectedness 
definitions. The unexpected rules represent atypical behaviors of reviewers. 
Below, an example behavior is given for each type of unexpectedness 
definition. The unexpectedness definiti ons are quite involved and can be 
found in (Jindal, Liu and Lim, 2010).     
 Confidence unexpectedness : Using this measure, one can find reviewers 
who give all high ratings to products of a brand, but most other reviewers are generally negative about the brand.  
 Support unexpectedness : Using this measure, one can find reviewers 
who write multiple reviews for a single product, while other reviewers only write one review.  
 Attribute distribution unexpectedness : Using this measure, one can 
find that most positive reviews for a brand of products are written by 
only one reviewer although there are a large number of reviewers who 
have reviewed the products of the brand.  
 Attribute unexpectedness : Using this measure, one can find reviewers 
who write only positive reviews to one brand and only negative reviews to another brand.  
The advantage of this approach is th at all the unexpectedness measures are 
defined on CARs rules, and are thus domain independent. The technique can 
thus be used in other domains to find unexpected patterns. The weakness is 
that some atypical behaviors cannot be detected, e.g., time-related behaviors, 
because class association rules do not consider time.  
It is important to note that the behaviors studied in published papers are all 
based on public data displayed on review pages of their respective review 
hosting sites. As mentioned earlier, review hosting sites also collect many 
other pieces of data about each reviewer and his/her activities at the sites. 
These data are not visible to the general public, but can be very useful, 
perhaps even more useful than the public data, for spam detection. For 
example, if multiple user-ids from th e same IP address posted a number of 
positive reviews about a product, then these user-ids are suspicious. If the 
positive reviews for a hotel are all from th e nearby area of th e hotel, they are 
also doubtful. Some review hosting sites are already using these and other