Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
127 
 review,  user-id of the reviewer, the time when the review was posted, the 
time taken to write the review, the host IP address and MAC address of 
the reviewer’s computer, the geo- location of the reviewer, and the 
sequence of clicks at the review site . From such data, we can mine many 
types of abnormal behavioral patterns  of reviewers and their reviews. 
For example, from review ratings, we may find that a reviewer wrote 
only positive reviews for a brand and only negative reviews for a 
competing brand. Along a similar line, if multiple user-ids from the same 
computer posted a number of positive reviews about a product, these 
reviews are suspicious. Also, if the positive reviews for a hotel are all 
from the nearby area of the hotel, th ey are clearly not trustworthy.  
Product information : Information about the entity being reviewed, e.g., the 
product description and sales volume/rank. For example, a product is not 
selling well but has many positive reviews, which is hard to believe.  
These types of data have been used to produce many spam features. One can 
also classify the data into public data  and site private data . By public data, 
we mean the data displayed on the review pages of the hosting site, e.g., the 
review content, the reviewer’s user-id and the time when the review was 
posted. By private data, we mean the data that the site collects but is not 
displayed on their review pages for public viewing, e.g., the IP address and 
MAC address from the reviewer’s com puter, and the cookie information.  
Opinion Spam Detection : The ultimate goal of opinion spam detection in 
the review context is to identify every fake review, fake reviewer, and fake 
reviewer group. The three concepts are clearly related as fake reviews are 
written by fake reviewers and fake reviewers can form fake reviewer groups. The detection of one type can help the detection of others. 
However, each of them also has its own special characteristics, which can 
be exploited for detection.  
In the next two sections, we focus on detecting individual fake reviews and 
reviewers, and in section 10.4 we discuss the detection of spammer groups.   
10.2 Supervised Spam Detection  
In general, opinion spam detection can be formulated as a classification problem with two classes, fake and non-fake . Supervised learning is 
naturally applicable. However, as we described above, 
a key difficulty is that 
it is very hard , if not impossible, to recognize fake reviews reliably by 
manually reading them because a spamme r can carefully craft a fake review 
that is just like any innocent review (Jindal and Liu, 2008). Due to this 
difficulty, there is no reliable fake review and non-fake review data available