Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
11 
 known as document-level sentiment classification . This level of analysis 
assumes that each document expresses opinions on a single entity (e.g., a 
single product). Thus, it is not applicable to documents which evaluate or 
compare multiple entities.  
Sentence level: The task at this level goes to the sentences and determines 
whether each sentence expressed a positive, negative, or neutral opinion. 
Neutral usually means no opinion.  This level of analysis is closely related 
to subjectivity classification  (Wiebe, Bruce and O'Hara, 1999), which 
distinguishes sentences (called objective sentences ) that express factual 
information from sentences (called subjective sentences ) that express 
subjective views and opinions. However, we should note that subjectivity 
is not equivalent to sentiment as  many objective sentences can imply 
opinions, e.g., “ We bought the car last month and the windshield wiper 
has fallen off .” Researchers have also analyzed clauses (Wilson, Wiebe 
and Hwa, 2004), but the clause level is still not enough, e.g., “ Apple is 
doing very well in this lousy economy .”  
Entity and Aspect level: Both the document level and the sentence level 
analyses do not discover what exactly people liked and did not like. 
Aspect level performs finer-grained analysis. Aspect level was earlier 
called feature level  (feature-based opinion mining and summarization ) 
(Hu and Liu, 2004). Instead of looking at language constructs 
(documents, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases), aspect level 
directly looks at the opinion itself. It is based on the idea that an opinion 
consists of a sentiment  (positive or negative) and a target  (of opinion). 
An opinion without its target being identified is of limited use. Realizing the importance of opinion targets also helps us understand the sentiment 
analysis problem better. For example, although the sentence “ although 
the service is not that great, I still love this restaurant ” clearly has a 
positive tone, we cannot say that this sentence is entirely positive. In fact, 
the sentence is positive about the restaurant (emphasized), but negative 
about its service (not emphasized). In many applications, opinion targets 
are described by entities and/or their different aspects. Thus, the goal of 
this level of analysis is to discover sentiments on entities and/or their 
aspects. For example, the sentence “ The iPhone’s call quality is good, but 
its battery life is short ” evaluates two aspects, call quality  and battery 
life, of iPhone  (entity). The sentiment on iPhone’s call quality is positive, 
but the sentiment on its battery life  is negative. The call quality  and 
battery life  of iPhone are the opinion targets. Based on this level of 
analysis, a structured summary of opinions about entities and their 
aspects can be produced, which turns unstructured text to structured data 
and can be used for all kinds of qualitative and quantitative analyses. 
Both the document level and sentence level classifications are already