Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
84 
 Must-link : If two aspect expressions ai and aj share one or more words, they 
form a must-link, i.e., they are likely to be in the same topic or category, 
e.g., “battery power” and “battery life.”  
Cannot-link : If two aspect expressions ai and aj in the same sentence, they 
form a cannot-link. The reason for this constraint is that people usually 
do not repeat the same aspect in the same sentence, e.g., “ I like the 
picture quality, battery life, and zoom of this camera .” 
In (Mukherjee and Liu, 2012), the domain knowledge came in the form of 
some user-provided seed aspect words to some topics (or aspects). The 
resulting model is thus semi-supervised. The model also separates aspect 
words and sentiment words. The model in (Andrzejewski, Zhu and Craven, 
2009) or the Constrained-LDA method does not do that.   
5.7 Entity, Opinion Holder and Time 
Extraction  
Entity, opinion holder and time extraction is the classic problem of named 
entity recognition (NER). NER has been studied extensively in several 
fields, e.g., information retrieval, text mining, data mining, machine learning and natural language processing under the name of information extraction 
(Hobbs and Riloff, 2010; Mooney and Bunescu, 2005; Sarawagi, 2008). 
There are two main approaches to in formation extraction: rule-based and 
statistical. Early extraction systems were mainly based on rules (e.g., (Riloff, 
1993)). Statistical methods were typically based on Hidden Markov Models 
(HMM) (Rabiner, 1989) (Jin and Ho, 2009) and Conditional Random Fields 
(CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum and Pereira, 2001). Both HMM and CRF are 
supervised methods. Due to the prior work in the area, specific works in the 
context of sentiment analysis and opinion mining is not extensive. Thus, we 
will not discuss it further. See a comprehensive survey of information 
extraction tasks and algorithms in (Sarawagi, 2008). Here we only discuss some specific issues in sentiment analysis applications.  
In most applications that use social media, we do not need to extract opinion 
holders and the times of postings from th e text as opinion holders are usually 
the authors of the reviews, blogs, or discussion postings, whose login ids are 
known although their true identities in the real world are unknown. The date 
and time when a posting was submitted are also known and displayed on the 
Web page. They can be scraped from the page using structured data 
extraction techniques (Liu, 2006 and 2011). In some cases, opinion holders 
can be in the actual text and need to be extracted. We discuss it below.