Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
108 
 sentences and pairs of sentences from opposite viewpoints based on both 
their representativeness and their contrastiveness with each other. Along a 
similar line, Park, Lee and Song (2 011) reported anot her method for 
generating contrasting opposing views in news articles. 
In (Lerman and McDonald, 2009), Lerman and McDonald formulated a 
different contrastive summarization problem. They wanted to produce 
contrastive summaries of opinions about two different products to highlight 
the differences of opinions about them. Their approach is to jointly model 
the two summarization tasks and in optimization to explicitly consider the 
fact that it wants the two summaries to contrast.  
7.4 Traditional Summarization 
Several researchers have also studied opinion summarization in the 
traditional fashion, e.g., producing a short text summary with limited or 
without consideration of aspects (or topics) and sentiments about them. A 
supervised learning method was proposed in (Beineke et al., 2003) to select 
important sentences in reviews. A paragraph-clustering algorithm was 
proposed in (Seki et al., 2006) to also  select a set of important sentences.  
In (Wang and Liu, 2011), the authors studied extractive summarization 
(selection of important sentences) of opinions in conversations. They 
experimented with both the traditional sentence ranking and graph-based approaches, but also considered addition al features such as topic relevance, 
sentiments, and the dialogue structure.  
A weakness of such traditional summaries is that they only have limited or 
no consideration of target entities and aspects, and sentiments about them. 
Thus, they may select sentences which are not related to sentiments or any 
aspects. Another issue is that there is no quantitative perspective, which is 
often important in practice because one out of ten people hating something is 
very different from 5 out of ten people hating something.  
7.5 Summary  
Opinion summarization is still an active research area. Most opinion 
summarization methods which produce a short text summary have not 
focused on the quantitative side (proportions of positive and negative 
opinions). Future research can deal with this problem while also producing 
human readable texts. We should no te that the opinion summarization