Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
31 
 review usually focuses on evaluating a single product or service and is 
written by a single reviewer. However, the assumption may not hold for a 
forum and blog post because in such a post the author may express opinions 
on multiple entities and compare them using comparative sentences.  
Below, we first discuss the classification problem to predict categorical class 
labels and then the regression problem to  predict rating scores. Most existing 
techniques for document-level classification use supervised learning, 
although there are also unsupervised methods. Sentiment regression has 
been done mainly using supervised learning. Recently, several extensions to 
this research have also appeared, most notably, cross-domain sentiment 
classification  (or domain adaptation ) and cross-language sentiment 
classification , which will also be discussed at length. 
3.1 Sentiment Classification Using 
Supervised Learning  
Sentiment classification is usually form ulated as a two-class classification 
problem, positive  and negative . Training and testing data used are normally 
product reviews. Since online reviews have rating scores assigned by their reviewers, e.g., 1-5 stars, the positive  and negative classes are determined 
using the ratings. For example, a review with 4 or 5 stars is considered a 
positive review, and a review with 1 to 2 stars is considered a negative 
review. Most research papers do not use the neutral class, which makes the 
classification problem considerably eas ier, but it is possible to use the 
neutral class, e.g., assigning all 3-star reviews the neutral class.  
Sentiment classification is essentially a text classification problem. 
Traditional text classification mainly classifies documents of different topics, e.g., politics, sciences, and sports. In such classifications, topic-
related words are the key features. However, in sentiment classification, 
sentiment or opinion words that indicate positive or negative opinions are 
more important, e.g., great , excellent , amazing , horrible , bad, worst , etc.  
Since it is a text classification problem, any existing supervised learning 
method can be applied, e.g., naïve Bayes classification, and support vector 
machines (SVM) (Joachims, 1999; Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini, 2000). 
Pang, Lee and Vaithyanathan (2002) was the first paper to take this approach to classify movie reviews into two classes, positive and negative. It was 
shown that using unigrams (a bag of words) as features in classification 
performed quite well with either naïve Bayes or SVM, although the authors 
also tried a number of other feature options.