Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
63 
 1. POSITIVE  ::=  P 
2. | PO 
3. |   sentiment_shifter  N  
4 | sentiment_shifter  NE 
5. NEGATIVE  ::=   N 
6. | NE 
7. |   sentiment_shifter  P 
8. | sentiment_shifter  PO 
The non-terminals P and PO represent two types of positive sentiment 
expressions . P indicates an atomic positive expression, a word or a phrase, 
while PO represents a positive expre ssion composed of multiple expressions. 
Similarly, the non-terminals N and NE also represent two types of negative 
sentiment expressions . “sentiment_shifter N” and “sentiment_shifter NE” 
represent the negation of N and NE, re spectively, and “sentiment_shifter P” 
and “sentiment_shifter PO” represent the negation of P and PO, respectively. 
We need to note that these are not expressed in the actual BNF form but a 
pseudo language stating some abstract concepts. It is hard to specify them 
precisely because in an actual sentence, the sentiment shifter may be in 
many different forms and can appear before or after N, NE, P, or PO and 
there may be words between the sentim ent shifter and positive (or negative) 
sentiment expressions. POSITIVE and NEGATIVE are the final sentiments 
used to determine the opinions on the targets/aspects in a sentence. 
Sentiment_shifters (or valence shif ters (Polanyi an d Zaenen, 2004)): 
Negation words  like not, never , none , nobody , nowhere , neither , and 
cannot  are the most common type of sentiment shifters. Modal auxiliary 
verbs  (e.g., would , should , could , might , must , and ought ) are another 
type, e.g., “ The brake could be improved ,” which may change sentiment 
orientation, but not always. Some presuppositional items  are yet another 
type. This case is typical for adverbs like barely  and hardly  as shown by 
comparing “ It works ” with “ It hardly works .” “Works” indicates positive, 
but “hardly works” does not: it presupposes that better was expected. 
Words like fail, omit, neglect  behave similarly, e.g., “ This camera fails to 
impress me .” Furthermore, sarcasm often changes orientations too, e.g., 
“What a great car, it failed to start the first day .” Although it may not be 
hard to recognize such shifters manually, spotting them and handling 
them correctly in actual sentences by  an automated system is challenging 
(see Section 4.4). Also, the rules 11-14 below can be seen as sentiment 
shifters as well. We present them separately because they also cover 
comparative opinions. Note that seve ral researchers also studied the 
application scope of negations (Ikeda et al., 2008; Jia, Yu and Meng, 
2009; Li et al., 2010; Morante, Schrauwen and Daelemans, 2011). We