Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
83 
 EM, but it eliminated the need of asking the user to provide seeds. Note that 
the general NLP research on concept similarity and synonym discovery is 
also relevant here (Mohammad and Hirst, 2006; Wang and Hirst, 2011).  
In (Guo et al., 2009), a method called multilevel latent semantic association was presented. At the first level, all the words in aspect expressions (each 
aspect expression can have more than one word)  are grouped into a set of 
concepts/topics using LDA. The results are used to build latent topic 
structures for aspect expressions . For example, we have four aspect 
expressions “day photos”, “day photo”, “daytime photos” and “daytime 
photo”. If LDA groups the individual words “day” and “daytime” into 
topic10, and “photo” and “photos” into topic12, the system will group all 
four aspect expressions into one group, call it “topic10-topic12”, which is called a latent topic structure. At the second level, aspect expressions  are 
grouped by LDA again but according to their latent topic structures 
produced at level 1 and their context snippets in reviews. Following the 
above example, “day photos”, “day photo”, “daytime ph otos” and “daytime 
photo” in “topic10-topic12” combined with their surrounding words form a 
document. LDA runs on such documents to produce the final result. In (Guo 
et al., 2010), a similar idea was also used to group aspects from different 
languages into aspect categories, wh ich can be used to compare opinions 
along different aspects from differe nt languages (or countries).  
Topic modeling methods discussed in Section 5.3.4 actually perform both 
aspect expression discovery and categorization at the same time in an 
unsupervised manner as topic modeling basically clusters terms in a 
document collection. Recently, some algorithms have also been proposed to use domain knowledge or constraints to guide topic modeling to produce 
better topic clusters (Andrzejewski, Zhu and Craven, 2009). The constraints 
are in the form of must-links  and cannot-links . A must-link constraint in 
clustering specifies that two data instances must be in the same cluster. A 
cannot-link constraint specifies that two data instances cannot be in the same 
cluster. However, the method can result in an exponential growth in the 
encoding of cannot-link constraints and thus have difficulty in processing a 
large number of constraints.  
Constrained-LDA of Zhai et al. (2011) took a different but heuristic 
approach. Instead of treating constraints as priors, the constraints were used 
in Gibbs sampling to bias the conditional probability for topic assignment of a word. This method can handle a large number of must-link and cannot-link 
constraints. The constraints can also be relaxed, i.e., they are treated as soft 
(rather than hard) constraints and may not be satisfied. For aspect 
categorization, Constrained-LDA used the following constraints: