Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
12 
 highly challenging. The aspect-level is even more difficult. It consists of 
several sub-problems, which we will discuss in Chapters 2 and 5.  
To make things even more interesting and challenging, there are two types 
of opinions, i.e., regular opinions  and comparative opinions  (Jindal and Liu, 
2006b) . A regular opinion expresses a sentiment only on an particular entity 
or an aspect of the entity, e.g., “ Coke tastes very good, ” which expresses a 
positive sentiment on the aspect taste  of Coke. A comparative opinion 
compares multiple entities based on some of their shared aspects, e.g., “ Coke 
tastes better than Pepsi ,” which compares Coke and Pepsi based on their 
tastes (an aspect) and expresses a pr eference for Coke (see Chapter 8).  
1.2.2 Sentiment Lexicon and Its Issues  
Not surprisingly, the most importa nt indicators of sentiments are sentiment 
words , also called opinion words . These are words that are commonly used 
to express positive or negative sentiments. For example, good , wonderful , 
and amazing  are positive sentiment words, and bad, poor , and terrible  are 
negative sentiment words. Apart from individual words, there are also 
phrases and idioms, e.g., cost someone an arm and a leg . Sentiment words 
and phrases are instrumental to sentiment analysis for obvious reasons. A list 
of such words and phrases is called a sentiment lexicon (or opinion lexicon ). 
Over the years, researchers have de signed numerous algorithms to compile 
such lexicons. We will discuss these algorithms in Chapter 6.  
Although sentiment words and phrases are important for sentiment analysis, 
only using them is far from sufficient. The problem is much more complex. 
In other words, we can say that sentiment lexicon is necessary but not 
sufficient for sentiment analysis. Below, we highlight several issues: 
1. A positive or negative sentiment word may have opposite orientations in 
different application domains. For example, “suck” usually indicates negative sentiment, e.g., “ This camera sucks ,” but it can also imply 
positive sentiment, e.g., “ This vacuum cleaner really sucks .”  
2. A sentence containing sentiment words may not express any sentiment. 
This phenomenon happens frequently in several types of sentences. 
Question (interrogative) sentences and conditional sentences are two 
important types, e.g., “ Can you tell me which Sony camera is good ?” 
and “ If I can find a good camera in the shop, I will buy it .” Both these 
sentences contain the sentiment word “ good ”, but neither expresses a 
positive or negative opinion on any specific camera. However, not all 
conditional sentences or interrogative sentences express no sentiments, 
e.g., “ Does anyone know how to repair this terrible printer ” and “ If you