Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
25 
 years, a significant amount of research has been done on opinion summary. 
Most of them are related to this framework (see Chapter 7).  
Let us use an example to illustrate this form of summary, which was 
proposed in (Hu and Liu, 2004; Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005) . We summarize a 
set of reviews of a digital camera, called digital  camera 1. The summary 
looks like that in Figure 2.1, which is called a structured summary  in 
contrast to a traditional text summary of a short document generated from 
one or multiple long documents. In the figure, GENERAL represents the 
camera itself (the entity). 105 reviews expressed positive opinions about the 
camera and 12 expressed negative opinions. Picture quality  and battery life  
are two camera aspects. 95 reviews ex pressed positive opinions about the 
picture quality, and 10 expressed negative opinions. <Individual review 
sentences>  is a link pointing to the senten ces and/or the whole reviews that 
give the opinions. With such a summa ry, one can easily see how existing 
customers feel about the camera. If one is  interested in a particular aspect 
and additional details, he/she can drill down by following the <Individual 
review sentences>  link to see the actual opinion sentences or reviews. 
2.3 Different Types of Opinions  
The type of opinions that we have discussed so far is called regular opinion  
(Liu, 2006 and 2011). Another type is called comparative opinion  (Jindal 
and Liu, 2006b). In fact, we can also classify opinions based on how they are 
expressed in text, explicit opinion  and implicit (or implied ) opinion .  
2.3.1 Regular and Comparative Opinions 
Regular opinion : A regular opinion  is often referred to simply as an  Digital Camera 1:  
 Aspect: GENERAL  
  Positive:  105 <Individual review sentences>   Negative:  12 <Individual review sentences> 
 Aspect: Picture quality  
  Positive:  95 <Individual review sentences>   Negative:  10 <Individual review sentences> 
 Aspect: Battery life  
  Positive:  50       <Individual review sentences>    Negative:  9 <Individual review sentences> 
 … 
Figure 2.1.  An aspect-based opinion summary.