Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
100 
 following observation was used.  
Observation : For normal aspects which themselves don’t have positive or 
negative connotations, people can express different opinions, i.e., both 
positive and negative. For example, for aspect “voice quality”, people 
can say “good voice quality” and “bad voice quality”. However, for 
aspects which represent desirable or undesirable facts, they often have 
only a single sentiment, either positive or negative, but not both. For 
example, it is unlikely that both the following two sentences appear: “ A 
bad valley has formed ” and “ a good valley has formed ”.  
With this observation in mind, the approach consists of two steps: 
1. Candidate identification : This step determines the surrounding sentiment 
context of each noun aspect. If an aspect  occurs in negative (respectively 
positive) sentiment contexts significantly more frequently than in positive 
(or negative) sentiment contexts, it is inferred that its polarity is negative 
(or positive). This step thus produces a list of candidate aspects with 
positive opinions and a list of candidate aspects with negative opinions. 
2.  Pruning : This step prunes the two lists based on the observation above. 
The idea is that when a noun aspect is directly modified by both positive 
and negative sentiment words, it is unlikely to be an opinionated aspect. 
Two types of direct dependency relations were used.  
Type 1: O   O-Dep  F 
It means O depends on F through the relation O-Dep , e.g., “ This TV 
has a good picture quality. ” 
Type 2:  O  O-Dep  H  F-Dep  F 
It means both O and F depend on H through relations O-Dep and F-
Dep respectively, e.g., “ The springs of the mattress are bad .” 
where O is a sentiment word, O-Dep / F-Dep  is a dependency relation. F 
is the noun aspect. H means any word. For the first example, given aspect 
“picture quality”, we can identify its modification sentiment word 
“good.” For the second example, given aspect “springs”, we can get its 
modification sentiment word “bad”. Here H is the word “are”. 
This work is just the first attempt to tackle the problem. Its accuracy is still 
not high. Much further research is needed.  
6.4 Summary  
Due to contributions of many researchers, several general-purpose 
subjectivity, sentiment, and emotion lexicons have been constructed, and 
some of them are also publ ically available, e.g.,