Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
136 
 CHAPTER 11 
Quality of Reviews  
 
In this chapter, we discuss the qualit y of reviews. The topic is related to 
opinion spam detection, but is also different because low quality reviews 
may not be spam or fake reviews, and fake reviews may not be perceived as 
low quality reviews by read ers because as we discussed in the last chapter, 
by reading reviews it is very hard to spot fake reviews. For this reason, fake reviews may also be seen as helpful or  high quality reviews if the imposters 
write their reviews early and craft them well.  
The objective of this task is to determine the quality, helpfulness, usefulness, 
or utility of each review (Ghose and Ipeirotis, 2007; Kim et al., 2006; Liu et 
al., 2007; Zhang and Varadarajan, 2006). This is a meaningful task because 
it is desirable to rank reviews based on quality or helpfulness when showing 
reviews to the user, with the most helpfu l reviews first. In fact, many review 
aggregation or hosting sites have been practicing this for years. They obtain 
the helpfulness or quality score of each review by asking readers to provide 
helpfulness feedbacks to each review. For example, in amazon.com, the 
reader can indicate whether he/she finds a review helpful by responding to 
the question “ Was the review helpful to you? ” just below each review. The 
feedback results from all those responded are then aggregated and displayed right before each  review, e.g., “ 15 of 16 people found the following review 
helpful .” Although most review hosting sites already provide the service, 
automatically determining the quality of  each review is still useful because a 
good number of user feedbacks may take a long time to accumulate. That is 
why many reviews have few or no feedbacks. This is especially true for new 
reviews.  
11.1 Quality as Regression Problem  
Determining the quality of reviews is usually formulated as a regression 
problem. The learned model assigns a quality score to each review, which 
can be used in review ranking or re view recommendation. In this area of 
research, the ground truth data used fo r both training and testing are usually 
the user-helpfulness feedback given to each review, which as we discussed 
above is provided for each review at many review hosting sites. So, unlike 
fake review detection, the training and testing data here is not an issue.