Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
49 
 algorithms using general and language specific features.  
4.2 Sentence Sentiment Classification  
If a sentence is classified as being subjective, we determine whether it 
expresses a positive or negative opinion. Supervised learning again can be 
applied just like that for document-level sentiment classification, and so can 
lexicon-based methods. Before discussing existing algorithms (some 
algorithms do not use the subjectivity classification step), let us point out an 
implicit assumption made in much of the research on the subject. 
Assumption of sentence-lev el sentiment classification : A sentence 
expresses a single sentiment from a single opinion holder.  
This assumption is appropriate for simple sentences with one sentiment, e.g., 
“The picture quality of this camera is amazing .” However, for compound 
and complex sentences, a single sentence may express more than one 
sentiment. For example, the sentence, “ The picture quality of this camera is 
amazing and so is the battery life, but the viewfinder is too small for such a 
great camera ,” expresses both positive and negative sentiments (or it has 
mixed sentiments). For “picture quality” and “battery life,” the sentence is 
positive, but for “viewfinder,” it is negative. It is also positive about the 
camera as a whole (which is the GE NERAL aspect in Section 2.1).   
For sentiment classification of subjective sentences, Yu and 
Hatzivassiloglou (2003) used a method similar to that in (Turney, 2002), 
which has been discussed in Section 3.2. Instead of using one seed word for 
positive and one for negative as in (Turney, 2002), this work used a large set 
of seed adjectives. Furthermore, instead of using PMI, this work used a 
modified log-likelihood ratio to determine the positive or negative 
orientation for each adjective, adve rb, noun and verb. To assign an 
orientation to each sentence, it used th e average log-likelih ood scores of its 
words. Two thresholds were chosen using the training data and applied to 
determine whether the sentence has a positive, negative, or neutral 
orientation. The same problem was also studied in (Hatzivassiloglou and 
Wiebe, 2000) considering gradable adjectives.  
In (Hu and Liu, 2004), Hu and Liu proposed a lexicon-based algorithm for 
aspect level sentiment classification, but the method can determine the sentiment orientation of a sentence as well. It was based on a sentiment 
lexicon generated using a bootstrapping strategy with some given positive 
and negative sentiment word seeds and the synonyms and antonyms 
relations in WordNet. We will discuss various methods for generating