Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
18 
 of the sentiment (e.g., 1 to 5 stars). Positive, negative and neutral are 
called sentiment (or opinion ) orientations  (or polarities ).    
For example, the target of the opinion in sentence (2) is Canon G12 , and 
the target of the opinion in sentence (3) is the picture quality of Canon 
G12. Target is also called topic  in the literature.  
2. This review has opinions from two persons, which are called opinion 
sources  or opinion holders  (Kim and Hovy, 2004; Wiebe, Wilson and 
Cardie, 2005). The holder of the opinions  in sentences (2),  (3), and (4) is 
the author of the review (“John Smith”), but for sentence (5), it is the 
wife of the author.  
3. The date of the review is September 10, 2011. This date is important in 
practice because one often wants to know how opinions change with time and opinion trends.   
We are now ready to define opinion as a quadruple.  
Definition  (Opinion): An opinion  is a quadruple,  
 ( g, s, h, t), 
where g is the opinion (or sentiment) target, s is the sentiment about the 
target, h is the opinion holder and t is the time when the opinion was 
expressed.  
This definition, although quite concise, may not be easy to use in practice 
especially in the domain of online reviews of products, services, and brands 
because the full description of the target can be complex and may not even 
appear in the same sentence. For exampl e, in sentence (3), the opinion target 
is actually “picture quality of Canon G12”, but the sentence mentioned only 
“picture quality”. In this case, the opinion target is not just 
“picture quality”  
because without knowing that the sentence is evaluating the picture quality  of 
the Canon G12 camera, the opinion in sentence (3) alone is of little use. In 
practice, the target can often be decomposed and described in a structured 
manner with multiple levels, which greatly facilitate both mining of opinions 
and later use of the mined opinion results. For example, “picture quality of 
Canon G12” can be decomposed into an entity and an attribute of the entity 
and represented as a pair, 
(Cannon-G12, picture-quality)   
Let us use the term entity  to denote the target object that has been evaluated. 
Entity can be defined as follows (Hu and Liu, 2004; Liu, 2006 and 2011). 
Definition  (entity ): An entity  e is a product, service, topic, issue, person, 
organization, or event. It is described with a pair, e: (T, W), where T is a 
hierarchy of parts , sub-parts , and so on, and W is a set of attributes  of e.