Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
129 
  Negative outlier reviews (ratings with significant negative deviations 
from the average rating of a product)  tend to be heavily spammed. 
Positive outlier reviews are not badly spammed.   
 Reviews that are the only reviews of some products are likely to be fake. 
This can be explained by the tendency of a seller promoting an unpopular 
product by writing a fake review.  
 Top-ranked reviewers are more likely to be fake reviewers. Amazon.com 
gives a rank to each reviewer based on its proprietary method. Analysis 
showed that top-ranked reviewers generally wrote a large number of 
reviews. People who wrote a large number of reviews are natural 
suspects. Some top reviewers wrote thousands or even tens of thousands 
of reviews, which is unlikely for an ordinary consumer.  
 Fake reviews can get good feedbacks and genuine reviews can get bad 
feedbacks. This shows that if the quality of a review is defined based on 
helpfulness feedbacks, people can be fooled by fake reviews because 
spammers can easily craft a sophistic ated review that can get many 
positive feedbacks.  
 Products of lower sales ranks are more likely to be spammed. This 
indicates that spam activities seem to be limited to low selling products, 
which is intuitive as it is difficult to damage the reputation of a popular 
product, and an unpopular product needs some promotion.  
It should be stressed again that these results are tentative because (1) it is not 
confirmed that the three types of duplic ates are definitely fake reviews, and 
(2) many fake reviews are not duplicat es and they are c onsidered as non-
fake reviews in model building in (Jindal and Liu, 2008).  
In (Li et al., 2011), another supervised learning approach was attempted to 
identify fake reviews. In their case, a manually labeled fake review corpus 
was built from Epinions reviews. In Epinions, after a review is posted, users 
can evaluate the review by giving it a helpfulness score. They can also write 
comments about the reviews. The authors manually labeled a set of fake or 
non-fake reviews by reading the reviews and the comments. For learning, 
several types of features were proposed , which are similar to those in (Jindal 
and Liu, 2008) with some additions, e.g., subjective and objectivity features, 
positive and negative features, reviewer’s profile, authority score computed 
using PageRank (Page et al., 1999), etc. For learning, they used naïve 
Bayesian classification which gave pr omising results. The authors also 
experimented with a semi-supervised learning method exploiting the idea 
that a spammer tends to write many fake reviews.  
In (Ott et al., 2011),  supervised learning  was also employed. In this case, the 
authors used Amazon Mechanical Turk to crowdsource fake hotel reviews of