Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
24 
 life is short too . (4) My friend was very happy with his camera and 
loves its picture quality . (5) I want a camera that can take good 
photos . (6) I am going to return it tomorrow . 
Task 1 should extract the entity expressions, “Samsung,” “Samy,” and 
“Canon,” and group “Samsung” and “Samy” together as they represent the 
same entity. Task 2 should extract aspect expressions “picture,” “photo,” and 
“battery life,” and group “picture” and “photo” together as for cameras they 
are synonyms. Task 3 should find the holder of the opinions in sentence (3) 
to be bigJohn (the blog author) and the holder of the opinions in sentence (4) to be bigJohn’s friend . Task 4 should also find the time when the blog was 
posted is Sept-15-2011. Task 5 should find that sentence (3) gives a negative 
opinion to the picture quality of the Samsung camera and also a negative 
opinion to its battery life. Sentence (4) gives a positive opinion to the Canon 
camera as a whole and also to its picture quality. Sentence (5) seemingly 
expresses a positive opinion, but it does not. To generate opinion quintuples 
for sentence (4) we need to know what “his camera” and “its” refer to. Task 
6 should finally generate the following four opinion quintuples: 
(Samsung, picture_quality, negative, bigJohn, Sept-15-2011) 
(Samsung, battery_life, negative, bigJohn, Sept-15-2011) 
(Canon, GENERAL, positive, bigJohn’s_friend, Sept-15-2011) 
(Canon, picture_quality, positive, bigJohn’s_friend, Sept-15-2011) 
2.2 Opinion Summarization  
Unlike factual information, opinions ar e essentially subjective. One opinion 
from a single opinion holder is usually not sufficient for action. In most 
applications, one needs to analyze opin ions from a large number of people. 
This indicates that some form of summary of opinions is desired. Although 
an opinion summary can be in one of many forms, e.g., structured summary 
(see below) or short text summary, the key components of a summary should 
include opinions about different entit ies and their aspects and should also 
have a quantitative perspective. The quantitative perspective is especially 
important because 20% of the people being positive about a product is very 
different from 80% of the people being positive about the product. We will 
discuss this furthe r in Chapter 7.  
The opinion quintuple defined above actually provides a good source of 
information and also a framework for generating both qualitative  and 
quantitative  summaries. A common form of summary is based on aspects 
and is called aspect-based opinion summary  (or feature-based opinion 
summary ) (Hu and Liu, 2004; Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005). In the past few