Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
8 
 the first time in human history, we now have a huge volume of opinionated 
data in the social media on the Web. Without this data, a lot of research 
would not have been possible. Not surprisingly, the inception and the rapid 
growth of sentiment analysis coincide w ith those of the social media. In fact, 
sentiment analysis is now right at the center of the social media research. 
Hence, research in sentiment analysis not only has an important impact on 
NLP, but may also have a profound impact on management sciences, 
political science, economics, and social sciences as they are all affected by 
people’s opinions. Although the sentiment analysis research mainly started 
from early 2000, there were some earlier work on interpretation of 
metaphors, sentiment adjectives, subjectivity, view points, and affects 
(Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997; Hearst, 1992; Wiebe, 1990; Wiebe, 1994; Wiebe, Bruce and O'Hara, 1999). This book serves as an up-to-date 
and comprehensive introductory text, as well as a survey to the subject.  
1.1 Sentiment Analysis Applications  
Opinions are central to almost all human activities because they are key 
influencers of our behaviors. Whenever we need to make a decision, we 
want to know others’ opinions. In the real world, businesses and 
organizations always want to find consumer or public opinions about their 
products and services. Individual consumers also want to know the opinions of existing users of a product before purchasing it, and others’ opinions 
about political candidates before making a voting decision in a political 
election. In the past, when an individual needed opinions, he/she asked 
friends and family. When an organization or a business needed public or 
consumer opinions, it conducted surveys, opinion polls, and focus groups. 
Acquiring public and consumer opinions has long been a huge business itself 
for marketing, public relations, and political campaign companies.  
With the explosive growth of social media (e.g., reviews, forum discussions, 
blogs, micro-blogs, Twitter, comments, and postings in social network sites) 
on the Web, individuals and organizations are increasingly using the content 
in these media for decision making. Nowadays, if one wants to buy a 
consumer product, one is no longer limited to asking one’s friends and 
family for opinions because there are many user reviews and discussions in public forums on the Web about the product. For an organization, it may no 
longer be necessary to conduct surveys, opinion polls, and focus groups in 
order to gather public opinions because there is an abundance of such 
information publicly available. However, finding and monitoring opinion 
sites on the Web and distilling the information contained in them remains a