Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
135 
 right after the product launch, group review content similarity, group 
rating deviation, etc (Mukherjee, Liu and Glance, 2012). A relational 
model, called GSRank (Group Spam Rank), was then proposed to exploit 
the relationships of groups, individual  group members, and products that 
they reviewed to rank candidate groups based on their likelihoods for 
being spammer groups. An iterative algorithm was then used to solve the 
problem. A set of spammer groups was also manually labeled and used to 
evaluate the proposed model, which showed promising results. One 
weakness of this method is that due to the frequency threshold used in 
pattern mining, if a group has not worked together many times (three or 
more times), it will not be detected by this method.  
This method is unsupervised as it does not use any manually labeled data for 
training. Clearly, with the labeled data supervised learning can be applied as 
well. Indeed, (Mukherjee, Liu and Glance, 2012) described experiments with 
several state-of-the-art supervised classification, regression and learning to 
rank algorithms but they were shown to be less effective.  
10.5 Summary  
As social media is increasingly used for critical decision making by 
organizations and individuals, opinion spamming is also becoming more 
and more widespread. For many businesses, posting fake opinions 
themselves or employing others to do it for them has become a cheap 
way of marketing and brand promotion.  
Although current research on opinion spam detection is still in its early 
stage, several effective algorithms have already been proposed and used in practice. Spammers, however, are also  getting more sophisticated and 
careful in writing and posting fake opinions to avoid detection. In fact, we 
have already seen 
an arms race between detection algorithms and 
spammers. However, I am optimistic that more sophisticated detection 
algorithms will be designed to make it very difficult for spammers to 
post fake opinions. Such algorithms ar e likely to be holistic approaches 
that integrate all possible features or clues in the detection process.  
Finally, we should note that opinion spamming occurs not only in reviews, 
but also in other forms of social media such as blogs, forum discussions, 
commentaries, and Twitter postings. However, so far little research has been 
done in these contexts.