Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
137 
 Researchers have used many types of features for model building.  
In (Kim et al., 2006), SVM regression  was used to solve the problem. The 
feature sets included,  
Structure features : review length, number of sentences, percentages of 
question sentences and exclamations, and the number of HTML bold tags 
<b> and line breaks <br>.  
Lexical features : unigrams and bigrams with tf-idf weights.  
Syntactic features : percentage of parsed tokens that are of open-class (i.e., 
nouns,  verbs, adjectives and adverbs), percentage  of tokens that are 
nouns, percentage of tokens  that are verbs, percentage of tokens  that are 
verbs conjugated in the first person, and percentage of tokens that are 
adjectives or adverbs. 
Semantic features : product aspects, and sentiment words.   
Meta-data features : review rating (number of stars).   
In (Zhang and Varadarajan, 2006), the authors also treated the problem as a 
regressions problem. They used similar features, e.g., review length, review 
rating, counts of some specific POS tags, sentiment words, tf-idf weighting 
scores, wh-words, product aspect mentions, comparison with product 
specifications, comparison with editorial reviews, etc.  
Unlike the above approaches, (Liu et  al., 2008) considered three main 
factors, i.e., reviewers’ expertise, the timeliness of reviews, and review 
styles based on POS tags. A nonlinear regression model was proposed to 
integrate the factors. This work focused on movie reviews. 
In (Ghose and Ipeirotis, 2007; Ghose and Ipeirotis, 2010), three additional 
sets of features were used, namely, reviewer profile f eatures which are 
available from the review site, reviewer  history features which capture the 
helpfulness of his/her reviews in the past, and a set of readability features, 
i.e., spelling errors and readability indices from the readability research. For 
learning, the authors tried both regression and binary classification.   
Lu et al. (2010) looked at the problem from an additional angle. They 
investigated how the social context of reviewers can help enhance the 
accuracy of a text-based review quality  predictor. They argued that the 
social context can reveal a great deal of information about the quality of 
reviewers, which in turn affects the qu ality of their reviews. Specifically, 
their approach was based on the following hypotheses:  
Author consistency hypothesis : reviews from the same author are of similar 
quality. 
Trust consistency hypothesis : A link from a reviewer r1 to a reviewer r2 is an 
explicit or implicit statement of trust. Reviewer r1 trusts reviewer r2 only