Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
125 
 First, fake reviewers actually like to use I, myself , mine , etc., to give readers 
the impression that their reviews express their true experiences . Second, fake 
reviews are not necessarily the tradit ional lies. For example, one wrote a 
book and pretended to be a reader and wrote a review to promote the book. 
The review might be the true feeling of the author. Furthermore, many fake 
reviewers might have never used the reviewed products/services, but simply 
tried to give positive or negative opinions about something that they do not 
know. They are not lying about any facts they know or their true feelings.  
10.1.1 Harmful Fake Reviews 
Not all fake reviews are equally harmful. Table 10.1 gives a conceptual view 
of different kinds of fake reviews. Here we assume we know the true quality 
of a product. The objective of fake reviews in regions 1, 3 and 5 is to 
promote the product. Although opinions expressed in region 1 may be true, 
the reviewers do not disclose their conflict of interests or hidden motives. 
The goal of fake reviews in regions 2, 4, and 6 is to damage the reputation of the product. Although opinions in the reviews of region 6 may be true, the 
reviewers have malicious intensions. Clearly, fake reviews in regions 1 and 
6 are not very damaging, but fake reviews in regions 2, 3, 4, and 5 are very 
harmful. Thus, fake review detection algorithms should focus on identifying 
reviews in these regions. Some of the existing detection algorithms are 
already using this idea by employing different types of rating deviation 
features. Note that the good, bad, and average quality may be defined based 
on the average rating of the reviews given to the product. However, this can 
be invalid if there are many spamme rs or there are too few reviews. 
10.1.2 Individual and Group Spamming 
Fake reviews may be written by many types of people, e.g., friends and 
family, company employees, competitors, businesses that provide fake 
review writing services, and even genuine customers  (some businesses give discounts and even full refunds to some of their customers on the condition 
that the customers write positive reviews for them). In othe r forms of social Table 10.1.  Fake reviews vs. product quality 
 Positive fake review Negative fake review 
Good quality product 1 2 
Average quality product 3 4 
Bad quality product 5 6