Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
130 
 20 hotels. Several provisions were made to ensure the quality of the fake 
reviews. For example, they only allowed each Turker to make a single 
submission, Turkers must be in the United States, etc. The Turkers were 
also given the scenario that they wo rked in the hotels and their bosses 
asked them to write fake reviews to promote the hotels. Truthful reviews 
were obtained from the TripAdvisor Web site. The authors tried several 
classification approaches which have been used in related tasks such as 
genre identification, psycholinguistic deception detection, and text 
classification. All these tasks have some existing featur es proposed by 
researchers. Their experiments showed that text classification performed the 
best using only unigram and bigrams based on the 50/50 fake and non-fake 
class distribution. Traditional features for deceptions (Hancock et al., 2007; 
Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009; Newman et al., 2003; Pennebaker et al., 
2007; Vrij, 2008; Zhou, Shi and Zhang, 2008) did not do well. However, like the previous studies, the evaluation data used here is also not perfect. 
The fake reviews from Amazon Mechanical Turk may not be true “fake 
reviews” as the Turkers do not know  the hotels being reviewed although 
they were asked to pretend that they worked for the hotels. Furthermore, 
using 50/50 fake and non-fake data for testing may not reflect the true 
distribution of the real-life situation. The class distribution can have a 
significant impact on the precision of the detected fake reviews.  
10.3 Unsupervised Spam Detection  
Due to the difficulty of manually labeling of training data, using supervised 
learning alone for fake review detectio n is difficult. In this section, we 
discuss two unsupervised approaches. Techniques similar to these are 
already in use in many review hosting sites.  
10.3.1 Spam Detection based on Atypical Behaviors  
This sub-section describes some techni ques that try to discover atypical 
behaviors of reviewers for spammer detection. For example, if a reviewer 
wrote all negative reviews for a brand but other reviewers were all positive 
about the brand, and wrote all positive reviews for a competing brand, then 
this reviewer is naturally suspicious. 
The first technique is from (Lim et al., 2010), which identified several 
unusual reviewer behavior models based on different review patterns that 
suggest spamming. Each model assigns a numeric spamming behavior score