Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
112 
 English also has irregular comparatives  and superlatives , i.e., more , most , 
less, least , better , best, worse , worst , further/farther  and furthest/farthest , 
which do not follow the above rules. However, they behave similarly to 
Type 1 comparatives and are thus grouped under Type 1.  
These standard comparatives and superl atives are only some of the words 
that indicate comparisons. In fact, there are many other words and phrases 
that can be used to express comparisons, e.g., prefer  and superior . For 
example, the sentence “ iPhone’s voice quality is superior to that of 
Blackberry ” says that iPhone has a better voice quality and is preferred. In 
(Jindal and Liu, 2006a), a list of such words and phrases were compiled 
(which by no means is complete).  Since these words and phrases usually 
behave  similarly to Type 1 comparatives, they are also grouped under Type 
1. All these words and phrases plus the above standard comparatives and 
superlatives are collectively called comparative keywords .  
Comparative keywords used in non- equal gradable comparisons can be 
further grouped into two categories according to whether they express 
increased or decreased quantities, whic h are useful in sentiment analysis.  
 Increasing comparative : Such a comparative expresses an increased 
quantity, e.g., more  and longer .  
 Decreasing comparative:  Such a comparative expresses a decreased 
quantity, e.g., less and fewer .  
Objective of mining comparative opinions  (Jindal and Liu, 2006b; Liu, 
2010): Given an opinion document d, discover in d all comparative 
opinion sextuples of the form:  
 ( E1, E2, A, PE, h, t ),  
where E1 and E2 are the entity sets being co mpared based on their shared 
aspects A (entities in E1 appear before entities in E2 in the sentence), PE 
( {E1, E2}) is the preferred entity set of the opinion holder h, and  t is the 
time when the comparative opinion is expressed. For a superlative 
comparison, if one entity set is implicit (not given in the text), we can use 
a special set U to denote it. For an equative comparison, we can use the 
special symbol EQUAL as the value for PE.     
For example, consider the comparative sentence “ Canon’s picture quality is 
better than those of LG and Sony ,” written by Jim on 9-25-2011. The 
extracted comparative opinion is: 
 ({Canon}, {LG, Sony}, {picture_quality}, {Canon}, Jim, 9-25-2011)  
The entity set E1 is {Canon}, the entity set E2 is {LG, Sony }, their shared 
aspect set A being compared is {picture_quality}, the preferred entity set is