Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
78 
 sentence. The links are also weighted based on the co-occurrence frequency. 
After the iterative clustering, the strongest n links between aspects and 
sentiment word groups form the mapping.   
In (Hai, Chang and Kim, 2011), a two- phase co-occurrence association rule 
mining approach was proposed to match implicit aspects (which are also 
assumed to be sentiment words) with explicit aspects. In the first phase, the 
approach generates association rules involving each sentiment word as the 
condition and an explicit aspect as the consequence, which co-occur 
frequently in sentences of a corpus. In the second phase, it clusters the rule 
consequents (explicit aspects) to generate more robust rules for each 
sentiment word mentioned above. For application or testing, given a 
sentiment word with no explicit aspect, it finds the best rule cluster and then assigns the representative word of the cl uster as the final identified aspect.  
5.4 Identifying Resource Usage Aspect  
As discussed in Section 4.3, research ers often try to solve a problem in a 
general fashion and in many cases based on a simplistic view. In the context 
of aspect extraction and aspect sentiment classification, it is not always the 
sentiment word and aspect word pairs that are important. As indicated in 
Section 5.2, the real world is much more complex and diverse than that. 
Here, we use resource usage as an example to show that a divide and conquer approach may be needed for aspect-based sentiment analysis.   
In many applications, resource usage is an important aspect, e.g., “ This 
washer uses a lot of water .” Here the water usage is an aspect of the washer, 
and this sentence indicates a negative opinion as consuming too much 
resource is undesirable. There is no opinion word in this sentence. 
Discovering resource words and phrases, which are called resource terms , 
are thus important for sentiment analysis. In Section 5.2, we presented some 
opinion rules involving resources. We reproduce two of them below:  
1. P  ::=  consume  no,_little_or_less  resource 
2. N  ::=  consume  a_large_quantity_of_or_more  resource 
In (Zhang and Liu, 2011a), a method was proposed to extract resource terms. 
For example, in the above example, “water” should be extracted as a 
resource term. The paper formulated the problem based on a bipartite graph and proposed an iterative algorithm to  solve the problem. The algorithm was 
based on the following observation: 
Observation : The sentiment or opinion expressed in a sentence about 
resource usage is often determined by the following triple,