Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
79 
 (verb, quantifier, noun_term), 
where noun_term  is a noun or a noun phrase 
For example, in “ This washer uses a lot of water ,” “uses” is the main verb, 
“a lot of” is a quantifier phrase, and “water” is the noun representing a 
resource. The method used such triples to help identify resources in a 
domain corpus. The model used a circul ar definition to reflect a special 
reinforcement relationship between resource usage verbs  (e.g., consume ) 
and resource terms  (e.g., water ) based on the bipartite graph. The quantifier 
was not used in computation but was employed to identify candidate verbs 
and resource terms. The algorithm assumes that a list of quantifiers is given, 
which is not numerous and can be manually compiled. Based on the circular 
definition, the problem is solved using an iterative algorithm similar to the HITS algorithm in (Kleinberg, 1999). To start the iterative computation, 
some global seed resources  are employed to find and to score some strong 
resource usage verbs. These scores are then applied as the initialization for 
the iterative computation for any application domain. When the algorithm 
converges, a ranked list of candid ate resource terms is identified.  
5.5 Simutaneous Opinion Lexicon 
Expansion and Aspect Extraction  
As mentioned in Chapter 2, an opinion always has a target. This property has 
been exploited in aspect extraction by several researchers (see Section 
5.3.2). In (Qiu et al., 2009; Qiu et al., 2011), it was used to extract both 
sentiment words and aspects at the same  time by exploiting certain syntactic 
relations between sentiments and targets, and a small set of seed sentiment 
words (no seed aspects are required) for extraction. The method is based on 
bootstrapping. Note that sentiment words generation is an important task 
itself (see Chapter 6). 
Due to the relationships between sentiments/opinions and their targets (or 
aspects), sentiment words can be recognized by identified aspects, and aspects can be identified by known sentiment words. The extracted 
sentiment words and aspects are utilized to identify new sentiment words 
and new aspects, which are used again to extract more sentiment words and 
aspects. This propagation process ends when no more sentiment words or 
aspects can be found. As the process involves propagation through both 
sentiment words and aspects, the method is called double propagation . 
Extraction rules were based on certain special dependency relations among 
sentiment words and aspects. The dependency grammar  (Tesniere, 1959)