Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
34 
 learning were experimented . In (Kim, Li and Lee, 2009) and (Paltoglou and 
Thelwall, 2010), different IR term weighting schemes were studied and 
compared for sentiment classification. In (Martineau and Finin, 2009), a new 
term weighting scheme called Delta TFIDF was proposed. In (Qiu et al., 
2009), a lexicon-based and self-supervision approach was used. In (He, 
2010), labeled features (rather than labeled documents) were exploited for 
classification. In (Mejova and Srinivas an, 2011) the authors explored various 
feature definition and selection stra tegies. In (Nakagawa, Inui and 
Kurohashi, 2010), a dependency tree-based classification method was 
proposed, which used conditional random fields (CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum 
and Pereira, 2001) with hidden variables. In (Bickerstaffe and Zukerman, 
2010), a hierarchical multi-classifier considering inter-class similarity was reported. In (Li et al., 2010), persona l (I, we) and impersonal (they, it, this 
product) sentences were exploited to help classification. In (Yessenalina, 
Choi and Cardie, 2010), automatically generated annotator rationales was 
used to help classification. In (Yessenalina, Yue and Cardie, 2010), multi-
level structured models were proposed. In (Wang et al., 2011), the authors 
proposed a graph-based hashtag approach to classifying Twitter post 
sentiments, and in (Kouloumpis, Wilson and Moore, 2011), linguistic 
features and features that capture information about the informal and 
creative language used in microblogs were also utilized. In (Maas et al., 
2011), the authors used word vectors which can capture some latent aspects 
of the words to help classification. In (Bespalov et al., 2011), sentiment 
classification was performed based on supervised latent n-gram analysis. In 
(Burfoot, Bird and Baldwin, 2011), congressional floor debates were classified. In (Becker and Aharonson,  2010), the authors showed that 
sentiment classification should focus on the final portion of the text based on 
their psycholinguistic and psychophysical experiments. In (Liu et al., 2010), 
different linguistic features were compared for both blog and review 
sentiment classification. In (Tokuhisa, Inui and Matsumoto, 2008), emotion 
classification of dialog utterances was investigated. It  first performed 
sentiment classification of three classe s (positive, negative and neutral) and 
then classified positive and negative utterances into 10 emotion categories.  
3.2 Sentiment Classification Using 
Unsupervised Learning  
Since sentiment words are often the dominating factor for sentiment 
classification, it is not hard to imagine that sentiment words and phrases may 
be used for sentiment classification in an unsupervised manner. The method