Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
38 
 each aspect in a review. For good accuracy, instead of predicting for every 
review, they focused on predicting only aspect ratings for a selected subset 
of reviews which comprehensively evaluates the aspects. Clearly, the 
estimations from these reviews should be more accurate than for those of 
other reviews because these other reviews do not have sufficient 
information. The review selection method used an information measure 
based on Kolmogorov complexity. The aspect rating prediction for the 
selected reviews used machine learning. The features for training were only 
from those aspect related sentences. The aspect extraction was done in a 
similar way to that in (Hu and Liu, 2004).  
3.4 Cross-Domain Sentiment 
Classification  
It has been shown that sentiment classification is highly sensitive to the 
domain from which the training data is extracted. A classifier trained using 
opinion documents from one domain often performs poorly on test data from 
another domain. The reason is that word s and even language constructs used 
in different domains for expressing opinions can be quite different. To make matters worse, the same word in one domain may mean positive but in 
another domain may mean negative. Thus, domain adaptation or transfer 
learning is needed. Existing resear ches are mainly based on two settings. 
The first setting needs a small amount of labeled training data for the new 
domain (Aue and Gamon, 2005). The second needs no labeled data for the 
new domain (Blitzer, Dredze and Pereira, 2007; Tan et al., 2007). The 
original domain with labeled training data is often called the source domain , 
and the new domain which is used for testing is called the target domain .  
In (Aue and Gamon, 2005), the authors proposed to transfer sentiment 
classifiers to new domains in the absence of large amounts of labeled data in 
these domains. They experimented with four strategies: (1) training on a 
mixture of labeled reviews from other domains where such data are available 
and testing on the target domain; (2) training a classifier as above, but 
limiting the set of features to those only observed in the target domain; (3) using ensembles of classifiers from domains with available labeled data and 
testing on the target domain; (4) combining small amounts of labeled data 
with large amounts of unlabeled data in the target domain (this is the 
traditional semi-supervised learning setting). SVM was used for the first 
three strategies, and EM for semi-supervised learning (Nigam et al., 2000) was used for the fourth st rategy. Their experiments sh owed that the strategy 
(4) performed the best because it was able to make use of both the labeled 
and unlabeled data in the target domain.