Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
116 
  Here, P (respectively N) denotes a posi tive (negative) sentiment word or 
phrase of the base type. The first rule above says that the combination of 
an increasing comparative (e.g., more ) and a negative sentiment word 
(e.g., awful ) implies a negative comparative opinion  (on the left). The 
other rules have similar meanings. Note that the above four rules have 
already been discussed as basic rules of opinions in Section 5.2.  
2.  Context-dependent comparative sentiment words : In the case of Type 1 
comparatives, such words include higher , lower , etc. For example, 
“Nokia phones have longer battery life than Motorola phones ” carries a 
comparative positive sentiment about “Nokia phones” and a comparative 
negative sentiment about “Motorola phones,” i.e., “Nokia phones” are 
preferred with respect to the battery life  aspect. However, without 
domain knowledge it is hard to know whether “longer” is positive or 
negative for battery life. This issue is the same as for regular opinions, 
and this case has also been included in the basic rules of opinions in 
Section 5.2. Here, “battery life” is a positive potential item (PPI).  
In the case of Type 2 comparatives, the situation is similar. However, in 
this case the comparative word ( more , most , less or least ), the 
adjective/adverb, and the aspect are all important in determining the 
preference. If we know whether the comparative word is an increasing or 
decreasing comparative (which is easy since there are only four of them), 
then the opinion can be determined by applying the four rules in (1).  
As discussed in Section 6.2, the pair ( aspect , context_sentiment_word ) 
forms an opinion context. To determine whether a pair is positive or 
negative, the algorithm in (Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008) uses a large amount of external data. It employed a large corpus of Pros and Cons 
from product reviews. The idea is to determine whether the aspect  and 
context_sentiment_word  are more associated with each other in Pros or in 
Cons. If they are more associated in Pros, context_sentiment_word  is 
most likely to be positive. Otherwise, it is likely to be negative. However, 
since Pros and Cons seldom use comparative opinions, the context 
opinion words in a comparative sentence have to be converted to its base 
form, which can be done using WordNet with the help of English 
comparative formation rules. This conversion is useful because of the 
following observation.  
Observation:  If an adjective or adverb of the base form is positive (or 
negative), then its comparative or superlative form is also positive (or 
negative), e.g., good , better , and best.  
After the conversion, these word s are manually categorized into 
increasing and decreasin g comparatives. For context dependent opinion