Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
58 
 CHAPTER 5 
Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis  
 
Following the natural progression of chapters, this chapter should focus on 
phrase and word-level sentiment classifi cation as the last two chapters were 
about document and sentence-level classification. However, we leave that 
topic to the next chapter. In this chapter, we focus on aspect-based sentiment 
analysis as it is time to deal with the full problem defined in Chapter 2 and many phrase and word sentiments depend on aspect contexts.  
As we discussed in the two previous chapters, classifying opinion texts at the 
document level or the sentence level is often insufficient for applications 
because they do not identify opinion targets or assign sentiments to such 
targets. Even if we assume that each document evaluates a single entity, a 
positive opinion document about the entity does not mean that the author has 
positive opinions about all aspects of the entity. Likewise, a negative opinion 
document does not mean that the author is negative about everything. For 
more complete analysis, we need to  discover the aspects and determine 
whether the sentiment is positive or negative on each aspect.  
To extract such details, we go to the aspect level, which means that we need 
the full model of Chapter 2, i.e., aspect-based sentiment analysis  (or opinion 
mining ), which was also called the feature-based opinion mining  in (Hu and 
Liu, 2004). Note that as discussed in Chapter 2, the opinion target is 
decomposed into entity and its aspect s. The aspect GENERAL is used to 
represent the entity itself in the result. Thus aspect-based sentiment analysis 
covers both entities and aspects. It al so introduces a suite of problems which 
require deeper NLP capabilities and produce a richer set of results.  
Recall that, at the aspect level, the ob jective is to discover every quintuple 
(e
i, aij, sijkl, hk, tl) in a given document d. To achieve this goal, six tasks have 
to be performed. This chapter mainly focuses on the two core tasks listed 
below. They have been studied extens ively by researchers. The other tasks 
will also be covered but relatively briefly.  
1. Aspect extraction : This task extracts aspects that have been evaluated. 
For example, in the sentence, “ The voice quality of this phone is 
amazing ,” the aspect is “voice quality” of the entity represented by “this 
phone.” Note that “this phone” does not indicate the aspect GENERAL 
here because the evaluation is not about the phone as a whole, but only 
about its voice quality. However, the sentence “ I love this phone ”