Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
36 
 the probabilities in Equation (1) can be estimated. In (Turney, 2002), the 
AltaVista search engine was used because it has a NEAR operator to 
constrain the search to documents that contain the words within ten words 
of one another in either order. Let hits(query ) be the number of hits 
returned. Equation (2) can be rewritten as: 
.) excellent""()"poor"  phrase() poor""() excellent""  phrase(log) (2 


hits NEAR hitshits NEAR hitsphraseSO  (3) 
Step 3: Given a review, the algorithm computes the average SO of all 
phrases in the review and classifies the review as positive if the average 
SO is positive and negative otherwise.  
Final classification accuracies on reviews from various domains range from 
84% for automobile reviews to 66% for movie reviews.  
Another unsupervised approach is the lexicon-based method, which uses a 
dictionary of sentiment words and phrases with their associated orientations 
and strength, and incorporates intensification and negation to compute a 
sentiment score for each document (Taboada et al., 2011). This method was 
originally used in sentence and aspect -level sentiment classification (Ding, 
Liu and Yu, 2008; Hu and Liu, 2004; Kim and Hovy, 2004).  
3.3 Sentiment Rating Prediction  
Apart from classification of positive and negative sentiments, researchers 
also studied the problem of predicting the rating scores (e.g., 1–5 stars) of 
reviews (Pang and Lee, 2005). In this case, the problem can be formulated as 
a regression problem since the rating scores are ordinal, although not all 
researchers solved the problem using regression techniques. Pang and Lee 
(2005) experimented with SVM regression, SVM multiclass classification 
using the one-vs-all (OVA) strategy, and a meta-learning method called metric labeling. It was shown that OVA based classification is significantly 
poorer than the other two approaches, which performed similarly. This is 
understandable as the numerical ratings are not categorical values. Goldberg 
and Zhu (2006) improved this approach by modeling rating prediction as a 
graph-based semi-supervised learning problem, which used both labeled 
(with ratings) and unlabeled (without ratings) reviews. The unlabeled 
reviews were also the test reviews whose ratings need to be predicted. In the 
graph, each node is a document (review) and the link between two nodes is 
the similarity value between the two documents. A large similarity weight 
implies that the two documents tend to have the same sentiment rating. The