Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
76 
 in (Sauper, Haghighi and Barzilay, 2011). They are able to discover latent 
aspects and their corresponding sentiment ratings. Moghaddam and Ester 
(2011) also proposed a joint topic model to find and group aspects and to 
derive their ratings.  
Although topic modeling is a principled approach based on probabilistic 
inferencing and can be extended to model many types of information, it does 
have some weaknesses which limit its practical use in real-life sentiment 
analysis applications. One main issue is that it needs a large volume of data 
and a significant amount of tuning in order to achieve reasonable results. To 
make matters worse, most topic modeling methods use Gibbs sampling, 
which produces slightly different results in different runs due to MCMC 
(Markov chain Monte Carlo) sampling, which makes parameter tuning time consuming. While it is not hard for topic modeling to find those very general 
and frequent topics or aspects from a large document collection, it is not 
easy to find those locally frequent but globally not so frequent aspects. Such 
locally frequent aspects are often the most useful ones for applications 
because they are likely to be most relevant to the specific entities that the 
user is interested in. Those very general and frequent aspects can also be 
easily found by the methods discussed earlier. These methods can find less 
frequent aspects as well without the need of a large amount of data. In short, 
the results from current topic modeling methods are usually not granular or 
specific enough for many practical sentim ent analysis applications. It is 
more useful for the user to get some high level ideas about what a document 
collection is about.  
That being said, topic modeling is a powerful and flexible modeling tool. It 
is also very nice conceptually and ma thematically. I expect that continued 
research will make it more practic ally useful. One promising research 
direction is to incorporate more existing natural language and domain 
knowledge in the models. There are already some initial works in this 
direction (Andrzejewski and Zhu, 2009; Andrzejewski, Zhu and Craven, 
2009; Mukherjee and Liu, 2012; Zhai et al., 2011). We will discuss them 
Section 5.6. However, I think they are still too statistics centric and come 
with their own limitations. It could be fruitful if we can shift more toward 
natural language and knowledge centric for a more balanced approach. 
Another direction would be to integrate topic modeling with some other 
techniques to overcome its shortcomings.  
Apart from the main methods discussed above and in the previous three 
sections, there are still other works on aspect extraction. For example, Yi et 
al. (2003) used a mixture language model and likelihood ratio to extract 
product aspects.
 Ma and Wan (2010) used the centering theory and 
supervised learning. Meng and Wang (2009) extracted aspects from product