Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
119 
 for factual information search because one fact equals to any number of the 
same fact . That is, if the first page contains the required information, there is 
no need to see the rest of the relevant pages. For opinion search, this 
paradigm is fine only for the second type of queries because the opinion 
holder usually has only one opinion about a particular entity or topic, and the 
opinion is contained in a single document or page. However, for the first 
type of opinion queries, this paradigm needs to be modified because ranking 
in opinion search has two objectives. First, it needs to rank those opinionated 
documents or sentences with high utilities or information contents at the top 
(see Chapter 11). Second, it needs to reflect the natural distribution of 
positive and negative opinions. This se cond objective is important because 
in most applications the actual proportions of positive and negative opinions are critical pieces of information. Only reading the top ranked result as in the 
traditional search is problematic because the top result only represents the 
opinion of a single opinion holder. Thus, ranking in opinion search needs to 
capture the natural distribution of positive and negative sentiments of the 
whole population. One simple solution for this is to produce two rankings, 
one for positive opinions and one for negative opinions, and also to display 
the numbers of positive and negative opinions.   
Providing an aspect-based summary for each opinion search will be even 
better. However, it is an extremely challenging problem because aspect 
extraction, aspect categorization, and asso ciating entities to its aspects are all 
very challenging problems. Without effective solutions for them, such a 
summary will not be possible.  
9.2 Existing Opinion Retrieval 
Techniques  
Current research in opinion retrieval typically treats the task as a two-stage 
process. In the first stage, documents are ranked by topi cal relevance only. 
In the second stage, candidate relevant documents are re-ranked by their 
opinion scores. The opinion scores can be acquired by either a machine 
learning based sentiment classifier, such as SVM, or a lexicon-based 
sentiment classifier using a sentiment lexicon and a combination of 
sentiment word scores and query term–sentiment word proximity scores. 
More advanced research models topic relevance and opinion at the same 
time, and produces rankings based on their integrated score.  
To give a flavor of opinion search, we present an example system (Zhang 
and Yu, 2007), which was the winner of the blog track in the 2007 TREC