Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
37 
 paper experimented with se veral different similarity schemes. The algorithm 
also assumes that initially a separate learner has already predicted the 
numerical ratings of the unlabeled documents. The graph based method only 
improves them by revising the ratings through solving an optimization 
problem to force ratings to be smooth throughout the graph with regard to 
both the ratings and the link weights. 
Qu, Ifrim and Weikum (2010) introduce d a bag-of-opinions  representation 
of documents to capture the strength of n-grams with opinions, which is 
different from the traditional bag-of-words representation. Each of the 
opinions is a triple, a sentiment word, a modifier, and a negator. For 
example, in “not very good”, “good” is the sentiment word, “very” is the 
modifier and “not” is the negator.  Fo r sentiment classification of two classes 
(positive and negative), the opinion modifier is not crucial but for rating 
prediction, it is very important and so is the impact of negation. A 
constrained ridge regression method was developed to learn the sentiment 
score or strength of each opinion from domain-independent corpora (of 
multiple domains) of rated reviews. The key idea of learning was to exploit 
an available opinion lexicon and the review ratings. To transfer the 
regression model to a newly given domain-dependent application, the 
algorithm derives a set of statistics over the opinion scores and then uses 
them as additional features together with the standard unigrams for rating 
prediction. Prior to this work, (Liu and Seneff, 2009) proposed an approach 
to extracting adverb-adjective-noun phr ases (e.g., “very nice car”) based on 
the clause structure obtained by parsing sentences into a hierarchical 
representation. They assigned sentiment scores based on a heuristic method which computes the contribution of adjectives, adverbials and negations to 
the sentiment degree based on the ratings of reviews where these words 
occurred. Unlike the above work, there was no learning involved in this 
work.   
Instead of predicting the rating of each review, Snyder and Barzilay (2007) 
studied the problem of predicting the rating for each aspect. A simple 
approach to this task would be to use a standard regression or classification 
technique. However, this approach does not exploit the dependencies 
between users’ judgments across different aspects. Knowledge of these 
dependencies is useful for accurate pr ediction. Thus, this paper proposed 
two models, aspect model (which works on individual aspects) and agreement model (which models the rating agreement among aspects). Both 
models were combined in learning. The features used for training were 
lexical features such as unigra m and bigrams from each review.  
Long, Zhang and Zhu (2010) used a similar approach as that in (Pang and 
Lee, 2005) but with a Baysian network classifier for rating prediction of