Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
131 
 to a reviewer by measuring the exte nt to which the reviewer practices 
spamming behavior of the type. All the scores are then combined to produce 
the final spam score. Thus, this method focuses on finding spammers or fake 
reviewers rather than fake reviews. The spamming behavior models are:   
(a)  Targeting products : To game a review system, it is hypothesized that a 
spammer will direct most of his efforts on promoting or victimizing a 
few target products. He is expected to monitor the products closely and 
mitigate the ratings by writing fake reviews when time is appropriate. 
(b) Targeting groups : This spam behavior model defines the pattern of 
spammers manipulating ratings of a set of products sharing some 
attribute(s) within a short span of time. For example, a spammer may 
target several products of a  brand  within a few hours. This pattern of 
ratings saves the spammers’ time as they do not need to log on to the 
review system many times. To achieve maximum impact, the ratings 
given to these target groups of products are either very high or very low. 
(c)  General rating deviation : A genuine reviewer is expected to give 
ratings similar to other raters of the same product. As spammers attempt to promote or demote some products, their ratings typically deviate a 
great deal from those of other reviewers.   
(d)  Early rating deviation : Early deviation captures the behavior of a 
spammer contributing a fake review soon after product launch. Such 
reviews are likely to attract attention from other reviewers, allowing 
spammers to affect the view s of subsequent reviewers. 
The second technique also focused on finding fake reviewers or spammers 
(Jindal, Liu and Lim, 2010). Here the problem was formulated as a data 
mining task of discovering unexpect ed class association rules. Unlike 
conventional spam detection approaches such as the above supervised and 
unsupervised methods, which first manually identify some heuristic spam features and then use them for spam de tection. This technique is generic and 
can be applied to solve a class of prob lems due to its domain independence.  
Class association rules are a special type of association rules (Liu, Hsu and 
Ma, 1998) with a fixed class attribute. The data for mining class association 
rules (CARs) consists of a set of data records, which are described by a set 
of normal attributes A = {A
1, , An}, and a class attribute C = {c1, , cm} of 
m discrete values, called class labels . A CAR rule is of the form: X  ci, 
where X is a set of conditions from the attributes in A and ci is a class label 
in C. Such a rule computes the conditional probability of Pr( ci | X) (called 
confidence ) and the joint probability Pr( X, ci) (called support ).  
For the spammer detection application, the data for CAR mining is produced 
as follows: Each review forms a data record with a set of attributes, e.g.,