Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
114 
 Since keywords alone are able to achiev e a high recall, they can be used to 
filter out those sentences that are unlikely to be comparative sentences. We 
just need to improve the precision on the remaining sentences.  
It was also observed in (Jindal and Liu, 2006a) that comparative sentences 
have strong patterns involving comparative keywords, which is not 
surprising. These patterns can be used as features in learning. To discover 
these patterns, class sequential rule (CSR) mining was employed in (Jindal 
and Liu, 2006a). Class sequential rule mining is a special kind of sequential 
pattern mining (Liu, 2006 and 2011). Each training example is a pair ( si, yi), 
where si is a sequence and yi is a class label, i.e., yi  {comparison , non-
comparison }. The sequence is generated from a sentence. Using the training 
data, CSRs can be generated.  
For classification model building, the left-hand side sequence patterns of the CSR rules with high conditional probabilities were used as features. Naïve 
Bayes was employed for model building. In (Yang and Ko, 2011), the same problem was studied but in the context of Korean language. The learning 
algorithm used was the transformation-based learning, which produces rules. 
Classifying comparative sent ences into four types: After comparative 
sentences are identified, the algorithm also classifies them into four types, 
non-equal gradable , equative , superlative , and non-gradable . For this task, 
(Jindal and Liu, 2006a) showed that keywords and keyphrases as features 
were already suffi cient. SVM gave the best results.
  
Li et al. (2010) studied the problem of identifying comparative questions 
and the entities (which they call comp arators) that are compared. Unlike 
the works above, this paper did not decide the types of comparison. For 
comparative sentences identification, they also used sequential patterns/rules. However, their pa tterns are different. They decided 
whether a question is a comparative question and the entities being 
compared at the same time. For example, the question sentence “Which 
city is better, New York or Chicago ?” satisfies the sequential pattern 
<which NN is better, $C or $C ?>, where $C is an entity. A weakly 
supervised learning method based on the idea in (Ravichandran and 
Hovy, 2002) was used to learn such patterns. The algorithm is based on bootstrapping, which starts with a user -given pattern. From this pattern, 
the algorithm extracts a set of initial se ed entity (comparators) pairs. For 
each entity pair, all questions containing the pair are retrieved from the question collection and regarded as  comparative questions. From the 
comparative questions and entity pair s, all possible sequential patterns 
are learned and evaluated. The learning process is the traditional