Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
90 
 CHAPTER 6 
Sentiment Lexicon Generation  
 
By now, it should be quite clear that words and phrases that convey positive 
or negative sentiments are instrumental for sentiment analysis. This chapter 
discusses how to compile such words lists. In the research literature, 
sentiment words  are also called opinion words , polar words , or opinion-
bearing words . Positive sentiment words are used to express some desired 
states or qualities while negative sen timent words are used to express some 
undesired states or qualities. Examples of positive sentiment words are 
beautiful , wonderful , and amazing . Examples of negative sentiment words 
are bad, awful , and poor . Apart from individual words, there are also 
sentiment phrases and idioms, e.g., cost someone an arm and a leg . 
Collectively, they are called sentiment lexicon  (or opinion lexicon ). For easy 
presentation, from now on when we sa y sentiment words, we mean both 
individual words and phrases.  
Sentiment words can be divided into two types, base type  and comparative 
type. All the example words above are of the base type. Sentiment words of 
the comparative type (which include the superlative type) are used to express 
comparative and superlative opinio ns. Examples of such words are better , 
worse , best, worst , etc., which are comparative and superlative forms of their 
base adjectives or adverbs, e.g., good  and bad. Unlike sentiment words of 
the base type, sentiment words of th e comparative type do not express a 
regular opinion on an entity but a comparative opinion on more than one 
entity, e.g., “ Pepsi tastes better than Coke .” This sentence does not express 
an opinion saying that any of the two drinks is good or bad. It just says that 
compared to Coke , Pepsi  tastes better. We will discuss comparative and 
superlative sentiment words further in Chapter 8. This ch apter focuses only 
on sentiment words of the base type.  
Researchers have proposed many approaches to compile sentiment words. 
Three main approaches are: manual approach , dictionary-based approach , 
and corpus-based approach . The manual approach is labor intensive and 
time consuming, and is thus not usually used alone but combined with 
automated approaches as the final check, because automated methods make 
mistakes. Below, we discuss the tw o automated approaches. Along with 
them, we will also discuss the issue of factual statements implying opinions, 
which has largely been overlooked  by the research community.