Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
120 
 evaluation (http://trec.nist.gov/). The task was exactly opinion search (or 
retrieval). This system has two components. The first component is for 
retrieving relevant documents for each query. The second component is for 
classifying the retrieved documents as being opinionated or not-opinionated. 
The opinionated documents are further classified into positive, negative, or 
mixed (containing both positive and negative opinions).  
Retrieval component : This component performs the traditional information 
retrieval (IR) task. It considers both keywords and concepts. Concepts are 
named entities (e.g., names of people or organizations) or various types of 
phrases from dictionaries and other sources (e.g., Wikipedia entries). The 
strategy for processing a user query is as follows (Zhang et al., 2008; Zhang 
and Yu, 2007): It first recognizes and disambiguates the concepts within the user query. It then broadens the search query with its synonyms. After that, 
it recognizes concepts in the retrieved documents and also performs pseudo-
feedback to automatically extract relevant words from the top-ranked 
documents to expand the query. Finally, it computes a similarity (or 
relevance score) of each document w ith the expanded query using both 
concepts and keywords.  
Opinion classification component : This component performs two tasks: (1) 
classifying each document into one of  the two categories, opinionated and 
not-opinionated, and (2) classifyi ng each opinionated document as 
expressing a positive, negative, or mixed opinion. For both tasks, the system 
uses supervised learning. For the first task, it obtains a large amount of 
opinionated (subjective) training data from review sites such as rateitall.com 
and epinions.com. The data are also collected from different domains involving consumer goods and services as well as government policies and 
political viewpoints. The not-opinionated training data are obtained from 
sites that give objective information such as Wikipedia. From these training 
data, a SVM classifier is constructed.  
This classifier is then applied to each retrieved document as follows. The 
document is first partitioned into sentences. The SVM classifier then 
classifies each sentence as opinionated or not-opinionated. If a sentence is 
classified to be opinionated, its strength, as determined by SVM, is also 
noted. A document is regarded opinionate d if there is at least one sentence 
that is classified as opinionated. To ensure that the opinion of the sentence is 
directed at the query topic, the system requires that enough query concepts/words are found in its vicinity. The totality of the opinionated 
sentences and their strengths in a document together with the document’s 
similarity with the query is used to rank the document.