Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
88 
 performance of full WSD on the same data, suggesting that the SWSD task 
was feasible, and that subjectivity provided a natural coarse grained 
grouping of senses. They also showed that SWSD can subsequently help 
subjectivity and sentiment analysis.   
5.9 Summary  
Aspect-level sentiment analysis is usually the level of details required for practical applications. Most industrial systems are so based. Although a 
great deal of work has been done in the research community and many 
systems have also been built, the problem is still far from being solved. Every sub-problem remains to be highly challenging. As one CEO put it, 
“our sentiment analysis is as bad as  everyone else’s,” which is a nice 
portrayal of the current situation and the difficulty of the problem.   
Two most outstanding problems are aspect extraction and aspect sentiment 
classifications. The accuracies for bo th problems are not high because 
existing algorithms are still unable to deal with complex sentences that 
requires more than sentiment words and simple parsing, or to handle factual 
sentences that imply opinions. We discussed some of these problems in 
basic rules of opinions in Section 5.2. 
On the whole, we seem to have met a long tail problem. While sentiment 
words can handle about 60% of the cases  (more in some domains and less in 
others), the rest are highly diverse, numerous and infrequent, which make it 
hard for statistical learning algorithms to learn patterns because there are 
simply not enough training data for them. In fact, there seem to be an 
unlimited number of ways that people can use to express positive or negative 
opinions. Every domain appears to have something special. In (Wu et al., 
2011), a more complex graph-based representation of opinions was 
proposed, which requires even more sophisticated solution methods.   
So far, the research community has mainly focused on opinions about 
electronics products, hotels, and restaurants. These domains are easier 
(although not easy) and reasonably good  accuracies can be achieved if one 
can focus on each domain and take care of its special cases. When one 
moves to other domains, e.g., mattress and paint, the situations get 
considerably harder because in these domains many factual statements imply 
opinions. Politics is another can of warms. Here, the current aspect 
extraction algorithms only had limited success because few political issues 
(aspects) can be described with one or two words. Political sentiments are 
also harder to determine due to complex mixture of factual reporting and 
subjective opinions, and heavy use of sarcastic sentences.