Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
71 
 5.3.2 Using Opinion and Target Relations  
Since opinions have targets, they are obviously related. Their relationships 
can be exploited to extract aspects which are opinion targets because sentiment words are often known. This method was used in (Hu and Liu, 
2004) for extracting infrequent aspects. The idea is as follows: The same 
sentiment word can be used to describe or modify different aspects. If a 
sentence does not have a frequent aspect but has some sentiment words, the 
nearest noun or noun phrase to each sentiment word is extracted. Since no 
parser was used in (Hu and Liu, 2004), the “nearest” function approximates 
the dependency relation between sentiment word and noun or noun phrase 
that it modifies, which usually works quite well. For example, in the 
following sentence,  
“The software is amazing.” 
If we know that “amazing” is a sentiment word, then “software” is extracted 
as an aspect. This idea turns out to be qui te useful in practice even when it is 
applied alone. The sentiment patterns method in (Blair-Goldensohn et al., 
2008) uses a similar idea. Additionally, this relation-based method is also a 
useful method for discovering important or key aspects (or topics) in opinion 
documents because an aspect or topic is unlikely to be important if nobody 
expresses any opinion or sentiment about it.  
In (Zhuang, Jing and Zhu, 2006), a dependency parser was used to identify 
such dependency relations for aspect extraction. Somasundaran and Wiebe (2009) employed a similar approach, and so did Kobayashi et al. (Kobayashi 
et al., 2006). The dependency idea was further generalized into the double-
propagation method for simultaneously extracting both sentiment words and 
aspects in (Qiu et al., 2011) (to be discussed in Section 5.5). In (Wu et al., 
2009), a phrase dependency parser was used rather than a normal 
dependency parser for extracting noun phrases and verb phrases, which form 
candidate aspects. The system then em ployed a language model to filter out 
those unlikely aspects. Note that a normal dependency parser identifies 
dependency of individual words only, but a phrase dependency parser 
identifies dependency of phrases, which can be more suitable for aspect 
extraction. The idea of using dependency relations has been used by many 
researchers for different purposes (Kessler and Nicolov, 2009).  
5.3.3 Using Supervised Learning  
Aspect extraction can be seen as a special case of the general information