Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
94 
 lexicon using Web pages. It was based on a graph propagation algorithm 
over a phrase similarity graph. It again assumed as input a set of positive 
seed phrases and a set of negative seed phrases. The nodes in the phrase 
graph were the candidate phrases selected from all n-grams up to length 10 
extracted from 4 billion Web pages. Only 20 million candidate phrases were 
selected using several heuristics, e.g., frequency and mutual information of 
word boundaries. A context vector for each candidate phrase was then 
constructed based on a word window of size six aggregated over all 
mentions of the phrase in the 4 billion documents. The edge set was 
constructed through cosine similarity computation of the context vectors of 
the candidate phrases. All edges ( vi, vj) were discarded if they were not one 
of the 25 highest weighted ed ges adjacent to either node vi or vj. The edge 
weight was set to the corresponding cosine similarity value. A graph-
propagation method was used to calculate the sentiment of each phrase as 
the aggregate of all the best paths to the seed words. 
In (Dragut et al., 2010), yet another but very different bootstrapping method 
was proposed using WordNet. Given a set of seed words, instead of simply 
following the dictionary, the author s proposed a set of sophisticated 
inference rules to determine other words’ sentiment orientations through a 
deductive process. That is, the algorithm takes words with known sentiment 
orientations (the seeds) as input an d produces synsets (sets of synonyms) 
with orientations. The synsets with the deduced orientations can then be 
used to further deduce the polarities of other words.  
Peng and Park (2011) presented a sentiment lexicon generation method 
using constrained symmetric nonnegative matrix factorization (CSNMF). The method first uses bootstrapping to find a set of candidate sentiment 
words in a dictionary and then uses a large corpus to assign polarity scores 
to each word. This method thus uses both dictionary and corpus. Xu, Meng 
and Wang (2010) presented several integrated methods as well using 
dictionaries and corpora to find emotion words. Their method is based on 
label propagation in a similarity graph (Zhu and Ghahramani, 2002).   
In summary, we note that the advantage of using a dictionary-based 
approach is that one can easily and quickly find a large number of sentiment 
words with their orientations. Although the resulting list can have many 
errors, a manual checking can be performed to clean it up, which is time 
consuming (not as bad as people thought, only a few days for a native speaker) but it is only a one-time effort. The main disadvantage is that the 
sentiment orientations of words collected this way are general or domain and 
context independent.  In other words, it is hard to use the dictionary-based 
approach to find domain or context dependent orientations of sentiment 
words. As discussed befo re, many sentiment words have context dependent