Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
23 
 Model of entity : An entity ei is represented by itself as a whole and a finite 
set of aspects Ai = {ai1, ai2, …, ain}. ei can be expressed with any one of a 
finite set of its entity expressions { eei1, eei2, …, eeis}. Each aspect aij  Ai 
of entity ei can be expressed with any one of its finite set of aspect 
expressions { aeij1, aeij2, …, aeijm}.  
Model of opinion document : An opinion document d contains opinions on 
a set of entities { e1, e2, …, er} and a subset of their aspects from a set of 
opinion holders { h1, h2, …, hp} at some particular time point.  
Finally, to summarize, given a set of opinion documents D, sentiment 
analysis consists of the following 6 main tasks.  
Task 1  (entity extraction and categorization): Extract all entity expressions 
in D, and categorize or group synonymous entity expressions into entity 
clusters (or categories). Each entity expression cluster indicates a unique 
entity ei. 
Task 2  (aspect extraction and categorization): Extract all aspect expressions 
of the entities, and categor ize these aspect expressions into clusters. Each 
aspect expression cluster of entity ei represents a unique aspect aij.  
Task 3 (opinion holder extraction and categorization): Extract opinion 
holders for opinions from text or structured data and categorize them. 
The task is analogous to the above two tasks.  
Task 4 (time extraction and standardization): Extract the times when 
opinions are given and standardize different time formats. The task is 
also analogous to the above tasks.  
Task 5 (aspect sentiment classification): Determine whether an opinion on 
an aspect aij is positive, negative or neutral, or assign a numeric 
sentiment rating to the aspect.  
Task 6 (opinion quintuple generation): Produce all opinion quintuples ( ei, 
aij, sijkl, hk, tl) expressed in document d based on the results of the above 
tasks. This task is seemingly very simple but it is in fact very difficult in 
many cases as Example 4 below shows.   
Sentiment analysis (or opinion mining) based on this framework is often 
called aspect-based sentiment analysis  (or opinion mining ), or feature-based 
sentiment analysis (or opinion mining ) as it was called in (Hu and Liu, 2004; 
Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005).   
We now use an example blog to illustrate the tasks (a sentence id is again 
associated with each sentence) and the analysis results.  
Example 4:   Posted by: bigJohn  Date: Sept. 15, 2011  
(1) I bought a Samsung camera and my friends brought a Canon 
camera yesterday . (2) In the past week, we both used the cameras a 
lot. (3) The photos from my Samy are not that great, and the battery