Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
44 
 CHAPTER 4 
Sentence Subjectivity and 
Sentiment Classification  
As discussed in the previous chapter, document-level sentiment 
classification may be too crude for most applications. We now move to the 
sentence level, i.e., to classify sentiment expressed in each sentence. 
However, there is no fundamental difference between document and 
sentence level classifications because sentences are just short documents. 
One assumption that researchers often make about sentence-level analysis is 
that a sentence usually contains a single opinion (although not true in many cases). A document typically contains multiple opinions. Let us start our 
discussion with an example review:  
 “I bought a Motorola phone two weeks ago. Everything was good 
initially. The voice was clear and the battery life was long, although it 
is a bit bulky. Then, it stopped working yesterday .”  
The first sentence expresses no opinion as it simply states a fact. All other 
sentences express either explicit or implicit sentiments. Note no opinion is 
usually regarded as neutral. 
Problem definition : Given a sentence x, determine whether x expresses a 
positive, negative, or neutral (or no) opinion.   
The quintuple ( e, a, s, h, t) definition is not used here because sentence-level 
classification is an intermediate step. In most applications, one needs to 
know the opinion targets. Knowing only that a sentence expresses a positive or negative opinion, but not what entities/aspects the opinion is about, is of 
limited use. However, sentence level classification is still useful because in 
many cases, if we know what entities and entity aspects are talked about in a 
sentence, this step can help determine whether the opinions about the entities 
and their aspects are positive or negative.   
Sentence sentiment classification can be solved either as a three-class 
classification problem or as two separate classification problems. In the 
latter case, the first problem (also called the first step) is to classify whether 
a sentence expresses an opinion or not.  The second problem (also called the 
second step) then classifies those opinion sentences into positive and 
negative classes. The first problem is usually called subjectivity 
classification , which determines whether a sentence expresses a piece of 
subjective information or factual (objective) information (Hatzivassiloglou