Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
103 
 Aspect-based opinion summarization has two main characteristics. First, it 
captures the essence of opinions: opinio n targets (entities and their aspects) 
and sentiments about them. Second, it is quantitative, which means that it 
gives the number or percent of people who hold positive or negative 
opinions about the entities and aspect s. The quantitative side is crucial 
because of the subjective nature of opinions. The resulting opinion summary 
is a form of structured summary produced from the opinion quintuple in 
Section 2.1. We have described the summary in Section 2.2. It is reproduced 
here for completeness. Figure 7.1 shows an aspect-based summary of 
opinions about a digital camera (Hu and Liu, 2004). The aspect GENERAL 
represents opinions on the camera as a whole, i.e., the entity. For each aspect 
(e.g., picture quality), it shows how many people have positive and negative opinions respectively. <individual review sentences> links to the actual 
sentences (or full reviews or blogs).  This structured summary can also be 
visualized (Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005). Figure 7.2(A) uses a bar chart to 
visualize the summary in Figure 7.1.  In the figure, each bar above the X-axis 
shows the number of positive opinions about the aspect given at the top. The 
corresponding bar below the X-axis shows the number of negative opinions 
on the same aspect. Clicking on each bar, we can see the individual 
sentences and full reviews. Obviously, other visualizations are also possible. 
For example, the bar charts of both Microsoft Bing search and Google 
Product Search use the percent of positive opinions on each aspect. 
Comparing opinion summaries of a few entities is even more interesting 
(Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005). Figure 7.2(B) shows the visual opinion 
comparison of two cameras. We can see how consumers view each of them 
along different aspect dimensions including the entities themselves.  
The opinion quintuples in fact allows one to provide many more forms of 
structured summaries. For example, if  time is extracted, one can show the 
trend of opinions on different aspects. Even without using sentiments, one 
can see the buzz (frequency) of each asp ect mentions, which gives the user 
an idea what aspects people are most concerned about. In fact, with the 
quintuple, a full range of database and OLAP tools can be used to slice and 
dice the data for all kinds of qualitative and quantitative analysis. For example, in one practical sentiment an alysis application in the automobile 
domain, opinion quintuples of individual cars were mined first. The user 
then compared sentiments about small cars, medium sized cars, German cars 
and Japanese cars, etc. In addition, the sentiment analysis results were also 
used as raw data for data mining. The user ran a clustering algorithm and 
found some interesting segments of the market. For example, it was found 
that one segment of the customers always talked about how beautiful and 
slick the car looked and how fun it was to drive, etc, while another segment 
of the customers talked a lot about b ack seats and trunk space, etc. Clearly,