Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
142 
 and critical task.  
By reading this book thus far, it is not hard to see that sentiment analysis is 
very challenging technically. Although the research community has 
attempted so many sub-problems from many different angles and a large 
number of research papers have also been published, none of the sub-
problems has been solved satisfactorily. Our understanding and knowledge 
about the whole problem and its solution are still very limited. The main 
reason is that this is a natural language processing task, and natural language 
processing has no easy problems. Another reason may be due to our popular 
ways of doing research. We probably relied too much on machine learning. 
Some of the most effective machine learning algorithms, e.g., support vector 
machines, naïve Bayes and conditional random fields, produce no human understandable results such that although they may help us achieve 
improved accuracy, we know little about how and why apart from some 
superficial knowledge gained in the manual feature engineering process.  
That being said, we have indeed made significant progresses over the past 
decade. This is evident from the larg e number of start-up and established 
companies that offer sentiment analysis  services. There is a real and huge 
need in the industry for such services because every business wants to know 
how consumers perceive their products and services and those of their 
competitors. The same can also be said about consumers because whenever 
one wants to buy something, one wants to know the opinions of existing 
users. These practical needs and the technical challenges will keep the field 
vibrant and lively for years to come. 
Building on what has been done so far, I believe that we just need to conduct 
more in-depth investigations and to build integrated systems that try to deal 
with all the sub-problems together because their interactions can help solve 
each individual sub-problem. I am optimistic that the whole problem will be 
solved satisfactorily in the near future for widespread applications.  
For applications, a completely automate d and accurate solution is nowhere 
in sight. However, it is possible to devise effective semi-automated 
solutions. The key is to fully understand the whole range of issues and 
pitfalls, cleverly manage them, and determine what portions can be done 
automatically and what portions need  human assistance. In the continuum 
between the fully manual solution and the fully automated solution, as time 
goes by we can push more and more towards automation. I do not see a silver bullet solution soon. A good bet would be to work hard on a large 
number of diverse application domains, understand each of them, and design 
a general solution gradually.