Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
134 
 a store is more reliable if it has more positive reviews from trustworthy 
reviewers; and a review is more honest if it is supported by many other 
honest reviews. Furthermore, if the honesty of a review goes down, it affects 
the reviewer’s trustiness, which has an impact on the store he/she reviewed. 
These intertwined relations are revealed in the review graph and defined 
mathematically. An iterative computation method was proposed to compute 
the three values, which are then used to  rank reviewers, stores and reviews. 
Those top ranked reviewers, stores and reviews are likely to be involved in 
review spamming. The evaluation was done using human judges by 
comparing with scores of stores from Better Business Bureaus (BBB), which 
is a well-known corporation in USA that gathers reports on business 
reliability and alerts the public to business or consumer scams.  
10.4 Group Spam Detection  
An initial group spam detection algorithm was proposed in (Mukherjee et 
al., 2011), which was improved in (M ukherjee, Liu and Glance, 2012). The 
algorithm finds groups of spammers who might have worked in collusion in 
promoting or demoting some target entities. It works in two steps:  
1.  Frequent pattern mining : First, it pre-processes the review data to 
produce a set of transactions. Each transaction represents a unique 
product and consists of all reviewers (their ids) who have reviewed that product. Using all the transactions, it performs frequent pattern mining to 
find a set of frequent patterns. Each pattern is basically a group of 
reviewers who have all reviewed a set of products. Such a group is 
regarded as a candidate spam group. The reason for using frequent 
pattern mining is as follows: If a group of reviewers who only worked 
together once to promote or to demote a single product, it can be hard to 
detect based on their collective behavior. However, these fake reviewers 
(especially those who get paid to write) cannot be just writing one review 
for a single product because they would not make enough money that 
way. Instead, they work on many products, i.e., write many reviews 
about many products, which also gives them away. Frequent pattern 
mining can find them working together on multiple products. 
2.  Rank groups based on a set of group spam indicators : The groups 
discovered in step 1 may not all be true spammer groups. Many of the 
reviewers are grouped together in pattern mining simply due to chance. 
Then, this step first uses a set of indicators to catch different types of 
unusual group and individual member behaviors. These indicators 
include writing reviews together in a short time window, writing reviews