Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
82 
 use different words and phrases to describe the same aspect. For 
example, “call quality” and “voice qual ity” refer to the same aspect for 
phones. Grouping such aspect expre ssions from the same aspect is 
critical for opinion analysis. Although WorldNet and other thesaurus dictionaries can help to some extent , they are far from sufficient because 
many synonyms are domain dependent (Liu, Hu and Cheng, 2005). For 
example, “movie” and “picture” are synonyms in movie reviews, but they are not synonyms in camera reviews as “picture” is more likely to be synonymous to “photo” while “movie” to “video”. 
Many aspect 
expressions are multi-word phrases, which cannot be easily handled with 
dictionaries. Furthermore, it is also important to note that many aspect 
expressions describing the same aspect are not general or domain specific 
synonyms. For example, “expensive” and “cheap” can both indicate the 
aspect price  but they are not synonyms of each other (but antonyms) or 
synonyms of price .  
Carenini, Ng and Zwart (2005) proposed the first method to deal with this 
problem. Their method was based on several similarity metrics defined using 
string similarity, synonyms, and lexical distances measured using WordNet. 
The method requires a taxonomy of aspects to be given for a particular 
domain. It merges each discovered aspect expression to an aspect node in the 
taxonomy based on the similarities. Experiments based on digital camera 
and DVD reviews showed promising results. In (Yu et al., 2011), a more 
sophisticated method was presented to also use publicly available aspect 
hierarchies/taxonomies of products and the actual product reviews to 
produce the final aspect hierarchies. A set of distance measures was also 
used but was combined with an optimization strategy.  
In (Zhai et al., 2010), a semi-supervised learning method was proposed to 
group aspect expressions into some us er-specified aspect categories. To 
reflect the user needs, he/she first labels a small number of seeds for each 
category. The system then assigns the rest of the aspect expressions to 
suitable categories using a semi-supervised learning method working with 
labeled and unlabeled examples. The method uses the Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm in (Nigam et al., 2000). The method also 
employed two pieces of prior knowledge to provide a better initialization for 
EM: (1) aspect expressions sharing some common words are likely to belong 
to the same group, e.g., “battery life” and “battery power,” and (2) aspect 
expressions that are synonyms in a di ctionary are likely to belong to the 
same group, e.g., “movie” and “picture.” These two pieces of knowledge help EM produce better classification results. In (Zhai et al., 2011), soft 
constraints were used to help label some examples, i.e., sharing words and 
lexical similarity (Jiang and Conrath, 1997). The learning method also used