Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
92 
 other words are given the score of 0. The scores are revised during the 
propagation process. When the propagation stops after a number of 
iterations, the final scores after a logarithmic scaling are assigned to words 
as their degrees of being positive or negative.  
In (Rao and Ravichandran, 2009), three graph-based semi-supervised 
learning methods were tried to separate positive and negative words given a 
positive seed set, a negative seed set, and a synonym graph extracted from 
the WordNet. The three algorithms we re Mincut (Blum and Chawla, 2001), 
Randomized Mincut (Blum et al., 2004), and label propagation (Zhu and 
Ghahramani, 2002). It was shown that Mincut and Randomized Mincut 
produced better F scores, but label propagation gave significantly higher 
precisions with low recalls.  
Hassan and Radev (2010) presented a Markov random walk model over a 
word relatedness graph to produce a sentiment estimate for a given word. It 
first uses WordNet synonyms and hypernyms to build a word relatedness 
graph. A measure, called the mean hitting time  h(i|S), was then defined and 
used to gauge the distance from a node i to a set of nodes (words) S, which is 
the average number of steps that a random walker, starting in state i  S, will 
take to enter a state k  S for the first time. Given a set of positive seed 
words S+ and a set of negative seed words S−, to estimate the sentiment 
orientation of a given word w, it computes the hitting times h(w|S+) and 
h(w|S−). If h(w|S+) is greater than h(w|S−), the word is classified as negative, 
otherwise positive. In (Hassan et al., 2011), this method was applied to find 
sentiment orientations of foreign words. For this purpose, a multilingual 
word graph was created with both English words and foreign words. Words 
in different languages are connected based on their meanings in dictionaries. 
Other methods based on graphs include those in (Takamura, Inui and Okumura, 2005) and (Takamura, Inui and Okumura, 2007; Takamura, Inui 
and Okumura, 2006).  
In (Turney and Littman, 2003), the same PMI based method as in (Turney, 
2002) was used to compute the sentiment orientation of a given word. 
Specifically, it computes the orientation of the word from the strength of its 
association with a set of positive words ( good , nice, excellent , positive , 
fortunate , correct , and superior ), minus the strength of its association with a 
set of negative words ( bad, nasty , poor , negative , unfortunate , wrong , and 
inferior ). The association strength is measured using PMI. 
 
Esuli and Sebastiani (2005) used superv ised learning to classify words into 
positive and negative classes. Given a set P of positive seed words and a set 
N of negative seed words, the two seed sets are first expanded using 
synonym and antonym relations in an online dictionary (e.g., WordNet) to