Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
62 
 this case, parsing is needed to find the dependency as in the supervised 
method discussed above. We can also automatically discover the sentiment 
orientation of context dependent words such as “long” above. More details 
will be given in Chapter 6. In fact, the above simple approach can be 
enhanced in many directions. For example, Blair-Goldensohn et al. (2008) 
integrated the lexicon-based method with supervised learning. Kessler and 
Nicolov (2009) experimented with four different strategies of determining 
the sentiment on each aspect/target (including a ranking method). They also 
showed several interesting statistics on why it is so hard to link sentiment 
words to their targets based on a large amount of manually annotated data.  
Along with aspect sentiment classificati on research, researchers also studied 
the aspect sentiment rating prediction problem which has mostly been done 
together with aspect extraction in the context of topic modeling, which we discuss in Section 5.3.4.  
As indicated above, apart from sentiment words and phrases, there are many 
other types of expressions that can convey or imply sentiments. Most of 
them are also harder to handle. Below, we list some of them, which are 
called the basic rules of opinions  (Liu, 2010).  
5.2 Basic Rules of Opinions and 
Compositional Semantics 
An opinion rule expresses a concept that implies a positive or negative 
sentiment. It can be as simple as individual sentiment words with their 
implied sentiments or compound expressions that may need commonsense 
or domain knowledge to determine their orientations. This section describes 
some of these rules. One way of representing these rules is to use the idea of 
compositional semantics (Dowty, Wall and Peters, 1981; Montague, 1974), 
which states that the meaning of a compound expression is a function of the 
meaning of its constituents and of the syntactic rules by which they are combined. Below, we first describe the rules at the conceptual level without 
considering how they may be expressed in actual sentences because many of 
these rules can be expressed in numerous ways and can also be domain and 
context dependent. After that, we go to the expression level to discuss the 
current research on compositional semantics in the context of sentiment 
analysis, which aims to combine more than one input constituent expressions 
to derive an overall sentiment orientation for the composite expression.  
The rules are presented using a formalism similar to the BNF form. The 
rules are from (Liu, 2010).