Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
61 
 The most commonly used contrary word in English is “but”. A sentence 
containing a contrary word or phrase is handled by applying the 
following rule: the sentiment orientations before the contrary word (e.g., 
but) and after the contrary word are oppo site to each other if the opinion 
on one side cannot be determined. The if-condition in the rule is used 
because contrary words and phrases do not always indicate an opinion 
change, e.g., “ Car-x is great, but Car-y is better .” After this step, the 
above sentence is turned into “The voice quality  of this phone is not 
good [-1], but the battery life  is long[+1]” due to “but” ([+1] is added at 
the end of the but-clause). Notice here, we can infer that “long” is 
positive for “battery life”. Apart from but, phrases such as “with the 
exception of,” “except that,” and “except for” also have the meaning of contrary and are handled in the same way. As in the case of negation, not 
every but means contrary, e.g., “not only … but also.” Such non-but 
phrases containing  “but”  also need to be identified beforehand.  
4. Aggregate opinions : This step applies an opinion aggregation function 
to the resulting sentiment scores to determine the final orientation of the 
sentiment on each aspect in the sentence. Let the sentence be s, which 
contains a set of aspects { a
1, …, am} and a set of sentiment words or 
phrases { sw1, …, swn} with their sentiment scores obtained from steps 1-
3. The sentiment orientation for each aspect ai in s is determined by the 
following aggregation function:  
 ,),(.),(

s ow i jj
i
jaswdistsoswsa score  (5) 
where swj is an sentiment word/phrase in s, dist(swj, ai) is the distance 
between aspect ai and sentiment word swj in s. swj.so is the sentiment 
score of swi. The multiplicative inverse is used to give lower weights to 
sentiment words that are far away from aspect ai. If the final score is 
positive, then the opinion on aspect ai in s is positive. If the final score is 
negative, then the sentiment on the aspect is negative. It is neutral 
otherwise.  
This simple algorithm performs quite well in many cases. It is able to handle 
the sentence “ Apple is doing very well in this bad economy ” with no 
problem. Note that there are many other opinion aggregation methods. For 
example, (Hu and Liu, 2004) simply summed up the sentiment scores of all 
sentiment words in a sentence or sentence segment. Kim, and Hovy (2004) 
used multiplication of sentiment scores of words. Similar methods were also 
employed by other researchers (W an, 2008; Zhu et al., 2009). 
To make this method even more effective, we can determine the scope of 
each individual sentiment word instead of  using words distance as above. In