Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
86 
 candidates in a sentence, i.e., all noun phrases, including common noun 
phrases, named entities, and pronouns . It then parses the sentence and 
extracts a set of features from the parse tree. A learned Maximum Entropy 
(ME) model then ranks all holder candidates according to  the scores 
obtained by the ME model. The system picks the candidate with the highest 
score as the holder of the opinion in the sentence. Johansson and Moschitti 
(2010) used SVM with a set of features. Wiegand and Klakow (2010) used 
convolution kernels, and Lu (2010) applied a dependency parser.   
In (Ruppenhofer, Somasundaran and Wiebe, 2008), the authors discussed 
the issue of using automatic semantic role labeling (ASRL) to identify 
opinion holders. They argued that ASRL is insufficient and other linguistic 
phenomena such as the discourse structure may need to be considered. Kim and Hovy (2006) earlier also used semantic role labeling for the purpose.  
5.8 Coreference Resolution and Word 
Sense Disambiguation 
Although we discuss only coreference resolution  and word sense 
disambiguation  in this section, we really want to highlight NLP issues and 
problems in the sentiment analysis context. Most of such issues have not 
been studied in sentiment analysis. 
Coreference resolution has been studied extensively in the NLP community 
in general. It refers to the problem of determining multiple expressions in a 
sentence or document referring to the same thing, i.e., they have the same 
"referent."  For example, in “ I bought an iPhone two days ago. It looks very 
nice. I made many calls in the past two days. They were great ,” “It” in the 
second sentence refers to iPhone, which is an entity, and “they” in the fourth 
sentence refers to “calls”, which is an aspect. Recognizing these coreference 
relationships is clearly very important for aspect-based sentiment analysis. If 
we do not resolve them, but only consider opinion in each sentence in isolation, we lose recall. That is, although we know that the second and 
fourth sentences express opinions, we do not know about what. Then, from 
this piece of text we will get no useful opinion, but in fact, it has a positive 
opinion on iPhone itself and also a positive opinion on the call quality.  
Ding and Liu (2010) proposed the problem of entity and aspect coreference 
resolution . The task aims to determine which mentions of entities and/or 
aspects that pronouns refer to. The paper took a supervised learning 
approach. The key interesting points were the design and testing of two 
opinion-related features, which showed that sentiment analysis was used for