Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
48 
 labeling consistencies. The purpose of this work was actually to remove 
objective sentences from reviews to improve document level sentiment 
classification.  
Barbosa and Feng (2010) classified the subjectivity of tweets (postings on Twitter) based on traditional features with the inclusion of some Twitter 
specific clues such as retw eets, hashtags, links, upper case words, emoticons, 
and exclamation and question marks. For sentiment classification of 
subjective tweets, the same set of features was also used.  
Interestingly, in (Raaijmakers and Kraai j, 2008), it was found that character 
n-grams of subwords rather than words n-grams can also perform sentiment 
and subjectivity classification well. For example, for the sentence “ This car 
rocks ”, subword character bigrams are th, hi, is, ca, ar, ro, oc, ck, ks. In 
(Raaijmakers, Truong and Wilson, 2 008) and (Wilson and Raaijmakers, 
2008), word n-grams, character n-gr am and phoneme n-grams were all 
experimented and compared for subjec tivity classification. BoosTexter 
(Schapire and Singer, 2000) was used as the learning algorithm. 
Surprisingly, their experiments showed that character n-grams performed the 
best, and phoneme n-grams performed similarly to word n-grams. 
Wilson, Wiebe and Hwa (2004) pointed out that a single sentence may 
contain both subjective and objective clauses. It is useful to pinpoint such 
clauses. It is also useful to identify  the strength of subjectivity. A study of 
automatic subjectivity classification was presented to classify clauses of a 
sentence by the strength  of subjectivity expressed in individual clauses, 
down to four levels deep ( neutral , low, medium , and high). Neutral indicates  
the absence of subjectivity. Strength classification thus subsumes the task of classifying a sentence as subjective or objective. The authors used 
supervised learning. Their features included subjectivity indicating words 
and phrases, and syntactic clues generated from the dependency parse tree.  
Benamara et al. (2011) performed subjectivity classification with four 
classes, S, OO, O and SN, where S means subjective and evaluative (their 
sentiment can be positive or negative), OO means positive or negative 
opinion implied in an objective sentence or sentence segment, O means 
objective with no opinion, and SN means subjective but non-evaluative (no 
positive or negative sentiment). This classification is more complete and 
conforms to our discussion earlier and also in Section 2.4, which showed 
that a subjective sentence may not be evaluative (with positive or negative sentiment) and an objective sentence can imply sentiment too. 
Additional works on subjectivity cla ssification of sentences has also been 
done in Arabic (Abdul-Mageed, Diab and Korayem, 2011) and Urdu 
languages (Mukund and Srihari, 2010) based on different machine learning