Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
118 
 CHAPTER 9 
Opinion Search and Retrieval  
 
As Web search has proven to be a valuab le service on the Web, it is not hard 
to imagine that opinion search will also be of great use. Two typical kinds of 
opinion search queries are:  
1. Find public opinions about a particular entity or an aspect of the entity, 
e.g., find customer opinions about a digital camera or the picture quality of the camera, and find public opinions about a political issue or 
candidate.  
2. Find opinions of a person or organization (i.e., opinion holder) about a 
particular entity or an aspect of the entity (or topic) , e.g., find Barack 
Obama’s opinion about abortion. This type of search is particularly 
relevant to news articles, where individuals or organizations who 
express opinions are explicitly stated.  
For the first type of queries, the user may simply give the name of the entity 
or the name of the aspect together with the name of the entity. For the 
second type of queries, the user may gi ve the name of the opinion holder and 
the name of the entity or topic.  
9.1 Web Search vs. Opinion Search  
Similar to traditional Web search, opinion search also has two major tasks: 
1) retrieve relevant documents/sentences to the user query and 2) rank the 
retrieved documents or sentences. Howeve r, there are also major differences. 
On retrieval, opinion search needs to perform two sub-tasks:  
1. Find documents or sentences that are relevant to the query. This is the 
only task performed in the traditional Web search or retrieval.  
2. Determine whether the documents or sentences express opinions on the 
query topic (entity and/or aspect) and whether the opinions are positive 
or negative. This is the task of sentiment analysis. Traditional search does not perform this sub-task.  
As for ranking, traditional Web search engines rank Web pages based on 
authority and relevance scores (Liu, 2006 and 2011). The basic premise is 
that the top ranked pages (ideally the first page) co ntain sufficient 
information to satisfy the user’s information need. This paradigm is adequate