Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
69 
 were identified by a part-of-sp eech (POS) tagger. Their occurrence 
frequencies are counted, and only the frequent ones are kept. A frequency 
threshold can be decided experimentally. The reason that this approach 
works is that when people comment on different aspects of an entity, the 
vocabulary that they use usually conv erges. Thus, those nouns that are 
frequently talked about ar e usually genuine and impor tant aspects. Irrelevant 
contents in reviews are often diverse, i. e., they are quite di fferent in different 
reviews. Hence, those infrequent nouns are likely to be non-aspects or less 
important aspects. Although this method is very simple, it is actually quite effective. Some commercial companies are using this method with several 
improvements.  
The precision of this algorithm was improved in (Popescu and Etzioni, 
2005). Their algorithm tried to remove those noun phrases that may not be 
aspects of entities.  It evaluated each discovered noun phrase by computing a 
pointwise mutual information (PMI) score between the phrase and some 
meronymy discriminators associated with the entity class, e.g., a camera 
class. The meronymy discriminators for the camera class are, “of camera,” 
“camera has,” “camera comes with,” etc., which were used to find 
components or parts of cameras by searching the Web. The PMI measure 
was a simplified version of that in Section 3.2: 
,)()() (),(dhitsahitsdahitsda PMI  (4) 
where a is a candidate aspect  identified using the frequency approach and d 
is a discriminator. Web search was used to find the number of hits of My SLR is on the shelf 
by camerafun4. Aug 09 ‘04 
Pros:  Great photos, easy to use, very small 
Cons:  Battery usage; included memory is stingy. 
I had never used a digital camera prior to purchasing this Canon A70. 
I have always used a SLR … Read the full review  
Figure 5.1.  An example of a review of format 1. 
GREAT Camera. , Jun 3, 2004  
Reviewer: jprice174 from Atlanta, Ga. 
I did a lot of research last year be fore I bought this camera... It kinda 
hurt to leave behind my beloved nikon 35mm SLR, but I was going to Italy, and I needed something smaller, and digital.  
The pictures coming out of this cam era are amazing. The 'auto' feature 
takes great pictures most of the time. And with digital, you're not wasting film if the picture doesn't come out. … 
Figure 5.2.  An example of a review of format 2.