Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
128 
 to train a machine learning algorithm to recognize fake reviews. Despite 
these difficulties, several detection algorithms have been proposed and 
evaluated in various ways. This section discusses three supervised learning 
methods. The next section describes some unsupervised methods.  
Due to the fact that there is no labeled training data for learning, Jindal and 
Liu (2008) exploited duplicate reviews. In their study of 5.8 million reviews 
and 2.14 million reviewers from amazon.com, a large number of duplicate 
and near-duplicate reviews were found, which indicated that review spam 
was widespread. Since writing new reviews can be taxing, many spammers 
use the same reviews or slightly revised reviews for different products. 
These duplicates and near-duplicates can be divided into four categories: 
1. Duplicates from the same user-id on the same product  
2. Duplicates from different user-ids on the same product 
3. Duplicates from the same user-id on different products 
4. Duplicates from different user-ids on different products  
The first type of duplicates can be the results of reviewers mistakenly 
clicking the review submit button multiple times (which can be easily 
checked based on the submission dates). However, the last three types of 
duplicates are very likely to be fake. Thus the last three types of duplicates 
were used as fake reviews and the rest  of the reviews as non-fake reviews in 
the training data for machine learning. Th ree sets of features were employed:  
Review centric features : These are features about each review. Example 
features include the actual words and n-grams of the review, the number 
of times that brand names are mentioned, the percent of opinion words, 
the review length, and the number of helpful feedbacks. In many review 
sites (e.g., amazon.com), the readers ca n provide feedback to each review 
by answering a question like “ Do you find this review helpful? ” 
Reviewer centric features : These are features about each reviewer. Example 
features include the aver age rating given by the reviewer, the mean and 
the standard deviation in rating, the ratio of the number of reviews that 
this reviewer wrote which were the first reviews of products to the total 
number of reviews that he/she has written, and the ratio of the number of 
cases in which he/she was the only reviewer. 
Product centric features : These features are abou t each product. Example 
features include the price of the pr oduct, the sales rank of the product 
(amazon.com assigns a sales rank to each product according to its sales volume), the mean and the standard deviation of review ratings of the 
product. 
Logistic regression was used for model building. Experimental results 
showed some tentative but interesting results.