Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
113 
 {Canon}, the opinion holder h is Jim, and the time t when this comparative 
opinion was written is 9-25-2011.  
Note that the above representation may not be easily put in a database due to 
the use of sets, but it can be easily converted to multiple tuples with no sets, 
e.g., the above sets based sextuples can be expanded into two tuples:   
(Canon, LG, picture_quality, Canon, Jim, Dec-25-2010) 
(Canon, Sony, picture_quality, Canon, Jim, Dec-25-2010) 
Like mining regular opinions, mining comparative opinions needs to extract 
entities, aspects, opinion holders, and times. The tech niques used are similar 
too. In fact, these tasks are often easier for comparative sentences because 
entities are usually on the two sides of the comparative keyword, and aspects 
are also near. However, for sentiment anal ysis to identify the preferred entity 
set, a different method is needed which we will discuss in Section 8.3. We 
also need to identify comparative se ntences themselves because not all 
sentences containing comparative keywords express comparisons and many 
comparative keywords and phrases are hard to identify (Jindal and Liu, 
2006b). Below, we only focus on studying two comparative opinion 
sentiment analysis specific problems, i.e., identifying comparative sentences 
and determining the preferred entity set.   
8.2 Identify Comparative Sentences  
Although most comparative sentences contain comparative and superlative 
keywords, e.g., better , superior , and best, many sentences that contain such 
words are not comparative sentences, e.g., “ I cannot agree with you more .”  
In (Jindal and Liu, 2006a), it was sh own that almost every comparative 
sentence has a keyword (a word or phrase) indicating comparison. Using a 
set of keywords, 98% of comparative sentences (recall = 98%) were 
identified with a precision of 32% based on their data set. The keywords are: 
1. Comparative adjectives (JJR) and comparative adverbs (RBR), e.g., more , 
less, better , and words ending with - er. These are counted as only two 
keywords. 
2. Superlative adjectives (JJS) and superlative adverbs (RBS), e.g., most , 
least , best, and words ending with -est. These are also counted as only 
two keywords. 
3. Other non-standard indicative words and phrases such as favor , beat, win, 
exceed , outperform, prefer , ahead,  than, superior , inferior , number one, 
up against , etc. These are counted indi vidually in the number of 
keywords.