Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
99 
 Brody and Diakopoulos (2011) studied the lengthening of words (e.g., 
slooooow ) in microblogs. They showed that lengthening is strongly 
associated with subjectivity and sentiment, and presented an automatic way 
to leverage this association to detect domain sentiment and emotion words. 
Finally, Feng, Bose and Choi (2011) studied the problem of producing a 
connotation lexicon. A connotation lexicon differs from a sentiment lexicon 
in that the latter concerns words that express sentiment either explicitly or 
implicitly, while the former concerns wo rds that are often associated with a 
specific polarity of sentiment, e.g., award  and promotion  have positive 
connotation and cancer  and war have negative connotation. A graph-based 
method based on mutual reinforcement was proposed to solve the problem.  
6.3 Desirable and Undesirable Facts  
Sentiment words and expressions that we have discussed so far are mainly 
subjective words and expressions that indicate positive or negative opinions. 
However, as mentioned earlier, many objective words and expressions can 
imply opinions too in certain domains or contexts because they can represent 
desirable or undesirable facts in these domains or contexts.  
In (Zhang and Liu, 2011b), a method was proposed to identify nouns and 
noun phrases that are aspects and also  imply sentiments in a particular 
domain. These nouns and noun phrases alone indicate no sentiments, but in the domain context they may represent desirable or undesirable facts. For 
example, “valley” and “mountain” do not have any sentiment connotation in 
general, i.e., they are objective. However, in the domain of mattress reviews, 
they often imply negative opinions as in “ Within a month, a valley has 
formed in the middle of the mattress .” Here, “valley” implies a negative 
sentiment on the aspect of mattress quality. Identifying the sentiment 
orientations of such aspects is very  challenging but critical for effective 
sentiment analysis in these domains.  
The algorithm in (Zhang and Liu, 2011b) was based on the following idea: 
Although such sentences are usually objective with no explicit sentiments, in 
some cases the authors/reviewers may al so give explicit sentiments, e.g., 
“Within a month, a valley has formed in the middle of the mattress, which is 
terrible .” The context of this sentence indicates that “valley” may not be 
desirable. Note that this work assumed that the set of aspects which are 
nouns and noun phrases are given. However, the problem with this approach 
is that those aspects (nouns and noun phrases) with no implied sentiment 
may also be in some positive or negative sentiment contexts, e.g., “voice 
quality” in “ The voice quality is poor .” To distinguish these two cases, the