Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
5 
 Preface 
Opinions are central to almost all human activities and are key influencers of 
our behaviors. Our beliefs and perceptions of reality, and the choices we make, are, to a considerable degree, conditioned upon how others see and 
evaluate the world. For this reason, when we need to make a decision we 
often seek out the opinions of others. Th is is not only true for individuals but 
also true for organizations.  
Opinions and its related concepts such as sentiments, evaluations, attitudes, 
and emotions are the subjects of study of sentiment analysis and opinion 
mining . The inception and rapid growth of the field coincide with those of 
the social media on the Web, e.g., reviews, forum discussions, blogs, micro-
blogs, Twitter, and social networks, because for the first time in human 
history, we have a huge volume of opinionated data recorded in digital 
forms. Since early 2000, sentiment analysis has grown to be one of the most active research areas in natural language processing. It is al so widely studied 
in data mining, Web mining, and text mining. In fact, it has spread from 
computer science to management sciences and social sciences due to its 
importance to business and society as a whole. In recent years, industrial 
activities surrounding sentiment analysis have also thrived. Numerous 
startups have emerged. Many large corporations have built their own in-
house capabilities. Sentiment analysis systems have found their applications 
in almost every business and social domain.  
The goal of this book is to give an in-depth introduction to this fascinating 
problem and to present a comprehensive survey of all important research 
topics and the latest developments in the field. As evidence of that, this book 
covers more than 400 references fro m all major conferences and journals. 
Although the field deals with the natural language text, which is often considered the unstructured data, this book takes a structured approach in 
introducing the problem with the aim of bridging the unstructured and 
structured worlds and facilitating qualitative and quantitative analysis of 
opinions. This is crucial for practical applications. In this book, I first define 
the problem in order to provide an abstraction or structure to the problem. 
From the abstraction, we will naturally see its key sub-problems. The 
subsequent chapters discuss the existing techniques for solving these sub-
problems. 
This book is suitable for students, researchers, and practitioners who are 
interested in social media analysis in general and sentiment analysis in 
particular. Lecturers can readily use it in class for courses on natural