Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
43 
 In (Guo et al., 2010), a topic model based method was proposed to group a 
set of given aspect expressions in different languages into aspect clusters 
(categories) for aspect-based sentiment comparison of opinions from 
different countries (see also Section 5.3.4).  
In (Duh, Fujino and Nagata, 2011), the authors presented their opinions 
about the research of cross-language se ntiment classification. Based on their 
analysis, they claimed that domain mi smatch was not caused by machine 
translation (MT) errors, and accuracy degradation would occur even with 
perfect MT. It also argued that the cross-language adaptation problem was 
qualitatively different from other (monolingual) adaptation problems in 
NLP; thus new adaptation algorithms should to be considered. 
3.6 Summary  
Sentiment classification at the document level provides an overall opinion 
on an entity, topic or event. It has been studied by a large number of 
researchers. However, this level of classification has some shortcomings for 
applications:  
 In many applications, the user needs to know additional details, e.g., what 
aspects of entities are liked and disliked by consumers. In typical opinion 
documents, such details are provided, but document sentiment classification does not extract them for the user.  
 Document sentiment classification is not easily applicable to non-reviews 
such as forum discussions, blogs, an d news articles, because many such 
postings can evaluate multiple entities and compare them. In many cases, 
it is hard to determine whether a posting actually evaluates the entities 
that the user is interested in, and whether the posting expresses any 
opinion at all, let alone to determine the sentiment about them. 
Document-level sentiment classifi cation does not perform such fine-
grained tasks, which require in-depth natural language processing. In fact, 
online reviews do not need sentiment classification because almost all reviews already have user-assigned star ratings. In practice, it is the forum 
discussions and blogs that need sentiment classification to determine 
people’s opinions about different entities (e.g., products and services) and 
topics.