Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
35 
 in (Turney, 2002) is such a technique. It performs classification based on 
some fixed syntactic patterns that are likely to be used to express opinions. 
The syntactic patterns are composed based on part-of-speech (POS) tags. 
The algorithm given in (Turney, 2002) consists of three steps:  
Step 1: Two consecutive words are extracted if their POS tags conform to 
any of the patterns in Table 3.2. For example, pattern 2 means that two 
consecutive words are extracted if the first word is an adverb, the second 
word is an adjective, and the third word (not extracted) is not a noun. As 
an example, in the sentence “ This piano produces beautiful sounds ”, 
“beautiful sounds ” is extracted as it satisfies the first pattern. The reason 
these patterns are used is that JJ,  RB, RBR and RBS words often express 
opinions. The nouns or verbs act as the contexts because in different contexts a JJ, RB, RBR and RBS word may express different sentiments. 
For example, the adjective (JJ) “unpredictable” may have a negative 
sentiment in a car review as in “unpredictable steering,” but it could have 
a positive sentiment in a movie review as in “unpredictable plot.”  
Step 2: It estimates the sentiment orientation ( SO) of the extracted phrases 
using the pointwise mutual information  (PMI) measure:  
.) Pr() Pr() Pr(log) , (
2 12 1
2 2 1 


 term termterm termterm term PMI  (1) 
PMI measures the degree of statisti cal dependence between two terms. 
Here, Pr( term 1  term 2) is the actual co-occurrence probability of term 1 
and term 2, and Pr( term 1)Pr(term 2) is the co-occurrence probability of the 
two terms if they are statistically independent. The sentiment orientation 
(SO) of a phrase is computed based on its association with the positive 
reference word “excellent” and the negative reference word “poor”: 
SO(phrase ) = PMI (phrase, “excellent”)  PMI (phrase, “poor”). (2) 
The probabilities are calculated by i ssuing queries to a search engine and 
collecting the number of hits. For each search query, a search engine 
usually gives the number of relevant documents to the query, which is the 
number of hits. Thus, by searching the two terms together and separately, 
Table 3.2.  Patterns of POS tags for extracting two-word phrases  
 First word  Second word  Third word 
(not extracted) 
1 JJ NN or NNS anything 
2 RB, RBR, or RBS JJ not NN nor NNS 
3 JJ JJ not NN nor NNS 
4 NN or NNS JJ not NN nor NNS 
5 RB, RBR, or RBS VB, VBD, VBN, or VBG anything