Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
32 
 In subsequent research, many more f eatures and learning algorithms were 
tried by a large number of researchers. Like other supervised machine 
learning applications, the key for sentiment classification is the engineering 
of a set of effective features. Some  of the example features are:   
Terms and their frequency . These features are individual words (unigram) 
and their n-grams with associated frequency counts. They are also the 
most common features used in tradi tional topic-based text classification. 
In some cases, word positions may also be considered. The TF-IDF 
weighting scheme from information retrieval may be applied too. As in 
traditional text classification, these features have been shown highly 
effective for sentiment classification as well.  
Part of speech . The part-of-speech (POS) of each word can be important too. 
Words of different parts of speech (P OS) may be treated  differently. For 
example, it was shown that adjectives are important indicators of 
opinions. Thus, some researchers treate d adjectives as special features. 
However, one can also use all POS tags and their n-grams as features. 
Note that in this book, we use the standard Penn Treebank POS Tags  as 
shown in Table 3.1 (Santorini, 1990). The Penn Treebank site is at  
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/ ~treebank/home.html. 
Sentiment words and phrases . Sentiment words  are words in a language that 
are used to express positive or negative sentiments. For example, good , 
wonderful , and amazing  are positive sentiment words, and bad, poor , and 
terrible  are negative sentiment words. Most sentiment words are 
adjectives and adverbs, but nouns (e.g., rubbish , junk, and crap) and 
verbs (e.g., hate and love) can also be used to express sentiments. Apart 
from individual words, there are also sentiment phrases  and idioms , e.g., 
cost someone an arm and a leg .  
Rules of opinions . Apart from sentiment words and phrases, there are also 
many other expressions or language compositions that can be used to 
express or imply sentiments and opinions. We will list and discuss some 
of such expressions in Section 5.2.  
Sentiment shifters.  These are expressions that are used to change the 
sentiment orientations, e.g., from positive to negative or vice versa. 
Negation words are the most important class of sentiment shifters. For 
example, the sentence “ I don’t like this camera ” is negative. There are 
also several other types of sentiment shifters. We will discuss them in 
Section 5.2 too. Such shifters also need to be handled with care because 
not all occurrences of such words mean sentiment changes. For example, 
“not” in “not only … but also” does not change sentiment orientation.  
Syntactic dependency . Words dependency-based features generated from 
parsing or dependency trees ar e also tried by researchers.