Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
9 
 formidable task because of the proliferation of diverse sites. Each site 
typically contains a huge volume of opinion text that is not always easily 
deciphered in long blogs and forum pos tings. The average human reader will 
have difficulty identifying relevant sites and extracting and summarizing the 
opinions in them. Automated sentiment analysis systems are thus needed.  
In recent years, we have witnessed that opinionated postings in social media 
have helped reshape businesses, and sway public sentiments and emotions, 
which have profoundly impacted on our social and political systems. Such 
postings have also mobilized masses for  political changes such as those 
happened in some Arab countries in 2011. It has thus become a necessity to 
collect and study opinions on the Web. Of course, opinionated documents 
not only exist on the Web (called external data), many organizations also have their internal data, e.g., custom er feedback collected from emails and 
call centers or results from surveys conducted by the organizations.  
Due to these applications, industrial  activities have flourished in recent 
years. Sentiment analysis applications have spread to almost every possible 
domain, from consumer products, services, healthcare, and financial services 
to social events and political elections. I myself have implemented a 
sentiment analysis system called Opinion Parser , and worked on projects in 
all these areas in a start-up company. There have been at least 40-60 start-up 
companies in the space in the USA alon e. Many big corporations have also 
built their own in-house capabilities, e.g., Microsoft, Google, Hewlett-
Packard, SAP, and SAS. These practical applications and industrial interests 
have provided strong motivations for research in sentiment analysis.  
Apart from real-life applications, many application-oriented research papers 
have also been published. For example, in (Liu et al., 2007), a sentiment 
model was proposed to predict sales performance. In (McGlohon, Glance 
and Reiter, 2010), reviews were used to rank products and merchants. In 
(Hong and Skiena, 2010), the relationships between the NFL betting line and 
public opinions in blogs and Twitter were studied. In (O'Connor et al., 
2010), Twitter sentiment was linked with public opinion polls. In (Tumasjan 
et al., 2010), Twitter sentiment was also applied to predict election results. 
In (Chen et al., 2010), the authors studied political standpoints.
 In (Yano and 
Smith, 2010), a method was reported for predicting comment volumes of 
political blogs. In (Asur and Huberman, 2010; Joshi et al., 2010; Sadikov, 
Parameswaran and Venetis, 2009), Twitter data, movie reviews and blogs were used to predict box-office revenues for movies. In (Miller et al., 2011), 
sentiment flow in social networks was investigated. In (Mohammad and 
Yang, 2011), sentiments in mails were used to find how genders differed on 
emotional axes. In (Mohammad, 2011), emotions in novels and fairy tales 
were tracked. In (Bollen, Mao and Zeng, 2011), Twitter moods were used to