Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
40 
 The link weight is the frequency of thei r co-occurrence. A spectral clustering 
algorithm is then applied on the bipartite graph to co-align domain-specific 
and domain-independent words into a set of feature clusters. The idea is that 
if two domain-specific words have connections to more common domain-
independent words in the graph, they tend to be aligned or clustered together 
with a higher probability. Similarly, if two domain-independent words have 
connections to more common domain-specific words in the graph, they tend 
to be aligned together with a higher probability. For the final cross-domain training and testing, all data examples  are represented with the combination 
of these clusters and the original set of features. 
Along the same line, He, Lin and Alani (2011) used joint topic modeling to 
identify opinion topics (which are similar to clusters in the above work) 
from both domains to bridge them. The resulting topics which cover both domains are used as additional featur es to augment the original set of 
features for classification. In (Gao and Li, 2011), topic modeling was used 
too to find a common semantic space based on domain term 
correspondences and term co-occurrences  in the two domains. This common 
semantic space was then used to learn a classifier which was applied to the 
target domain. Bollegala, Weir and Carroll (2011) proposed a method to 
automatically create a sentiment sensitive thesaurus using both labeled and unlabeled data from multiple source domains to find the association between 
words that express similar sentiments in different domains. The created 
thesaurus is then used to expand the orig inal feature vectors to train a binary 
sentiment classifier. In (Yoshida et al., 2011), the authors proposed a method 
for transfer from multiple source domains to multiple target domains by identifying domain dependent and independent word sentiments. In 
(Andreevskaia and Bergler, 2008), a method using an ensemble of two 
classifiers was proposed. The first classifier was  built using a dictionary and 
the second was built using a small amount of in-domain training data.  
In (Wu, Tan and Cheng, 2009), a graph-based method was proposed, which 
uses the idea of label propagation on a similarity graph (Zhu and 
Ghahramani, 2002) to perform the transfer . In the graph, each document is a 
node and each link between two nodes is a weight computed using the 
cosine similarity of the two documents. Initially, every document in the old 
domain has a label score of +1 (positive) or -1 (negative) and each document 
in the new domain is assigned a label score based a normal sentiment 
classifier, which can be learned from the old domain. The algorithm then iteratively updates the label score of each new domain document i by finding 
k nearest neighbors in the old domain and k nearest neighbors in the new 
domain. A linear combination of the neighbor label scores and link weights 
are used to assign a new score to node i. The iterative process stops when the 
label scores converge. The sentiment orientations of the new domain 
documents are determined by their label scores.