Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
87 
 the purpose of coreference resolution. The first feature is based on sentiment 
analysis of regular sentences and co mparative sentences, and the idea of 
sentiment consistency . Consider these sentences, “ The Nokia phone is better 
than this Motorola phone. It is cheap too .” Our commonsense tells us that 
“It” means “Nokia phone” because in th e first sentence, the sentiment about 
“Nokia phone” is positive (comparative positive), but it is negative 
(comparative negative) for “Motorola phone,” and the second sentence is 
positive. Thus, we conclude that “It” refers to “Nokia phone” because people 
usually express sentiments in a consistent way. It is unlikely that “It” refers 
to “Motorola phone.” However, if we change “ It is cheap too ” to “ It is also 
expensive ”, then “it” should now refer to “Motorola phone.” To obtain this 
feature, the system needs to have the ability to determine positive and negative opinions expressed in both regular and comparative sentences.  
The second feature considers what entities and aspects are modified by what 
opinion words. Consider these sentences, “ I bought a Nokia phone 
yesterday. The sound quality is good. It is cheap too .” The question is what 
“It” refers to, “sound quality” or the “Nokia phone.” Clearly, we know that 
“It” refers to “Nokia phone” because “sound quality” cannot be cheap. To 
obtain this feature, the system needs to identify what sentiment words are 
usually associated with what entities or aspects. Such relationships have to 
be mined from the corpus. These two f eatures are semantic features that 
current general coreference resolution methods do not consider. These two 
features can help improve the coreference resolution accuracy.  
In (Stoyanov and Cardie, 2006), Stoyanov and Cardie proposed the problem 
of source coreference resolution, which is  the task of determining which 
mentions of opinion holders (sources) refer to the same entity. The authors 
used existing coreference resolution features in (Ng and Cardie, 2002). 
However, instead of simply employing supervised learning, they used 
partially supervised clustering.  
Akkaya, Wiebe and Mihalcea (2009) studied subjectivity word sense 
disambiguation  (SWSD). The task is to automatically determine which  word 
instances in a corpus are being used  with subjective senses, and which are 
being used with objective senses. Currently, most subjectivity or sentiment 
lexicons are compiled as lists of words,  rather than word meanings (senses). 
However, many words have both subjective and objective senses. False hits 
– subjectivity clues used with objective senses – are a significant source of error in subjectivity and sentiment analysis. The authors built a supervised 
SWSD model to disambiguate members of a subjectivity lexicon as having a 
subjective sense or an objective sense in a corpus context. The algorithm 
relied on common machine learning features for word sense disambiguation 
(WSD). However, the performance wa s substantially better than the