Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
73 
 5.3.4 Using Topic Models 
In recent years, statistical topic models have emerged as a principled method 
for discovering topics from a large collection of text documents. Topic modeling is an unsupervised learning method that assumes each document 
consists of a mixture of topics and each topic is a probability distribution 
over words. A topic model is basically a document generative model which 
specifies a probabilistic procedure by which documents can be generated. 
The output of topic modeling is a set of word clusters. Each cluster forms a 
topic and is a probability distribution over words in the document collection.  
There were two main basic models, pLSA (Probabilistic Latent Semantic 
Analysis) (Hofmann, 1999) and LDA (Latent Dirichlet allocation) (Blei, Ng 
and Jordan, 2003; Griffiths and Steyvers, 2003; Steyvers and Griffiths, 
2007). Technically, topic models are a type of graphical models based on 
Bayesian networks. Although they ar e mainly used to model and extract 
topics from text collections, they can be extended to model many other types 
of information simultaneously. For example, in the sentiment analysis 
context, one can design a joint model to model both sentiment words and 
topics at the same time, due to the observation that every opinion has a 
target. For readers who are not familiar with topic models, graphical models 
or Bayesian networks, apart from reading the topic modeling literature, the 
“pattern recognition and machine learning” book by Christopher M. Bishop 
(Bishop, 2006) is an excellent source of background knowledge.   
Intuitively topics from topic models are aspects in the sentiment analysis 
context. Topic modeling can thus be applied to extract aspects. However, 
there is also a difference. That is, to pics can cover both aspect words and 
sentiment words. For sentiment analysis, they need to be separated. Such 
separations can be achieved by extending the basic model (e.g., LDA) to jointly model both aspects and sentiments. Below, we give an overview of 
the current research in sentiment anal ysis that has used topic models to 
extract aspects and to perform other tasks. Note that topic models not only 
discover aspects but also group synonym aspects.  
Mei et al (Mei et al., 2007) proposed a joint model for sentiment analysis. 
Specifically, they built an aspect-sentiment mixture model, which was based 
on an aspect (topic) model, a positive sentiment model, and a negative 
sentiment model learned with the help of some external training data. Their 
model was based on pLSA. Most other models proposed by researchers are 
based on LDA.  
In (Titov and McDonald, 2008), the authors showed that global topic models 
such as LDA (Blei, Ng and Jordan, 2003 ) might not be suitable for detecting