Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
14 
 Researchers now also have a much better understanding of the whole 
spectrum of the problem, its structure, and core issues. Numerous new 
(formal) models and methods have been proposed. The research has not only 
deepened but also broadened signifi cantly. Earlier research in the field 
mainly focused on classifying the sentiment or subjectivity expressed in 
documents or sentences, which is insufficient for most real-life applications. 
Practical applications often demand more in-depth and fine-grained analysis. 
Due to the maturity of the field, the book  is also written in a structured form 
in the sense that the problem is now better defined and different research 
directions are unified around the definition.    
1.3 Opinion Spam Detection  
A key feature of social media is that it enables anyone from anywhere in the 
world to freely express his/her views and opinions without disclosing his/her 
true identify and without the fear of undesirable consequences. These 
opinions are thus highly valuable. However, this anonymity also comes with 
a price. It allows people with hidden agendas or malicious intentions to 
easily game the system to give people the impression that they are 
independent members of the public and post fake opinions to promote or to 
discredit target products, services, organizations, or individuals without 
disclosing their true intentions, or th e person or organizat ion that they are 
secretly working for. Such individuals are called opinion spammers  and their 
activities are called opinion spamming (Jindal and Liu, 2008; Jindal and Liu, 
2007).  
Opinion spamming has become a major issue. Apart from individuals who 
give fake opinions in reviews and forum discussions, there are also 
commercial companies that are in the business of writing fake reviews and 
bogus blogs for their clients. Several high profile cases of fake reviews have 
been reported in the news. It is important to detect such spamming activities 
to ensure that the opinions on the Web are a trusted source of valuable 
information. Unlike extraction of positive and negative opinions, opinion 
spam detection is not just a NLP probl em as it involves the analysis of 
people’s posting behaviors. It is thus also a data mining problem. Chapter 10 
will discuss the current state-of-the-art detection techniques.  
1.4 What’s Ahead  
In this book, we explore this fascinating topic. Although the book deals with