Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
77 
 specifications, which are structured data. Kim and Hovy (2006) used 
semantic role labeling. Stoyanov and Cardie (2008) exploited coreference 
resolution. Toprak, Jakob and Gurevych (2010) designed a comprehensive 
annotation scheme for aspect-based opinion annotation. Earlier annotations 
were partial and mainly for the special needs of individual papers. Carvalho 
et al. (2011) annotated a collection of  political debates with aspects and 
other information.  
5.3.5 Mapping Implicit Aspects  
In (Hu and Liu, 2004), two kinds of aspects were identified, explicit aspects 
and implicit aspects. However, it only dealt with explicit aspects. Recall in 
Section 2.1, we call aspects that are expressed as nouns and noun phrases the 
explicit aspects , e.g., “picture quality” in “ The picture quality of this camera 
is great .” All other expressions that indicate aspects are called implicit 
aspects . There are many types of implicit aspect expressions. Adjectives and 
adverbs are perhaps the most common types because most adjectives 
describe some specific attributes or properties of entities, e.g., expensive 
describes “price,” and beautiful  describes “appearance.” Implicit aspects can 
be verbs too. In general, implicit aspect expressions can be very complex, 
e.g., “ This camera will not easily fit in a pocket .” “fit in a pocket” indicates 
the aspect size.  
Although explicit aspect extraction has been studied extensively, limited 
research has been done on mapping implicit aspects to their explicit aspects. 
In (Su et al., 2008), a clustering method was proposed to map implicit aspect 
expressions, which were assumed to be sentiment words, to their 
corresponding explicit aspects. The method exploits the mutual 
reinforcement relationship between an explicit aspect and a sentiment word 
forming a co-occurring pair in a sentence. Such a pair may indicate that the sentiment word describes the aspect, or the aspect is associated with the 
sentiment word. The algorithm finds the mapping by iteratively clustering 
the set of explicit aspects and the set of sentiment words separately. In each 
iteration, before clustering one set, the clustering results of the other set is 
used to update the pairwise similarity of the set. The pairwise similarity in a 
set is determined by a linear combination of intra-set similarity and inter-set 
similarity. The intra-set similarity of two items is the traditional similarity. 
The inter-set similarity of two items is computed based on the degree of 
association between aspects and sentiment words. The association (or 
mutual reinforcement relationship) is modeled using a bipartite graph. An 
aspect and an opinion word are linked if they have co-occurred in a