Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
21 
 4. This definition provides a framework to transform unstructured text to 
structured data. The quintuple above is basically a database schema, 
based on which the extracted opinions can be put into a database table. 
Then a rich set of qualitative, qu antitative, and trend analyses of 
opinions can be performed using the whole suite of database 
management systems (DBMS) and OLAP tools.  
5. The opinion defined here is just one type of opinion, called regular 
opinion . Another type is comparative opinion (Jindal and Liu, 2006b; 
Liu, 2006 and 2011), which needs a different definition. Section 2.3 will 
discuss different types of opinions. Chapter 8 defines and analyzes 
comparative opinions. For the rest of this section, we only focus on 
regular opinions. For simplicity, we just called them opinions.  
2.1.2 Sentiment Analysis Tasks 
With the definition, we can now present the objective and the key tasks of sentiment analysis (Liu, 2010; Liu, 2006 and 2011).  
Objective of sentiment analysis: Given an opinion document d, discover all 
opinion quintuples ( e
i, aij, sijkl, hk, tl) in d. 
The key tasks are derived from the 5 components of the quintuple. The first 
component is the entity. That is, we need to extract entities. The task is 
similar to named entity recognition (NER) in information extraction (Hobbs 
and Riloff, 2010; Mooney and Bunescu, 2005; Sarawagi, 2008). Thus, the 
extraction itself is a problem. After extraction, we also need to categorize the 
extracted entities. In natural language text, people often write the same entity 
in different ways. For example, Motorola may be written as Mot, Moto, and 
Motorola. We need to recognize that they all refer to the same entity. 
Definition (entity category a nd entity expression ): An entity category  
represents a unique entity, while an entity  expression  is an actual word or 
phrase that appears in the text indicating an entity category.  
Each entity category (or simply entity) should have a unique name in a 
particular application. The process of grouping entity expressions into entity 
categories is called entity categorization .  
Now we look at aspects of entities. The problem is basically the same as for 
entities. For example, picture , image , and photo  are the same aspect for 
cameras. We thus need to extract aspe ct expressions and categorize them.   
Definition (aspect category and aspect expression ): An aspect category  of 
an entity represents a unique aspect of the entity, while an aspect