Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
97 
 and antonyms, as well as conjunction “and” rules, “but” rules, and 
“negation” rules. To some extent, the methods in (Takamura, Inui and 
Okumura, 2007; Turney, 2002) can also be considered as an implicit method 
for finding context-specific opinions, but they did not use the sentiment 
consistency idea. Instead, they used the Web to find their orientations. 
However, we should note that all these context definitions are still not 
sufficient for all cases as the basic rules of opinions discussed in Section 5.2 
showed, i.e., many contexts can be more complex, e.g., consuming a large 
amount of resources.  
Along a similar line, Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann (2005) studied 
contextual subjectivities and sentiments at the phrase or expression level. 
Contextual sentiment means that although  a word or phrase in a lexicon is 
marked positive or negative, but in the context of the sentence expression it 
may have no sentiment or have the opposite sentiment. In this work, the 
subjective expressions were first labeled in the corpus, i.e., those expressions 
that contain subjective words or phrases in a given subjectivity lexicon. Note 
that a subjectivity lexicon is slightly different from a sentiment lexicon as 
subjectivity lexicon may contains words that indicate only subjectivity but 
no sentiment, e.g., feel, and think . The goal of the work was to classify the 
contextual sentiment of the given ex pressions that contain instances of 
subjectivity clues in the subjectivity lexicon. The paper took a supervised 
learning approach with two steps. In the first step, it determines whether the 
expression is subjective or objective. In the second step, it determines 
whether the subjective expression is positive, negative, both, or neutral. Both  
means there are both positive and negative sentiments. Neutral is still included because the first step can make mistakes and left some neutral 
expressions unidentified. For subjectivity  classification, a large and rich set 
of features was used, which included word features , modification features  
(dependency features), structure features  (dependency tree based patterns), 
sentence features , and document features . For the second step of sentiment 
classification, it used features such as word tokens , word prior sentiments , 
negations , modified by polarity , conj polarity , etc. For both steps, the 
machine learning algorithm BoosTexter AdaBoost.HM (Schapire and 
Singer, 2000) was employed to build classifiers.  
A related work on expression level sentiment classification was also done in 
(Choi and Cardie, 2008), where the authors classified the expressions annotated in Multi-Perspective Qu estion Answering (MPQA) corpus 
(Wiebe, Wilson and Cardie, 2005). Both lexicon–based classification and 
supervised learning were experimented. In (Breck, Choi and Cardie, 2007), 
the authors studied the problem of extracting sentiment expressions with any 
number of words using Conditional Random Fields (CRF) (Lafferty,