Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
42 
 etc. If a Chinese lexicon is also available, the same technique can be applied 
to the Chinese version. Its result may also be combined with the results of 
those English translations. The results show that the ensemble technique is 
effective. Brooke, Tofiloski and Tabo ada (2009) also experimented with 
translation (using only one translator) from the source language (English) to 
the target language (Spanish) and then used a lexicon-based approach or 
machine learning for target language document sentiment classification. 
In (Wan, 2009), a co-training method was proposed which made use of an 
annotated English corpus for classification of Chinese reviews in a 
supervised manner. No Chinese resources were used. In training, the input 
consisted of a set of labeled English reviews and a set of unlabeled Chinese 
reviews. The labeled English reviews were translated into labeled Chinese reviews, and the unlabeled Chinese reviews were translated into unlabeled 
English reviews. Each review was thus associated with an English version 
and a Chinese version. English features  and Chinese features for each review 
were considered as two independent and redundant views of the review. A 
co-training algorithm using SVM was then applied to learn two classifiers. 
Finally, the two classifiers were combin ed into a single classifier. In the 
classification phase, each unlabeled Ch inese review for testing was first 
translated into an English review, and then the learned classifier was applied 
to classify the review into either positive or negative. 
Wei and Pal (2010) proposed to use a transfer learning method for cross-
language sentiment classification. Due to the fact that machine translation is 
still far from perfect, to minimize the noise introduced in translation, they 
proposed to use the structural correspondence learning (SCL) method (Blitzer, Dredze and Pereira, 2007) discussed in the previous section to find 
a small set of core features shared by  both languages (English and Chinese). 
To alleviate the problem of data and feature sparseness, they issued queries 
to a search engine to find other highly correlated features to those in the core 
feature set, and then used the newly discovered features to create extra 
pseudo-examples for training.   
Boyd-Graber and Resnik (2010) extended the topic modeling method 
supervised latent Dirichlet allocation  (SLDA) (Blei and McAuliffe, 2007) to 
work on reviews from multi-languages for review rating prediction. SLDA is 
able to consider the user-rating of each review in topic modeling. The 
extended model MLSLDA creates topics using documents from multiple languages at the same time. The resulting multi-language topics are globally 
consistent across languages. To bridge topic terms in different languages in 
topic modeling, the model used the aligned WordNets of different languages 
or dictionaries.