Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
123 
 CHAPTER 10 
Opinion Spam Detection  
Opinions from social media are increasingly used by individuals and 
organizations for making purchase decisions and making choices at elections 
and for marketing and product design. Positive opinions often mean profits 
and fames for businesses and individuals, which, unfortunately, give strong 
incentives for people to game the system by post ing fake opinions  or 
reviews  to promote or to discredit some target products, services, 
organizations, individuals, and even ideas without disclosing their true 
intentions, or the person or organization that they are secretly working for. Such individuals are called opinion spammers  and their activities are 
called opinion spamming (Jindal and Liu, 2008; Jindal and Liu, 2007).
 
Opinion spamming about social and political issues can even be frightening 
as they can warp opinions and mobilize masses into positions counter to 
legal or ethical mores. It is safe to say that as opinions in social media are 
increasingly used in practice, opinion spamming will become more and more 
rampant and also sophisticated, which presents a major challenge for their 
detection. However, they must be detected in order to ensure that the social 
media continues to be a trusted source of public opinions, rather than being 
full of fake opinions, lies, and deceptions.  
Spam detection in general has been studied in many fields. Web spam and 
email spam are the two most widely studied types of spam. Opinion spam is, 
however, very different. There are two main types of Web spam, i.e., link 
spam  and content spam (Castillo and Davison, 2010; Liu, 2006 and 2011). 
Link spam is spam on hyperlinks, which hardly exist in reviews. Although 
advertising links are common in other forms of social media, they are 
relatively easy to detect. Content spam adds popular (but irrelevant) words 
in target Web pages in order to fool search engines to make them relevant to 
many search queries, but this hardly occurs in opinion postings. Email spam 
refers to unsolicited advertisements, whic h are also rare in online opinions.  
Challenge : The key challenge of opinion spam detection is that unlike other 
forms of spam, it is very hard, if not impossible, to recognize fake 
opinions by manually reading them, which makes it difficult to find 
opinion spam data to help design and evaluate detection algorithms. For 
other forms of spam, one can re cognize them fairly easily.  
In fact, in the extreme case, it is logi cally impossible to recognize spam by 
simply reading it. For example, one can write a truthful review for a good