Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
10 
 predict the stock market. In (Bar-Haim et al., 2011; Feldman et al., 2011), 
expert investors in microblogs were identified and sentiment analysis of 
stocks was performed.  In (Zhang and Skiena, 2010), blog and news 
sentiment was used to study trading strategies. In (Sakunkoo and Sakunkoo, 
2009), social influences in online book reviews were studied. In (Groh and 
Hauffa, 2011), sentiment analysis was used to characterize social relations. 
A comprehensive sentiment analysis syst em and some case studies were also 
reported in (Castellanos et al., 2011). My own group has tracked opinions 
about movies on Twitter and predicted box-office revenues with very 
accurate results. We simply used our Opinion Parser  system to analyze 
positive and negative opinions about each movie with no additional 
algorithms.  
1.2 Sentiment Analysis Research 
As discussed above, pervasive real-life applications are only part of the 
reason why sentiment analysis is a popular research problem. It is also 
highly challenging as a NLP research topic, and covers many novel sub-
problems as we will see later. Additionally, there was little research before 
the year 2000 in either NLP or in linguist ics. Part of the reason is that before 
then there was little opinion text available in digital forms. Since the year 
2000, the field has grown rapidly to become one of the most active research areas in NLP. It is also widely researched in data mining, Web mining, and 
information retrieval. In fact, it has spread from computer science to 
management sciences (Archak, Ghose and Ipeirotis, 2007; Chen and Xie, 
2008; Das and Chen, 2007; Dellarocas, Zhang and Awad, 2007; Ghose, 
Ipeirotis and Sundararajan, 2007; Hu, Pavlou and Zhang, 2006; Park, Lee 
and Han, 2007).  
1.2.1 Different Levels of Analysis  
I now give a brief introduction to the main research problems based on the 
level of granularities of the existing research. In general, sentiment analysis 
has been investigated mainly at three levels: 
Document level: The task at this level is to classify whether a whole opinion 
document expresses a positive or negative sentiment (Pang, Lee and 
Vaithyanathan, 2002; Turney, 2002). For example, given a product 
review, the system determines whether the review expresses an overall 
positive or negative opinion about the product. This task is commonly