Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
45 
 and Wiebe, 2000; Riloff, Patwardhan and Wiebe, 2006; Riloff and Wiebe, 
2003; Wiebe et al., 2004; Wilson, Wiebe and Hwa, 2004; Wilson, Wiebe 
and Hwa, 2006; Yu and Hatzivassilogl ou, 2003). Objective sentences are 
regarded as expressing no sentiment or opinion. This can be problematic as 
we discussed earlier because objective sentences can also imply opinions. 
For example, “ Then, it stopped working yesterday ” in the above review is an 
objective sentence, but it implies a negative sentiment about the phone 
because of the undesirable fact. Thus, it is more appropriate for the first step 
to classify each sentence as opinionated or not opinionated, regardless 
whether it is subjective or objective. However, due to the common practice, 
we still use the term subjectivity classification  in this chapter. Below, we 
first discuss existing work on sentence-level subjectivity classification and then sentiment classification.  
4.1 Subectivity Classification  
Subjectivity classification classifies sentences into two classes, subjective and objective (Wiebe, Bruce and O'Hara, 1999). An objective sentence 
expresses some factual information, while a subjective sentence usually 
gives personal views and opinions. In fact, subjective sentences can express 
many types of information, e.g., opinions, evaluations, emotions, beliefs, 
speculations, judgments, allegations, stances, etc. (Quirk et al., 1985; Wiebe, Bruce and O'Hara, 1999). Some of them indicate positive or negative 
sentiments and some of them do not. Early research solved subjectivity 
classification as a standalone problem, i.e., not for the purpose of sentiment 
classification. In more recent research, some researchers treated it as the first 
step of sentiment classification by using it to remove objective sentences 
which are assumed to express or imply no opinion.  
Most existing approaches to subjectivity classification are based on 
supervised learning. For example, the early work reported in (Wiebe, Bruce 
and O'Hara, 1999) performed subjectivity classification using the naïve 
Bayes classifier with a set of binary  features, e.g., the presence in the 
sentence of a pronoun, an adjective, a cardinal number, a modal other than 
will and an adverb other than not. Subsequent researches also used other 
learning algorithms and more sophisticated features.  
In (Wiebe, 2000), Wiebe proposed an unsupervised method for subjectivity 
classification, which simply used the pr esence of subjective expressions in a 
sentence to determine the subjectivity of a sentence. Since there was not a 
complete set of such expressions, it provided some seeds and then used 
distributional similarity (Lin, 1998) to find similar words, which were also