Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
91 
 6.1 Dictionary-based Approach  
Using a dictionary to compile sentiment words is an obvious approach 
because most dictionaries (e.g., Word Net (Miller et al., 1990)) list synonyms 
and antonyms for each word. Thus, a simple technique in this approach is to 
use a few seed sentiment words to bootstrap based on the synonym and 
antonym structure of a dictionary. Sp ecifically, this method works as 
follows: A small set of sentiment words (seeds) with known positive or 
negative orientations is first collected manually, which is very easy. The 
algorithm then grows this set by searching in the WordNet or another online dictionary for their synonyms and antonyms. The newly found words are 
added to the seed list. The next iteration begins. The iterative process ends 
when no more new words can be found. This approach was used in (Hu and 
Liu, 2004). After the process complete s, a manual inspection step was used 
to clean up the list. A similar method was also used by Valitutti, Strapparava 
and Stock (2004). Kim and Hovy (2004) tried to clean up the resulting 
words (to remove errors) and to assign a sentiment strength to each word 
using a probabilistic method. Mohammad, Dunne and Dorr (2009) 
additionally exploited many antonym-generating affix patterns like X and 
disX (e.g., honest–dishonest) to increase the coverage. 
A more sophisticated approach was propos ed in (Kamps et al., 2004), which 
used a WordNet distance based method to determine the sentiment 
orientation of a given adjective. The distance d(t
1, t2) between terms t1 and t2 
is the length of the shortest path that connects t1 and t2 i n  W o r d N e t .  T h e  
orientation of an adjective term t is determined by its relative distance from 
two reference (or seed) terms good  and bad, i.e., SO(t) = ( d(t, bad) − d(t, 
good))/ d(good, bad). t is positive iff SO(t) > 0, and is negative otherwise. 
The absolute value of SO(t) gives the strength of the sentiment. Along a 
similar line, Williams and Anand (2009) studied the problem of assigning 
sentiment strength to each word.  
In (Blair-Goldensohn et al., 2008), a different bootstrapping method was 
proposed, which used a positive seed set, a negative seed set, and also a 
neutral seed set. The approach works ba sed on a directed, weighted semantic 
graph where neighboring nodes are synonyms or antonyms of words in WordNet and are not part of the seed neutral set. The neutral set is used to 
stop the propagation of sentiments through neutral words. The edge weights 
are pre-assigned based on a scaling parameter for different types of edges, 
i.e., synonym or antonym edges. Each word is then scored (giving a 
sentiment value) using a modified version of the label propagation algorithm 
in (Zhu and Ghahramani, 2002). At the beginning, each positive seed word 
is given the score of +1, each negative seed is given the score of -1, and all