Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
53 
 distinguish sarcastic tweets and non-sa rcastic tweets that directly convey 
positive or negative opinions (neutral utterances were not considered). 
Again, a supervised learning approach was taken using SVM and logistic 
regression. As features, they used unigrams and some dictionary-based 
information. The dictionary-based fe atures include (i ) word categories 
(Pennebaker et al., 2007); ii) Word Net Affect (WNA) (Strapparava and 
Valitutti, 2004); and iii) a list of interjections (e.g., ah, oh, yeah), and 
punctuations (e.g., !, ?). Features like emoticons, and ToUser  (which marks 
if a tweet is a reply to another tweet, signaled by <@user>) were also used. 
Experimental results for three-way classification (sarcastic, positive and 
negative) showed that the problem is very challenging. The best accuracy 
was only 57%. Again, this work did no t classify sarcastic sentences into 
positive and negative classes.  
4.5 Cross-language Subjectivity and 
Sentiment Classification 
As in document-level cross-language sentiment classification, researchers 
have also studied cross-language subjectivity classification and sentiment classification at the sentence level. Again, the research focused on using 
extensive resources and tools available in English and automated translations 
to help build sentiment analysis systems in other languages which have few 
resources or tools. Current research proposed three main strategies: 
(1)  Translate test senten ces in the target language into the source language 
and classify them using a source language classifier. 
 
(2).  Translate a source language training corpus into the target language and 
build a corpus-based classifier in the target language.  
(3). Translate a sentiment or subjectivity lexicon in the source language to 
the target language and build a lexi con-based classifier in the target 
language.  
Kim and Hovy (2006) experimented with (1) translating German emails to 
English and applied English sentiment words to determine sentiment orientation, and (2) translating English sentiment words to German, and 
analyzing German emails using German sentiment words. Mihalcea, Banea 
and Wiebe (2007) also experimented with translating English subjectivity 
words and phrases into the target language. In fact, they actually tried two 
translation strategies for cross-language subjectivity classification. First, they derived a subjectivity lexicon for the new language (in their case, 
Romanian) using an English subjectivity lexicon through translation. A rule-
based subjectivity classifier similar to that in (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003) was