Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
39 
 In (Yang, Si and Callan, 2006), a simple strategy based on feature selection 
was proposed for transfer learning for sentence level classification. Their 
method first used two fully labeled training set from two domains to select 
features that were highly ranked in both domains. These selected features 
were considered domain independent features. The classifier built using 
these features was then applied to any target/test domains. Another simple 
strategy was proposed in (Tan et al., 2007), which first trains a base 
classifier using the labeled data from the source domain, and then uses the classifier to label some informative examples in the target domain. Based on 
the selected examples in the target domain, a new classifier is learned, which 
is finally applied to classify the test cases in the target domain. 
In (Blitzer, Dredze and Pereira, 2007) , the authors used a method called 
structural correspondence learning (SCL) for domain adaptation, which was proposed earlier in (Blitzer, McDonald and Pereira, 2006). Given labeled 
reviews from a source domain and unlabeled reviews from both the source 
and target domains, SCL first chooses a set of m features which occur 
frequently in both domains and are also good predictors of the source label 
(the paper chose those features with highest mutual information to the source 
label). These features are called the pivot features  which represent the shared 
feature space of the two domains. It th en computes the correlations of each 
pivot feature with other non-pivot features in both domains. This produces a 
correlation matrix W where row i is a vector of correlation values of non-
pivot features with the ith pivot feature. Intuitively, positive values indicate 
that those non-pivot features are positively correlated with the ith pivot 
feature in the source domain or in th e new domain. This establishes a feature 
correspondence between the two domains. After that, singular value 
decomposition (SVD) is employed to compute a low-dimensional linear 
approximation 
 (the top k left singular vectors, transposed) of W. The final 
set of features for training and for testing is the original set of features x 
combined with x which produces k real-valued features. The classifier built 
using the combined features and labeled data in the source domain should 
work in both the source and the target domains.  
Pan et al. (Pan et al., 2010) proposed a method similar to SCL at the high 
level. The algorithm works in the setting where there are only labeled examples in the source domain and unlabeled examples in the target domain. 
It bridges the gap between the domains by using a spectral feature alignment 
(SFA) algorithm to align domain-specific words from different domains into 
unified clusters, with the help of domain independent words as the bridge. 
Domain-independent words are like pivot words in (Blitzer, Dredze and 
Pereira, 2007) and can be selected similarly. SFA works by first constructing 
a bipartite graph with the domain-independent words as one set of nodes and the domain-specific words as the other set of nodes. A domain specific word 
is linked to a domain-independent word  if they co-occur. The co-occurrence 
can be defined as co-occurring in the same document or within a window.