Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
17 
 the authors are usually straight to the point. Thus, it is often easier to achieve 
high sentiment analysis accuracy. Revi ews are also easier because they are 
highly focused with little irrelevant information. Forum discussions are 
perhaps the hardest to deal with because the users there can discuss anything 
and also interact with one another. In terms of the degree of difficulty, there 
is also the dimension of different application domains. Opinions about 
products and services are usually easie r to analyze. Social and political 
discussions are much harder due to complex topic and sentiment 
expressions, sarcasms and ironies.  
2.1 Problem Definitions  
As mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 1, sentiment analysis mainly 
studies opinions which express or imply positive or negative sentiments. 
This section thus defines the problem in this context.  
2.1.1 Opinion Defintion 
We use the following review about a Canon camera to introduce the problem 
(an id number is associated with each sentence for easy reference): 
Posted by: John Smith Date: September 10, 2011 
“(1) I bought a Canon G12 camera six months ago . (2) I simply love 
it. (3) The picture quality is amazing . (4) The battery life is also long . 
(5) However, my wife thinks it is too heavy for her .”  
From this review, we notice a few important points: 
1. The review has a number of opinions, both positive and negative, about 
Canon G12 camera. Sentence (2) expresses a positive opinion about the 
Canon camera as a whole. Sentence (3) expresses a positive opinion 
about its picture equality. Sentence (4) expresses a positive opinion 
about its battery life. Sentence (5) expresses a negative opinion about 
the weight of the camera. From these opinions, we can make the 
following important observation:  
Observation : An opinion consists of two key components: a target g 
and a sentiment s on the target, i.e.,  
(g, s),  
where g can be any entity or aspect of the entity about which an 
opinion has been expressed, and s is a positive, negative, or neutral 
sentiment, or a numeric rating score expressing the strength/intensity