Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
106 
 representative sentence for the group. The sentence should mention the 
fewest aspects (thus the representative sentence is focused). They then 
ordered the sentences using a given domain ontology by mapping sentences 
to the ontology nodes. The ontology basically encodes the key domain 
concepts and their relations. The sent ences were ordered and organized into 
paragraphs following the tree such that they appear in a conceptually 
coherent fashion. 
Lu et al. (2010) also used online ontologies of entities and aspects to 
organize and summarize opinions. Their method is related to the above two, 
but is also different. Their system fi rst selects aspects that capture major 
opinions. The selection is done by frequency, opinion coverage (no 
redundancy), or conditional entropy. It then orders aspects and their corresponding sentences based on a co herence measure, which tries to 
optimize the ordering so that they best follow the sequences of aspect 
appearances in their original postings.  
Ku, Liang, and Chen (2006) performed blog opinion summarization, and 
produced two types of summaries: brief and detailed summaries, based on 
extracted topics (aspects) and sentiments on the topics. For the brief 
summary, their method picks up the document/article with the largest 
number of positive or negative sentences and uses its headline to represent 
the overall summary of positive-topical or negative-topical sentences. For 
detailed summary, it lists positive-topical and negative-topical sentences 
with high sentiment degrees. 
Lerman, Blair-Goldensohn and McDonald (2009) defined opinion 
summarization in a slightly different way. Given a set of documents D (e.g., 
reviews) that contains opinions about some entity of interest, the goal of an 
opinion summarization system is to generate a summary S of that entity that 
is representative of the average opinion and speaks to its important aspects. 
This paper proposed three different models to perform summarization of 
reviews of a product. All these models  choose some set of sentences from a 
review. The first model is called sentiment match  (SM), which extracts 
sentences so that the average sentim ent of the summary is as close as 
possible to the average sentiment rating of reviews of the entity. The second 
model, called sentiment match + aspect coverage  (SMAC), builds a 
summary that trades-off between maximally covering important aspects and 
matching the overall sentiment of the entity. The third model, called sentiment-aspect match  (SAM), not only attempts to cover important 
aspects, but cover them with appropriate sentiment. A comprehensive 
evaluation of human users was conducted to compare the three types of 
summaries. It was found that although the SAM model was the best, it is not 
significantly better than others.