Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
93 
 generate the expanded sets P’ and N’, which form the training set. The 
algorithm then uses all the glosses in the dictionary for each term in P’  N’ 
to generate a feature vector. A binary classifier is then built using different 
learning algorithms. The process can also be run iteratively. That is, the 
newly identified positive and negative terms and their synonyms and 
antonyms are added to the training set, an updated classifier can be 
constructed and so on. In (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006), the authors also 
included the category objective . To expand the objective seed set, hyponyms 
were used in addition to synonyms and antonyms. They then tried different 
strategies to do the three-class classification. In (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006), 
a committee of classifiers based on the above method was utilized to build 
the SentiWordNet, a lexical resource in which each synset of WordNet is 
associated with three numerical scores Obj(s), Pos(s) and Neg(s), describing 
how Objective, Positive, and Negative the terms contained in the synset are. 
The method of Kim and Hovy (2006) also started with three seed sets of positive, negative, and neutral words. It then finds their synonyms in 
WordNet. The expanded sets, however, have many errors. The method then 
uses a Bayesian formula to compute the closeness of each word to each 
category (positive, negative, and neutral) to determine the most probable 
class for the word.  
Andreevskaia and Bergler (2006) proposed a more sophisticated 
bootstrapping method with several techniques to expand the initial positive 
and negative seed sets and to clean up the expanded sets (removing non-
adjectives and words in both positive and negative sets). In addition, their 
algorithm also performs multiple runs of the bootstrapping process using 
non-overlapping seed sub-sets. Each run typically finds a slightly different set of sentiment words. A net overlapping score for each word is then 
computed based on how many times the wo rd is discovered in the runs as a 
positive word and as a negative word. The score is then normalized to [0, 1] 
based on the fuzzy set theory.  
In (Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 2006; Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 2007), many 
heuristics were used to build a sentiment lexicon from HTML documents 
based on Web page layout structures. For example, a table in a Web page 
may have a column clearly indicate positive or negative orientations (e.g., 
Pros and Cons) of the surround text. These clues can be exploited to extract 
a large number of candidate positive and negative opinion sentences from a 
large set of Web pages. Adjective phr ases are then ex tracted from these 
sentences and assigned sentiment orientations based on different statistics of 
their occurrences in the positive and negative sentence sets respectively. 
Velikovich et al. (2010) also proposed a method to construct a sentient