Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 
68 
 we should also note that some opinion expressions can play two roles, i.e., 
indicating a positive or negative sentiment and implying an (implicit) aspect 
(target). For example, in “ this car is expensive ,” “expensive” is a sentiment 
word and also indicates the aspect price . We will discuss implicit aspects in 
Section 5.3.5. Here, we will focus on explicit aspect extraction. There are 
four main approaches:  
1. Extraction based on frequent nouns and noun phrases  
2. Extraction by exploiting opinion and target relations 
3. Extraction using supervised learning 
4. Extraction using topic modeling 
Since existing research on aspect extraction (more precisely, aspect 
expression extraction ) is mainly carried out in online reviews, we also use 
the review context to describe these techniques, but there is nothing to 
prevent them being used on other forms of social media text.  
There are two common review formats on the Web.  
Format 1  Pros, Cons, and the detailed review:  The reviewer first 
describes some brief pros and cons separately and then writes a 
detailed/full review. An example of such a review is given in Figure 5.1.    
Format 2  Free format:  The reviewer writes freely, i.e., no brief pros and 
cons. An example of such a review is given in Figure 5.2. 
Extracting aspects from Pros and Cons in reviews of Format 1 (not the 
detailed review, which is the same as that in Format 2) is a special case of 
extracting aspects from the full review and also relatively easy. In (Liu, Hu 
and Cheng, 2005), a specific method based on a sequential learning method 
was proposed to extract aspects from Pros and Cons, which also exploited a 
key characteristic of Pros and Cons, i.e., they are usually very brief, 
consisting of short phrases or senten ce segments. Each segment typically 
contains only one aspect. Sentence se gments can be separated by commas, 
periods, semi-colons, hyphens, &, and, but, etc. This observation helps the 
extraction algorithm to perform more accurately. 
Since the same set of basic techniques can be applied to both Pros and Cons 
and full text, from now on we will not distinguish them, but will focus on different approaches.  
5.3.1 Finding Frequent Nouns and Noun Phrases  
This method finds explicit aspect expressions  that are nouns and noun 
phrases from a large number of reviews in a given domain. Hu and Liu 
(2004) used a data mining algorithm. Nouns and noun phrases (or groups)