Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
CONVERGENT AND EFFICIENT DEEPQ N ETWORK AL-
GORITHM
Zhikang T. Wang & Masahito Ueda
Department of Physics and Institute for Physics of Intelligence
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
{wang,ueda}@cat.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
Despite the empirical success of the deep Q network (DQN) reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm and its variants, DQN is still not well understood and it does not
guarantee convergence. In this work, we show that DQN can indeed diverge and
cease to operate in realistic settings. Although there exist gradient-based con-
vergent methods, we show that they actually have inherent problems in learning
dynamics which cause them to fail even in simple tasks. To overcome these prob-
lems, we propose a convergent DQN algorithm ( C-DQN ) that is guaranteed to
converge and can work with large discount factors ( 0:9998 ). It learns robustly
in difﬁcult settings and can learn several difﬁcult games in the Atari 2600 bench-
mark that DQN fails to solve. Our codes have been publicly released and can be
used to reproduce our results.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
With the development of deep learning, reinforcement learning (RL) that utilizes deep neural net-
works has demonstrated great success recently, ﬁnding applications in various ﬁelds including
robotics, games, and scientiﬁc research (Levine et al., 2018; Berner et al., 2019; Fösel et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2020). One of the most efﬁcient RL strategy is Q-learning (Watkins, 1989), and the
combination of Q-learning and deep learning leads to the DQN algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015; Hes-
sel et al., 2018; Riedmiller, 2005), which hold records on many difﬁcult RL tasks (Badia et al.,
2020). However, unlike supervised learning, Q-learning, or more generally temporal difference
(TD) learning, does not guarantee convergence when function approximations such as neural net-
works are used, and as a result, their success is actually empirical, and the performance relies heavily
on hyperparameter tuning and technical details involved. This happens because the agent uses its
own prediction to construct the learning objective, a.k.a. bootstrapping, and as it generalizes, its pre-
dictions over different data interfere with each other, which can make its learning objective unstable
in the course of training and potentially lead to instability and divergence.
This non-convergence problem was pointed out decades ago by the pioneering works of Baird (1995)
and Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1997), and it has been empirically investigated for DQN by Van Hasselt
et al. (2018). We have also observed the divergence of DQN in our experiments, as in Fig. 6. The
non-convergence problem often shows up as instability in practice and it places signiﬁcant obstacles
to the application of DQN to complicated tasks. It makes the training with deeper neural networks
more difﬁcult, limits the time horizon for planning, and makes the results sometimes unstable and
sensitive to hyperparameters. This state of affairs is not satisfactory especially for those scientiﬁc
applications that require convergence and generality. Although convergent gradient-based methods
have also been proposed (Sutton et al., 2009; Bhatnagar et al., 2009; Feng et al., 2019; Ghiassian
et al., 2020), they cannot easily be used with deep non-linear neural networks as they either re-
quire linearity or involve computationally heavy operations, and they often show worse empirical
performance compared with TD methods.
RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
1https://github.com/Z-T-WANG/ConvergentDQN
1arXiv:2106.15419v3  [cs.LG]  2 May 2022