use of instance masks which require precise localization.
For the mask head, a new loss term LMask has been intro-
duced, which calculates the pixel-wise cross entropy between
the predicted and target masks. The Mask R-CNN loss func-
tion
LMRCNN =LClass+LBox+LMask (1)
is a multi-task loss based on the Faster R-CNN loss.
We propose to attach an Edge Agreement Head to the mask
branch of Mask R-CNN which acts as an auxiliary task to Mask
R-CNN. This head uses traditional edge detection ﬁlters such as
Sobel and Laplacian kernels (Sobel and Feldman, 1973; Forsyth
and Ponce, 2002) on both the predicted mask and the ground-
truth mask to encourage their edges to agree. Instances in nat-
ural images are bounded by the edges that annotators use to
mark the instance. Therefore, we show that encouraging the
edges in the predicted and ground-truth mask to agree leads to
faster training of our mask head. We argue that this is a result
of the instance boundary being a robust feature to mask pre-
diction, which can be easily propagated from the image to the
mask branch.
2. Related Work
Multi Task Learning. The Edge Agreement Head acts as
an auxiliary task (Ruder, 2017) to the multi-task model Mask
R-CNN, which is performing both object detection and in-
stance segmentation. Auxiliary tasks have shown to encourage
models to learn robust representations of their input in a variety
of applications, such as facial landmark detection (Zhang et al.,
2014), natural language processing (Collobert and Weston,
2008) or steering prediction in autonomous driving (Caruana,
1997). Even seemingly unrelated tasks, e.g. weather prediction
to semantic scene segmentation, can improve the model’s
overall performance (Liebel and K ¨orner, 2018).
Monocular Depth Estimation. Godard et al. (2017) use
image gradients to encourage consistency between input
images and predicted disparity maps. However, the left-right
disparity consistency loss does not ensure image gradients of
the predicted disparity of the left and right camera to exhibit
similar edge detection ﬁlter responses.
Scene segmentation. Chen et al. (2016) show a two-part
model predicting both semantic segmentations and edges. The
semantic segmentation model is based on the DeepLab model
(Chen et al., 2018a) and the edge detection ﬁlter is created
using intermediate convolutional ﬁlters of the DeepLab model.
The task speciﬁc edge-detection on the input image is used
to reﬁne the coarse segmentation using domain transform.
Our approach determines edges in ﬁxed size, low dimensional
instance mask images, for which traditional edge detection
ﬁlters have been proven to be e ective. Similarly, Marmanis
et al. (2018) predict both semantic scene segmentation and
semantic boundaries. The network responsible for predicting
semantic boundaries is trained using a Euclidean loss before
each pooling layer to enforce each layer to predict edges atdierent scales. Our approach uses predeﬁned edge detection
ﬁlters with well-known properties, which are kept constant
during training, leaving us with a signiﬁcantly lower additional
memory footprint and computational costs.
Edge detection. The detection of edges has been a research
topic for many decades and numerous methods have been
proposed (Sobel and Feldman, 1973; Konishi et al., 2003).
This ﬁeld has seen large improvements due to deep learning
techniques (Bertasius et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015; Xie and
Tu, 2015). Our work uses the Sobel image gradient ﬁlters
proposed in (Sobel and Feldman, 1973), because it keeps the
computational overhead to a minimum. Furthermore, our edge
detection ﬁlters are used on 28 28 sized masks with only
one channel depicting a single instance and not high-resolution
color images. This signiﬁcantly reduces the complexity of the
problem and justiﬁes our choice of simple edge detection ﬁlters.
Instance segmentation. Hayder et al. (2017) propose a
model that predicts the truncated distance transform (Borge-
fors, 1986) of the mask, making it more resilient towards non-
instance enclosing bounding box proposals. The proposed ar-
chitecture for the boundary-aware instance segmentation net-
work has many similarities to Mask R-CNN as they are both
based on the Faster R-CNN architecture by Ren et al. (2017).
However, they achieved lower results on the instance segmen-
tation benchmark on the Cityscapes dataset compared to Mask
R-CNN, which we are basing our work on. Yang et al. (Yang
et al., 2016) propose an encoder - decoder architecture which
predicts object contours. For training on the MS COCO dataset
(Lin et al., 2014) the coarse polygon ground-truth edges are re-
ﬁned to follow the object contours more closely by applying a
dense conditional random ﬁeld (Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl and Koltun, 2011)
or applying graph cut (Boykov and Jolly, 2001). This is par-
ticularly necessary in this case since the model predicts high
resolution edges. Since the instance masks by Mask R-CNN
only have a low resolution of e.g. 28 x 28, we argue that the
preprocessing is unnecessary in this case, since most details are
lost at this scale. It was also not used by the original Mask R-
CNN Paper by He et al. (2017). Kirillov et al. (Kirillov et al.,
2017) propose a model combination which predicts both a se-
mantic segmentation and edges. The output of the edge score
is used to compute super pixels which, alongside the predic-
tions and the edge score, are used to solve a Multi Cut problem
(Chopra and Rao, 1993) which predicts instances. This work
is dierent from our experiments since we ﬁrst ﬁnd instance
masks and then compare the predicted and ground-truth edges
of these. In addition, this work operates on high resolution im-
ages, which complicates training, since the ground-truth edges
only occupy a very small region of the overall area. The au-
thors therefore rescale the cost function for underrepresented
classes. This step is less relevant for the Edge Agreement Head
applied to Mask R-CNN since the masks are predicted based
on a proposed bounding box and because the class and mask
prediction are decoupled in the Mask R-CNN architecture (He
et al., 2017).
2