Faster Training of Mask R-CNN by Focusing on Instance BoundariesI
Roland S. Zimmermanna,b,1, Julien N. Siemsa,c,2
aBMW Car IT GmbH, Lise-Meitner-Straße 14, 89081 Ulm, Germany
bGeorg-August University of G¨ ottingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, 37077 G¨ ottingen, Germany
cAlbert Ludwig University of Freiburg, Fahnenbergplatz, 79085 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
Abstract
We present an auxiliary task to Mask R-CNN, an instance segmentation network, which leads to faster training of the mask head.
Our addition to Mask R-CNN is a new prediction head, the Edge Agreement Head, which is inspired by the way human annotators
perform instance segmentation. Human annotators copy the contour of an object instance and only indirectly the occupied instance
area. Hence, the edges of instance masks are particularly useful as they characterize the instance well. The Edge Agreement Head
therefore encourages predicted masks to have similar image gradients to the ground-truth mask using edge detection ﬁlters. We
provide a detailed survey of loss combinations and show improvements on the MS COCO Mask metrics compared to using no
additional loss. Our approach marginally increases the model size and adds no additional trainable model variables. While the
computational costs are increased slightly, the increment is negligible considering the high computational cost of the Mask R-CNN
architecture. As the additional network head is only relevant during training, inference speed remains unchanged compared to Mask
R-CNN. In a default Mask R-CNN setup, we achieve a training speed-up and a relative overall improvement of 8.1% on the MS
COCO metrics compared to the baseline.
Keywords: Mask R-CNN, Instance Segmentation, Computer Vision, Auxiliary Task, Edge Detection Filter, Sobel Filter, Laplace
Filter, Convolutional Neural Network
1. Introduction
Signiﬁcant improvements in computer vision techniques
have been made possible by the rapid progress of training
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks in recent years. Ap-
plication areas include image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015;
He et al., 2016) and object detection (Girshick, 2015; Redmon
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016). One of the most demanding com-
puter vision tasks is instance segmentation, as it involves lo-
calizing and segmenting object instances. Recently, there have
been multiple methods (Li et al., 2017; Bai and Urtasun, 2017;
Liu et al., 2018; He et al., 2017) proposed to perform this task.
Another beneﬁcial factor to the success of these Deep Learn-
ing architectures is the availability of large labeled datasets
such as MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and the Cityscapes dataset
(Cordts et al., 2016). Labeling an image dataset for instance
segmentation is particularly time-consuming, because it re-
quires segmenting all objects in a scene. It is therefore highly
desirable to speed up training of an instance segmentation
model to be more data e cient. In this work, we propose a
IBoth authors contributed equally to this work and must both be cited. They
are both corresponding authors.
1R. S. Zimmermann is with the University of G ¨ottingen, G ¨ottingen, Ger-
many. This work was started when he was an intern at BMW Car IT GmbH,
Ulm, Germany. Email: roland.zimmermann@stud.uni-goettingen.de
2J. N. Siems is with the Albert Ludwig University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. This work was started when he was an intern at BMW Car IT GmbH,
Ulm, Germany. Email: siemsj@cs.uni-freiburg.deconceptually straightforward addition to the Mask R-CNN (He
et al., 2017) architecture which reduces training time of the
mask branch.
The Mask R-CNN architecture is based on Faster R-CNN
(Ren et al., 2017), which introduced an e cient Region Pro-
posal Network (RPN) design to output bounding box proposals.
The proposals are computed using a sliding window approach
to make them translation invariant. A feature extractor such as
ResNet (He et al., 2016), Inception (Szegedy et al., 2017) or
VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015) is used as input to
the region proposal network. The regions and features are used
in the bounding box regression head, that reﬁnes the bounding
box localization and the softmax classiﬁcation head, which de-
termines the instance class. This second stage is the architecture
as described in Fast R-CNN (Girshick, 2015).
Mask R-CNN is a simple but e ective addition to the Faster
R-CNN architecture that adds a head for instance mask predic-
tion. Using a small Fully Convolutional Neural Network (FCN)
(Long et al., 2015), it can predict pixel level instance masks.
Besides the mask branch, it uses a Feature Pyramid Network
(FPN) backbone as proposed by Lin et al. (2017). This addition
allows the network to make use of both high-resolution feature
maps in the lower layers for accurate localization, as well as
semantically more meaningful higher-level features, which are
of lower resolution. Another contribution is ROI Align which
maps arbitrarily sized spatial regions of interest in the features
to a ﬁxed spatial resolution using bilinear interpolation. This
modiﬁcation improves the COCO Mask metrics and enables the
Published in Computer Vision and Image Understanding, http: //doi.org /10.1016 /j.cviu.2019.102795 August 13, 2019arXiv:1809.07069v4  [cs.CV]  10 Aug 2019