The edge agreement head can be calculated with only mini-
mal additional computational and memory requirements. This
means, that the method can be integrated in existing systems
for training Mask R-CNN without requiring new or additional
hardware.
4. Implementation Details
A mask size of 28 28 pixels and an image resolution of
1024800 pixels are used. All training images are resized to
this size preserving their aspect ratio. As the training images
may have di erent aspect ratios, the remaining space of the
image is zero padded. This method di ers from the one used
in the original Mask R-CNN implementation (He et al., 2017),
where resizing is done such that the smallest side is 800 pixels
and the largest is trimmed at 1000 pixels.
The ResNet (He et al., 2016) feature extractor is initialized
with weights trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009); all other
weights (e.g. in the region proposal network) are initialized
using Xavier initialization (Glorot and Bengio, 2010).
A similar training strategy to other Mask R-CNN work (He
et al., 2017) is followed. We choose to train the network for
160k steps on the MS COCO 2017 train dataset with a batch
size of 2 on a single GPU machine, while for Mask R-CNN an
eective batch size of 16 was used. The training consists of
three stages each lasting for 40k, 80k, 40k steps respectively:
in the ﬁrst stage only the Mask R-CNN branches and not the
ResNet backbone are trained. Next, the prediction heads and
parts of the backbone (starting at layer 4) are optimized. Fi-
nally, in the third stage, the entire model (backbone and heads)
is trained together. For the ﬁrst two training stages we use a
learning rate of 0 :001 and for the last one a decreased learn-
ing rate of 0 :001=10. The optimization is done by SGD with
momentum set to 0 :9 and weight decay set to 0 :0001.
5. Experiments
We perform our experiments using the implementation of
Mask R-CNN by matterport (Abdulla, 2017), based on the
Keras framework (Chollet et al., 2015) with a T ensor Flow
backend (Abadi et al., 2015). Each training is carried out on
a single GPU using either an NVIDIA Titan X or an NVIDIA
GeForce GTX 1080 Ti.
We examine three aspects of the proposed Edge Agreement
Head. At ﬁrst, we inspect the inﬂuence of the edge detection
ﬁlters on the training speed (section 5.1). In section 5.2, the
dierent metrics of the Lpfamily are used to examine the in-
ﬂuence of the loss function’s steepness on the training speed.
Section 5.3 shows the impact weighting the Edge Agreement
Loss has on the overall loss. We investigate the inﬂuence of the
Edge Agreement Head with varied mask size in section 5.4. In
section 5.5 we show the results on the metrics after longer train-
ing. Finally, in section 5.6 we elaborate on modiﬁcations to theEdge Agreement Head which did not have a positive e ect on
the training.
For all experiments, we follow the same scheme: every net-
work conﬁguration examined is trained and evaluated three
times. The resulting training curves and metrics displayed are
the averaged values. Furthermore, to be able to compare all
runs and to reduce the time required for all experiments we do
not train the networks until they have converged, but only for a
ﬁxed and limited number of training steps. The only data aug-
mentation used in all three steps are random horizontal ﬂips.
We present the COCO metrics for our experiments and com-
pare them with the results obtained using a Mask R-CNN
model without modiﬁcations (baseline) for every experiment
conducted. A signiﬁcant disadvantage of using the COCO
Mask metrics is that they do not compare the ground-truth and
predicted mask pixel per pixel since they only consider the
area and the instance enclosing bounding box. As a result, the
COCO Mask metrics are unsuitable to compare the improve-
ment in the details of instance masks which are located on the
inside of the mask and do not a ect the extremities. We use
the COCO metrics because of their dominance in other pub-
lications. The mask loss however, can be regarded as a better
metric to compare the quality of the instance mask, because it is
computed using a cross entropy between matched ground-truth
and predicted mask.
5.1. Inﬂuence of Filters
In the ﬁrst experiment the choice of edge detection ﬁlters on
the training speed and the mask quality is analyzed. The Edge
Agreement Loss is computed using the L2loss. The mask loss
LMaskand the original Mask R-CNN loss LMRCNN are displayed
in Figure 4a. The graphs show that using the Sobel ﬁlter leads
to a faster decrease of the LMRCNN and the LMask loss. This is
underlined well by plotting LMRCNN while using the Sobel ﬁlter
relative to the baseline (dotted curves with respect to the right
y-axis in Figure 4a) which demonstrates a consistent improve-
ment at every training step.
To allow for a comparison between di erent edge detection
ﬁlters, we analyzed their performance based on their impact on
the other loss terms, as their Edge Agreement Loss magnitude
varies depending on the ﬁlter. The results on the COCO Mask
metrics are shown in Table 1. Note, that these results are lower
than the results reported by (He et al., 2017), since we use a
dierent batch size, input image resolution and implementation
of Mask R-CNN ((Abdulla, 2017) not (Girshick et al., 2018)).
Using the Sobel edge detection ﬁlter gave a 7% relative im-
provement on the AP score. Notably the Sobel ﬁlter resulted
in a 12% relative improvement on the AP 75and a 10% relative
improvement on the AP Scompared to the respective baseline
scores. On average, the COCO metrics have been improved
relatively by 8.1%. Using the Laplacian kernel showed only
marginal improvements over the baseline. The combination of
multiple ﬁlters, e.g. Sobel and Laplacian (S & L), showed no
increase in performance.
A possible explanation for the superiority of the Sobel ﬁlter
is its structure: as it consists of two ﬁlters, not only the strength
of an edge along the x and y axis but also the edge’s orientation
4