YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 6
problem which cannot be solved eciently with conventional methods [28]. Typical examples include
the joint optimizations for the physical and media access control layers [29], joint source and channel
optimizations [30] and the joint optimization for algorithm and hardware implementation [31].
3 Paradigms of AI in 5G
In this section, examples of the application of AI techniques in 5G are presented, which cover four
dierent problems in 5G including: network resource allocation, SON, uniform 5G accelerator and the
optimization of the end-to-end physical layer communication.
3.1 AI for SON: Automatic root cause analysis
Self-organizing networks (SONs) establish a new concept of network management which provide intel-
ligence in the operation and maintenance of the network. It has been introduced by 3GPP as a key
component of LTE network. In the 5G era, network densication and dynamic resource allocation will
result in new problems for coordination, conguration and management of the network, hence bringing
increased demand for the improvements of the SON functions. SON modules in mobile networks can be
divided into three main categories: self-conguration, self-optimization and self-healing. The main ob-
jectives of SON are to automatically perform network planning, conguration and optimization without
human intervention, in order to reduce the overall complexity, Operational Expenditure (OPEX), Capital
Expenditure (CAPEX) and man-made faults. Various researches of AI in SON have been summarized
in [32{34] which includes AI applied in automatic base station conguration, new cell and spectrum
deployment, coverage and capacity optimization, cell outage detection and compensation, etc., using
approaches including ANN, ant colony optimization, genetic algorithm, etc..
In this section, we introduce the automatic root cause analysis framework proposed in [35] as an
example for AI in SON. The design of the fault identication system in LTE networks faces two main
challenges: (1) A huge number of alarms, KPIs and conguration parameters can be taken as fault
indicators in the system. Meanwhile, most of the symptoms of these indicators are not labeled with
fault causes, hence are dicult to identify; (2) The system is not automatic and experts are involved to
analyze each fault cause. With the huge amount of high-dimensional data, human intervention is not
ecient while expensive. Authors of [35] proposes an AI-based automatic root cause analysis system
which combines supervised and unsupervised learning techniques as summarized in the following steps:
1. Unsupervised SOM training. SOM as shown in Figure 2 is applied for an initial classication of
the high-dimensional KPIs. An SOM is a type of unsupervised neural network capable of acquiring
knowledge and learning from a set of unlabeled data. It will process high-dimensional data and reducing
it to a two-dimensional map of neurons that preserves the topological properties of the input data. Hence,
inputs close to each other will be mapped to adjacent neurons. By this unsupervised process, the high-
dimensional KPIs are mapped into a lower-dimensional map which can classify new KPI data by nding
the closest neurons.
2. Unsupervised clustering. After SOM training, all the neurons in the SOM system will be clustered
into a certain number of groups using an unsupervised algorithm. Since the SOM neurons are already
ordered and the dierence between the original inputs can be represented by Euclidean distance between
the corresponding neurons, clustering algorithms based on Euclidean distance, e.g. Wards hierarchical
method, can be applied to cluster the neurons.
3. Labeling by Experts. After the above two steps, the original high-dimensional data are clustered
into several classes. We will nally have the experts to analyze and identify the fault causes of each
obtained cluster to have all the clusters labeled.
With the training, clustering and labeling, an automatic system for network diagnosis is constructed
by the work
ow shown in Figure 4. For a new input of KPIs, it will rstly be mapped to a neuron in
SOM. Then by the label of the cluster this neuron belongs to, we can identify the fault and the causes.
After obtaining a certain amount of new fault data, we can verify whether the system is right or not and