YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 9
On-chip 
Buffer 
Ifmap 
Buffer 
Filter 
Buffer 
Ofmap 
Buffer PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
... ... ... ... FIFO 
FIFO 
FIFO FIFO FIFO FIFO FIFO 
. . . . . . 
Max Pooling/ReLU/Sparse Ofmap FIFO Systolic
Array
Figure 6 Systolic array hardware structure for neural networks [18].
Figure 7 Architecture of a receiver including neural network equalizer and decoder [21].
construct the receiver, one being the CNN-based equalizer while the other being the DNN-based decoder.
This architecture has more hardware consumption, but achieves higher throughput rate.
Overall, the AI-based uniform accelerator is more 
exible for the hardware implementation, hence can
achieve various system requirements.
3.4 AI for physical layer: DNN-based end-to-end communication
As mentioned above, AI, especially DNN, has been applied to dierent function blocks in the physical
layer, e.g., modulation recognition [44], polar codes decoder [20] and MIMO detection [43]. For the joint
optimization of two or more blocks, AI algorithms also achieve success, e.g., the aforementioned joint
optimization of channel equalizer and channel decoder proposed in [21]. However, optimizing each of the
blocks individually cannot guarantee the optimization for the whole physical layer communication [45].
In the viewpoint of the whole end-to-end communication system, the intuitive connection of dierent
AI modules may bring extra computational cost for both training and online tasks. Hence, a joint
optimization method for the end-to-end system is in need.
[46] proposes an autoencoder-based end-to-end system optimization method, in which the communi-
cation system is recast as an end-to-end reconstruction optimization problem, and a novel concept, the
autoencoder, is introduced to serve as a simplied representation of the system. The autoencoder is a
type of ANN. It aims at learning a representation (encoding) for a set of data in an unsupervised manner,
which will be capable to reconstruct compressed inputs at the output layer. In the proposed approach
in [46], the end-to-end system is simply represented with three blocks, the transmitter, the receiver and
the channel. The transmitter and the receiver are both represented as fully connected DNNs. A nor-
malization layer is connected to the transmitter to guarantee the energy constraints, whereas a softmax
activation layer is placed before the receiver to output soft decisions for the received information. The
AWGN channel in between is represented as a simple noise layer with a certain variance. The resulted
autoencoder has a structure as shown in Figure 8. This autoencoder is trained based on bit error rate