YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 7
Figure 4 Automatic root cause analysis work
ow [35].
MT(1,3)
BS1 
MT(1,2)MT(1,1)MT(2,1)
MT(2,2)MT(2,3)
BS2 
RB-A
RB-B
Figure 5 Dynamic resource allocation for multi-cell and multi-user systems.
update it by re-training with the above three steps. Simulation results presented in [35] show that the
proposed root cause analysis system is highly accurate even though it's mainly built using unsupervised
techniques.
3.2 AI for resource allocation: OFDMA downlink resource allocation
The OFDM resource block (RB) allocation in 5G NR is more complicated and challenging than ever
before due to the support for the three aforementioned generic services. In Figure 5, a typical multi-cell,
multi-user downlink resource allocation scenario is illustrated. In this system, the intra-cell interference
is eliminated since the RB allocated to dierent users in the same cell is orthogonal to each other. The
system interference mainly depends on the inter-cell interference, which makes the RB allocation for users
in neighboring cells important. Suppose the throughput of each user can be evaluated based on signal-to-
interference ratio (SIR), the target for the optimization of the RB allocation is the maximization of the
total system throughput. This is indeed an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem with nonlinear
constraints. The complexity of the traditional solution is proportional to the factorial of the number of
users in coverage, which is computationally prohibitive.
Q-learning can be applied to this problem. Suppose an \Agent" is in charge of the RB allocation, then
the possible \Action" of this \Agent", which is to update the RB for each user, can be selected by the
following strategies as illustrated in Figure 5: (1) Within the same cell, allocate free RB with higher SIR
to the users; (2) Update the RB allocated to the user with the worst SIR in current cell continuously
to achieve better overall system capacity; (3) For a certain RB, pair or cluster the user with worst SIR
in the current cell with users with the best SIR from the neighboring cell. The rst two strategies are