YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 8
intuitive. The third one is applied to avoid allocating the same RB to users in neighboring cells that are
located close to the boarder, since in such situations the involved users cannot acquire essential SIR to
work properly regardless of the transmitting power of the base stations.
After dening all the possible \Actions", the \Agent" will evaluate each of them to select the next
\Action" to adjust the RB allocation which maximizes the overall capacity of the whole system. The Q
function is updated according to the Bellman equation [13] at the same time. We iterate through this
process until the Q function converges.
These iterations should also be considered with the optimization of the user power allocation. In [36],
a framework based on generalized Nash equilibrium problem (GNEP) is proposed for the optimization of
the power control for users from multiple cells that are assigned the same RB. Global quality of service
(QoS) constraints are also considered hence Lagrange multipliers are introduced to evaluate the \Actions"
and establish the Q function.
3.3 AI for baseband signal processing: Uniform 5G accelerator
The baseband signal processing in 5G consists of a series of signal processing blocks including massive
MIMO detection, NOMA detection and decoding for polar codes. The increased number of baseband
blocks leads to more hardware area and varied implementation structures. However, we notice that
the belief propagation algorithm based on factor graphs can be applied to all the blocks as proposed
in [37{41]. For each specic block, the frameworks are kept unchanged and we only have to adapt the
symbol set and constraints of the variables to the certain function. Hence, a uniform accelerator for the
baseband can be designed based on the belief propagation algorithms with congurable variables.
However, the performance of belief propagation is limited in some baseband blocks in certain scenarios.
Here, AI can be a possible solution to these problems. By improving the belief propagation methods with
the AI techniques, an AI-based uniform accelerator can be constructed. The AI-aided belief propagation
algorithms can be designed with the following two methods:
DNN-aided belief propagation: (1) Unfold the factor graph of belief propagation by duplicating
the iterations to form a DNN; (2) Train the DNN by supervised training. Applications of this method
in the baseband include the DNN-based polar codes decoder proposed in [20] and the DNN-aided MMO
detector proposed in [42].
Belief propagation-based CNN: (1)Map each node in the factor graph of belief propagation to
one pixel in a picture, in which connected nodes should be mapped into neighboring pixels; (2) Train
the CNN using the obtained pictures. This method is utilized in the BP-CNN channel decoder proposed
in [43].
The neural networks are highly self-adaptive and reliable. By applying DNN and CNN in the baseband,
we can achieve performance enhancements as long as a uniform hardware implementation framework.
Actually, the core operation for CNN is the convolution, while the core of DNN is the multiplication of
the two-dimensional matrices. We notice that the systolic architecture can realize both of the operations.
Figure 6 illustrates a recongurable systolic architecture designed for accelerating convolutional neural
network [18]. It can be seen that the systolic architecture is regular and scalable, which supports dierent
CNNs and DNNs. This motivates us to explore the possibilities of reusing the same hardware architecture
to realize both 5G and DL algorithms.
The authors of [21] point out that in a system formed with the channel encoder, the channel, the
channel equalizer and the decoder (as shown in Figure 7), the equalizer and the decoder in the receiver
can be implemented with a CNN and a DNN, respectively. The associated AI accelerator can be jointly
realized by two strategies:
(1) The uniform architecture: The overall receiver can be folded into one uniform processor to save
the hardware area. This processor rstly works as a CNN-based equalizer with the input signals from
the channel. The output of the CNN will be saved at this point. The processor will then function as a
DNN-based decoder, for which the saved output from the CNN will serve as the input. The decoding
results will be the nal output. (2) The cascade architecture: Two processors will be cascaded directly to