YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 5
performance can be \learned" with AI in every specic problem in the communication system. Finally,
AI algorithms usually bring large computational complexity, which makes them not that competitive
compared to conventional methods if the performance improvement is minor.
With all these limitations, nonetheless, AI still has great potentials and prospects in the communication
system of the 5G era. As introduced above, 5G brings complicated conguration issues and evolving
service requirements, resulting in new problems that are hard to be modeled, solved or implemented
within the current conventional framework. Hence, new opportunities as long as challenges are brought
by 5G for AI techniques. From all the challenging problems in 5G, typical and potential research directions
to which AI can make promising contributions need to be identied, evaluated, and investigated.
In this paper, we summarize the potential application directions for AI in 5G in four main categories:
(1) Problems dicult to model; (2) Problems dicult to solve; (3) Uniform implementation; (4) Joint
optimization and detection. In the following analysis and examples, we will see that for problems in
(1) and (2), conventional methods are barely eective and AI techniques are expected to be promising;
on the other hand, for (3) and (4), the potential of AI is problem-dependent compared to conventional
methods, and careful investigation should be done to identify if AI is benecial.
Problems dicult to model: The network optimization problems in communication systems is
overall a kind of technical problem that is hard to model, which includes typical issues such as the net-
work coverage, interference, neighboring cell selection and handover. Current solutions mostly depend on
experience of the engineers. For 5G NR scenarios, these problems are more challenging due to the com-
plicated network structures and large number of KPIs. Applications of new features like massive MIMO
beamforming [25] are associated with high-dimensional optimization parameters and the optimization
problem itself is dicult to model. Also, 5G NR involves multiple KPIs including peak data rate, spec-
tral eciency, latency, connection density, quality of experience (QoE) and so on. These KPIs should
be jointly optimized even if some of them contradicts with each other [7]. In these situations, an overall
optimization model cannot be achieved with conventional methods and AI techniques are expected to be
able to handle them.
Problems dicult to solve: Network resource allocation is a key issue in 5G NR [25,26], which
includes specic issues in inter-cell resource block allocation, orthogonal pilot resource allocation, beam-
forming resource allocation, massive MIMO user clustering and resource pool deployment in virtualized
networks. The network resource allocation aims at maximizing the throughput of the network while
balancing the service rate. It's mostly a NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, and the com-
putational complexity to solve this kind of problem increases exponentially as the size of the systems.
Traditional solutions use static partition of the network to cut down the computational cost for a sub-
optimal solution. Nowadays, with the assistance of modern computing technologies, AI will be an new
eective solution for these problems.
Uniform implementation: Conventional methods are designed in a divide-and-conquer manner
for some function blocks in 5G NR. For example, the physical layer in 5G NR consists of a series of signal
processing blocks such as multiuser MIMO space-time processing, NOMA signal detection and encoding
and decoding for LDPC or polar codes. Researchers have attempted to optimize the algorithms and
implementations of each processing module and achieved success in practice. However, the ecient and
scalable implementation of the entire communication system is lacking, with guaranteed performance. It
is noted that, AI techniques are supposed to be capable for handling each of the modules [15{23]. This
inspires us to further develop a uniform AI-based implementation which works jointly for all the key
modules in the 5G NR physical layer [27]. By unifying the modules with AI methods in both algorithm
and hardware, the design, conguration and implementation of the physical layer communications will
be simpler, faster, more economical and more ecient.
Joint optimization and detection: An intuitive idea for applying AI in 5G is to simply substitute
the conventional modules of transmitters and receivers by ANN. However, the capacity of the channels is
bounded by the Shannon limit and the improvement by using ANN is constricted. Also as discussed above,
the complexity and the convergence of training should be carefully examined in this area. Compared
to this intuitive method, AI is more potential in a bigger picture of the cross-layer joint optimization