YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 2
The 5G technology standards are in development, getting complete and mature [2, 3]. In December
2017, 3G Partnership Project (3GPP) ocially announced the new standards for 5G New Radio (NR)
which include supports for 5G Non-Standalone architecture (NSA) and eMBB [4]. On June 14, 2018,
3GPP formally completed the Standalone (SA) version of the 5G NR standard, marking a long-awaited
target date for 5G standardization [5]. These announced standards eectively set the stage to launch
full-scale and cost-eective development of 5G networks. Compared to the current 4G networks, 5G
NR: (1) enhances the MIMO systems with the massive MIMO technology; (2) makes completion to the
time slot structure and resource block (RB) allocation of the orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM), proposing a more 
exible air interface; (3) will introduce the non-orthogonal multiple access
(NOMA) to support the Internet of Things (IoT) in the near future; (4) follows the previous distributed
antenna systems [6], splits the wireless functions into distributed units (DU) and central units (CU) and
applies network virtualization and network slicing techniques based on cloud computing.
Overall, 5G networks will tailor the provisioning mechanisms for more applications and services, hence
is more challenging with the complicated conguration issues and evolving service requirements. Before
5G, researches of communication systems mainly aim at satisfactory data transmission rate and supportive
mobility management. In the 5G era, the communication systems will gain the abilities to interact with
the environment, and the targets are expanded to joint optimizations of ever-increasing numbers of key
performance indicators (KPIs) including latency, reliability, connection density, user experience, etc [7].
Meanwhile, new features like the dynamic air interface, virtualised network and network slicing introduce
complicated system design and optimization requirements as long as challenges for network operation and
maintenance. Fortunately, such problems falls into the eld of articial intelligence (AI) which provides
brand new concepts and possibilities beyond traditional methods, hence has recently regained attention
in the eld of communications in both academia and industry.
AI is dedicated to allowing machines and systems to function with intelligence similar to humans. The
eld of AI research was born in 1950s, which experienced ups and downs, and is revived in recent years
due to the rapid development of modern computing and data storage technologies. The general problem
of simulating intelligence contains sub-problems like reasoning, inference, data tting, clustering and
optimization, which involves approaches including genetic algorithms [8] and articial neural networks
(ANN) [9, 11]. Specically, AI learning techniques have constructed a universal framework for various
problems and have made tremendous progress, becoming the state of the art in dierent elds.
AI learning tasks are typically classied into two broad categories, supervised and unsupervised learn-
ing, depending on whether labels of the training data are available to the learning system. And another
learning approach, reinforcement learning, is not exactly supervised neither unsupervised, hence can be
listed in a new category.
Supervised learning: Sample data pairs of inputs and desired outputs are feed into the computer,
and the goal is to learn a general function that relates the inputs to the outputs and further detects the
unknown outputs of the future inputs. One typical example of supervised learning is illustrated in Figure
1, in which labeled data pairs are feed in a multi-layer deep neural network (DNN) to train the weights
between the nodes in the DNN. The training is carried out oine, and after convergence, the trained
DNN will be ready for recognition and inference of new inputs.
Unsupervised learning: In unsupervised learning, no labels are given to the learning algorithm
and structure in its input should be found on its own. Self-organizing map (SOM) is an example that is
trained using unsupervised learning. In SOM, unlabeled data are feed in to a neural network to produce
a low-dimensional (usually two-dimensional), discretized representation of the input space of the training
samples, called a map (as illustrated in Figure 2) , and is therefore a method to do dimensionality
reduction.
Reinforcement learning: This technique is based on alternative interaction between \Agent" and
\Environment" and the process is illustrated in Figure 3. The \Agent" will perform certain action and
as a result of this action his state will change which leads to either a reward or a penalty. The Agent
will then decide the next action based on this result. By iterating through action and reward/penalty
process, Agent learns the Environment.