YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 4
Observation 
Environment 
Most Favorite 
Action 
Q-Function Updating  
Agent Reward/Penalty 
Evaluation Possible 
Action Set 
Unsupervised 
learning: Q-learning 
Q-
Function Updating
Reward /
Penalty 
Evaluation
Possible 
Action Set
Figure 3 Example of reinforcement learning: Q-learning.
2 Research directions for AI in 5G
As a universal intelligent problem-solving technique, AI can be broadly applied in the design, conguration
and optimization for the 5G networks. Specically, AI is relevant to three main technical problems in
5G:
Combinatorial optimization: One typical example of the combinatorial optimization problem in
5G NR is the network resource allocation. Given a resource-limited network, an optimized scheme should
be gured out to allocate resources to dierent users who share the network such that the utilization
of the resource achieves maximum eciency. As the application of the HetNet architecture in 5G NR
with features like network virtualization, network slicing and self-organizing networks (SON), the related
network resource allocation problems are becoming more complicated, which requires more eective
solutions.
Detection: The design of the communication receiver is an example of the detection problem. An
optimized receiver is able to recover the transmitted messages based on the received signals, achieving
minimized detection error rate. Detection will be challenging in 5G within the massive MIMO framework.
Estimation: The typical example is the channel estimation problem. 5G requires accurate estima-
tion of the channel state information (CSI) to achieve communications in spatially correlated channels
of massive MIMO. The popular approach is the so-called training sequence (or pilot sequence), where a
known signal is transmitted and the CSI is estimated using the combined knowledge of the transmitted
and received signal.
Many researches have already been done for the application of AI in 5G as in literatures [15{23].
However, due to the limitations of both the communication systems and AI, some of the applications
may be restricted. Firstly, after years of research and test, conventional methods have shown their abilities
to handle the communication systems. A complete framework with conventional techniques have been
formed, which is eective, mature and easy to implement for real world scenarios. Secondly, the capacity
of a communication system is constrained with certain upper bounds (e.g., the Shannon limit), and some
of the well-designed methods can reach near-optimal performance suering negligible loss with respect to
the capacity bound. For example, in [24] a transmitter optimization method for MIMO is proposed based
on an iterative water-lling algorithm, which closely achieves near-Shannon performance in the general
jointly correlated MIMO channels. This kind of methods will not be over-performed by even the most-
advanced AI technique. Moreover, there're still obstacles to apply AI learning in real-world problems
due to the convergence issues for training. Careful checks should be done to make sure the optimal