SCIENCE CHINA
Information Sciences
.INVITED REVIEW .
AI for 5G: Research Directions and Paradigms
Xiaohu YOU1, Chuan ZHANG1*, Xiaosi TAN1, Shi JIN1& Hequan WU2
1National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096 , China;
2Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing 100088 , China
Abstract The 5th wireless communication (5G) techniques not only full the requirement of 1 ;000 times
increase of internet trac in the next decade, but also oer the underlying technologies to the entire in-
dustry and ecology for internet of everything. Compared to the existing mobile communication techniques,
5G techniques are more-widely applicable and the corresponding system design is more complicated. The
resurgence of articial intelligence (AI) techniques oers as an alternative option, which is possibly superior
over traditional ideas and performance. Typical and potential research directions to which AI can make
promising contributions need to be identied, evaluated, and investigated. To this end, this overview paper
rst combs through several promising research directions of AI for 5G, based on the understanding of the
5G key techniques. Also, the paper devotes itself in providing design paradigms including 5G network opti-
mization, optimal resource allocation, 5G physical layer unied acceleration, end-to-end physical layer joint
optimization, and so on.
Keywords 5G mobile communication, AI techniques, network optimization, resource allocation, unied
acceleration, end-to-end joint optimization
Citation YOU X H, ZHANG C, TAN X S, et al. AI for 5G: Research Directions and Paradigms. Sci China Inf
Sci, for review
1 Introduction
The fth generation mobile network (5G) applies the next generation of mobile telecommunication stan-
dards which targets at the needs of 2020 and beyond. It aims at providing a complete wireless com-
munication system with diverse applications. Specically, 5G is going to be responsible for supporting
three generic services, which are classied as enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), massive machine-type
communications (mMTC) and ultra-reliable and low-latency communications (URLLC) (also referred
to as mission-critical communications). These applications suggest new performance criteria for latency,
reliability, connection and capacity density, system spectral eciency, energy eciency and peak through-
put that need to be addressed with the 5G technology. To meet these criteria, ongoing researches are
conducted in many areas, mainly focused on key technologies including massive multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO), new radio access technology (RAT), heterogeneous ultra-densication networks (UDN),
channel coding and decoding (e.g. polar codes) and mmWave access [1]. Also, 5G networks will inevitably
be heterogeneous, with multiple modes and devices involved through one unied air interface tailored for
specic applications. Hence, architectures as the dense HetNet are involved and 5G systems are going to
be virtualised and implemented over cloud data centers. Network slicing will be a major feature of a 5G
network, as will the use of a new air interface designed to dynamically optimize the allocation of network
resources and utilize the spectrum eciently.
* Corresponding author (email: chzhang@seu.edu.cn)arXiv:1807.08671v1  [eess.SP]  23 Jul 2018