Bright
Dark
Train on nearby mutations Test on further mutations
Full Local Landscape
(a) Fluorescence
Most Stable
Least Stable
Train on broad 
sample of proteinsTest on small neighborhoods
 of best proteins(b) Stability
Figure 2: Protein Engineering Tasks. In both tasks, a parent protein pis mutated to explore the local
landscape. As such, dots represent proteins and directed arrow x→ydenotes that yhas exactly
one more mutation than xaway from parent p. (a) The Fluorescence task consists of training on
small neighborhood of the parent green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) and then testing on a more distant
proteins. (b) The Stability task consists of training on a broad sample of proteins, followed by testing
on one-mutation neighborhoods of the most promising sampled proteins.
(Generalization) SS prediction tests the degree to which models learn local structure. Data splits
are ﬁltered at 25% sequence identity to test for broad generalization.
(Metrics) We report accuracy on a per-amino acid basis on the CB513 [ 36] dataset. We further report
three-way and eight-way classiﬁcation accuracy for the test sets CB513, CASP12, and TS115.
Task 2: Contact Prediction (Structure Prediction Task)
(Deﬁnition) Contact prediction is a pairwise amino acid task, where each pair xi,xjof input amino
acids from sequence xis mapped to a label yij∈ {0,1}, where the label denotes whether the
amino acids are “in contact” (< 8Å apart) or not. See Figure 1b for illustration. The data are from
the ProteinNet dataset [25].
(Impact) Accurate contact maps provide powerful global information; e.g., they facilitate robust
modeling of full 3D protein structure [ 37]. Of particular interest are medium- and long-range
contacts, which may be as few as twelve sequence positions apart, or as many as hundreds apart.
(Generalization) The abundance of medium- and long-range contacts makes contact prediction an
ideal task for measuring a model’s understanding of global protein context. We select the data
splits that was ﬁltered at 30% sequence identity to test for broad generalization.
(Metrics) We report precision of the L/5most likely contacts for medium- and long-range contacts
on the ProteinNet CASP12 test set, which is a standard metric reported in CASP [ 24]. We further
report Area under PR Curve and Precision at L,L/2, andL/5for short-range, medium-range and
long-range contacts in the supplement.
Task 3: Remote Homology Detection (Evolutionary Understanding Task)
(Deﬁnition) This is a sequence classiﬁcation task where each input protein xis mapped to a label
y∈ {1,...,1195}, representing different possible protein folds. See Figure 1c for illustration.
The data are from Hou et al. [38].
(Impact) Detection of remote homologs is of great interest in microbiology and medicine; e.g., for
detection of emerging antibiotic resistant genes [39] and discovery of new CAS enzymes [40].
(Generalization) Remote homology detection measures a model’s ability to detect structural simi-
larity across distantly related inputs. We hold out entire evolutionary groups from the training set,
forcing models to generalize across large evolutionary gaps.
(Metrics) We report overall classiﬁcation accuracy on the fold-level heldout set from Hou et al. [ 38].
We further report top-one and top-ﬁve accuracy for fold-level, superfamily-level and family-level
holdout sets in the supplement.
Task 4: Fluorescence Landscape Prediction (Protein Engineering Task)
(Deﬁnition) This is a regression task where each input protein xis mapped to a label y∈R,
corresponding to the log-ﬂuorescence intensity of x. See Figure 2a for illustration. The data are
from Sarkisyan et al. [41].
5