tion (assuming a Markov sequence). The second is masked-token prediction [6], which models
p(xmasked|xunmasked)by replacing the value of tokens at multiple positions with alternate tokens.
Protein-speciﬁc loss: In addition to self-supervised algorithms, we explore another protein-speciﬁc
training procedure proposed by Bepler et al. [ 11]. They suggest that further supervised pretraining of
models can provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts. In particular, they propose supervised pretraining on contact
prediction and remote homology detection, and show it increases performance on secondary structure
prediction. Similar work in computer vision has shown that supervised pretraining can transfer well
to other tasks, making this a promising avenue of exploration [45].
Architectures and Training: We implement three architectures: an LSTM [ 46], a Transformer
[47], and a dilated residual network (ResNet) [ 48]. We use a 12-layer Transformer with a hidden
size of 512 units and 8 attention heads, leading to a 38M-parameter model. Hyperparameters for the
other models were chosen to approximately match the number of parameters in the Transformer. Our
LSTM consists of two three-layer LSTMs with 1024 hidden units corresponding to the forward and
backward language models, whose outputs are concatenated in the ﬁnal layer, similar to ELMo [ 5].
For the ResNet we use 35 residual blocks, each containing two convolutional layers with 256 ﬁlters,
kernel size 9, and dilation rate 2. We chose these hyperparameters based on common choices from
the literature. Our supervised tasks are of similar size to most of those in the GLUE [ 49] benchmark,
which has been instrumental in demonstrating the success of self-supervision in NLP. Since the
models that were applied to GLUE have tens to hundreds of millions of parameters, we chose to
make our models roughly the same size. See A.7 for model size ablation experiments. See A.2 for
details of how these pretrained models are fed into downstream tasks.
In addition, we benchmark two previously proposed architectures that differ signiﬁcantly from the
three above. The ﬁrst, proposed by Bepler et al. [ 11], is a two-layer bidirectional language model,
similar to the LSTM discussed above, followed by three 512 hidden unit bidirectional LSTMs. The
second, proposed by Alley et al. [ 12], is a unidirectional mLSTM [ 50] with 1900 hidden units. Details
on implementing and training these architectures can be found in the original papers.
The Transformer and ResNet are trained with masked-token prediction, while the LSTM is trained
with next-token prediction. Both Alley et al. and Bepler et al. are trained with next-token prediction.
All self-supervised models are trained on four NVIDIA V100 GPUs for one week.
Baselines: We evaluate learned features against two baseline featurizations. The ﬁrst is a one-
hot encoding of the input amino acid sequence, which provides a simple baseline. Most current
state-of-the-art algorithms for protein classiﬁcation and regression take advantage of alignment or
HMM-based inputs (see Section 2.2). Alignments can be transformed into various features, such
as mutation probabilities [ 38] or the HMM state-transition probabilities [ 34] for each amino acid
position. These are concatenated to the one-hot encoding of the amino acid to form another baseline
featurization. For our baselines we use alignment-based inputs that vary per task depending on the
inputs used by the current state-of-the-art method. See Appendix A.3 for details on the alignment-
based features used for each task. We do not use alignment-based inputs for protein engineering
tasks. Proteins in the engineering datasets differ by only a single amino acid, while alignment-based
methods search for proteins with high sequence identity, so alignment-based methods return the same
set of features for all proteins we wish to distinguish between.
Experimental Setup: The goal of our experimental setup is to systematically compare all featur-
izations. For each task we select a particular supervised architecture, drawing from state-of-the-art
where available, and make sure that ﬁne-tuning on all language models is identical. See Appendix A.3
for details on supervised architectures and training.
6 Results
Table 1 contains accuracy, perplexity, and exponentiated cross entropy (ECE) on the language
modeling task for the ﬁve architectures we trained with self-supervision as well as a random model
baseline. We report metrics on both the random split and the fully heldout families. Supervised
LSTM metrics are reported after language modeling pretraining, but before supervised pretraining.
Heldout family accuracy is consistently lower than random-split accuracy, demonstrating a drop in the
7