0 0 0 1 1
VY K F NInput
Output(a) Secondary Structure
<8 A
 (b) Contact Prediction
Fold = Beta Barrel
 (c) Remote Homology
Figure 1: Structure and Annotation Tasks on protein KgdM Porin (pdbid: 4FQE). (a) Viewing this
Porin from the side, we show secondary structure, with the input amino acids for a segment (blue) and
corresponding secondary structure labels (yellow and white). (b) Viewing this Porin from the front,
we show a contact map, where entry i,jin the matrix indicates whether amino acids at positions i,jin
the sequence are within 8 angstroms of each other. In green is a contact between two non-consecutive
amino acids. (c) The fold-level remote homology class for this protein.
4 Datasets
Here we describe our unsupervised pretraining and supervised benchmark datasets. To create
benchmarks that test generalization across large evolutionary distances and are useful in real-life
scenarios, we curate speciﬁc training, validation, and test splits for each dataset. Producing the
data for these tasks requires signiﬁcant effort by experimentalists, database managers, and others.
Following similar benchmarking efforts in NLP [ 32], we describe a set of citation guidelines in our
repository2to ensure these efforts are properly acknowledged.
4.1 Unlabeled Sequence Dataset
We use Pfam [ 33], a database of thirty-one million protein domains used extensively in bioinformatics,
as the pretraining corpus for TAPE. Sequences in Pfam are clustered into evolutionarily-related groups
called families . We leverage this structure by constructing a test set of fully heldout families (see
Section A.5 for details on the selected families), about 1% of the data. For the remaining data
we construct training and test sets using a random 95/5% split. Perplexity on the uniform random
split test set measures in-distribution generalization, while perplexity on the heldout families test
set measures out-of-distribution generalization to proteins that are less evolutionarily related to the
training set.
4.2 Supervised Datasets
We provide ﬁve biologically relevant downstream prediction tasks to serve as benchmarks. We
categorize these into structure prediction, evolutionary understanding, and protein engineering tasks.
The datasets vary in size between 8 thousand and 50 thousand training examples (see Table S1 for
sizes of all training, validation and test sets). Further information on data processing, splits and
experimental challenges is in Appendix A.1. For each task we provide:
(Deﬁnition) A formal deﬁnition of the prediction problem, as well as the source of the data.
(Impact) The impact of improving performance on this problem.
(Generalization) The type of understanding and generalization desired.
(Metrics) The metric reported in Table 2 to report results and additional metrics presented in
section A.8
Task 1: Secondary Structure (SS) Prediction (Structure Prediction Task)
(Deﬁnition) Secondary structure prediction is a sequence-to-sequence task where each input amino
acidxiis mapped to a label yi∈ {Helix(H),Strand(E),Other(C)}. See Figure 1a for illustration.
The data are from Klausen et al. [34].
(Impact) SS is an important feature for understanding the function of a protein, especially if the
protein of interest is not evolutionarily related to proteins with known structure [ 34]. SS prediction
tools are very commonly used to create richer input features for higher-level models [35].
2https://github.com/songlab-cal/tape#citation-guidelines
4