(a) True Contacts
 (b) LSTM
 (c) LSTM Pretrain
 (d) One Hot
 (e) Alignment
Figure 4: Predicted contacts for chain 1A of a Bacterioferritin comigratory protein (pdbid: 3GKN).
Blue indicates true positive contacts while red indicates false positive contacts. Darker colors
represent more certainty from the model.
the hand-engineered alignment features result in a much sharper map, accurately resolving more
long-range contacts. This increased speciﬁcity is highly relevant in structure prediction pipelines
[37, 51] and highlights a clear challenge for pretraining.
7 Discussion
Comparison to state of the art. As shown in Table 2, alignment-based inputs can provide a
powerful signal that outperforms current self-supervised models on multiple tasks. Current state-
of-the-art prediction methods for secondary structure prediction, contact prediction, and remote
homology classiﬁcation all take in alignment-based inputs. These methods combine alignment-based
inputs with other techniques (e.g. multi-task training, kernel regularization) to achieve an additional
boost in performance. For comparison, NetSurfP-2.0 [ 34] achieves 85% accuracy on the CB513 [ 36]
secondary structure dataset, compared to our best model’s 75% accuracy, RaptorX [ 52] achieves 0.69
precision at L/5on CASP12 contact prediction, compared to our best model’s 0.49, and DeepSF
[38] achieves 41% accuracy on remote homology detection compared to our best model’s 26%.
Need for multiple benchmark tasks. Our results support our hypothesis that multiple tasks are
required to appropriately benchmark performance of a given method. Our Transformer, which per-
forms worst of the three models in secondary structure prediction, performs best on the ﬂuorescence
and stability tasks. The reverse is true of our ResNet, which ties the LSTM in secondary structure
prediction but performs far worse for the ﬂuorescence task, with a Spearman’s ρof0.21compared to
the LSTM’s 0.67. This shows that performance on a single task does not capture the full extent of a
trained model’s knowledge and biases, creating the need for multi-task benchmarks such as TAPE.
8 Future Work
Protein representation learning is an exciting ﬁeld with incredible room for expansion, innovation,
and impact. The exponentially growing gap between labeled and unlabeled protein data means that
self-supervised learning will continue to play a large role in machine learning for proteins. Our
results show that no single self-supervised model performs best across all protein tasks. We believe
this is a clear challenge for further research in self-supervised learning, as there is a huge space of
model architecture, training procedures, and unsupervised task choices left to explore. It may be
that language modeling as a task is not enough, and that protein-speciﬁc tasks are necessary to push
performance past state of the art. Further exploring the relationship between alignment-based and
learned representations will be necessary to capitalize on the advantages of each. We hope that the
datasets and benchmarks in TAPE will provide a systematic model-evaluation framework that allows
more machine learning researchers to contribute to this ﬁeld.
Acknowledgments We thank Philippe Laban, David Chan, Jeffrey Spence, Jacob West-Roberts,
Alex Crits-Cristoph, Surojit Biswas, Ethan Alley, Mohammed AlQuraishi, Grigory Khimulya, and
Kevin Yang for valuable input on this paper. We thank the AWS Educate program for providing
us with the resources to train our models. Additionally, we acknowledge funding from Berkeley
Deep Drive, Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub, DARPA XAI, NIH, the Packard Fellowship for Science and
Engineering, and the Open Philanthropy Project.
9