than 25% exact amino acid matches. Other approaches besides sequence identity ﬁltering also exist,
depending on the generalization the task attempts to test [20].
2.2 Modeling Evolutionary Relationships with Sequence Alignments
The key technique for modeling sequence relationships in computational biology is alignment
[13,16,21,22]. Given a database of proteins and a query protein at test-time, an alignment-based
method uses either carefully designed scoring systems [ 21] or Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [ 16]
to align the query protein against all proteins in the database. Good alignments give information
about local perturbations to the protein sequence that may preserve, for example, function or structure.
The distribution of aligned residues at each position is also an informative representation of each
residue that can be fed into downstream models.
2.3 Semi-supervised Learning
The ﬁelds of computer vision and natural language processing have been dealing with the question
of how to learn from unlabeled data for years [ 23]. Images and text found on the internet generally
lack accompanying annotations, yet still contain signiﬁcant structure. Semi-supervised learning
tries to jointly leverage information in the unlabeled and labeled data, with the goal of maximizing
performance on the supervised task. One successful approach to learning from unlabeled examples is
self-supervised learning , which in NLP has taken the form of next token prediction [ 5], masked token
prediction [ 6], and next sentence classiﬁcation [ 6]. Analogously, there is good reason to believe that
unlabelled protein sequences contain signiﬁcant information about their structure and function [ 2,4].
Since proteins can be modeled as sequences of discrete tokens, we test both next token and masked
token prediction for self-supervised learning.
3 Related Work
The most well-known protein modeling benchmark is the Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction
(CASP) [ 24], which focuses on structure modeling. Each time CASP is held, the test set consists of
new experimentally validated structures which are held under embargo until the competition ends.
This prevents information leakage and overﬁtting to the test set. The recently released ProteinNet
[25] provides easy to use, curated train/validation/test splits for machine learning researchers where
test sets are taken from the CASP competition and sequence identity ﬁltering is already performed.
We take the contact prediction task from ProteinNet. However, we believe that structure prediction
alone is not a sufﬁcient benchmark for protein models, so we also use tasks not included in the CASP
competition to give our benchmark a broader focus.
Semi-supervised learning for protein problems has been explored for decades, with lots of work
on kernel-based pretraining [ 26,27]. These methods demonstrated that semi-supervised learning
improved performance on protein network prediction and homolog detection, but couldn’t scale
beyond hundreds of thousands of unlabeled examples. Recent work in protein representation learning
has proposed a variety of methods that apply NLP-based techniques for transfer learning to biological
sequences [ 11,12,28,29]. In a related line of work, Riesselman et al. [ 30] trained Variational Auto
Encoders on aligned families of proteins to predict the functional impact of mutations. Alley et al.
[12] also try to combine self-supervision with alignment in their work by using alignment-based
querying to build task-speciﬁc pretraining sets.
Due to the relative infancy of protein representation learning as a ﬁeld, the methods described above
share few, if any, benchmarks. For example, both Rives et al. [ 29] and Bepler et al. [ 11] report
transfer learning results on secondary structure prediction and contact prediction, but they differ
signiﬁcantly in test set creation and data-splitting strategies. Other self-supervised work such as
Alley et al. [ 12] and Yang et al. [ 31] report protein engineering results, but on different tasks and
datasets. With such varied task evaluation, it is challenging to assess the relative merits of different
self-supervised modeling approaches, hindering efﬁcient progress.
3