which raises a tantalizing question: can we adapt NLP-based techniques to extract useful biological
information from massive sequence datasets?
To help answer this question, we introduce the Tasks Assessing Protein Embeddings (TAPE), which
to our knowledge is the ﬁrst attempt at systematically evaluating semi-supervised learning on protein
sequences. TAPE includes a set of ﬁve biologically relevant supervised tasks that evaluate the
performance of learned protein embeddings across diverse aspects of protein understanding.
We choose our tasks to highlight three major areas of protein biology where self-supervision can
facilitate scientiﬁc advances: structure prediction, detection of remote homologs, and protein en-
gineering. We constructed data splits to simulate biologically relevant generalization, such as a
model’s ability to generalize to entirely unseen portions of sequence space, or to ﬁnely resolve small
portions of sequence space. Improvement on these tasks range in application, including designing
new antibodies [ 8], improving cancer diagnosis [ 9], and ﬁnding new antimicrobial genes hiding in the
so-called “Dark Proteome”: tens of millions of sequences with no labels where existing techniques
for determining protein similarity fail [10].
We assess the performance of three representative models (recurrent, convolutional, and attention-
based) that have performed well for sequence modeling in other ﬁelds to determine their potential for
protein learning. We also compare two recently proposed semi-supervised models (Bepler et al. [ 11],
Alley et al. [ 12]). With our benchmarking framework, these models can be compared directly to one
another for the ﬁrst time.
We show that self-supervised pretraining improves performance for almost all models on all down-
stream tasks. Interestingly, performance for each architecture varies signiﬁcantly across tasks,
highlighting the need for a multi-task benchmark such as ours. We also show that non-deep alignment-
based features [ 13–16] outperform features learned via self-supervision on secondary structure and
contact prediction, while learned features perform signiﬁcantly better on remote homology detection.
Our results demonstrate that self-supervision for proteins is promising but considerable improvements
need to be made before self-supervised models can achieve breakthrough performance. All code
and data for TAPE are publically available1, and we encourage members of the machine learning
community to participate in these exciting problems.
2 Background
2.1 Protein Terminology
Proteins are linear chains of amino acids connected by covalent bonds. We encode amino acids
in the standard 25-character alphabet, with 20characters for the standard amino acids, 2for the
non-standard amino acids selenocysteine and pyrrolysine, 2for ambiguous amino acids, and 1for
when the amino acid is unknown [ 1,17]. Throughout this paper, we represent a protein xof length L
as a sequence of discrete amino acid characters (x1,x2,...,x L)in this ﬁxed alphabet.
Beyond its encoding as a sequence (x1,...,x L), a protein has a 3D molecular structure. The different
levels of protein structure include primary (amino acid sequence), secondary (local features), and
tertiary (global features). Understanding how primary sequence folds into tertiary structure is a
fundamental goal of biochemistry [ 2]. Proteins are often made up of a few large protein domains ,
sequences that are evolutionarily conserved, and as such have a well-deﬁned fold and function.
Evolutionary relationships between proteins arise because organisms must maintain certain functions,
such as replicating DNA, as they evolve. Evolution has selected for proteins that are well-suited to
these functions. Though structure is constrained by evolutionary pressures, sequence-level variation
can be high, with very different sequences having similar structure [ 18]. Two proteins that share a
common evolutionary ancestor are called homologs . Homologous proteins may have very different
sequences if they diverged in the distant past.
Quantifying these evolutionary relationships is very important for preventing undesired information
leakage between data splits. We mainly rely on sequence identity , which measures the percentage of
exact amino acid matches between aligned subsequences of proteins [ 19]. For example, ﬁltering at a
25% sequence identity threshold means that no two proteins in the training and test set have greater
1https://github.com/songlab-cal/tape
2