AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, Security Intelligence Modeling and Research Directions 11
\If condition then action". Thus an agent rst checks
the condition and then the corresponding rule res if
the condition satises. The main advantage of such a
rule-based system in cybersecurity is that the \con-
dition" part can determine which rule is suitable to
apply for a specic security problem. And the \ac-
tion" part carries out the solutions associated with
that problem. Thus in a rule-based cybersecurity
system, it allows us to remove, add or modify the
rules according to the needs.
Overall, we can say that the knowledge for building
a knowledge-based conceptual model or system can be
represented in multiple ways. However, the eectiveness
of these methods in a security system may vary depend-
ing on the nature of the data and target application. In
the following, we discuss how security ontologies, a for-
mal way to dene the semantics of knowledge and data,
can be used to build a conceptual security model.
3.3.2 Security Ontologies and Conceptual Modeling
Ontologies, through information representation tech-
niques, are conceptual models of what exists in some
domain, brought into machine-interpretable form. Top-
level ontologies or upper ontologies, domain ontologies,
and application ontologies are several types of ontolo-
gies used in the area [153]. In general, ontology is \an
explicit specication of conceptualization and a formal
way to dene the semantics of knowledge and data"
[105]. According to [105], formally, an ontology is repre-
sented as \fO=C;R;I;H;Ag, wherefC=C1;C2;:::;C ng
represents a set of concepts, and fR=R1;R2;:::;R mg
represents a set of relations dened over the concepts. I
represents a set of instances of concepts, and Hrepre-
sents a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) dened by the
subsumption relation between concepts, and Arepre-
sents a set of axioms bringing additional constraints on
the ontology". In an ontology-based information secu-
rity, ve concepts such as threat, vulnerability, attack,
impact, and control, might be involved [119].
{Concept:Threat represents various types of dicul-
ties or dangers against a given set of security prop-
erties.
{Concept: Vulnerability mainly represents the weak-
nesses of a cybersecurity system.
{Concept:Attack represents various types of security
incidents caused by cyber criminals.
{Concept:Impact represents the eects that a secu-
rity incident can imply.
{Concept: Controls represents the relevant mecha-
nisms that can be used to reduce or avoid the eects
of a security incident or to protect a vulnerability.
Fig. 4: A structure of conceptual modeling based on security
ontologies in a cybersecurity system and the corresponding
information 
ow from data source to application.
Based on these concepts and their relationships, a
conceptual security model can be built to solve complex
security problems. The rationale behind the conceptual
security model can be structured as: a cyber-threat may
produce an attack or security incident that exploits the
vulnerabilities of the system, which may have an impact
on that system. A control mechanism that can detect,
prevent, or block the attack, is thus needed to protect
the system and make it secured. In Fig. 4, we show a
structure of conceptual modeling based on security on-
tologies in a cybersecurity system and the correspond-
ing information 
ow from data source to application.
According to Fig. 4, the automated security policies can
also be generated from the relevant security ontologies
that are used in the eventual security services or ap-
plications. Thus it is capable of making intelligent deci-
sions according to the concepts and their semantic rela-
tionships that exist in the ontologies. Based on dierent
knowledge representation formalisms, various ontology
languages can be used. In the area of semantic web,
Web Ontology Language (OWL) [107] is mostly used to
formalize and represent these concepts and their seman-
tic relationships in a graphical representation to build
an ontology-based security model. Overall, we can con-
clude that knowledge representation based conceptual
security modeling could be another part in the domain
of AI-driven cybersecurity according to its computing
capabilities while making intelligent decisions.Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1