4 Sarker et al.
Fig. 1: The worldwide popularity score of cyber security comparing with relevant terms in a range of 0 (min) to 100 (max)
over time where x-axis represents the timestamp information and y-axis represents the corresponding score.
network security, information security, application se-
curity, operational security, Internet of Things (IoT)
security, cloud security, infrastructure security, and rel-
evant others. While traditional cybersecurity systems
consist mainly of network protection systems and com-
puter security systems [116], we aim to provide a wide
range of cybersecurity view to the readers as it is one of
the major concern in our digital life in various perspec-
tive, from commercial purpose to personalized mobile
computing.
2.3 Security Incident and Attacks
A security incident is typically a malicious activity that
threatens the security factors, i.e., condentiality, in-
tegrity, and availability, dened earlier. Several types of
cybersecurity incidents, i.e., cyber threats and attacks,
may impact on an organization or an individual [154]. In
general, a cyber-threat can be dened as a possible se-
curity violation that might exploit the vulnerability of a
system or asset, while an attack is a deliberate unautho-
rized action on a system or asset. Cyber-attacks include
threats like computer viruses, data breaches, denial of
service (DoS) attacks, etc. In Table 1, we list the most
common cyber-threats and attacks that are needed for
consideration in today's cyber world.
2.4 Cybersecurity Defense Strategies
Cybersecurity defense strategies are typically for the
protection of the computer systems and networks from
the damage of the associated hardware, software, or
data, as well as the disruption of the services they pro-
vide. More granularly, they are responsible for prevent-ing data breaches or security incidents that can be de-
ned as any kind of malicious or unauthorized activity
to protect the systems [83]. In the following, we give an
overview of traditional security mechanisms.
{Access control [123] is a security mechanism that
typically regulates the access or use of the resources,
e.g., computer networks, system les, or data, in
a computing environment. For example, based on
the responsibilities of individual users, an attribute
or role-based access control scheme may be used to
limit network access, reducing the risk to the com-
pany or entity.
{Firewall [178] is a security framework for the net-
work that tracks and regulates incoming and outgo-
ing network trac. Firewalls are dened as a network-
based or host-based system that is based on a set of
security rules to allow or block the trac. It is also
capable of ltering trac from unsecured or sus-
picious sources to avoid attacks, such as malicious
trac.
{Anti-malware [175] also known as antivirus soft-
ware, is a computer program that is typically used
to prevent, detect, and remove computer viruses,
or malware. Modern antivirus software can protect
users from various malware attacks such as ran-
somware, backdoors, trojan horses, worms, spyware,
etc.
{Sandbox [69] is a security mechanism used for mit-
igating the system failures or software vulnerabili-
ties from spreading through separating the running
programs. It is often used to execute untrusted pro-
grams or code, possibly from unveried suppliers,
users, websites, or untrusted third parties.
{Security information and event management (SIEM)
[71] is a combination of security information man-Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1