10 Sarker et al.
the patterns that are inherent in domain names us-
ing a domain dataset collected via a domain crawl.
{Vulnerability analysis { to detect the weaknesses
and vulnerabilities in the code, the NLP techniques
can be used. For instance, n-grams and various smooth-
ing algorithms [113] combined with machine learn-
ing can be used to build such a model based on
the associated patterns for detecting vulnerabilities.
One example could be the detection of zero-day vul-
nerabilities in the banking sector. The analysts usu-
ally study conversations on various platforms on the
web and looking for the relevant information that is
useful for the purposes.
{Phishing identication { detection of a phishing at-
tack is a challenging problem, because of consider-
ing this as semantics-based attacks. Phishing can
be several categories, such as web page based, email
content-based, URL based, etc. A machine learning
model with a set of features can be used to detect
such phishing [57]. NLP techniques can be used to
eectively extract the features from such content as
well as to build the model.
{Malware family analysis { to modeling behavioral
reports into a series of words is necessary to eec-
tively detect malware. For the formulation of behav-
ioral reports [79], a bag-of-words (BoW) NLP model
might be helpful. For the automated engineering of
related security features and to construct the model,
NLP with machine learning techniques can be used.
Overall, to enhance the cybersecurity operations by
automating threat intelligence extracted from the un-
structured sources, an NLP-based methodology can be
used. Thus, NLP with the machine learning techniques
is considered as the driver for the automation of secu-
rity activities according to its capabilities in security
modeling depending on the target security application.
Therefore, we can conclude that NLP-based security
modeling could be another major part of the domain of
AI-driven cybersecurity.
3.3 Knowledge Representation and Conceptual
Modeling
Knowledge representation and reasoning is another eld
of AI that typically represents the real-world informa-
tion so that an intelligent cybersecurity system can uti-
lize that information to solve complex security problems
like a human. In the real world, knowledge of cybersecu-
rity is usually regarded as information about a specic
security domain. It is the analysis of how an intelligent
cybersecurity agent's views, intentions, and decisions
can be adequately articulated for automated reasoning,e.g., inference engines, classiers, etc., to solve complex
security problems. In this section, we rst discuss and
summarize the approaches of knowledge representation,
and then we discuss a conceptual security model based
on knowledge.
3.3.1 Knowledge Representation
Modeling the intelligent actions of a security agent is
the key purpose of knowledge representation. In the
eld of cybersecurity, it enables a computer to bene-
t from that knowledge of security and function like
a human being accordingly. Instead of considering the
bottom-up learning, it takes into account a top-down
approach to build the model to behave intelligently.
As discussed in [139], descriptive knowledge, structural
knowledge, procedural knowledge, meta knowledge, heuris-
tic knowledge, etc. are the several types of knowledge
that can be used in various application areas. In the
following, we summarize several knowledge representa-
tion methods such as logical, semantic network, frame,
and production rules [153], that can be used to build a
knowledge-based conceptual model.
{Logical representation: It represents with concrete
rules without any ambiguity that typically deals with
propositions. Thus, logic can be used to represent
simple facts that are the general statements that
may be either `True' or `False'. Overall, logical rep-
resentation means drawing a conclusion based on
various conditions. Although logical representation
enables us to do logical reasoning, the inference may
not be so ecient due to the restrictions and chal-
lenges to work with.
{Semantic network representation: We may represent
our information in the form of graphical networks
within semantic networks. This network is made up
of objects and arcs representing nodes that dene
the relationship between those objects. Overall, they
provide a structural representation of statements
about a domain of interest. Although semantic net-
works are a natural representation of information,
their intelligence in action depends on the system's
creator.
{Frame representation: A frame, derived from seman-
tic networks, is a structure-like record that consists
of a set of attributes to represent an object in the
world and its values. In the frame, knowledge about
an object or event can be stored together in the
knowledge base. Although frame representation is
easy to understand and visualize, it cannot proceed
with the inference mechanism smoothly.
{Production rules: It typically consists of pairs of the
condition, and corresponding action, which means,Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1