12 Sarker et al.
3.4 Cybersecurity Expert System Modeling
In articial intelligence, an expert system is generally
a computer system that emulates the decision-making
capacity of a human expert. A cybersecurity expert sys-
tem is an instance of a knowledge-based or rule-based
system in which decisions can be made based on se-
curity guidelines. The system is typically split into two
subsystems, such as the inference engine and the knowl-
edge base represented as security rules, as shown in g.
5.
Fig. 5: A structure of a cybersecurity expert system modeling.
The foundation of this cybersecurity expert frame-
work is the knowledge base shown in Fig. 5, as it con-
sists of knowledge of the domain of the target cyber-
security application as well as operational knowledge
of the rules of security decisions. The inference engine
shown in Fig. 5, on the other hand, applies the rules to
known facts from a security perspective to deduce new
facts. The user interface shown in Fig. 5 recognizes the
original security facts and invokes the inference engine
to trigger the knowledge base decision rules.
Usually, a rule consists of two parts: the antecedent
(IF part), called the state or premise, and the inference
or action called the consequent (THEN part). Thus, a
rule's basic syntax can be expressed as:
IF<antecedent> THEN<consequent>
For instance, \if the 
ag value is RSTR , then the
outcome is anomaly " can be an example of the IF-
THEN rule for detecting anomalies. Similarly, another
rule with multiple security features could be \if 
ag
value isSF, service isftb, and duration <= 4, then the
outcome isanomaly ", generated from the tree shown in
Fig. 2. In addition to human experts, several techniques
can be used to generate rules that can be used to build
the rule-based cybersecurity expert system.
{Classication learning rules: In machine learning,
the classication is one of the popular techniques
that can be used in various application areas. Sev-
eral popular classication techniques such as deci-
sion trees [125], IntrudTree [134], BehavDT [137],
Ripple Down Rule learner (RIDOR) [169], Repeated
Incremental Pruning to Produce Error Reduction(RIPPER) [170], etc. exist with the ability of rule
generation.
{Association learning rules: In general association
rules are created by searching for frequent IF-THEN
pattern data on the basis of [140] support and con-
dence value. For generating rules using a given
data set, common association rule learning tech-
niques such as AIS [25], Apriori [26], FP-Tree [66],
RARM [54], Eclat [182], ABC-RuleMiner [140], etc.
can be used.
{Fuzzy logic-based rules: Usually, fuzzy logic is an ap-
proach to computing focused on \degrees of truth"
rather than the usual \true or false" (1 or 0) [180].
Thus, instead of Boolean logic, a fuzzy rule-based
expert system uses fuzzy logic. In other words, by
using these rules, a fuzzy expert system is a set of
membership functions and rules that can provide
outputs.
{Conceptual semantic rule: As discussed earlier, an
ontology is \an explicit specication of conceptual-
ization and a formal way to dene the semantics of
knowledge and data" [105]. For instance, security
ontologies include the relationships between each
entry within an ontology that can be used to gener-
ate such conceptual rules. As each security decision
must consider the concrete company environment,
particular domain ontology can help for building an
eective semantic cybersecurity application.
Thus, a rule-based cybersecurity expert system model
may have the decision-making capacity of a security
expert in an intelligent cybersecurity framework that is
built to solve complex cybersecurity issues, as well as by
information reasoning. A rule generation method dis-
cussed above can play a major role in generating the IF-
THEN rules while developing the knowledge base mod-
ule. The rules can then be modied and handled accord-
ing to the requirements by domain experts with knowl-
edge of business rules. Overall, we can conclude that cy-
bersecurity expert systems modeling could be another
important part in the domain of AI-driven cybersecu-
rity according to its computing capabilities while mak-
ing intelligent decisions.
4 Research Issues and Future Directions
As we have discussed the role of Articial Intelligence
(AI) throughout the paper, which is known as the key
technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (In-
dustry 4.0), can play a signicant role for intelligent cy-
bersecurity services and management. To intelligently
solve today's various cybersecurity issues, i.e., protect-
ing of Internet-connected systems from cyber-threats,Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1