AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, Security Intelligence Modeling and Research Directions 3
{Integrity is another property of security policy that
typically refers to prevent any kind of destruction
or modication of information by unauthorized par-
ties. Integrity threat typically includes nance re-
lated threat like altering nancial data, stealing money,
reroute deposit, or hijacking, and to damage of the
organization trustworthiness, and can be considered
as \data alteration".
{Availability is also considered as another property
of security policy that typically refers to ensure the
access of information systems or assets to an autho-
rized party or entity in a reliable and timely manner.
Availability threat typically includes denial of ser-
vice, or physical destruction, and can be considered
as \denial access of the data".
Overall, based on the CIA triad for the security
policy discussed above, we can simply conclude that
\Condentiality" is limiting the data access, \Integrity"
is ensuring the data is accurate, and \Availability" is
making sure the accessibility of the data to the right
entity.
2.2 Cybersecurity and Related Terms
Over the last half-century, our modern and digital so-
ciety is highly integrated with information and com-
munication technology (ICT). As the smart comput-
ing devices used in our daily life activities are mostly
driven by global Internet connectivity, the associated
risk of data breaches or cyber-attacks is increasing day
by day. Thus, preventing and protecting the ICT sys-
tems from various kinds of advanced cyber-attacks or
threats, is known as ICT security, becomes the major
concern for our security professionals or policymakers
in recent days [128]. ICT security refers to relevant inci-
dents as well as measures, controls, and procedures ap-
plied by enterprises to ensure integrity, condentiality,
and availability of their data and systems. Cybersecu-
rity is simply about securing things that are vulnera-
ble through ICT. Although the term \Cybersecurity" is
popular nowadays, several relevant terms such as \In-
formation security", \Data security", \Network secu-
rity", \Internet/IoT security" often get interchangeable
and may create confusion among the readers as well as
the professionals in the area. In the following, we dene
these terms and highlight their world-wide popularity
score as well.
{Data security is all about securing data, which could
be specic to data, typically in storage. Thus, data
security can be dened as the prevention of unau-
thorized access, use, disruption, modication, or de-
struction of data in storage.{Information security is the prevention of unautho-
rized access, use, disruption, modication, or de-
struction of information. Information security, in a
sense, can be considered as a specic discipline un-
der the cybersecurity umbrella that is the broader
practice of defending IT assets from attacks or threats.
{Network security is usually the practice of prevent-
ing and tracking unauthorized access, misuse, alter-
ation, or denial of services available to a computer
network. It thus can be considered as a subset of cy-
bersecurity, which typically protects the data 
ow-
ing over the network.
{Internet security is a specic aspect of broader con-
cepts such as cybersecurity and computer security,
focusing on the specic risks and vulnerabilities of
internet access and use. IoT security is another rel-
evant term, is typically concerned with protecting
Internet-enabled devices, i.e., Internet of Things (IoT)
devices, that connect on wireless networks [28].
The above-mentioned security terms are related to
\Cybersecurity" , which is the practice of defending com-
puters, servers, mobile devices, electronic systems, net-
works, and data from malicious attacks, cyber-threats,
damage, or unauthorized access. Among these terms,
the worldwide popularity of \cybersecurity" is higher
than others and increasing day-by-day, which is shown
in Fig. 1. The popularity trend in Fig. 1 is shown based
on the data collected from Google Trends over the last
ve years [22]. According to Fig. 1, the popularity in-
dication values for cybersecurity was low in 2016 and
is increasing day-by-day. Thus, in this paper, we focus
on the popular term \cybersecurity", which is the key
to achieving the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry
4.0).
Many researchers dened cybersecurity in various
ways. For instance, the diverse activities or policies that
are taken into account to protect the ICT systems from
threats or attacks is known as cybersecurity [60]. Craigen
et al. dened \cybersecurity as a set of tools, practices,
and guidelines that can be used to protect computer
networks, software programs, and data from attack,
damage, or unauthorized access" [51]. According to Af-
tergood et al. [24], \cybersecurity is a set of technologies
and processes designed to protect computers, networks,
programs and data from attacks and unauthorized ac-
cess, alteration, or destruction". Overall, cybersecurity
typically concerns with the understanding of diverse cy-
ber threats or attacks and corresponding defense strate-
gies to prevent them, and eventually protect the sys-
tems, which is associated with condentiality, integrity,
and availability [50] [72] [103]. Based on these deni-
tions, we can conclude that cybersecurity is all about
the security of anything in the cyber realm, such asPreprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1