Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, Security Intelligence
Modeling and Research Directions
Iqbal H. Sarker1;2
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Articial Intelligence (AI) is one of the key
technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (In-
dustry 4.0), which can be used for the protection of
Internet-connected systems from cyber-threats, attacks,
damage, or unauthorized access. To intelligently solve
today's various cybersecurity issues, popular AI tech-
niques involving Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learn-
ing (DL) methods, the concept of Natural Language
Processing (NLP), Knowledge Representation and Rea-
soning (KRR), as well as the concept of knowledge or
rule-based Expert Systems (ES) modeling can be used.
Based on these AI methods, in this paper, we present a
comprehensive view on \AI-driven Cybersecurity" that
can play an important role for intelligent cybersecu-
rity services and management. The security intelligence
modeling based on such AI methods can make the cy-
bersecurity computing process automated and intelli-
gent than the conventional security systems. We also
highlight several research directions within the scope of
our study, which can help researchers do future research
in the area. Overall, this paper's ultimate objective is
to serve as a reference point and guidelines for cyber-
security researchers as well as industry professionals in
the area, especially from an AI-based technical point of
view.
Keywords Cybersecurity; articial intelligence;
machine learning; cyber data analytics; cyber-attacks;
anomaly; intrusion detection; security intelligence.
1Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122,
Australia.
2Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology,
Chittagong 4349, Bangladesh.
Corresponding: msarker@swin.edu.au (Iqbal H. Sarker)1 Introduction
The modern world depends more on technology than
ever before. A huge amount of data is generated and
gathered with the large implementation of booming tech-
nologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT) [95] and
cloud computing [162]. Although data can be used to
better serve the corresponding business needs, cyber-
attacks often pose major challenges. A cyber-attack is
usually a malicious and concerted attempt by an in-
dividual or organization to breach another individual
or organization's information system. Malware attack,
ransomware, denial of service (DoS), phishing or social
engineering, SQL injection attack, Man-in-the-middle,
Zero-day exploit, or insider threats are common nowa-
days in the area [141]. These types of security incidents
or cybercrime can aect organizations and individu-
als, cause disruptions, as well as devastating nancial
losses. For instance, according to the IBM report, a data
breach costs 8.19 million USD for the United States
[15], and the estimated annual cost to the global econ-
omy from cybercrime is 400 billion USD [60]. Cyber-
crimes are growing at an exponential rate that brings
an alarming message for the cybersecurity professionals
and researchers [141]. Therefore, to eectively and in-
telligently protect an information system, particularly,
Internet-connected systems from various cyber-threats,
attacks, damage, or unauthorized access, is a key issue
to be solved urgently, in which we are interested in this
paper.
In the real world, the overall national security of the
business, government, organizations, and individual cit-
izens of a country depends on the security management
tools having the capability of detecting and preventing
the security incidents in a timely and intelligent way.
Intelligent cybersecurity services and management arePreprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1
©  2021 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY  license.