AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, Security Intelligence Modeling and Research Directions 13
attacks, damage, or unauthorized access, popular AI
methods such as machine and deep learning, natural
language processing, knowledge representation and rea-
soning, as well as the concept of knowledge or rule-
based expert systems modeling can be used, discussed
brie
y in Section 3. However, several research issues
that are identied within the area of AI-driven cyber-
security, discussed brie
y in the following.
According to our study in this paper, cybersecurity
source datasets are the primary component, especially
to extract security insight or useful knowledge from
security data using machine and deep learning tech-
nique, discussed brie
y in Section 3. Thus, the primary
and most fundamental challenge is to understand the
real-world security issues and to explore the relevant
cybersecurity data to extract insights or useful knowl-
edge for future actions. For instance, public text data
such as cyber-related webpage text is used to detect and
track the potential cyberattacks [120]. However, collect-
ing the security data is not straight forward as the data
sources could be multiple and dynamic. Thus, collect-
ing various types of real-world data such as structured,
semi-structured, unstructured, etc. relevant to a partic-
ular problem domain with legal access, which may vary
from application to application, is challenging. There-
fore, to understand the security problem, and to inte-
grate and manage the collected data for eective data
analysis could be one of the major challenges to work
in the area of AI-driven cybersecurity.
The next challenge could be an eective and intelli-
gent solution to tackle the target security problems. Al-
though several machine and deep learning techniques,
such as clustering, rule-based approach, classication,
neural network, etc. [141] are employed to solve several
security problems, summarized in Table 2, these mod-
els can be improved with advanced analytics. For in-
stance, observing attack patterns in time-series, behav-
ioral analysis, data sparseness in security analysis, the
impact of security features in modeling, simplifying and
optimizing the security model, taking into account ad-
vanced feature engineering tasks, synchronizing tempo-
ral patterns in modeling while considering multiple data
sources, etc. can be considered. Moreover, several im-
portant issues such as data aggregation, redundancy in
rule generation, eectiveness of prediction algorithms,
data inconsistency, recent pattern analysis for predic-
tion [132] [133] [136], etc. might be an important is-
sue for eective data-driven modeling. Thus, advanced
analytics techniques, improved machine or deep learn-
ing techniques, new data-driven algorithms, or hybrid
methods could give better results for modeling security
intelligence, depending on the nature of the securityproblems, which could be a potential research direction
in the area.
Besides, to eectively extract the useful insights from
the unstructured security data and to eectively build
an intelligent security model could be another issue. For
instance, a large amount of textual content is needed
to analyze identifying malicious domains, security inci-
dent and event management, malware family analysis,
domain classication, phishing, source code vulnerabil-
ity analysis, spam emails, etc., that are discussed brie
y
in Section 3. Therefore eectively mining the relevant
contents using natural language processing (NLP) tech-
niques, or designing a new NLP based model, could be
another research direction in the area of AI-driven cy-
bersecurity. An eective cybersecurity expert system
modeling considering IF-THEN policy rules could be
another potential research direction in the area. How-
ever, the development of large-scale rule-based systems
in the area of cybersecurity may face numerous chal-
lenges. For instance, the reasoning process in the ex-
pert system can be very complex, dicult to manage
[139]. Thus, a lightweight rule-based inference engine
that allows to reason for intelligent cybersecurity ser-
vices is important. Although several rule mining tech-
niques are popular in the area, mentioned in Section 3,
a concise set of security policy rules considering general-
ization, reliability, non-redundancy, exceptional discov-
ery, etc., could make the expert security system more
eective. Therefore, a deeper understanding and design-
ing an eective rule-based system by taking into these
properties could be another research issue in the area
of AI-driven cybersecurity. Moreover, designing security
ontologies according to today's need, or knowledge rep-
resentation model, and eventually to build an eective
conceptual security modeling, could be another poten-
tial research scope in the area.
Overall, the most important task for an intelligent
cybersecurity system is to design and build an eective
cybersecurity framework that supports the articial in-
telligence techniques, discussed in Section 3. In such
a framework, we need to take into account AI-based
advanced analytics, so that the security framework is
capable to resolve the associated issues intelligently.
Therefore, to assess the feasibility and eectiveness of
the related AI-based approaches, a well-designed cy-
bersecurity framework and experimental evaluation are
required, which is a very important direction and a ma-
jor challenge as well. Overall, we can conclude that this
paper has uncovered lots of research issues and poten-
tial future directions to resolve, discussed above, in the
area of AI-driven cybersecurity.Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1