2 Sarker et al.
therefore essential because immense amounts of data on
computers and other devices are collected, processed,
and stored by government, military, corporate, nan-
cial, medical organizations, and many others. Cyber-
security usually refers to a collection of technologies,
procedures, and practices designed to protect networks,
computers, programs, and data from attack, disruption,
or unauthorized access. It's also known as \information
technology security" or \electronic information secu-
rity". Several related terms with the concept of cyberse-
curity are brie
y discussed and summarized in Section
2. According to today's numerous needs, the conven-
tional well-known security solutions such as antivirus,
rewalls, user authentication, encryption etc. may not
be eective [36] [112] [157] [159]. The key problem with
these traditional systems is that they are normally oper-
ated by a few experienced security experts, where data
processing is carried out in an ad-hoc manner and can
therefore not run intelligently according to needs [61]
[143]. On the other hand, Articial Intelligence (AI),
which is known as the key technologies of the Fourth In-
dustrial Revolution (Industry 4.0), can play an impor-
tant role for intelligent cybersecurity services and man-
agement according to its computing power and capabil-
ities. Thus, we focus on \AI-driven Cybersecurity" to
make the cybersecurity computing process automated
and intelligent than the conventional security systems
in the area.
Articial Intelligence (AI) is the branch of com-
puter sciences that usually emphasizes the creation of
intelligent machines, thinking and functioning like hu-
mans. To intelligently solve today's various cybersecu-
rity issues, e.g., intrusion detection and prevention sys-
tem, popular AI techniques involving Machine Learning
(ML) and Deep Learning (DL) methods, the concept of
Natural Language Processing (NLP), Knowledge Rep-
resentation and Reasoning (KRR), as well as the con-
cept of knowledge or rule-based Expert Systems (ES)
modeling can be used, which are brie
y discussed in
Section 3. For instance, these techniques can be applied
for identifying malicious activities, fraud detection, pre-
dicting cyber-attacks, access control management, de-
tecting cyber-anomalies or intrusions, etc. The aim of
this paper is therefore to provide a reference guide for
those processionals from academia and industry who
want to work and research based on AI methods in the
eld of cybersecurity. Therefore, in the sense of cyber-
security, great emphasis is put on common AI-based
methods and their applicability for solving today's di-
verse security issues. Overall, this paper provides a de-
tailed view of AI-driven cybersecurity in terms of princi-
ples and modeling for intelligent and automated cyber-
security services and management through intelligentdecision making by taking into account the benets of
AI methods.
The main contributions of this paper are therefore
listed as follows:
{To provide a brief overview on the concept of AI-
driven cybersecurity for intelligent cybersecurity ser-
vices and management according to today's needs.
For this, we rst brie
y review the related methods
and systems in the context of cybersecurity to mo-
tivate our study as well as to make a position for
the term AI-driven cybersecurity.
{To present security intelligence modeling where var-
ious AI-based methods such as machine and deep
learning, natural language processing, knowledge rep-
resentation and reasoning, as well as the knowledge
or rule-based expert systems modeling are taken
into account according to our goal.
{Finally, we discuss and highlight several research di-
rections within the scope of our study, which can
help the cybersecurity researchers to do future re-
search in the area.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 provides a background and reviews the related
work in this domain. In Section 3, we discuss how var-
ious AI techniques can be used for security intelligence
modeling. In section 4, we discover and summarize sev-
eral research issues and potential future directions, and
nally, Section 5 concludes this paper.
2 Background and Related Work
In this section, we provide an overview of the relevant
AI-driven cybersecurity technologies, including dier-
ent types of cybersecurity incidents within the scope of
our study.
2.1 Basic Security Properties and CIA Triad
Condentiality, integrity, and availability, also known
as the CIA triad, is a model usually designed to guide
information security policies within an organization.
Thus to understand the security policy, the CIA triad
with the mentioned properties is important that are
discussed as below.
{Condentiality is a property of security policy that
typically refers to protecting the information and
systems from unauthorized parties. Condentiality
threat can typically target databases, application
servers, and system administrators, and can be con-
sidered as \data theft".Preprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1