AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, Security Intelligence Modeling and Research Directions 9
learning combining the supervised and unsupervised
techniques discussed above, and reinforcement learn-
ing techniques such as Monte Carlo learning, Q-
learning, Deep Q Networks [78] [141] can be used
in the area.
Fig. 3: A structure of articial neural network modeling for
detecting cyber anomalies or attacks with multiple processing
layers.
Thus the machine and deep learning methods dis-
cussed above can play a vital role to understand and
analyze the actual phenomena with cybersecurity data,
depending on the nature or characteristics of the secu-
rity features and the sucient amount of data needed
for learning. These techniques can extract insights or
useful knowledge from the given security data and even-
tually build a data-driven security model. Such models
can learn from the training data and behave accordingly
for the unseen test cases. Overall, the resultant machine
learning-based security models can make intelligent cy-
bersecurity decisions through analyzing data from the
huge amount of cyber events. Therefore, we can con-
clude that machine learning security models would be
able to alter the future of cybersecurity applications
and industry, because of their data learning capabilities,
and could be a major part in the domain of AI-driven
cybersecurity.
3.2 NLP-based Modeling
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is considered as
an important branch of AI that can make it possible
for computers to understand human language, interpret
it, and eventually determine which parts are impor-
tant in an intelligent system [139]. NLP is increasingly
used nowadays by cybercriminals and security defense
tools in the understanding and processing of unstruc-
tured data generated. NLP's ultimate aim is to extract
knowledge from unstructured data or information, i.e.,
to interpret, decipher, comprehend, and make sense ofhuman languages in a valuable way. In the following,
we discuss several parts of NLP that can be used for
intelligent cybersecurity modeling when unstructured
security content is available.
{Lexical analysis: It usually includes the arrangement
of terms being described and analyzed. Lexical anal-
ysis separates the entire chunk of text according
to the criteria into paragraphs, sentences, phrases,
or tokens such as identier, keyword, literal, etc.
For example, the lexical analysis of domain names
[84] will lead to the development of the NLP-based
model to classify the malicious domains that may
encompass the \malicious nature" of the domains
used by cybercriminals.
{Syntactic analysis: This is seen as one of the key
tools used to complete the tasks of the NLP, which
is used to determine how the natural language aligns
with the grammatical rules. The most widely used
techniques in NLP are: lemmatization, morphologi-
cal segmentation, word segmentation, part-of-speech
marking, parsing, sentence breaking, stemming, etc.
A syntactic analysis, e.g., parsing [120], may con-
tribute to developing an NLP-based model for cy-
berattack prediction, for example, to quickly extract
useful data from large quantities of public text.
{Semantic analysis: Another of the key methods used
to complete NLP assignments is semantic analy-
sis, which includes understanding the context and
perception of words and how sentences are struc-
tured. For example, for phishing classication, la-
tent semantic analysis can be used with keyword
extraction [94]. The most widely used techniques in
NLP are entity recognition (NER), word sense dis-
ambiguation, natural language generation, etc. For
example, a NER-based automated system [63], can
be used to diagnose cybersecurity situations in IoT
networks.
Several most frequently used algorithms such as Bag-
of-Words (BoW), TF-IDF (term frequency-inverse doc-
ument frequency), Tokenization and Stop Words Re-
moval, Stemming, Lemmatization, Topic Modeling, etc.
are used in the area of NLP [155]. Most of the NLP-
based modeling relies on machine and deep learning
techniques discussed above for building the resultant
data-driven model that can be used for various pur-
poses in the domain of cybersecurity. In the following,
we give examples of NLP-based security modeling.
{Detecting malicious domain names { to identify ma-
licious domain names (e.g., clbwpvdyztoepfua.lu) from
benign domains (e.g., cnn.com), the NLP methods
can be used. It helps to build a technique for detect-
ing such malicious domains in DNS trac based onPreprints  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 25 January 2021                    doi:10.20944/preprints202101.0457.v1