Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 9 of 21
5.2. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Currently, CNN is considered the best machine-learning (ML) algorithm for analyzing medical
images [ 27–29]. The reason behind this is that after ﬁltering the input images, CNN preserves the
spatial relationships. These relationships are extremely signiﬁcant in the ﬁeld of radiology and other
medical tasks. CNN has several types of layers such as convolution, pooling, rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU), and fully connected layers [ 23]. Generally, its structure consists of a convolutional layer
followed by a ReLU layer, a pooling layer, one or more convolutional layers, and one or more fully
connected layers, respectively. The key feature that characterizes CNN apart from a normal neural
network is its image structure during processing. The CNN’s main layers are described below.
5.2.1. Convolutional Layer
The convolutional layer is identiﬁed following the convolution operation. Convolution in
mathematics is deﬁned as an operation executed on two functions that yield the third one.
The third function is a convoluted (modiﬁed) form of one of the two previous functions.
The resultant (third) function yields as an amount function that translated one of the previous
functions in the case of pointwise multiplication integral of the previous functions.
The convolutional layer is composed of neuron groups that form kernels. All kernels are often the
same depth as the input and are low in size. The receptive ﬁeld is a small input area that the kernel
neurons are connected to. In the case of images (high dimension inputs), it is useless to connect whole
neurons to whole previous outputs. For instance, if the input layer has 100 neurons and an image of
10,000 pixels (a size of 100 100), this yields one million parameters. Thus, a neuron contains the
weights of only the kernel input dimension, instead of having weights for the input full dimension.
The kernels slip crosswise to input height and width for extracting high-level features and producing a
2D activation map. The kernel stride is represented as a parameter. The resultant activation maps
are stacked to form the output of the convolutional layer, which will be used for deﬁning the next
layer input. For example, by considering an image of 32 32, an activation map of 28 28 will result
when operating a convolutional layer over it. Applying extra convolutional layers will reduce the size
further and, in turn, the size of the image will signiﬁcantly be reduced. This produces a vanishing
gradient problem as well as a loss of information. To overcome this problem, padding is used. Padding
enlarges the input data size via packing across input data with constants. These constants have zero
values; hence, this operation is called “zero paddings”. When the spatial dimensions of the output
feature are similar to the feature map of the input, then it is called “the same padding”. This applies
equally to padding right and left. Consequently, if the added columns are odd, a further column to the
right is added. No padding is equivalent to “valid padding”.
On the other hand, a kernel passes over image pixels without including them in the output due to
strides. If extra complex kernels and a larger image are utilized, strides obtain how a convolutional
task operates with a kernel. More speciﬁcally, the kernel employs the stride parameter for obtaining
the number of positions to be skipped when it slides the input. Usually, convolutional layers are
followed by the ReLU layer, which enlarges its nonlinear properties but does not decrease the network
size. It also operates the activation function max_(0, x).
5.2.2. Pooling Layers
The pooling layer has two primary jobs. The ﬁrst is reducing the number of computations
performed in the network and reducing the spatial dimensions of the representation. The second is
controlling the overﬁtting issue. There are three common types of pooling layers. The ﬁrst type is
average pooling, which applies the average operation on a selected window. The second type is max
pooling, which takes the maximum value of the selected window. The third type is the global average
pooling layer, which reduces the whole input into one value. It helps reduce the spatial dimensions of
a three-dimensional tensor to a one-dimensional tensor. Average and max-pooling layers use a sliding