Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 6 of 21
tasks, with lightweight models trained from scratch perform nearly as well as standard ImageNet
transferred models [66].
4. Aim and Contribution
In this section, we list the aims and the contributions of our work.
4.1. Aim
The aims of this paper are:
 To address the issue of lack of training data for DFU classiﬁcation.
 To test whether the type of images used for TL a ects the performance or not.
 To improve the performance of the DFU classiﬁcation task.
 To employ DCNN in the task of DFU classiﬁcation.
4.2. Contributions
In this paper, we investigate the issue of same and di erent domain TL using DFU image
classiﬁcation as a case study by implementing several experiments. We have utilized the same domain
TL with the DFU classiﬁcation task. Then, we implemented the same procedure with TL from the
nature image dataset. The contributions of the paper are multi-folds:
 A new dataset has been collected which containing 1200 images of feet that have been manually
labeled by a DFU expert as normal and abnormal.
 A hybrid deep learning model has been designed that combines traditional and parallel
convolutional layers along with residual connections.
 Several training scenarios have been performed with the proposed hybrid model.
 Two pre-trained deep learning models (VGG19, ResNet50) have been trained with target datasets.
 It has been empirically proven that TL from the same domain of the target dataset can signiﬁcantly
improve performance.
 The performance of DFU classiﬁcation has been improved by attaining F1-score value of 97.6%.
5. Methodology
This section consists of four parts: datasets, CNN, transfer learning, the proposed model and
training scenarios.
5.1. Datasets
In this paper, we utilized four datasets. Two datasets represented the target datasets while the
other two datasets were employed for TL purposes.
5.1.1. Target Datasets
We presented two target datasets from di erent domains. Both datasets have approximately the
same number of images for a fair comparison. The aim of using these datasets is to test the concept of
TL from the same and di erent domain datasets. For both datasets, we divided them into 80% for
training and 20% for testing.
DFU Dataset (Dataset A): The dataset was gathered from Al-Nasiriyah Diabetic and Endocrinology
Center in Iraq and we obtained ethical approval and written consent from all relevant persons and
patients. The dataset had 1200 images of feet classiﬁed as normal and abnormal (DFU). We cropped
the region of interest to 224 224 as shown in Figure 1. The total number of cropped regions was 1477,
with 742 classiﬁed as normal and 735 classiﬁed as abnormal.