Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 11 of 21
that can be used again for various tasks in a similar ﬁeld. The learning process can be similar to
the parameters of the highest likely solution for the considered task by employing the reprocessed
features of an initially trained model. In other words, TL is the concept of employing knowledge
gained for a speciﬁc task to resolve other correlated tasks as well as to overcome the separated learning
paradigm [33].
TL helps obtain accuracy for image classiﬁcation tasks by o ering a large dataset for learning
features as in [ 33]. Many researchers have demonstrated that the use of TL in medical image
classiﬁcation tasks is e ective and e cient [ 25,27]. Additionally, training a CNN model from scratch
(invaluable dataset) will not achieve signiﬁcant outcomes. As an alternative, the solution for improving
outcomes is transfer learning.
Solving complicated issues in deep learning models requires a massive amount of data. Supervised
models demand large amounts of labeled data, which is an extremely di cult task due to the e ort
and time taken to collect and label data. Thus, this issue established the motivational basis for TL and
its outstanding performance in the medical sector inspired us to utilize it.
In traditional machine learning, the common learning process is separate and only performed on
certain models, datasets, and tasks. Hence, knowledge is neither preserved nor transferred between
models. Conversely, in deep learning, TL can employ knowledge such as weights and features of the
pre-trained model to train a new model, as well as undertake issues in the novel task that has a smaller
amount of data. TL with deep learning models is more rapid, has improved accuracy, and /or needs
less training data. The TL concept is to utilize a trained network on di erent tasks for di erent source
data then adjust it for the target task as explained in Figure 6. There are a series of steps to ﬁne-tune
the proposed model and pre-trained models which are:
 The proposed model has trained on transfer learning datasets (Dataset C once then Dataset D) for
transfer learning purposes.
 The pre-trained model has been loaded.
 The ﬁnal layers have been replaced with new layers to learn features speciﬁc to the target task.
 The ﬁne-tuned model has trained with the target dataset.
 The model accuracy has been assessed.
 The results have been deployed.
Figure 6. The concept of the transfer learning.
The procedure of transfer learning explained in Figure 7. The pre-trained models (VGG, ResNet)
fellow the same procedure except for the ﬁrst point.