Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 12 of 21
Figure 7. Transfer leaning pipeline.
5.4. Proposed Model
We have designed our hybrid model based on the study of previous state-of-the-art architectures
and the advantages of each architecture. It integrates three di erent ideas involving traditional
convolutions, parallel convolutions, and residual connections. The total number of layers of the
proposed model is 91, which are explained in Table 1 and Figure 8.
At the beginning of the model, we used two traditional convolutional layers with a ﬁlter size of
33and 5 5 to reduce the input size of the input image. We chose these two ﬁlters to avoid losing
small or large features. Picking a small ﬁlter size, such as 1 1, would act as a bottleneck that prevents
large features passing through, which could help distinguish between classes; picking a large ﬁlter size,
such as 11 11, would ignore small details that could lead to false classiﬁcation. Therefore, we adopted
average ﬁlter sizes. All convolutional layers in the model were followed by batch normalization and
ReLU. Batch normalization speeds up the training progress, while the ReLU layer aids in reducing the
eect of the vanishing gradient problem.
Traditional convolutional layers are followed by ﬁve blocks of parallel convolutional layers. Each
block consists of four parallel convolutional layers with four di erent ﬁlter sizes (1 1, 33, 55,
77). The output of these four layers is combined in the concatenation layer to pass to the next block.
The blocks are connected with long and short connections. The beneﬁts of this type of combination
are that it can integrate di erent levels of features and learn both small and large details, as having a
variety of ﬁlter sizes. Furthermore, this structure is very helpful for gradient propagation as the error
can backpropagate from multiple paths.
We employed a global average pooling layer on top of the ﬁve blocks of convolutional layers.
Subsequently, three fully connected layers with two dropout layers were employed. Lastly, Softmax
was adapted to produce the output. The global average pooling and dropout layers were used to
overcome the issue of overﬁtting.
5.5. Training Scenarios
We utilized di erent training scenarios.
1. Scenario 1: Training the proposed model from scratch with original images from target datasets.