Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 5 of 21
images which could not present a good beneﬁt for the medical society. Therefore, to validate that issue,
we have implemented several experiments in this paper for that purpose.
Based on the study of the architectures mentioned above, we have designed our proposed model
combining di erent architectures inspired by GoogleNet and ResNet with some enhancements such
as adding the global average pooling layer. We also propose a solution to tackle the lack of training
data issue.
3. Challenges and Research Gap
In this section, we present the challenges of DFU classiﬁcation and research problem of
employing TL.
3.1. Challenges in DFU Classiﬁcation
The automatic classiﬁcation of DFU has several challenges including:
 Lack of training data due to costly and time-consuming data collecting and labeling by experts.
 Patient’s ethnicity.
 Low contrast between target objects and background.
 Various image qualities (di erent capturing devices).
 Heterogeneous and complex shapes.
 Lack of a robust and e ective deep learning model to di erentiate between DFU classes.
3.2. Research Problem in Transfer Learning
It is di cult to obtain good performance with a deep learning approach due to the massive
number of images required for training. In image recognition and classiﬁcation, a deep convolutional
neural network (DCNN) with many layers can achieve excellent results, sometimes better performance
than a human, if an enormous volume of data is obtainable [ 35,60,61]. However, these applications
demand large datasets to prevent overﬁtting and generalize DCNN models properly.
There is no minimum size for the dataset in training a DCNN, but training with small datasets or
using a DCNN with fewer layers prevents the model from being highly accurate because of under
or overﬁtting issues. Models with fewer layers are less accurate because they are unable to use the
hierarchical features of large datasets. Collecting labeled datasets is extremely cost-e ective in ﬁelds
such as environmental science and medical imaging etc. [62].
In particular, in the ﬁeld of medical image analysis, most crowdsourcing workers do not have the
required medical /biological knowledge to accurately annotate medical /biological images. For that,
machine-learning researchers frequently depend on the ﬁeld specialists for labeling these images.
Indeed, this is an unproductive and costly process. Thus, producing enough amount of labels to
ﬂourish deep networks becomes impracticable.
Researchers have used various techniques to overcome the lack of training data. One of the
most common techniques is data augmentation, where data is created virtually [ 63]. Although such
techniques enhance the data by creating further images, convolutional neural network (CNN) models
still struggle with overﬁtting issues due to repeated images in data augmentation. In recent years,
many researchers have employed a TL technique where deep learning models are trained on a large
dataset, then ﬁne-tuned to train on a smaller targeted dataset [ 27]. Although TL improves performance
in many CV and pattern recognition tasks [ 64,65], it still has a fundamental challenge which is the type
of source data used for TL compared to the target dataset. For example, DCNN models trained on the
ImageNet dataset [ 60], which comprises of natural images, are utilized to enhance the performance of
the medical image classiﬁcation task. These images of the ImageNet dataset are quite di erent from
medical images, which would not improve the performance of medical image classiﬁcation. It has
been proven that di erent domain TL does not signiﬁcantly a ect performance on medical imaging