Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 2 of 21
as DFU (diabetic foot ulcer) and this particular issue has shown an increasing trend in the past few
decades [ 5–7]. In general, the percentage of diabetic patients who su er from DFU over their lifespan
is 15% [8].
Obtaining accurate ﬁgures related to the occurrence of DFU is a challenge, but it can be in the
range of 4–27% [ 9–11]. Currently, DFU is counted as a primary source of hospitalization and is the
most important cause of morbidity in diabetic patients [ 1,5,12,13]. The expectancy of DFU among DM
patients is around 20% of hospital admittances [ 14]. More speciﬁcally, once a patient acquires DFU,
there is an increased risk of ulcer evolution [ 14], which could ﬁnally lead to amputation. According to
earlier studies, the cost of a single ulcer treatment was around $17,500. In Europe and North America,
between 7 and 20% of the total expenditure on diabetes could potentially be attributed to DFU if all
costs are considered.
The process of evaluating DFU consists of di erent imperative tasks in premature diagnosis,
tracking progress, and several long-lasting activities during DFU management and treatment based on
each case. This evaluation process includes: a) evaluating the patient’s medical history, b) examination
of the DFU by a diabetic foot specialist and c) supplementary tests such as X-Ray, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and computed tomography (CT) scans could be valuable for developing the treatment
plan. Thus, computer vision (CV) algorithms are needed to evaluate visual appearances like textures,
features and color descriptors.
Using automatic telemedicine systems for DFU recognition is still in its early stages. In 2015,
Liu et al. [15,16] employed 3D surface reconstruction, infrared thermal images, and spectral imaging
to develop a smart telemedicine system. Implementing such a system requires several cost-e ective
devices as well as expert training in using these devices. For classiﬁcation, an image-capture box
was utilized by Wang et al. [ 17] to determine the DFU area and to pick up image data. It was based
on a cascaded two-stage support vector machine (SVM). They presented a super-pixel method for
segmentation and they extracted several features to execute the two-stage classiﬁcation. Note that
this system was not applied to a big dataset, although it reported favorable results. Furthermore,
to capture the images, a touching-base between the box surface and the patient’s feet was required.
However, according to the health setting, this was disallowed due to worries about controlling the
infection. Thus, the image-capture box was unworkable for image-data gathering. Goyal et al. [ 18]
have performed the DFU segmentation task. They have also surrounded skin on the full foot images.
Computer techniques constructed via image processing methods or manually engineered features
were developed to segment and classify various tissues in correlated skin lesions. For classiﬁcation,
there are two stages for traditional machine learning. The ﬁrst stage is to extract di erent features such
as color and texture descriptors on undersized outlined patches related to wound images. The second
stage is the classiﬁcation of these patches into either normal or abnormal skin [ 19–22]. However,
skin color is based on the patient’s ethnicity group, while handcrafted features are inﬂuenced via the
lighting conditions in most CV systems. Overall, every skin lesion that belongs to an ulcer or wound
is currently named as the wound. From a medical viewpoint, ulcers and wounds are thought of as
dierent; an internal problem can be caused by an ulcer, while an external problem can be caused
by a wound. Deep learning (DL), which is a novel concept in computer intelligence, is signiﬁcant
to researchers as it shows a superior capability to classical methods [ 23]. We have witnessed huge
progress in di erent CV and pattern recognition tasks due to the utilization of DL models [ 24–27]. Deep
convolutional neural network models (DCNNs) have been employed to classify DFU against normal
skin [ 28,29]. Although these methods have performed well, they still need to be optimized further.
These methods have also utilized small private DFU datasets, while deep learning models demand a
signiﬁcant amount of training data to perform well. Additionally, collecting DFU images is challenging
due to both the acquisition time and the need for an expert to label them. Furthermore, to the best of
our knowledge, there is only one small diabetic foot ulcer (DUF) dataset that is available online [ 28].
The DUF classiﬁcation task has a serious su er from lack of data to train deep learning models and it is
the same situation with most of medical imaging classiﬁcation tasks. Therefore, the lack of training