Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 3 of 21
needs to be addressed in case the performance is to be improved. One of the best solutions of the
lack of training data is transfer learning (TL). TL is a technique that stores knowledge obtained while
solving one task and applying it to a di erent task. Most medical imaging classiﬁcation tasks that have
utilized TL employed it from models that trained on the ImageNet (consists of natural images such as
pen, cars, animals) dataset. In this case, this is an unrelated learning task to medical tasks. In order
to boost the performance, TL should be from a related task. For example, the knowledge obtained
while learning to classify lung diseases could apply when trying to recognize COVID19 in the lung.
In this paper, we employ TL to solve the lack of training data for DCNNs model then we investigate
the beneﬁt of using the same and di erent sources of TL.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in
image classiﬁcation and the state-of-the-art DCNNs models. Section 3 describes the challenges and
research problem. Section 4 lists the aims and the contributions of our work. Section 5 explains the
methodology. Section 6 presents the experimental results. Finally, the conclusion of the work is drawn
in Section 7.
2. Review of the State-of-the-Art
As there are very limited research papers related to deep learning applications in DFU, we review
the role of CNNs in image classiﬁcation as explained in subsection A. In subsection B, we review several
deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) architectures and the advantage of each architecture.
2.1. CNNs in Image Classiﬁcation
Image classiﬁcation in the ﬁeld of CV is a signiﬁcant task that has been researched for several
years [30,31]. It is used as a primary task in di erent application areas including event detection [32],
scene understanding [ 33], and object tracking [ 34]. In terms of human accuracy [ 35], machine learning
is the most promising technique compared to other available approaches [ 31,36]. As deep learning
developed, CNNs were introduced as a new state-of-the-art concept in image classiﬁcation [ 30,35,37].
This type of network can overcome several challenging issues in image classiﬁcation such as occlusion,
deformation, background clutter, and changes in scale and viewpoint. The most interesting part of
CNNs is that the feature extractor and the classiﬁer are put together. However, traditional machine
learning methods have two separate steps: the ﬁrst step is the handcrafted techniques for feature
extraction; the second step is when extracted features are used to train the classiﬁer such as K-nearest
neighbor (KNN) [ 36] and support vector machine (SVM) [ 38]. Another beneﬁt of CNNs is that they
can work with binary or multi-class classiﬁcation. CNNs have shown extraordinary achievements in
several pattern recognition and CV tasks [ 30,37] and have solved many problems in computer vision.
Krizhevsky et al. [ 30] developed the CNN further when they introduced the AlexNet network.
Subsequently, several architectures were introduced after the achievements of AlexNet, such as
VGG-Net [ 37], GoogLeNet [ 39], and ResNet [ 35]. Due to the success of these models, the majority
of recently proposed CNNs is often based on them and enhances performance by adding extra
convolutional layers [ 37,39]. In general, for classiﬁcation tasks, CNN’s architecture involves several
convolutional layers (at the beginning) and fully connected layers (on the top) heaped one over the
other. These CNNs extract features via the convolutional layers and executes the classiﬁcation tasks by
the fully connected layers [37,40,41].
The number of layers, or depth of the CNN, plays a critical role in a superior classiﬁcation model
as its learning capacity is controlled by changing its depth [ 42]. Examining the proposed models in the
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) showed that accuracy is increased as the
model becomes deeper [ 30,35,37]. Thus, as the depth is enlarged, accuracy is enhanced up to saturation
level [ 35]. Afterward, increasing the depth (via stacking extra layers) will not enable the CNN model to
reduce the error [ 35]. As an alternative to the usual architecture of stacked layers, ResNet introduced a
less complicated structure with up to 152 layers (deeper network), while GoogLeNet introduced a
hierarchical structure of convolutional layers for classiﬁcation.