Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 4523 10 of 21
window (such as 2 2; 33) to reduce the size. However, the global average pooling layer performs a
more extreme dimensionality reduction by turning the whole size to one dimension [ 75] as illustrated
in Figure 5. This layer is more robust to spatial translations and helps avoid overﬁtting.
Figure 5. Pooling operations.
5.2.3. Batch Normalization
Training a network with modiﬁcations to parameters and weights will change the real data
distribution of the total inputs of the whole layers in the DNN. This matter makes them either too
small or too large and in turn, makes them incomprehensible for training the network, particularly
with activation functions that apply nonlinear saturations like tanh and sigmoid. In 2015, the concept
of batch normalization was proposed by Iofee and Szegedy [ 58]. It enhances the accuracy of the DNN,
as well as the training time. For each mini-batch, batch normalization updates the inputs to have both
zero-mean and unit variance.
5.2.4. Dropout
A limited number of solutions are used to reduce the risk of overﬁtting. One of these solutions is
the dropout layer [ 57]. In this layer, the units are arbitrarily chosen and their weights are nulliﬁed
and output; therefore, they do not inﬂuence the backpropagation or forward pass. Other techniques
involve the use of regularization and enlargement of the training dataset utilizing the techniques of
label preserving. Compared to regularization, dropout performs well in accelerating the process of
training, as well as reducing the overﬁtting risk.
5.2.5. Fully Connected Layers
These layers are similar to those found in a regular neural network. Each output of the preceding
layer is linked to each neuron of the fully connected layer. All tasks behind the fully connected layer
are similar to that of the convolutional layer; hence, the exchange between the two layers is possible.
5.2.6. Loss Layers
If there is any deviation out of the expected output, the network is penalized by employing these
layers, as they represent the last layer of the network. Several types of loss layers are available such as
sigmoid cross-entropy and Softmax. Sigmoid is utilized for predicting multi-independent probabilities
(in the interval of [0, 1]) while Softmax is employed for predicting a class from multi-disjoint classes.
5.3. Transfer Learning
The lack of training data is a common problem in deep CNN. The common solution is transfer
learning. More speciﬁcally, training the models for one task encapsulates relations in the data category