2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:14634  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93977-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/suggested repurposing weights to embed relationships between object features. Indeed, being intrinsic trans-
formation between parts and a whole invariant to the viewpoint, weights are perfectly fitted to represent them 
efficiently, and they should be automatically capable of generalizing to novel viewpoints. Moreover, we do not 
want anymore to achieve activations invariant to transformations, but groups of neurons working in synergy 
to represent different properties of the same entity. Capsules are vector representations of features, and they are 
equivariant to viewpoint transformation. So, each capsule not only represents a specific type of entity but also 
dynamically describes how the entity is instantiated. Finally, the working principle of traditional networks, in 
which a scalar unit is activated based on the matching score with learned feature detectors, is dropped alto-
gether favouring a much more robust mechanism. Indeed, with viewpoint invariant transformations encoded 
in the weights, we can make capsules predict the whole that they should be part of. So, we can consider predic -
tions accordance of low-level capsules to activate high-level capsules. That requires a process to measure their 
agreement and route capsules to their best match parent. Originally, dynamic routing was proposed as the first 
routing-by-agreement mechanism. Exploiting groups of neuron activations to make predictions and assess their 
reciprocal agreement is a much more effective way to capture covariance and should lead to models with a con-
siderably reduced number of parameters and far better generalization capabilities.
Nevertheless, little attention has been given to the efficiency aspect of capsule networks and their intrinsic 
capability to represent knowledge object transformations better. Indeed, all model solutions presented so far 
account for a large number of parameters that inevitably hide the intrinsic generalization capability that cap-
sules should provide. In this paper, we propose Efficient-CapsNet, an extreme architecture with barely 160 K 
parameters and a 85% TOPs improvement upon the original CapsNet model that is perfectly capable of achieving 
state-of-the-art results on three distinct datasets, maintaining all important aspects of capsule networks. With 
extensive experimentation with traditional CNNs and other capsule implementations, we proved the effectiveness 
of our methodology and the important contribution lead by capsules inside a network. Moreover, we propose a 
novel non-iterative, routing algorithm that can easily cope with a reduced number of capsules exploiting a self-
attention mechanism. Indeed, attention, as also max-pooling layers, can be seen as a way to route information 
inside a network. Our proposed solution exploits similarities between low-level capsules to cluster and routs 
them to more promising high-level capsules. Overall, the main contribution of our work lies in:
• Deep investigation of the generalization power of networks based on capsules, drastically reducing the num-
ber of trainable parameters compared to previous literature research studies.
• The Conceptualization and development of an efficient, highly replicable, deep learning neural network based 
on capsules able to reach state-of-the-art results on three distinct datasets.
• The introduction of a novel non-iterative, highly parallelizable routing algorithm that exploits a self-attention 
mechanism to route a reduced number of capsules efficiently.
All of our training and testing code are open source and publicly available (https:// github. com/ EscVM/ Effic  
ient-  CapsN  et). The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. “ Related works ” covers the related work on 
capsule networks, their developments in the latest years and practical applications. “ Methods ” provides a com -
prehensive overview of the methodology, network architecture and its routing algorithm. “ Results ” discusses 
the experimentation and results with three datasets, MNIST, smallNorb and MultiMNIST. Moreover, it provides 
an introspect analysis of the inner operation of capsules inside a network. Finally, “ Conclusion ” draws some 
conclusions and future directions.
Figure 1.  Compressed representation of a simple CNN with max-pooling layers for spatial reduction and two 
input objects obtained with a plain spatial translation. Max-pooling operations are schematized in such a way 
that their primitive routing role is highlighted for both digits. Low-level features detected in the earlier stage of 
the network are progressively routed to common high-level features. So, the model is translation invariant but 
gradually loses relevant object localization information.