3
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:14634  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93977-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Related works
As already devised in the introduction to this paper, introducing a vectorial organization of neurons to encap -
sulate both probability and instantiation parameters of a detected feature was first proposed by Hinton et al.8 
introducing the new concept of capsules. Sabour et al.10 proposed the first CNN able to incorporate two layers 
of capsules, called CapsNet, and introduced the routing-by-agreement concept, with their dynamic routing. 
Several researchers have then investigated the routing process, proposing alternative ways to measure accordance 
between low-lever capsules in activating high-level ones.
Xi et al.11 proposed a variant to the squash activation function used in the original CapsNet. Wang et al.12 
gave a formal description of the original dynamic routing as an optimization problem that minimizes clustering 
loss and proposes a slightly modified version. Lenssen et al.13 proposed group capsule networks, claiming they 
preserve equivariance for the output pose and invariance for activations. The same authors of the original Cap -
sNet adapted the Expectation-Maximization algorithm to cluster similar votes, and route  predictions14. Spectral 
capsule  network15 was based on this last work, and modified routing basing it on Singular Value Decomposition 
of votes from the previous layers. Ribeiro et al.16 proposed a routing derived from Variational Bayes for fitting 
a gaussian mixture model. Gu et al.17 focused on making capsule networks robust to affine transformations by 
sharing transformation matrices between all low-level capsules and each high-level ones. Paik et al.18 put in dis-
cussion the effectiveness of the routing algorithm presented so far, claiming that better results can be obtained 
with no routing at all. On the other hand, Venkataraman et al.19 proved that routing-by-agreement mechanism 
is essential to ensure compositional structures of capsule-based networks. Byerly et al.20, instead, proposed a 
new architecture based on a variation of the original capsule idea, named Homogeneous Filter Capsules, and 
with no routing between layers.
The attention mechanism allows to dynamically give more importance to particular features that are consid-
ered more relevant for the problem under analysis. Such an idea gained great popularity in a number of Deep 
Learning applications and have been implemented in natural language  processing21,22 or computer  vision3,23–26. 
Choi et al.27 applied the attention mechanism to capsule routing with a feed-forward operation with no itera -
tions. However, they selected low-level capsules by multiplying their activations to a parameter vector learnt with 
backpropagation, and they did not measure agreement. In this way, the original idea of routing-by-agreement is 
drastically modified. Tsai et al.28 slightly changed the original dynamic routing to compute the agreement between 
a pose of a high-level capsule and the votes of the low-level capsules by an inverted dot-product mechanism. 
They proposed a concurrent iterative routing instead of a sequential one, performing the routing procedure 
simultaneously on all the capsule layer. Huang et al.29 proposed a dual attention mechanism by adapting the 
squeeze-and-excitation  block3 to both Primary and Digit Caps, together with a change in the squash activation 
function. Peng et al.30 applied capsules in addition with a self-attention based backbone for an entity relation 
task in natural language processing. However, both these last two works used attention mechanisms as part of 
the computational graph of the proposed networks, without modifying the original dynamic routing proposed 
by Sabour et al.10. In this sense, our approach strongly differs from theirs since we first propose self-attention 
as a substitute routing algorithm between capsules. Capsule-based networks have also been recently used for a 
variety of applications. For example, they have been applied for natural language  processing30–33, with GANs for 
image  generation34, computer  vision35–37 or  medicine38,39.
Methods
Efficient‑CapsNet. The overall architecture of Efficient-CapsNet is depicted in Fig.  2. As a high-level 
description, the network can be broadly divided into three different parts in which the first two are the main 
instruments of the primary capsule layer to interact with the input space. Indeed, each capsule exploits the below 
convolutional layer filters to convert pixel intensities into a vectorial representation of the feature it acts for. So, 
the activities of neurons within an active capsule embody the various properties of the entity it learnt to repre-
sent during the training process. As stated in Sabour et al.10, these properties can include many different types of 
instantiation parameter such as pose, texture, deformation, and among those the existence of the feature itself. 
In our implementation, the length of each vector is used to represent the probability that the entity represented 
by a capsule is present. That is compatible with our self-attention routing algorithm that does not require any 
sensible objective function minimization. Moreover, it makes biological sense as it does not use large activities to 
represent absent entities. Finally, the last part of the network operates under the self-attention algorithm to rout 
low-level capsules to the whole they represent.
More formally, in the case of a single instance (i ), the model takes as input an image that can be represented as 
a tensor X with a shape H×W×F where H , W and C  are the height, width, and channels/features of the single 
input image. Before entering the primary caps layer, we extract local features from the input image X by means 
of a set of convolutional and Batch Normalization  layers40. Each output of a convolution layer l  is constituted by 
a convolutional operation with a certain kernel dimension k , number of feature maps f , stride s=1 and ReLU 
as activation function:
Overall, the first convolutional part of the network can be modelled as a single function HConv that maps the 
input image onto a higher dimensional space that facilitates the capsule creation. On the other hand, the second 
part of the network is the main instrument used by primary capsules to create a vectorial representation of the 
features they represent. As depicted in Fig.  3, it is a depthwise separable convolution with linear activation that 
performs just the first step of a depthwise spatial convolution operation, acting separately on each channel. 
Moreover, imposing a kernel dimension k×k and a number of filters f  equal to the output dimensions H×W (1) Fl+1(Xl)=ReLU/parenleftBig
Conv k×k(Xl)/parenrightBig