10
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:14634  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93977-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/is behaving similarly to the original  CapsNet10, with the ability to encode combinations of different transforma-
tions of the digit. Retraining CapsNet also obtains similar behaviour with the proposed self-attention routing. 
A Convolutional Neural Network with a fake capsule layer, i.e. a vector instead of a scalar for each output class, 
also demonstrates the ability to encode actual shape, position and orientation information. On the other hand, 
considering the last features of a classical CNN, we are not able to reproduce this behaviour. That suggests that 
a capsule organization of the output, in which each digit has its instantiation parameters and the activation is 
measured by the length of the vector, is fundamental for a meaningful embedding of the information.
To further investigate the ability of the proposed model to capture meaningful information in the components 
of the output capsules, we study the equivariance to transformations with a method similar to the one proposed 
by Choi et al.27. For each test image we generate the images corresponding to the 11 translations between [− 5, 
+ 5] pixels on both the axes and to the 51 rotations between [− 25, + 25] degrees. If the model is behaving as 
expected, we should see that each affine transformation (translation on x, translation on y, rotation) is indepen-
dently linearly encoded in the activations of the correct output capsule. We verify it, by computing the Principal 
Component Analysis on the output vectors for each type of transformation. We denote as K  the number of trans -
formed images and with N  the number of output classes and we collect the output predictions ui,i=1,...,K . 
We center the data points and we compute the Singular Value Decomposition on the covariance matrix C :
As a linearity metric, we consider the fraction of the first eigenvalue σ1 of the matrix Σ over the sum of all its 
eigenvalues. Since the eigenvalues represent the variance of the original data points explained by each component 
of the PCA, if the transformations are linearly encoded, we should have a high fraction of the variance captured 
with just a single component, thus a high first eigenvalue ratio.
We perform this analysis on both the original  CapsNet10 and our model. The average results on all the test 
images are shown in Table  5, along with a comparison with the PCA performed on randomly generated vectors 
with the same dimension. Efficient-CapsNet shows higher linearity with respect to the original CapsNet in the 
encoding of affine transformations in the output capsule space. Figure  8 presents the average cumulative variance 
explained increasing the number of PCA components on the whole test set. For all the three transformations, 
Effienct-CapsNet is able to capture all the information with just two components, showing an almost perfectly 
linear behaviour with respect to the random example. That shows how our architecture can correctly embed 
position and orientation information of the recognized digit in the output vector components.(8) zi=ui−u
(9) C=1
KK/summationdisplay
i=1zizT
i
(10) C=UΣUT
(11)r=σ1/summationtextN
j=1σj
Figure 7.  Effect on the digit reconstruction of the addition of perturbations to the output capsule values with 
different tested methodologies. All networks are able to embed shape, position and orientation information of 
the input digit except for the classical CNN with softmax output. That suggests that the capsule structure of the 
output, in which each class has its feature vector, is fundamental to get interpretable output embeddings.