1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:14634  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93977-0
www.nature.com/scientificreportsEfficient‑CapsNet: capsule network 
with self‑attention routing
Vittorio Mazzia1,2,3*, Francesco Salvetti1,2,3 & Marcello Chiaberge1,2
Deep convolutional neural networks, assisted by architectural design strategies, make extensive use 
of data augmentation techniques and layers with a high number of feature maps to embed object 
transformations. That is highly inefficient and for large datasets implies a massive redundancy 
of features detectors. Even though capsules networks are still in their infancy, they constitute a 
promising solution to extend current convolutional networks and endow artificial visual perception 
with a process to encode more efficiently all feature affine transformations. Indeed, a properly 
working capsule network should theoretically achieve higher results with a considerably lower number 
of parameters count due to intrinsic capability to generalize to novel viewpoints. Nevertheless, 
little attention has been given to this relevant aspect. In this paper, we investigate the efficiency of 
capsule networks and, pushing their capacity to the limits with an extreme architecture with barely 
160 K parameters, we prove that the proposed architecture is still able to achieve state‑of ‑the‑art 
results on three different datasets with only 2% of the original CapsNet parameters. Moreover, we 
replace dynamic routing with a novel non‑iterative, highly parallelizable routing algorithm that 
can easily cope with a reduced number of capsules. Extensive experimentation with other capsule 
implementations has proved the effectiveness of our methodology and the capability of capsule 
networks to efficiently embed visual representations more prone to generalization.
In the last decade, convolutional neural networks (CNN) drastically changed artificial visual perception, achiev-
ing remarkable results in all core fields of computer vision, from image  classification1–3 to object  detection4–6 and 
instance  segmentation7. In contrast to other deep neural architectures, the main characteristic of a CNN is its 
capability to efficiently replicate the same knowledge at all locations in the spatial dimension of an input image. 
Indeed, using translated replicas of learned feature detectors, features learned at one spatial location are available 
at other locations. Local shared connectivity coupled with spatial reduction layers, such as max-pooling, extract 
local translation-invariant features. So, as shown in Fig.  1, object translations in the input space do not affect 
activations of high-level neurons, because max-pooling layers are able to rout low-level features between the 
layers. Nevertheless, translation invariance achieved by CNN comes at the expense of losing the precise encoding 
of objects location. Moreover, CNNs are not invariant to all other affine transformations.
During the years, different techniques have been developed to counterbalance that problem. Most of the 
adopted common solutions make use of an increased number of feature maps in such a way that the network 
is endowed with enough feature detectors for all additional transformations. Data augmentation techniques 
are used to produce the different pose to be learned, and residual connections and normalization techniques 
allow to enlarge networks filter capacity. However, all those additional mechanisms only partially make up for 
the intrinsic limitations of CNN, preventing the model from recognising different transformations of the same 
objects encountered during training. Indeed, CNNs trained on large datasets have a massive redundancy of 
features detectors and difficulties to scale to thousands of objects with their respective viewpoints.
Hinton et al.8 proposed to make neurons cooperate in a new form of unit, dubbed capsules, where individual 
activations inside them do not represent the presence of a specific feature but different properties of the same 
entity anymore. In their paper they showed that groups of neurons, if properly trained, are able to produce a 
whole vector of numbers, explicitly representing the pose of the detected entity as in classical hand-engineered 
 features9. After six years, Sabour et al.10 presented a first architecture, named CapsNet, that introduced capsules 
inside a CNN. The major insight of the paper is that viewpoint changes have complicated effects on the pixel 
space, but simple linear effects on the pose that represents the relationship between an object-part and the whole. 
In a generic fully-connected or convolutional deep neural network, weights are used to encode feature detectors 
and neuron activations to represent the presence of a specific feature. So, fixing weights after training, the model 
is not able to detect simple transformation patterns not encountered during training. On the other hand, they OPEN
1Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy. 2PIC4SeR, 
Politecnico di Torino Interdepartmental Centre for Service Robotics, Turin, Italy. 3SmartData@PoliTo, Big Data and 
Data Science Laboratory, Turin, Italy. *email: vittorio.mazzia@polito.it