103 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
of photos scrapped without permission from various social 
media sites and used to train their opaque AI system. Simi-
larly, the AI system outlined in an academic publication 
made headlines claiming that the “[w]ith 80 percent accu-
racy and with no racial bias, the software can predict if 
someone is a criminal based solely on a picture of their face. 
The software is intended to help law enforcement prevent 
crime" [48]. An open response letter to the publication outlet 
signed by over 1000 experts and researchers made clear that 
“there is no way to develop a system that can predict or iden -
tify “criminality” that is not racially biased—because the 
category of “criminality” itself is racially biased” [10, 27].
Major scandals (see, e.g., Enron) led to new standards 
in business ethics, with businesses disclosing information 
on ethically sensitive topics like integrity and societal or 
environmental impacts [132, 161]. Corporate Social Respon-
sibility (CSR) reporting or non-financial reporting has sub-
stantially evolved in recent years, providing an essential 
resource for standardizing and comparing corporate conduct 
for both strategic and ethical reasons [96, 141, 162]. The 
non-profit organization Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) 
and IIRC offer standardized key performance indicators for 
CSR reporting plus reporting guidance for the material dis-
closure of stakeholder dialog engagement [88, 102, 171]. 
The CSR reporting standards strive to support corporations 
in their efforts to transparently share economic, environmen-
tal, and social information with their stakeholders [88]. The 
main goal is to enhance the quality and comparability of the 
reported information, based on specified disclosure metrics 
[59]. Thus, allowing stakeholders to assess reliable and con-
sistent information about a firms societal and environmental 
impacts. CSR reporting can even match mandatory financial 
reporting standards via digital-data-based reporting taxono-
mies like XBRL as established by the U.S. securities and 
exchange commission for financial reporting [ 138]. Some 
technology companies such as the German Telekom already 
include ‘data protection and data security’ chapters in their 
CSR reporting [33]. And (local) governments are moving 
forward with legislation that requires reporting on auto-
mated decision systems, although remaining vague about 
what needs to be disclosed [30, 158]. These examples show 
that transparent and standardized disclosure on algorithms 
and data collection processes are undoubtedly part of the 
future of a more institutionalized AI ethics as corporate digi -
tal responsibility [70].
Whereas CSR reporting has come a long way from often 
incomparable ‘glossy’ public relations reports to established 
standards with clearly delineated disclosure metrics, AI 
ethics reporting can build on these insights to advance the 
recent discourse about ‘what and how ’ to report about AI 
systems [7 , 77, 163, 168]. The GRI and similar standards for 
CSR information disclosure can serve as a starting point to 
determine the type of information that can help stakeholders assess corporate conduct and increase the transparency of 
AI systems and the handling of personal data [86]. The 
challenge for AI ethics reporting lies in the timely provi-
sion reliable and comparable information on algorithmic 
systems based on disclosure metrics [59]. Recent research 
has already begun outlining types of information that may 
be relevant in this regard, such as fairness metrics, impact 
assessments, bias testing, system accuracy, and workflow 
verification [16, 92, 101, 145]. Analogue to the Environ -
ment, Social, and Governance (ESG) framework Herden 
et al. [70], outline a list of 20 items indicating highly rel-
evant information domains, such as energy and carbon foot-
print, socially compatible automation, and data responsibil-
ity and stewardship.
Recent proposals for the regulation of AI in the Euro-
pean Union foresee reporting obligations for providers of 
high-risk AI systems, which encompass the disclosure of AI-
related incidents and malfunctioning [ 44]. In addition, the 
EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) strives to 
establish transparent insights into algorithmic decision-mak -
ing aimed at individuals as well as third-party and regulatory 
oversight [85]. In contrast to CSR reporting, this regulatory 
approach goes beyond the provision of a single report to 
cover all stakeholders and includes an “individual right to 
explanation.” Thus, providing so-called data-subjects and 
experts distinct kinds of information [85]. In practice, this 
profound approach to transparency creates high costs for 
corporations and raises doubts about how “meaningful” 
the presented information is for individuals [34]. In light of 
these and other challenges, Edwards and Veale [37] suggest 
to focus on creating better algorithms a priori, via certifica-
tion systems and privacy by design requirements. Overall 
stimulating the discussion on the formalization of AI ethics 
information disclosure is an important topic for practitioners 
and academics.
3.3  Corporate governance and regulation
Next to ethics boards and committees, corporations and 
legislators have created soft-law guidelines to govern AI 
ethics. Soft-law guidelines represent voluntary measures 
to govern the ethical development and deployment of AI 
[110]. In essence, the guidelines build on high-level ethical 
principles and values to align AI systems with the common 
good [159]. Over 200 such soft-law guidelines have been 
issued by public and private actors within the past five years 
compiled and clustered in the repository of Standards Watch 
[117, 150]. A recent systematic review by Jobin et al. [79] 
has analyzed the ethical content of 84 of them, finding that 
the guidelines converge in terms of five major principles: (1) 
transparency, (2) justice and fairness, (3) non-maleficence, 
(4) responsibility, and (5) privacy. However, Jobin [80] cau-
tions, highlighting that “despite an apparent convergence