Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-022-00150-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Towards AI ethics’ institutionalization: knowledge bridges 
from business ethics to advance organizational AI ethics
Mario D. Schultz1  · Peter Seele1 
Received: 26 October 2021 / Accepted: 28 February 2022 / Published online: 21 March 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This paper proposes to generate awareness for developing Artificial intelligence (AI) ethics by transferring knowledge from 
other fields of applied ethics, particularly from business ethics, stressing the role of organizations and processes of institu-
tionalization. With the rapid development of AI systems in recent years, a new and thriving discourse on AI ethics has (re-)
emerged, dealing primarily with ethical concepts, theories, and application contexts. We argue that business ethics insights 
may generate positive knowledge spillovers for AI ethics, given that debates on ethical and social responsibilities have been 
adopted as voluntary or mandatory regulations for organizations in both national and transnational contexts. Thus, business 
ethics may transfer knowledge from five core topics and concepts researched and institutionalized to AI ethics: (1) stake-
holder management, (2) standardized reporting, (3) corporate governance and regulation, (4) curriculum accreditation, and 
as a unified topic (5) AI ethics washing derived from greenwashing. In outlining each of these five knowledge bridges, we 
illustrate current challenges in AI ethics and potential insights from business ethics that may advance the current debate. At 
the same time, we hold that business ethics can learn from AI ethics in catching up with the digital transformation, allowing 
for cross-fertilization between the two fields. Future debates in both disciplines of applied ethics may benefit from dialog 
and cross-fertilization, meant to strengthen the ethical depth and prevent ethics washing or, even worse, ethics bashing.
Keywords AI ethics · Business ethics · AI ethics washing · Stakeholder management · Standardized reporting · Corporate 
governance and regulation · Curriculum accreditation
1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) ethics as a discipline is still in the 
making—given not only the novelty of pervasive and power -
ful AI as such but even more the societal and commercial 
use and implications, raising questions of moral reasoning, 
normative controversy, as well as governance and regulation 
[149, 154]. This article argues that some structural analo-
gies from other applied ethics fields may serve as knowledge 
transfer bridges for AI ethics and provide cross-fertilization. 
We thereby build on a long tradition of cross-fertilization and knowledge transfer between subfields of applied ethics 
[38, 74, 123, 124]. Recently, a proposal to adopt medical 
ethics insights to the broader field of AI ethics has been 
published with important spillovers [166]. In analogy, we 
propose to adopt insights from the field of business ethics to 
advance the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics, 
as ethical concern about environmental and societal issues 
have produced experience with institutionalization, regula-
tion, and proposing management procedures for tackling 
ethical issues in corporate environments [24, 133]. Thus, 
insights about the success and failures of institutionalizing 
ethics may help advance the discussion about AI ethics [32, 
69, 149]. In turn, business ethics can gain by catching up 
with the recent challenges arising with AI in organizational 
contexts.
Broadly defined, business ethics focuses on “the study of 
business situations, activities, and decisions where issues of 
right and wrong are addressed” [31]. In this sense, business 
ethics comprises the study of the collective or ‘legal entity’ 
that produces goods and services, as well as its individual  * Mario D. Schultz 
 mario.schultz@usi.ch
 Peter Seele 
 peter.seele@usi.ch
1 Corporate Social Responsibility and Business Ethics, Ethics 
and Communication Law Center (ECLC), USI Università 
della Svizzera italiana, Via Buffi 13, CH-6900 Lugano, 
Switzerland