100 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
members and external stakeholders related to the business. 
From this perspective, technology corporations can be seen 
as powerful and pioneering collectives that maintain close 
relationships with governments and regulators via public 
affairs, lobbying, and corporate political activity, sometimes 
also close collaborations regarding security and intelligence 
[6, 71].
Corporate misconduct and shady business practices have 
substantially contributed to the growth of business ethics 
as a discipline and, in a broader vein, the advancement of 
governance and regulation [132, 161]. Over the past dec-
ades, business ethics has built a profound literature body 
dealing with various corporate scandals and implementing 
positive organizational ethics [24, 122]. Some of these eth-
ics and (corporate) social responsibility discussions have 
been gradually formalized and led to voluntary (soft), and 
mandatory (hard) law, guiding business practices in both 
national and transnational realms [28, 133], thus, triggering 
an institutionalization of organizational ethics [83, 98, 146]. 
Nonetheless, corporate misconduct and challenges with 
implementing ethics in firms’ daily practices persist, indi-
cating limitations of institutionalizing ethics in businesses 
[7, 8, 95, 119, 126]. Consequently, AI ethics may gain from 
insights into both the success and failures of institutional-
izing business ethics in recent decades.
In the following, we suggest five well-researched and 
institutionalized topics and concepts established for dec-
ades in business ethics that may help to advance the current 
debate and institutionalization of AI ethics: (1) stakeholder 
management, (2) reporting on non-financial digital issues, 
(3) corporate governance and regulation, (4) AI/tech ethics 
in tertiary education, and, the overarching topic, (5) Green-
washing and digital ethics washing. Thus, we will outline 
the new and thriving discourse on AI ethics of recent years 
as a (sub-) discipline of the broader field of applied eth-
ics, conjointly with business ethics as a valuable source of 
knowledge about the success and failures of institutional-
izing organizational ethics [32, 51, 69, 142, 149]. We then 
depict each of the five core concepts by elaborating on the 
current AI ethics challenges while highlighting the knowl-
edge transfer bridge from business ethics. Ultimately, we 
point out where limitations and potential for cross-fertiliza-
tion between business and AI ethics arise, stressing the value 
of joining forces between applied ethics fields.
2  AI ethics as a (sub‑) discipline of applied 
ethics
In the following, we outline that AI ethics is recommended 
to be integrated into the canon of applied ethics as a dis-
tinct field. So far, applied ethics as a field of ethics deals 
with “all systematic efforts to understand and to resolve moral problems that arise in some domain of practical 
life, […] or with some general issue of social concern” 
[174]. Within the (traditional) field of applied ethics, as 
Winkler continues, three major subfields are salient: bio-
medical, environmental, and business ethics. Whereas 
bio(medical) ethics revolves around issues of ethical con-
cern in medicine and biomedical research, environmental 
ethics is more future-oriented, focusing on the sustainable 
preservation of the earth’s ecosystems and the biosphere 
[174]. Further, business ethics, which will be central to 
the arguments presented below, is concerned with ethical 
issues arising in professional contexts, and that goes along 
with corporations’ conduct. All three subfields have grown 
over several decades, building a substantial research body 
and transitioning beyond a philosophical sub-discipline of 
applied ethics. For example, business ethics is considered 
an established field in general management and academic 
discipline, with “chairs, societies, master’s programs, con-
ferences, and dedicated journals” [122, 139]. Similarly, 
bioethics is considered a well-established field in biomedi-
cal research and public health, substantially contributing 
to advancing the practice of medicine [ 165]. Beyond these 
salient subfields, several other important research areas 
of applied ethics exist [for a profound overview, see, e.g., 
[23].
A new and thriving discourse of applied ethics has 
gradually moved into the public and scholarly spotlight in 
the past seven years: AI ethics. AI ethics as “a part or an 
extension of computer ethics” is thereby closely related 
to or sometimes used as an equivalent for digital ethics, 
cyberethics, tech ethics, information ethics, data ethics, 
internet ethics, and machine and robot ethics [35, 73, 98, 
103, 128, 149, 154, 156]. AI has spread rapidly across 
many areas of everyday life, driven by advancements in 
several approaches of computer sciences and particularly 
machine learning techniques, such as decision trees, sup-
port vector machines, neural nets, and deep learning (see, 
e.g., [ 29, 164]). With the gradual commercialization and 
deployment of AI across multiple sectors, such as self-
driving cars, job applicant assessment, bank lending, and 
autonomous weapon systems, AI decision-making ques-
tions have become a major concern [17, 94, 98, 125].
Critique has been raised about AI’s predictive and clas-
sificatory potential, leading to systemic errors and adverse 
outcomes for individuals and society. Numerous recent 
examples have shown that even unintended errors in AI’s 
design and training process can trigger profound ethical 
challenges regarding discrimination, fairness, privacy, and 
accountability [10, 39]. As a consequence, the study of the 
ethics of AI has become a salient focal point of academic 
discourse and drawn the attention of practitioners, policy -
makers, and the general public [114]. Seen as a continu-
ation and extension of the computer ethics discourse, AI