101 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
ethics is still in an early stage dealing with the institution-
alization of ethics to address ethical challenges raised in 
organizational environments [69, 98, 149]. As Powers and 
Ganascia [125] note: “[t]he ethics of AI may be a “work in 
progress,” but it is at least a call that has been answered.”
2.1  AI ethics building on the tradition of knowledge 
transfer and cross‑fertilization in applied ethics
This article strives to contribute to the progressing work 
in AI ethics, seeking to shed light on knowledge transfer 
bridges from the field of business ethics [98]. Thus, under -
lining how AI ethics may benefit from drawing on previous 
knowledge and cross-fertilizing with other applied ethics 
disciplines. In this regard, we build on a long tradition of 
reciprocal enrichment and knowledge sharing between sub-
fields of applied ethics [38, 74, 123, 124]. To illustrate this 
point, one may consider Eiser et al. [38] and Poitras [123] 
outlining the common ground between medical and busi-
ness ethics; Hoffman [74] exploring the interconnections 
between environmental and business ethics; and Potter [124] 
linking medical and environmental ethics. The most recent, 
hands-on approach of such a mutually enriching knowledge 
transfer has been published by Carissa Véliz [166]. Véliz 
[166] adopts insights from medical ethics to AI ethics. The 
analogy between the two “is quite close,” but as Véliz also 
writes, “the analogy between medical and digital ethics 
is not perfect, however. The digital context is much more 
political than the medical one, as well as more dominated 
by private forces, and it will have to develop its own ethi-
cal practices” [166]. In light of this accurate description, 
this article proposes to adopt insights in analogy to Vèliz 
from the well-established field of business ethics to AI eth-
ics. Therefore, this paper is not to present a ‘better’ analogy 
but to complement and empower Véliz's [166] work with a 
selection of well-researched and institutionalized topics and 
concepts established for decades in business ethics. Thereby 
hoping to advance AI ethics by a multilateral perspective, 
ideally joining forces from various established ethics fields 
(see also [ 32, 51]). Given the scale and frequency of busi -
ness scandals of the past decades, there is a lot to learn from 
business ethics on tackling ethical challenges concerning 
institutionalizing organizational ethics [83, 146]. As Ven-
kataramakrishnan notes [167]: “[t]he assumption that tech 
ethics is mutually exclusive with innovation is at best lazy; 
so is the view that ethical treatment is an “optional” extra 
for companies that can afford it. […] Other sectors, such as 
coal and oil, have faced a reckoning over the impact they 
have on society; there is no reason why technology should 
not do the same.” Over the past decades, many ethical and 
social responsibility debates have been translated into volun-
tary and mandatory regulation in national and transnational 
perspectives. Consequently, in the following, we portray five knowledge bridges to connect business and AI ethics, 
explaining today’s challenge in AI ethics followed by the 
respective business ethics concept we propose to adopt con-
cerning the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics 
(Fig.  1).
3  Five business ethics areas to advance AI 
ethics
3.1  Stakeholder management
The digital transformation driven by AI and algorithmic 
decision-making comes with new and often invisible or 
unclear societal impacts [3 ]. Related ethical issues often 
remain blurry (job loss, dehumanization, singularity) or 
technologically mediated (face recognition, privacy (by 
design)), and few influential non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) address AI ethics.1 Initially, AI ethics boards 
and committees were created to engage with societal con-
cerns. However, some have mired in controversy, dissolved 
shortly after their launch [94], or have ethicists step down 
[4]. Thus, they are considered a public relations measure or 
ethical façade, which critics have labeled as ‘ethics washing’ 
or ‘machine washing’ [11, 108, 148].
Here, the stakeholder management approach may offer 
guidance on openly and systematically addressing ethical 
issues of AI to initiate dialog, participation, and delibera-
tion. In 1984 stakeholder theory and management were 
introduced to counter the dominance of shareholder or stock -
holder theory [52, 54]. Whereas shareholder theory claims 
that the social responsibility of corporations is to increase 
profits, stakeholder theory underlines that corporations have 
to actively manage relations with stakeholders, defined as 
everyone who affects or is affected by the company [14]. In 
the course of the past decades, stakeholder theory became a 
highly influential framework to analyze ethical problems that 
arise in corporate decision-making [53]. However, stake-
holder theory also attracted criticism, helpful to understand 
where its theoretical and practical limitations lie. Orts and 
Strudler [119] summarized the central weaknesses of stake-
holder theory in three points: (1) the issue of defining and 
identifying stakeholders (2) the semantic vagueness and con-
ceptual flexibility when it comes to approaching concrete 
stakeholder problems; and (3) the challenge of balancing 
conflicting stakeholder interests in corporate decision-mak -
ing without a common measure. Banerjee [7 ] also takes up 
1 Algorithm Watch and Opendatawatch are one of the few excep-
tions, but still not (yet) on the level as well-known social and envi-
ronmental NGOs, such as Greenpeace, Amnesty International or Lob-
byWatch.