102 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
this point, warning about “stakeholder colonialism” when 
stakeholder theory is utilized as a means to regulate stake-
holder behavior. As a consequence, the risk arises that cor -
porations focus unilaterally on stakeholders with a financial 
or competitive influence on the firm, while disregarding the 
interests of marginalized stakeholder groups [7 ].
First attempts to define and engage stakeholders in AI 
ethics exist [3 , 5, 97, 169]. Still, a similar rollout as has 
happened in business ethics 35 years ago is yet to come. 
In this regard, stakeholder theory as a concept for strategic 
organizational management provides a systematic approach 
to identifying, addressing, and balancing the competing 
demands of individuals and groups affected by technology 
companies [36, 53]. As stressed by Ayling and Chapman [5 ], 
stakeholders of technology firms are those “who either have 
direct roles in the production and deployment of AI tech-
nologies or who have legitimate interests in the usage and 
impact of such technologies.” In light of the critique above, 
the complexity and opposing nature of stakeholder interests 
make applying stakeholder theory in practice challenging 
[119]. However, the relative adaptability of the theory as 
a managerial instrument to respond to moral demands of 
internal and external stakeholders has been outlined in many 
types of organizations and sectors, including healthcare 
institutions, NGOs, and recently, on-demand labor platforms 
[100]. Proper stakeholder management in AI ethics means 
to go beyond an ethical façade and address the interests and demands of everyone who affects or is affected by products 
and services featuring AI, regardless of their saliency or 
relative power [5 , 53]. Consequently, engaging with stake-
holder theory can advance practice-driven approaches of AI 
ethics, while shedding new light on the theory of the firm 
when discussing narrow and broad definitions of stakehold -
ers in digital environments [70].
3.2  Reporting on non‑financial digital issues
A core challenge of AI ethics is the opacity and obfusca-
tion of algorithms and third-party data collection [ 22, 40]. 
Open source as a transparent alternative remains to a large 
extent, a niche segment. The reasons for that are manifold 
(patents, protecting business models, value chains). How -
ever, frequent scandals shed light on ethical issues, where 
AI and data are used for political surveillance, disinforma-
tion, or manipulation [ 58, 67, 131]. Often organizations 
and AI developer teams make profound claims about how 
effectively their developed algorithms perform. Yet, without 
giving insights into neither the training data nor the code 
underlying the algorithm. The opacity and obfuscation are 
most striking in the context of law enforcement technology 
involving AI. A recent scandal involving the corporation 
Clearview, offering a facial recognition app to law enforce-
ment agencies, made this evident [72]. Hill [72] outlines that 
the corporation built a large-scale database with millions 
4. AI/T ech E thics in  
Tertiary Education 3. Corpo rate  
Governance and 
Regulation 2. St andardiz ed  
Reporting 1. St akeholder 
Management Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Doubts about credibility and moral authority of AI ethics  
• Ethics washing: as a façade to avoid regulation and ethics bashing trivializing ethics and moral philosophy  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Businesses perceived as actors that strive to dominate and shape both market and non-market spheres, via public affairs, lobby ing, corporate political activity  
• The greenwashing concept with its various typologies as means to study ethics washing regarding corporate AI communication and action  
Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Opacity and obfuscation of algorithms  
and third-party data collection 
• Training data and code of algorithms  
remain undisclosed without  
possibilities to review  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Standardized CSR reporting provides 
comparative insights into corporate  
conduct related to social and 
environmental impacts (via e.g., the 
Global Reporting Intuitive guidelines) 
• Transparent and standardized 
disclosure on algorithms and data 
collection as one pathway for 
institutionalizing AI ethics Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Ethics boards and soft-law guidelines  
as voluntary measures to govern  
ethical AI  
• Both with little relevance for practice, 
as boards lack competencies and 
guidelines are based on high-level  
ethical principles  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Industry self-regulation comes with  
conceptual and practical limits that  
may even turn it into a lobbying 
instrument  
• Business ethics insights on soft and 
hard-law, co- and self-regulation, and 
the institutionalization of industry 
standards can prove a helpful  
perspective on governing ethical 
challenges of AI  Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Lack of (standardized) ethics curricula  
in higher education of AI developers, 
engineers, and practitioners  
 
• Curricula demanded that prepare 
students for ethical challenges in 
practice and provide ethical 
background understandings about AI’s  
deeper societal impacts 
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Business school accreditation requiring  
dedicated ethics courses and chairs 
exemplifying standardization process  
• AI/tech ethics can draw on rich and 
multifaceted (applied) ethics 
literature, creating mutual benefits  
across curricula 5. Gr eenw ashing and E thics W ashing  
Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• AI’s invisible and unclear impacts on  
society raising ethical concer n 
• Few NGOs and institutional  
mechanisms to represent stakeholder 
voices and civil society in general 
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Stakeholder management as 
systematic approach to address 
stakeholder concerns and initiate 
dialogue, participation, and 
deliberation about AI impacts (e.g., via 
stakeholder roundtables)  
• Stakeholders: everyone who affects or 
is affected by products and services  
featuring AI  
Five Knowledge Bridges to advance the in stitutionali zation of or ganizational AI E thics 
Fig. 1  Five knowledge bridges to advance the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics