106 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
[61, 82, 160]. On the other hand, ethics washing serves as a 
means to avoid external regulation, as in the case of corpo-
rate lobbying and self-regulatory approaches to prevent and 
influence regulation favorable for technology firms [ 61, 129, 
160]. Thus, as shown by business ethics research, persuasion 
and lobbying fulfill instrumental purposes as “non-market 
strategies” to not only succeed in market competition but to 
conquer and dominate markets through shaping legal frame-
works [75, 142].
In business ethics, greenwashing has been researched 
since the mid-1980s, when environmental ethics and the 
green movement gained traction [9 ]. NGOs like Greenpeace 
raised awareness by presenting specific criteria for identify -
ing corporate greenwashing, and governmental actors, such 
as the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, followed suit with 
regulatory guidelines to help practitioners avoid making 
unfair or deceptive environmental claims [46, 65]. Particu-
larly, this role of governing bodies for green corporate com -
munication is deemed suitable to inform ethics washing and 
anticipate challenges and advancements of AI ethics.
Over the years, a profound body of business ethics litera-
ture, has observed greenwashing practices through various 
theoretical lenses, ranging from the individual level (e.g., 
agency theory [15]), over the organizational level (e.g., 
organizational institutionalism [64]), up to the institutional 
level (e.g., legitimacy theory [152]). Thus, greenwashing 
literature provides a range of typologies to better understand 
misleading corporate claims and explore the thin red line 
between deceptive and non-deceptive communication and 
action [90, 93, 99, 142]. Consequently, there is no need to 
reinvent the wheel, but a rich body of greenwashing research 
that can inform the study of AI ethics washing and the 
accompanying deceptive practices of technology corpora-
tions [61].
4  Limitations and future research
Recognizing a new and prevalent AI ethics emerging in 
recent years, this article drew on five salient areas of busi-
ness ethics literature to elaborate potential for knowledge 
transfer and spillovers between these applied ethics fields 
concerning the institutionalization of organizational ethics. 
Against this background, future research is needed to study 
the five depicted insights in depth. One major limitation, 
however, is the scope of this knowledge spill-over: Just as 
business ethics over the past decades failed to make the busi-
ness world ethical, so it may not to be expected that AI ethics 
will make AI fully ethical. This, however, is by far no reason 
not to keep pushing the application of ethics to societal and 
technologically important fields such as AI and business and 
their overlaps. Thus, beyond the scope of the underlying 
paper, fruitful avenues for future research open up when it comes to: (1) defining, identifying, and engaging with AI 
stakeholders and, for instance, mapping their salience; (2) 
the type of information on algorithms specific stakehold -
ers may need, value, and can comprehend concerning AI; 
(3) building effective governance mechanism that helps to 
connect ethical codes to practice; (4) designing AI/Tech 
and ethics courses and generating teaching content, which 
provides ethical backgrounds while preparing students for 
ethical challenges they will face in their future careers; and 
(5) gaining more profound understandings of causes and out-
comes of ethics washing, particularly in light of different 
stakeholders. Overall, the five knowledge bridges represent 
a non-exhaustive list of concepts business ethics literature 
may offer. Thus, opening space for future research to extend 
this initial set and identify topic areas where spillover effects 
and cross-fertilization between AI ethics and business eth-
ics may occur. Such mutually beneficial knowledge creation 
may even emerge in areas where business and AI ethics cur -
rently differ, as will be discussed next.
From an AI ethics perspective, the depicted business 
ethics concepts may provide new insights that can help 
to develop the research agenda. However, it is essential to 
stress the potential limits of the structural analogy of the 
two applied ethics fields. Whereas corporations can be seen 
as artificial entities or legal persons [12], AI and automated 
decision-making systems (currently) lack such a status [19, 
84]. Thus, in the case of the violation of others’ rights, AI 
respectively, the algorithmic decision-maker that has caused 
an infringement cannot be held accountable like a corpora-
tion. Although in some jurisdictions (e.g., European Union, 
UK), legal framework adjustments are considered regarding 
the civil and criminal liability of AI, such legal overhauls 
are regarded as troublesome and unlikely [19, 76]. However, 
Jowitt [84] argues that legal personhood for AI should be 
granted if the threshold of “bare, noumenal agency in the 
Kantian sense” is reached. With constant progress made, 
AI may undoubtedly advance in the coming years, further 
fueling this complex debate. Nevertheless—at least from a 
short-term perspective —it remains intangible to treat AI as 
a legal person, and thus, potential stakeholder. Regarding 
business ethics literature, AI as a latent stakeholder is also an 
important topic for future research, showing where the two 
fields of applied ethics can produce cross-fertilizing insights.
A second area where business and AI ethics structural 
analogy diverges emerges from how AI is developed and dis-
tributed. The twentieth century business context was char -
acterized by scale economies, where corporations focused 
on standardized goods, produced, distributed, and marketed 
in mass [155]. However, the digital business environment 
of today substantially differs. AI as a product or service 
may be costly to develop in the first place but can be digi-
tally replicated at close to zero cost. On top of this comes 
unprecedented customization due to AI’s ability to adapt to