Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable
Neural Architecture Search
ALEXANDRE HEUILLET, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France and Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, USA
AHMAD NASSER, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France
HICHEM ARIOUI, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France
HEDI TABIA, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France
In the past few years, Differentiable Neural Architecture Search (DNAS) rapidly imposed itself as the trending approach to automate
the discovery of deep neural network architectures. This rise is mainly due to the popularity of DARTS, one of the first major DNAS
methods. In contrast with previous works based on Reinforcement Learning or Evolutionary Algorithms, DNAS is faster by several
orders of magnitude and uses fewer computational resources. In this comprehensive survey, we focus specifically on DNAS and review
recent approaches in this field. Furthermore, we propose a novel challenge-based taxonomy to classify DNAS methods. We also discuss
the contributions brought to DNAS in the past few years and its impact on the global NAS field. Finally, we conclude by giving some
insights into future research directions for the DNAS field.
CCS Concepts: •General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →Search methodologies ;
Computer vision .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: deep learning, neural architecture search, meta learning
ACM Reference Format:
Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia. 2018. Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey
on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search. 1, 1 (May 2018), 36 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has witnessed rapid development in recent years. The automation of this field
supported the development of novel Deep Learning (DL) [ 62] architectures, especially Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [ 61], that competed with previous state-of-the-art handcrafted models. Since the introduction of CNNs with
LeNet [ 61] and the beginning of Deep Learning with AlexNet [ 60], most improvements in the field (e.g., deepening the
architecture or adding residual connections) were driven by empiricism. NAS aims to put an end to this trial-and-error
practice and bring a formal way to smoothen the progress in deep learning architecture design. Moreover, automatically
discovering more efficient architectures is particularly relevant in the ecological transition context (i.e., green Deep
Learning [ 119]). The role of manual feature engineering and model development has gradually decreased ever since.
Authors’ addresses: Alexandre Heuillet, alexandre.heuillet@univ-evry.fr, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France and Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, USA; Ahmad Nasser, ahmad.nasser@universite-paris-saclay.fr, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France; Hichem Arioui,
hichem.arioui@univ-evry.fr, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, France; Hedi Tabia, hedi.tabia@univ-evry.fr, IBISC, Univ Evry, Université
Paris-Saclay, France.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1arXiv:2304.05405v2  [cs.LG]  1 May 2023