Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 9
4.1 Gradient Approximation Inconsistencies and Optimization Gap
FairDARTS [21] tackled DARTS’ gradient-related issues by replacing softmax for the categorical choice of operations
by the sigmoid operation𝜎. This change is motivated by the fact that, contrary to softmax ,𝜎does not create exclusive
competition between the different operations (i.e., the weights associated with operations can independently increase
or decrease). This improves fairness in the operation selection and thus results in better gradient approximations (see
Section 4.1).In addition, FairDARTS introduced a novel loss function dubbed zero-one loss and denoted L01. This
loss function aims to push the sigmoid values of the architectural weights (i.e., 𝜎(𝛼)) towards 0 or 1 to minimize the
discretization gap. Its gradient magnitude is adequately designed to let the 𝛼weights fluctuate but still pull them
towards 0 or 1 if they stray away from 0.5. L01is designed as follows:
L01(𝛼)=−1
𝑁𝑁∑︁
𝑖(𝜎(𝛼𝑖)−0.5)2, (4)
where N is the number of nodes in a cell. L01is differentiable and thus can be backpropagated to help optimize the
architectural weights 𝛼. This loss is combined with L𝑣𝑎𝑙to form the total loss
L𝑇(𝑤∗,𝛼)=L𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑤∗(𝛼),𝛼)+𝑤01L01 (5)
where𝑤01is an hyperparameter weighting L01.
ProxylessNAS [9] also sought to close the optimization gap but strayed away from what had been set up by DARTS.
The authors proposed to search directly on the target large-scale dataset (e.g., ImageNet [ 26]) instead of transferring from
a small-scale proxy dataset (e.g., CIFAR-10) as done by DARTS and most of its derivatives. To achieve this, they designed
a search space that is no longer composed of repetitive building blocks but instead comprises an entire architecture and
includes additional candidate operations. However, this comes at the cost of a greatly increased memory consumption as,
if we recall Eq. 1, every output feature vector associated with every path in the mixed output of every cell edge must be
instantiated and stored in GPU memory. To alleviate this issue, ProxylessNAS replaced DARTS’ real-value architectural
weights𝛼with binary gates 𝑔that output one-hot vectors according to a probability distribution {𝑝1,...,𝑝𝐾}:
𝑔=binarize(𝑝1,...,𝑝𝐾)= 
[1,0,...,0]with probability 𝑝1
...
[0,0,...,1]with probability 𝑝𝐾(6)
Thus, Eq. 1 is modified as follows:
𝑜𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)=𝐾∑︁
𝑘=1𝑔𝑘
𝑖,𝑗𝑜𝑘
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)= 
𝑜1
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)with probability 𝑝1
...
𝑜𝐾
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)with probability 𝑝𝐾(7)
This mechanism allows entire paths to be binarized and instantiates only one path at a time in memory during the
search phase. Thus, it reduces memory consumption to the same level as a regular model. ProxylessNAS successfully
overperforms DARTS by 2 % on ImageNet. Nevertheless, these positive results come with a drastically increased search
cost from 1.5 GPU days (DARTS) to 8.3 GPU days.
Another work, entitled Progressive DARTS ( P-DARTS ) [15], focused on reducing the optimization gap between the
search and final architectures by improving the proxy model used during search. More precisely, the authors gradually
increased the proxy network depth during search (e.g., from 5 cells to 20 cells) in contrast with the original DARTS
Manuscript submitted to ACM