2 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
Consequently, new challenges such as memory efficiency, transferability between datasets, or computational efficiency
have been introduced in the field. This has encouraged researchers to integrate all possible approaches in the literature
to improve NAS methodologies. Notably, parameter space differentiability, which uses state-of-the-art optimizers for
deep learning model training, is considered one of the most promising leads.
A typical NAS method always consists of three components regardless of the methodology employed, as visually
summarized in Fig 1. Firstly, a search space that comprises all the possible hyperparameter sets of the architecture.
Generally, this is a discrete search space as it often only covers the categorical choice of operations that compose the
architecture. However, it can be made continuous by relaxing this choice using a projection function (e.g., softmax ) [73]
or by including continuous hyperparameters (e.g., the learning rate). It is theoretically infinite, but in practice, it is
limited to finite bounds to reduce computational cost and avoid too deep/dense/big architectures. Secondly, a search
strategy also denoted as search algorithm or optimizer, that is responsible for exploring the search space and sampling
candidate architectures by taking into account the performance feedback of candidates previously sampled. Finally, an
evaluation strategy that evaluates each candidate architecture selected by the search strategy. This strategy aims to
estimate the model’s performance, ideally without the need to fully train the model to reduce computational cost.
Search Space  Search Algorithm
Performance feedback for Performance
Evaluation Strategy
Fig. 1. Typical layout of a Neural Architecture Search framework.
In the literature, handcrafted approaches have first been used to find optimal deep learning architectures. However,
in the past few years, ML-based methodologies emerged to accurately address the NAS problem within well-defined
constraints. In the following subsections, we briefly present the main categories of NAS approaches as well as the
organization of this article.
1.1 Tabular-based Approaches
The first methods that were implemented to automate neural network design were heuristic-based approaches that
process tabular data. Such methods include random search [ 64], regular grid sampling of search space [ 37], tree-based
sampling [ 55], and many other methods inspired by the field of optimization [ 48,57,71,118]. Although quickly eclipsed
by ML-based approaches (see the following subsections) and especially Differentiable NAS, these methods remain
present in the NAS landscape as several ones have been proposed in the past few years [48, 64].
1.2 Reinforcement Learning
Zoph et al. [ 141] deployed Reinforcement Learning (RL) to drive the architecture search process. This was one of the
first ML-based NAS methods. The RL controller (or agent) continuously chooses new sets of hyperparameters based on
the previously evaluated ones. For each set of hyperparameters, the model is fully trained on a given dataset, and a final
evaluation score is used as a reward for the RL controller. Since fully training each candidate model is time-consuming,
the authors implemented parallelism and asynchronous parameter update to speed up the search process. Later on,
Zoph et al. [ 142] introduced the concept of cell-based hyperparameter tuning, where only the internal architecture
Manuscript submitted to ACM