26 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
Search for 
parameters
Cell n
αnCell 1
α1InputGround T ruth
LossCriterion
( LCE)
Directly connected to deriveOutput Search for 
parametersModel Optimizer
(SGD with
momentum + Cosine
Annealing scheduler)
Partial Network T rainingArchitecture
Optimizer 1
(Adam)
Search for 
parametersArchitecture
Optimizer n
(Adam)LossCriterion 1
( L1T)
LossCriterion n
( LnT).
.
..
.
.Ground T ruth
Dataset
OutputNetwork
(Supernet)
Search Algorithm
(Architect)HyperparametersGround T ruth Output
Ground T ruth Output
Fig. 15. Layout of the D-DARTS search process. Figure from Heuillet et al. [46].
The authors of DenseNAS [ 35] introduced a densely-connected block-based search space that allows them to search
for block widths and the number of blocks per layer. They designed routing blocks with gradually increasing widths,
and each block output linked to multiple other blocks, covering a large spectrum of block widths and block numbers per
layer. Each routing block comprises several shape-alignment layers and several basic layers, which are mixed outputs of
the different candidate operations. The basic layers are relaxed into continuous operations using softmax , similarly to
DARTS (see Eq. 1). In the same way, the routing block output is a mixed output of all the possible paths leading to the
next routing block and relaxed using a softmax . Furthermore, DenseNAS features a chained cost estimation algorithm
that aims to restrict the computational cost and latency of the final architecture. The cost of each basic layer operation
is retrieved from a lookup table and is used to estimate the cost of the whole architecture as follows:
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑙=∑︁
𝑜∈𝑂𝑤𝑙
𝑜𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑙
𝑜 (47)
˜𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖=𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖
𝑏+𝑖+𝑚∑︁
𝑗=𝑖+1𝑝𝑖,𝑗(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑗
𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛+𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑗
𝑏), (48)
where𝑤𝑙𝑜is the softmax weight of operation 𝑜in basic layer 𝑙,𝑝𝑖,𝑗is the softmax weight of the path from routine block
𝐵𝑖to routine block 𝐵𝑗, m is the number of subsequent blocks, and 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑗
𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛is the cost of the shape-alignment layer in
block𝐵𝑗with input from block 𝐵𝑖. This cost is then integrated into the loss function
L(𝑤,𝛼,𝛽)=L𝐶𝐸+𝜆logT(˜𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡1). (49)
DenseNAS overperformed previous methods on ImageNet (+2.8 % top 1 accuracy compared to DARTS) while being able
to constrain the number of FLOPS and the latency.
The authors of FBNetV2 [106] (first presented in Section 4.3) pointed out that the main issue in previous DNAS
works (DARTS [ 73] and FBNet [ 112] primarily) is related to their severely restricted search space. Therefore, they crafted
a novel search space encompassing two new hyperparameters (i.e., the number of channels and the input resolution).
This novel search space comprises 1035candidate architectures and is 1014times larger than FBNet’s. By leveraging
Manuscript submitted to ACM