Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 15
x1x2x3
x4
x5
x6x3
x6
x7 x1x2x3
x4
x5
x6x7
x51234
1 2 3 412 13 14 23 24 34Operation Search Topology Search
Fig. 9. Layout of the DOTS search process featuring both the operational and topological subprocesses. Figure from Gu et al. [40]
the architecture discretization process in EnTranNAS is no longer part of post-processing but rather done at the end
of each search iteration. Hence, the Transit-cells serve to host the currently derived architecture and transmit it to
later cells. EnTranNAS includes the target (derived) architecture in the search process, resulting in higher confidence
when selecting operations. In addition, the authors introduced a feature-sharing strategy to improve search efficiency,
assuming that the same operation from node 𝑖to node𝑗>𝑖always shares the same features in a single cell. Thus, Eq. 1
is modified as follows
𝑜𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)= 
Í
𝑖<𝑗Í𝐾
𝑘=1𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛼𝑘
𝑖,𝑗/𝜏)
Í𝐾
𝑘′=1𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛼𝑘′
𝑖,𝑗/𝜏)𝑜𝑘
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)=𝑝𝑘
𝑖,𝑗𝑜𝑘
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥),in Engine-cells,
Í
(𝑖,𝑘)∈𝑆𝑗𝑜𝑘
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥),in Transit-cells,(20)
where𝜏is a temperature parameter that acts as a regularization factor for the differentiable process in the Engine-
cells. This strategy helps to balance optimization between parametric and non-parametric operations. It reduces the
computational cost by only computing feature maps of each operation only once per cell (from node 𝑖to ulterior
nodes𝑗>𝑖). However, EnTranNAS does not completely eliminate the optimization gap. Hence the authors also
proposed a novel topology-search-oriented architecture derivation method dubbed EnTranNAS-DST. Concretely, they
introduced an additional set of trainable parameters {𝛽𝑗}𝑛
𝑗=2for each intermediary node 𝑗and implemented thresholds
𝑡𝑗=sigmoid(𝛽𝑗)to perform operation pruning on those nodes as
𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗=ReLU(𝑝𝑘
𝑖,𝑗
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖<𝑗,1≤𝑘≤𝐾{𝑝𝑘
𝑖,𝑗}−𝑡𝑗). (21)
If there is𝑘s.t.𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗≠0,𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗is further normalized by
ˆ𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗=𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗Í
𝑘𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗. (22)
EnTranNAS-DST node output is thus obtained simply by replacing 𝑝𝑘
𝑖,𝑗with ˆ𝑞𝑘
𝑖,𝑗in Eq. 20. The authors experimentally
showed that EnTranNAS overperforms most prior works on both CIFAR-10 (+0.28 % top 1 accuracy vs. DARTS) and
ImageNet (+2.9 % top 1 accuracy compared to DARTS).
CDARTS [124] proposed to address the optimization gap issue by implementing a cyclic feedback mechanism
between the search and evaluation networks analogous to a teacher-student model. The search network (composed
of 8 cells) provides an intermediate architecture to the evaluation network (composed of 20 cells) and, in return, gets
performance feedback. Hence, the search strategy takes into account the performance of the final discretized (and
larger) architecture. Furthermore, the two networks are jointly trained and unified into a single architecture. The joint
Manuscript submitted to ACM