Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 21
CDARTS [124] straightforwardly addressed the over-representation issue. They simply added a L1 regularization
factor to the architectural weights of non-parametric operations 𝑂𝑛𝑝=𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝_𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑚𝑎𝑥 _𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙_3𝑥3,𝑎𝑣𝑔_𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙_3𝑥3as:
L𝑟𝑒𝑔=𝜆∑︁
𝑜∈𝑂𝑛𝑝|𝛼𝑜|, (35)
where𝜆is a hyperparameter that balances the value of L𝑟𝑒𝑔. The authors showed that this method successfully
prevented the operations in 𝑂𝑛𝑝from becoming dominant.
4.3 Computational Efficiency and Latency Reduction
Chen et al. [ 15] defined the problem of NAS in the wild as being able to search for an architecture on a proxy dataset
(e.g., CIFAR-10 [ 60]) to limit computational cost and successfully transfer to another, more challenging dataset (e.g.,
ImageNet [ 26]). Most DARTS derivatives followed this paradigm, contrary to most non-DARTS approaches such as
ProxylessNAS [9].
As discussed above (see Section 4.1 for additional details), ProxylessNAS searches directly on the target dataset (e.g.,
ImageNet [ 26]) rather than a proxy dataset (e.g., CIFAR-10). It also enforces latency constraints on specific hardware
(e.g., mobile phones, GPU, or CPU). Hence, it is a multi-objective NAS method, but one of the objectives (latency) is not
differentiable. Instead, latency is measured in real-time on GPU/CPU and is predicted from a lookup table on mobile
settings. ProxylessNAS successfully constrained mobile latency to a similar level to MobileNetV2 [ 99] and improved
top 1 accuracy by 2.6 % on ImageNet.
With PC-DARTS (Partially-Connected DARTS), Xu et al. [ 120] sought to improve computational efficiency without
compromising performance. To this end, they perform architecture search in only a subset of randomly sampled channels
while bypassing the rest. This concept is based on the assumption that computation on this subset is an adequate
approximation of the effective computation on all the channels. Considering edge 𝑒𝑖,𝑗, partial channel connection
involves defining a channel sampling mask 𝑆𝑖,𝑗which nullifies (i.e., assigns a weight value of 0) all channels except
selected ones in the mixed output 𝑜𝑖,𝑗, thus modifying Eq. 1 as follows:
𝑜𝑃𝐶
𝑖,𝑗(𝑥)=𝐾∑︁
𝑘=1exp(𝛼𝑘
𝑖,𝑗)
Í𝐾
𝑘′=1exp(𝛼𝑘′
𝑖,𝑗)𝑜𝑘
𝑖,𝑗(𝑆𝑖,𝑗𝑥)+(1−𝑆𝑖,𝑗)𝑥. (36)
This process has the advantage of reducing the memory overhead by 𝐾times, with1
𝐾being the channel selection ratio.
Subsequently, it helps reduce the search cost on CIFAR-10 from 1 GPU day (DARTS) to only 0.1 GPU day, and PC-DARTS
achieves a better top 1 accuracy on ImageNet than ProxylessNAS (75.8 % vs. 75.1 %) with half the search cost. However,
partial channel connection induces an inconsistency in the selection of operations across the different sampled channels.
To palliate this issue, the authors introduced an additional set of learning parameters 𝛽𝑖,𝑗that are shared throughout
the search process to act as an edge normalization mechanism. The PC-DARTS approach is summarized in Fig 13.
Cai et al. proposed Once-for-All ( OFA ) [8] as a solution for decoupling the training and search phases with the
objective of drastically reducing the computational cost of DNAS. In particular, they trained a single large supernet
whose configuration (e.g., kernel size, depth, or width) can be altered and directly deployed without further training.
OFA follows two stages: (1) a training phase where the different subnetworks that compose the supernet are optimized to
improve their accuracy (2) a hardware-aware NAS phase (model specialization stage) where sub-networks are sampled
to train accuracy and latency predictors. This enables OFA to target specific hardware and latencies. However, since
simultaneously optimizing the parameters of the very large ( 1019) number of subnetworks is prohibitively expensive,
Manuscript submitted to ACM