Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 23
output𝑥𝑙of layer𝑙is a masked output defined as:
𝑥𝑙=∑︁
𝑖𝑚𝑙,𝑖𝑏𝑙,𝑖(𝑥𝑙−1), (38)
where𝑚𝑙,𝑖is a mask that equals to 1 if block 𝑏𝑙,𝑖is sampled or 0 otherwise. Therefore, the probability of sampling an
architecture 𝑎∈A is described by the following equation:
𝑃Θ(𝑎)=Ö
𝑙𝑃Θ𝑙(𝑏𝑙=𝑏𝑎
𝑙,𝑖), (39)
where Θis composed of all the parameters that determine the sampling probabilities of blocks for each layer. Furthermore,
the authors resorted to the Gumbel-Softmax [ 52] function to relax the discrete masks 𝑚𝑙into a continuous distribution
and thus make the whole search process differentiable w.r.t. the sampling parameters Θ. The authors empirically showed
that FBNet reached a higher top 1 accuracy (e.g., +1.8 % for FBNet-C) on ImageNet than DARTS for a 33 % lower search
cost. FBNet-A also reached a latency as low as 19.8 ms when targeting a Samsung Galaxy S8.
However, FBNet is not free from limitations, and hence Wan et al. [ 106] designed an updated method dubbed
FBNetV2 . Their primary concern was to palliate the small search space size issue present in FBNet and DARTS.
Consequently, they introduced a greatly enlarged search space (see Section 4.4). To keep their method computationally
efficient, the authors proposed DMaskingNAS. This NAS algorithm uses weight-sharing approximations to efficiently
search over additional hyperparameters, such as the number of filters and the input dimensions. They kept the layer-wise
DNAS paradigm described in FBNet but used a channel-masking mechanism parameterized through a Gumbel-Softmax
function. Thus the output 𝑦of a block𝑏can be computed as follows:
𝑦=𝑏(𝑥)◦𝑘∑︁
𝑖=1𝑔𝑖 1𝑖, (40)
where𝑔𝑖denotes Gumbel weights and 1𝑖is a mask vector whose first 𝑖values are 1s with the rest being 0s. This way,
each block’s channel number can be searched without significant additional computational cost. Furthermore, FBNetV2
searches for different input resolutions by performing resolution subsampling from the original input (i.e., extracting
smaller input feature maps using the nearest neighbors method). Once the output feature map has been computed, it is
upsampled into a larger fixed-size one to preserve dimensional consistency. FBNetV2 maintains a computational cost
similar to FBNet despite searching on a search space up to 1014times larger.
VIM-NAS (Variational Information Maximization Neural Architecture Search) [ 108] observed that each cell edge is
considered independent in the global architecture of previous DNAS methods. In contrast, the authors introduced a
novel way of formulating the NAS problem by assuming that the architectural distribution Ais a latent representation
of specific data points from dataset Dsuch as there is a distribution 𝑝𝜙(D,A)=𝑝(D)𝑝𝜙(A|D) parameterized by 𝜙.
More specifically, VIM-NAS strives to maximize the mutual information 𝐼𝜙(D,A)betweenAandDas
max
𝜙𝐼𝜙(D,A)=E𝑝𝜙(D,A[log𝑝𝜙(D|A)]. (41)
Thus, the objective L(𝜙,𝜃,D)of the DNAS process can be formulated as
max
𝜃,𝜙L(𝜙,𝜃,D)=∑︁
𝑑∈DE𝑝𝜙(D,A[log𝑞𝜃(D,A], (42)
where log𝑞𝜃(D,A)is a supernet approximation of log𝑝𝜙(D|A) . In practice, 𝑝𝜙(D|A) is reformulated to the Gaussian
noiseN(𝜇𝜃,1)where𝜇𝜙is parameterized by the convolutional network 𝜙. This makes VIM-NAS very fast as it can
Manuscript submitted to ACM