Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 13
Wang et al. [ 107] argued that the optimization gap in DARTS is linked to the architecture selection process, as the
𝛼weight values associated with an operation might not always reflect this operation’s strength. They defined the
discretization accuracy at convergence of an operation as the supernet accuracy after discretizing to this operation
and fine-tuning the remaining network until it converges again. Hence, Fig. 7 showcases empirical evidence that the
discretization accuracy at convergence of an operation does not necessarily match its 𝛼weight value. In fact, some
operations with a small 𝛼value can reach a high discretization accuracy, further reinforcing the critical aspect of the
underlying architecture selection problem.
Fig. 7. Bar chart comparing the value of 𝛼w.r.t. the discretization accuracy at convergence for each operation of 3 randomly selected
edges from a pretrained DARTS model. Figure from Wang et al. [107].
To alleviate this issue, the authors proposed a perturbation-based architecture selection (PT) where each operation
of each edge of the architecture is masked in turn. Then, the operation that leads to the highest drop in performance
when masked is considered to be the most important on that edge. This process is not too invasive as it only masks one
operation at a time, thus making the supernet accuracy close to the one of the unmodified supernet. Finally, the authors
showed that training a DARTS supernet normally and then using PT to discretize the architecture (a process denoted
DARTS+PT ) significantly improves performance (e.g., +0.4 % top 1 accuracy on CIFAR-10 compared to DARTS).
In the continuation of DARTS- (discussed in Section 4.2), 𝛽-DARTS [123] introduced a novel and very simple
regularization method called Beta-Decay inspired from L2regularization that involves imposition restrictions on the
architectural parameters to reduce optimization discrepancies. This regularization occurs on the 𝛼parameters after the
softmax activation and consists of a straightforward loss function L𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎:
L𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎(𝛼)=𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐾∑︁
𝑘=1exp(𝛼𝑘)), (16)
where𝐾is the total number of candidate operations. L𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 is differentiable and added to the validation loss L𝑣𝑎𝑙
pondered by a parameter denoted 𝜆. Thus, Eq. 2 is modified as follows:
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝛼(L𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑤∗(𝛼),𝛼)+𝜆L𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎(𝛼)). (17)
According to the theoretical analysis provided by the authors, L𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 improves generalization and increases robustness.
Ultimately,𝛽-DARTS reached competitive scores on both small-scale (CIFAR-10/100) and large-scale (ImageNet) datasets
while searching only on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The search process of 𝛽-DARTS is resumed in Fig. 8.
Gu et al. [ 40] argued that the ranking of operations in DARTS edges is not representative of the final model
performance as it does not take correctly into account operations that are related to topology (e.g., skip connections ),
Manuscript submitted to ACM