22 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
3x3 sep
5x5sep
Identity…  …+
+
+ConcatSample 0
1
2
3+𝑞1,3Partial Channel 
Connection
Partial Channel 
Connection
Partial Channel 
ConnectionPartial Channel Connection
Edge Normalization𝑝𝑜1
𝐱0
𝐱1
𝐱2𝑓0,3PC(𝐱0;𝐒0,3)
𝑓1,3PC(𝐱1;𝐒1,3)
𝑓2,3PC(𝐱2;𝐒2,3) 𝐱3PC𝐱0𝐒0,3
𝑓0,3PC(𝐱0;𝐒0,3)
𝑝𝑜=exp{𝛼𝑖,𝑗𝑜}
σ𝑜′∈𝒪exp{𝛼𝑖,𝑗𝑜′}
𝑞𝑖,𝑗=exp{𝛽𝑖,𝑗}
σ𝑖′<𝑗exp{𝛽𝑖′,𝑗}𝑝𝑜2
𝑝𝑜8
0
1
23
Fig. 13. Layout of the PC-DARTS search process. Figure from Xu et al. [120]
the authors introduced a novel training process during which the OFA network is progressively fine-tuned to train
subnetworks of increasingly smaller size. This is akin to a pruning process performed over different modalities (i.e.,
input resolution, width, depth, and kernel size). Overall, OFA only requires 4.2𝑘GPU hours for end-to-end training (3
times lower than DARTS [ 73]) to overperform all previous approaches on ImageNet in the mobile setting (i.e., less than
600M FLOPS).
Although it was not their primary objective, the authors of DOTS [40] were able to reduce computational cost to
only 0.26 GPU day when searching on CIFAR-10 and 1.3 GPU days when searching on ImageNet. This is due to the
decoupling between the topology search and operation search that greatly reduces the number of candidate operations
on each edge (and thus the search space size), making both processes converge fast.
Wu et al. [ 112] proposed FBNet as a DNAS framework aimed at improving latency and computational efficiency,
especially targeted at low-power hardware such as mobile phones. Firstly, FBNet browses a search space Adifferent
than DARTS’ that is not organized around cell building blocks but rather around layers. The macro-architecture (i.e.,
the pre-processing/post-processing layers, the number of intermediate layers, and their input shapes) is fixed, whereas
independent architectures (from a selection of "blocks") are searched for each layer. This leads to a greater diversity of
candidate architectures than in DARTS’ search space. In addition, FBNet combines the standard Cross-Entropy loss
L𝐶𝐸with a hardware-aware latency loss L𝐿𝐴𝑇defined as follows:
L𝐿𝐴𝑇=𝛼log ∑︁
𝑖𝐿𝐴𝑇(𝑏𝑎
𝑙)!𝛽
, (37)
where𝐿𝐴𝑇(𝑏𝑎
𝑙)denotes the latency of block 𝑎of the𝑙-th layer, and 𝛼and𝛽are coefficients weighting L𝐿𝐴𝑇. The latency
values are retrieved from a latency lookup table (similarly to ProxylessNAS [ 9]), as measuring latency from mobile
processors in real time is prohibitively expensive. In addition, using a lookup table makes L𝐿𝐴𝑇differentiable. Finally,
the authors devised a differentiable NAS algorithm where the search space is modeled by a stochastic supernet. Thus,
only one candidate block is sampled at a time independently for each layer from a probability distribution obtained
through a softmax instead of a weighted mixed output of operation as featured in DARTS (see Eq. 1). Consequently, the
Manuscript submitted to ACM