4 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
Importantly, DNAS and the other ML-based NAS methods discussed above are generally considered black-box
approaches. However, ML explainability (eXplainable Artificial Intelligence, XAI) is starting to emerge [ 44,78]. This
point will be more thoroughly discussed in Section 6.
1.5 Article Organization
In this survey, we focused on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search (DNAS) as a trending approach to perform NAS.
We analyzed 26 papers that have appeared since 2019 in leading machine learning and computer vision conferences and
journals. The goal is to help the reader navigate this emerging field, which gained significant momentum in the past
few years. To the extent of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a survey specifically centered on DNAS. We also
put the emphasis on computer vision tasks, although other fields of application are discussed in Section 5. Compared
with the existing survey literature [96, 116], the main contributions of this article are as follows:
•An attempt to create a taxonomy of DNAS (Section 2) where we identify the main challenges posed by DNAS
(Section 3).
•A comprehensive review of recent DNAS works according to the challenges they addressed (Section 4). We
provide a summary of the reviewed methods in tabular form (Table 2).
•A discussion on the impact of DNAS on NAS and Deep Learning, along with information on Explainable NAS
and insights on future research directions (Section 6).
Finally, in Section 7, we bring a conclusion to this article.
2 PROBLEM STATEMENT AND TAXONOMY OF DIFFERENTIABLE NAS
This survey article aims to discuss and analyze Differentiable NAS works according to a novel taxonomy. DNAS methods
are typically categorized into two classes: (a)DARTS [73] derivatives, to which the majority (62 %) of prior works we
reviewed belong, and (b)all other DNAS studies. Works in (a)assumed that DARTS is on the right track and could be
further improved to go past its limitations (detailed in Section 3). The fact that a large number of works belong to (a)
can be explained by the high popularity that DARTS enjoyed in the past few years. In 2022, DARTS was already an old
method (having been published in 2019) but continued to inspire new publications [ 121,123], thus demonstrating it
passed the test of time. Studies in (b)proposed novel DNAS algorithms and search spaces. In many cases [ 9,106,112],
they would assume that DARTS’ issues are inherent to its conception and that a tabula rasa approach was necessary.
However, this classification is trivial and does not help navigate the DNAS landscape. Thus, in this article, we propose
a novel taxonomy where methods are classified according to the challenge they attempt to solve rather than belonging
to(a)or(b). We identified 4 different challenges: (I)Bridging the optimization gap between the proxy (i.e., used during
search) and final models and resolving gradient approximation issues, (II)Countering the over-representation of
non-parametric operations (e.g., skip connections ,(III) Improving computational efficiency and reducing latency at
inference time, and (IV) Bypassing the search space restrictions inherent to DNAS. These challenges are presented in
detail in Section 3. Fig. 2 presents a taxonomic tree summarizing the different works we reviewed and our proposed
DNAS classification.
Manuscript submitted to ACM