Efficient Automation of Neural Network Design: A Survey on Differentiable Neural Architecture Search 3
of a building block (denoted “cell”) is optimized instead of a complete neural network. Thus, the final model consists
of a stacked series of cells. This structural approach, called NASNet, was employed to support model transferability
and reduce the search space size. Although NASNet has offered new advantages to help with model optimization, it
imposed new challenges concerning the gap between the developing cell structure and the actual multi-cell model
derived for evaluation. This structural concept has later migrated to other NAS approaches, as discussed later.
1.3 Evolutionary Algorithms
Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) have also presented a valid approach for NAS. Applying EA to NAS is straightforward, as
hyperparameter sets are “genotypes” that define an architecture. In EA, a Darwinist process gradually improves an initial
population of randomly initialized architectures over several generations. A new generation is obtained by deriving
“children” through the recombination (crossover) of genes from the best individuals in the current population. Recent
works implemented evolutionary strategies such as guided evolution [ 74], reinforced evolution [ 16], and regularized
EA [95]. These NAS approaches were among the first to be implemented. However, they are computationally expensive,
especially when handling vast search spaces, as they blindly explore the search space during the first iterations.
Thus, the overall computational time in GPU days is often ludicrous (e.g., more than 3000 GPU days for AmoebaNet
[95]). Moreover, most works in the literature are case-specific. Hence, transferability was less practical than in later
gradient-based approaches.
1.4 Gradient Descent and Differentiability
Gradient descent is a powerful technique that has been known since the early 19th century with the works of French
mathematician Augustin-Louis Cauchy [ 63]. Its practical implementation is nearly as old as computer science itself, as it
was first explored by Haskell Curry in the 1940s [ 24]. Since then, it became increasingly well-studied and eventually led
to the tremendous success of ML with the gradient backpropagation algorithm [ 98]. More specifically, gradient-based
methods for hyperparameter optimization have been in the literature since the early 1990s [ 3,11]. Similar to many
contributions to Machine Learning at the time, these works were responding to control challenges. They implemented
gradient descent for automatically selecting and changing the shape of activation functions in artificial neural networks.
In a practical sense, this process is similar to weighing the neurons of a neural network, which affects the model’s output
shape. The past few years saw the rise of a novel approach for combining gradient descent and NAS: Differentiable
NAS (DNAS).
DNAS implements gradient-based methods to tune the hyperparameters of deep learning models as first pointed
out by Bender et al. [5]. The hyperparameter tuning problem is converted into a continuous optimization problem by
considering the search space as a smooth manifold. Similar to model training, DNAS uses the gradient information
of hyperparameter weights to find the optimal set. This makes it possible to use a supernetwork that instantiates
in memory all candidate architectures, thus removing the need to evaluate each candidate independently to get
performance feedback. As a result, fewer computational resources are used to reach the optimal set compared to
other implementations, such as evolutionary strategies or reinforcement learning. As shown earlier, implementing
such approaches requires a relaxation of the discrete search space. This has been first achieved by Differentiable
ARchitecTure Search (DARTS) [ 73] using a cell-based paradigm for the search space. From this point onward, DARTS
became increasingly popular, helping to democratize NAS with its computational efficiency.
Manuscript submitted to ACM