12 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
In addition to the optimization gap issue, Zhang et al. [ 133] observed that a catastrophic forgetting problem (multi-
model forgetting [ 6]) occurs in the supernet’s weights training, leading to a deterioration of the optimization process for
all the candidate architectures derived from the supernet. To palliate these issues, they introduced E2NAS (Exploration
Enhancing Neural Architecture Search with Architecture Complementation), a novel DNAS approach that leverages a
VGAE (Variational Graph AutoEncoder) to create an injection between the final discrete architectures and the continuous
search space. More precisely, an asynchronous message-passing scheme encodes the architecture into an injective space
by encoding the final output 𝐶of the network into a continuous representation 𝑧(i.e., a latent space). Hence, the hidden
stateℎ𝑣of node𝑣is defined as
ℎ𝑣=U(𝑤𝑣,ℎ𝑖𝑛
𝑣)withℎ𝑖𝑛
𝑣=G(ℎ𝑢:𝑢→𝑣), (12)
whereUis a function updating the hidden state ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑣obtained by aggregating all its predecessors with function G.
Since bothGandUare injective, the VGAE maps 𝐶to𝑧injectively. From then, E2NAS performs differentiable
architecture search on the latent continuous space. In addition, a new complementation loss L𝑐is introduced to
tackle the catastrophic forgetting problem. This loss works in conjunction with a replay buffer that contains the last
architecture 𝛼𝑖−1along with another complementary architecture 𝛼𝑐
𝑖.L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 in Eq. 2 is replaced with 𝐿𝑐defined for
weights𝑤𝑖=𝑤∗(𝛼𝑖)and𝑤𝑐
𝑖=𝑤∗(𝛼𝑐
𝑖)at step𝑖as
L𝑐(𝑤𝑖)=(1−𝜖)L𝐶𝐸+𝜖(L𝐶𝐸(𝑤𝑐
𝑖)+L𝐶𝐸(𝑤𝑖−1))+𝜂R(𝑤𝑖), (13)
whereL𝐶𝐸is the Cross-Entropy loss, Ris a𝑙2regularization term, 𝜖is a value that balances between optimizing the
current architecture (exploitation) or preventing other alternatives from vanishing (exploration). E2NAS successfully
overperformed previous works on the three datasets available in NAS-Bench-201 [ 30] (e.g., a +29.45 % top 1 accuracy
improvement on ImageNet-16-120).
Zhang et al. [ 134] proposed iDARTS , a solution that reformulates the optimization process of DARTS with a
Neumann-approximation of the Implicit Theorem Function (IFT) [ 76]. Concretely, the architectural parameter gradients
Δ𝛼L𝑣𝑎𝑙(see Eq. 3) are calculated as follows:
Δ𝛼L𝑣𝑎𝑙=𝜕L𝑣𝑎𝑙
𝜕𝛼−𝜕L𝑣𝑎𝑙
𝜕𝑤𝜕2L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
𝜕𝑤2−1𝜕2L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
𝜕𝛼𝜕𝑤, (14)
whereL𝑣𝑎𝑙is the validation loss, L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 is the training loss, and 𝑤are the network weights. However, it is computa-
tionally intensive to compute the inverse of the Hessian matrix𝜕2L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
𝜕𝑤𝜕𝑤in Eq. 14. Hence, to alleviate this burden, the
authors approximated this inverse matrix using a Neumann series [ 76]. This Neumann approximation is computed in a
stochastic setting where minibatches are used instead of the whole dataset. Thus, the stochastic approximation of the
gradients described in Eq. 14 is formulated as follows:
Δ𝛼ˆL𝑖
𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑤𝑗(𝛼),𝛼)=𝜕L𝑖
𝑣𝑎𝑙
𝜕𝛼−𝛾𝜕L𝑖
𝑣𝑎𝑙
𝜕𝑤𝐾∑︁
𝑘=0"
𝐼−𝜕2L𝑗
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
𝜕𝑤2#𝑘𝜕2L𝑗
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
𝜕𝛼𝜕𝑤, (15)
where𝑖and𝑗are minibatches randomly sampled from the training and validation datasets respectively, 𝛾is the learning
rate,𝐾is the number of terms of the Neumann series used for approximation, and 𝐼is the identity matrix. This
reformulation of the architectural gradient computation performs multiple optimization steps before updating 𝛼, hence
making𝑤(𝛼)closer to its optimal value 𝑤∗(𝛼). The authors empirically showed that iDARTS improves performance
over standard DARTS by 2.6 % on ImageNet [26].
Manuscript submitted to ACM