30 Alexandre Heuillet, Ahmad Nasser, Hichem Arioui, and Hedi Tabia
This regularization is generally applied either before ( 𝛼weights) or after ( 𝛽weights) the softmax relaxation. This proved
relevant as adding regularization prevented skip connections from becoming dominant and improved performance. This
outcome is logical as a search space mixing parametric and non-parametric operations is inherently unbalanced, and
regularization is a well-explored solution to overfitting and rebalancing ill-formed problems [ 7,103]. Finally, as an
alternative solution, other works [ 68,129] devised early-stopping mechanisms to stop the search process before the
architecture overfits. However, these approaches are based on arbitrary or empirical criteria that are less formal than
regularization-based approaches, hence explaining the popularity of the latter.
(III) Some approaches [ 108,120,121] managed to reduce the search cost drastically (up to 43 times for VIM-NAS
[108]) compared to DARTS. This made it possible to launch the search process on low-end, consumer-grade GPUs (and
even CPUs in some cases). Hence, it contributed to making DNAS a very accessible process to automate neural network
design. However, other methods [ 9,89,106] chose to trade computational cost for reduced latency at inference, hence
helping Deep Learning to deploy on low-resource devices, such as mobile phones. They did so by adding the inference
latency as a differentiable objective so that raw performance is no longer the only goal of the search process. To save
computational resources, the latency values for a specific platform are often retrieved from a latency lookup table.
(IV) As previously stated, the fact that most DNAS methods that addressed search space restrictions are not DARTS-
based highlights that it is an issue more closely associated with DARTS. Thus, those methods had to craft search
algorithms and/or search spaces that deeply diverge from DARTS. Most notably, all approaches in that area abandoned
the cell-based building block paradigm as it is one of the main elements that restrict the search space. For instance, the
FBNet family [ 25,106,112,113] relied on a novel MobileNet-like search space that is block-based rather than cell-based.
ProxylessNAS [ 9], and DenseNAS [ 35] also leveraged a similar search space. Finally, the low number of studies tackling
the search restrictions (i.e., 6) means that researchers mostly focused on other issues judged more urgent. In addition,
using a larger search space leads to a drastic increase in computational cost, hence making it necessary to design
mechanisms to save resources. This fact might explain why proposing a novel method addressing this issue is difficult.
Overall, over the past few years, all of these works contributed to making DNAS more and more viable, with the
ability to discover architectures that can now far surpass the performance of handcrafted ones (e.g., CDARTS [ 124]
reaches 78.2 % top 1 accuracy on ImageNet [ 26] vs. 74.7 % for MobileNetV2 [ 99]). In addition, the computational cost
(i.e., the number of FLOPs) and the latency can be restrained to deploy models on embedded platforms such as mobile
phones [ 9,89,112]. This makes DNAS (and Deep Learning by extension) easier to deploy to solve real-world tasks and
accessible to a wider audience. Thus, one could argue that DNAS is now a maturing field, with some methods being
included in major AutoML libraries such as Microsoft NNI [86] and NASLib [97].
Nevertheless, DNAS still suffers from limitations as none of the proposed could solve all of the four identified
challenges at once. Hence, no DNAS method could impose itself as a novel standard. This may substantially explain
how DARTS withstood the test of time and remains popular despite its age. In our opinion, this also indicates that
DNAS has room for improvement and has not reached its full potential yet.
As discussed in Section 5, DNAS has already been applied to a wide range of applications (mainly related to computer
vision). In the near future, with DNAS becoming more and more robust, we can expect it to be applied to an ever-
increasing number of fields. For instance, works on transformers improvements [ 17] and self-supervised learning [ 45]
have already started to emerge. Other already explored fields, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) design
[36], could be further expanded to other applications, such as face generation [56].
Additionally, Explainable AI (XAI) is paramount to ensure the deployment of Deep Learning in everyday tasks. In
the case of automated decision making (e.g., judicial case analysis or autonomous driving), people affected by those
Manuscript submitted to ACM