10 30 50 70 90
% Features Removed50607080Accuracy mean ± stdN-GCNfcN-GCNaN-SAGEfc DCNN GCN SAGEFigure 2: Classiﬁcation accuracy for the Cora dataset with 20 labeled nodes per class (jVj= 20C), but features
removed at random, averaging 10 runs. We use a different random seed for every run (i.e. removing different features
per node), but the same 10 random seeds across models.
10 30 50 70 900.100.150.200.250.30N-GCNam0 m1 m2 m3 m4 m5
Figure 3: Attention weights ( m) for N-GCN awhen trained with feature removal perturbation on the Cora dataset.
Removing features shifts the attention weights to the right, suggesting the model is relying more on long range depen-
dencies.
4.7 Tolerance to Feature Noise
We test our method under feature noise perturbations
by removing node features at random. This is prac-
tical, as article authors might forget including relevant
terms in the article abstract, and more generally not all
nodes will have the same amount of detailed information.
Fig. 2 shows that when features are removed, methods
utilizing unmodiﬁed random walks (N-GCN, N-SAGE,
and DCNN) outperform convolutional methods includ-
ing GCN and SAGE. Moreover, the performance gap
widens as we remove more features. This suggests that
our methods can somewhat recover removed features
bydirectly pulling-in features from nearby and distant
neighbors. We visualize in Fig. 3 the attention weights
as a function of features removed. With little feature re-
moval, there is some weight on ^A0, and the attention
weights for ^A1;^A2;::: decay. Maliciously dropping
features causes our model to shift its attention weights
towards higher powers of ^A.
4.8 Random Walk Steps vs. GCN Depth
K-step random walk will allow every node to accumu-
late information from its neighbors, up to distance K.
Similarly, aK-layer GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2017) will
do the same. The difference between the two was mathe-
matically explained in Section 3.1. To summarize, theformer averages node feature vectors according to the
random walk co-visit statistics, whereas the latter creates
non-linearities and matrix multiplies at every step. So far,
we display experiments where our models (N-GCN and
N-SAGE) are able to use information from distant nodes
(e.g.K= 5), but for all GCN and SAGE modules, we
use 2 GCN layer for baselines and our models.
Even though the authors of GCN (Kipf and Welling,
2017) and SAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) suggest using
two GCN layers, according by holdout validation, for
a fair comparison with our models, we run experiments
utilizing deeper GCN and SAGE are models so that its
“receptive ﬁeld” is comparable to ours.
Table 5 shows test accuracies when training deeper GCN
and SAGE models, using our implementation. We notice
that, unlike our method which beneﬁts from a wider “re-
ceptive ﬁeld”, there is no direct correspondence between
depth and improved performance.
5 RELATED WORK
We divide the rapidly-growing ﬁeld of graph learning
into two kinds of algorithms. The ﬁrst kind is unsuper-
vised , and the second kind is supervised .
We refer to the ﬁrst kind as embedding learning al-
gorithms . They input a graph and output one embed-