Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 3 of 14
prominent role in smart city transformation [ 26]. Toronto Sidewalk, Masdar and Songdo
are among the major smart city initiatives that have resulted in project cancellations or
failures in living up to their smart urban future promises [29].
The main reason behind this failure is that AI system adoption practices are heavily
technologically determined and reductionist in nature, and do not envisage and develop
long-term, ethical, responsible and sustainable solutions [ 30]. Most government AI ap-
proaches have also overlooked urban, human and social complexities; subsequently, this
has created conditions for new forms of societal control, and boosted inequality and
marginalization among the layers of our societies [ 31]. Thus, the current practice of AI has
generated as many constraints as prospects, where, at times, the constraints outweigh the
prospects [32].
Against this backdrop, this perspective paper highlights the fundamental shortfalls
in current AI system conceptualization and practice, and points to a novel approach—
i.e., green AI that also accommodates green sensing—that moves away from short-term
efﬁciency solutions to focus on a long-term ethical, responsible and sustainable AI practice
that will help build sustainable urban futures for all through smart city transformation.
Here, we note that, as this is a perspective piece reﬂecting the authors’ opinions and
interpretations of the topic, the methodological approach of the paper is not systematic;
rather, the paper uses the literature to support the claims and views related to AI and smart
city discourses, practices, developments, trends and applications.
2. Prospects and Constraints of AI for Smart City Transformation
The utilization of smart and innovative digital technologies has become a common
approach to tackling urban crises—whether they are related to climate, pandemics, natural
disasters or socioeconomic factors [ 33,34]. In recent years, advancements in AI—as one of
the most prominent technologies of our time, with signiﬁcant implications for our economy,
society, environment and governance—have resulted in invaluable opportunities for cities
to increase their infrastructural efﬁciencies and predictive analytic capabilities, and hence,
to a degree, to improve the quality of life and sustainability in cities under the smart city
brand [ 35]. According to Ullah et al. [ 36], today, AI is rapidly becoming a critical smart city
element that helps in achieving necessary efﬁciencies and automation in order to deliver
urban infrastructures, services and amenities.
Especially when coupled with other smart urban technologies, AI applications—e.g.,
chatbots and virtual agents, cognitive robotics and autonomous systems, cognitive security
analytics, expert systems, identity analytics, intelligent digital assistants, knowledge man-
agement systems, predictive analytics and data visualization, process automation systems,
recommendation systems, speech analytics, threat intelligence—provide new capabilities
and directions for our cities, such as building the next generation smart cities, i.e., the
“Artiﬁcially Intelligent Cities” of the future [ 37]. There is a vast array of literature on the
prospects of AI for smart cities [38].
Nonetheless, as much as creating beneﬁts—for instance, generating operational in-
frastructure or service efﬁciencies—AI technology also involves substantial risks and
disruptions for cities and citizens, through the opaque decision-making processes and the
privacy violations that are related to it; e.g., automating inequality, generating algorithmic
bias due to bad or limited data and training, removing or limiting human responsibility,
and lacking an adequate level of transparency and accountability [ 39]. Additionally, in
comparison to the other technologies, AI involves some unique data-related challenges
that include data acquisition, the large volume and the streaming of data, heterogeneous
data, complex dependencies among the data, noisy and incomplete data, distributed data
storage and processing, training data, and data privacy [12].
Some examples of AI mishaps that impact society, and that also diminish public trust
in the AI solutions implemented as part of smart city projects, include, but are not limited
to, the following: