Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 8 of 14
of techniques have been developed to reduce data communication energy and improve
network efﬁciency. In addition to reducing data generation through the various green
sensing techniques mentioned earlier, various data pruning methods have been developed,
such as using data compression to reduce communication and bandwidth requirements.
Probably the most important development in this respect is fog and edge computing-
based solutions, which reduce the data transfer and bandwidth requirements of smart
applications by processing data at the edge or fog layers, near the sensors and devices, while
offering other beneﬁts such as data security and privacy. Several works have investigated
the energy efﬁciency and other beneﬁts of fog- and edge-based solutions [102].
For instance, Janbi et al. [ 103] developed a framework for the provision of distributed
AI as a service (DAIaaS) in future environments. The framework divides “the actual
training and inference computations of AI workﬂow into smaller computations that are
executed in parallel according to the level and capacity of resources available with cloud,
fog, and edge layers” [ 103]. They consider “multiple provisioning scenarios for DAIaaS
in three case studies comprising nine applications and AI delivery models and 50 distinct
sensor and software modules”, and report the energy consumption and other beneﬁts of
edge- and fog-based AI delivery solutions.
Mohammed et al. [ 104] proposed the UbiPriSEQ framework, which aims to holistically
and adaptively optimize energy efﬁciency, security, privacy, and quality of service (QoS).
They reported an implementation of the proposed framework using deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), which allows for devising policies and making decisions related to impor-
tant parameters, such as transmit power, the speciﬁc fog nodes to be selected for ofﬂoading
data and computation, and so on.
A number of key technological developments are shaping the development of high-
speed and low-latency networks, such as ﬁfth-generation networks (5G), which offer a
powerful system for ubiquitous environments with advanced sensing and processing
capabilities, along with IoT [ 104]. The requirements of next-generation societies are un-
derpinned by the need to ubiquitously deliver smart services (AI and data-driven) and to
increase the numbers of sensors, and these requirements are expected to be met by 6G, the
next generation of cellular networks [103–106].
The 6G networks are expected to meet these requirements by use of higher-spectrum
and multiple communication technologies [ 107], ultra-dense heterogeneous network-
ing [ 106], terrestrial and non-terrestrial communications [ 108], and the use of AI to optimize
service-oriented network operations [ 109,110]. An important feature of the 6G networks
would be their support of ubiquitous AI services. More importantly, energy efﬁciency is
considered the critical requirement of 6G, and this feature is expected to be ten to a hundred
times better than that of 5G, achieved using novel antenna designs, zero-energy nodes, and
other technologies related to low-rate sensing applications [105,111].
Energy efﬁciency is a grand challenge in the design of large-scale computing systems,
such as supercomputers and computational clouds. For example, the system that is
currently ranked number one on the list of the top 500 supercomputers, Fugaku, has over
seven million cores and requires 28.3MW of power for its operation. While AI algorithms
consume large amounts of power, they can be used to reduce the energy requirements of
computations while optimizing performance [ 112], thus allowing for the concept of green
(virtual) sensing and optimizations to be introduced into computing systems.
5. Final Remarks: Policy Directions for Making AI Greener and Cities Smarter
This perspective paper generally contributes to the growing AI literature by underlin-
ing the fundamental shortfalls in mainstream AI system conceptualizations and practices,
and by advocating the need for a green AI approach to further support smart city transfor-
mation and SDGs.
The paper also provides a perspective on the green AI concept. It deﬁnes and elabo-
rates on the concept, and discusses why a consolidated effort is needed in the area, including
the beneﬁts of a strengthened green AI approach. The elaborations are supported by the