Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 9 of 14
literature from diverse disciplines, including computer, environmental and social sciences,
and urban studies. The paper also discusses issues that relate to the development of digital
infrastructure for green AI. The intention is to discuss these infrastructural issues together
with other high-level issues, and to provide a holistic overview such that different com-
munities working in policy and infrastructure research can understand cross-disciplinary
issues and collaboratively devise holistic and globally optimum solutions.
Moreover, in order to aid in the development of green AI, both at the policy and
infrastructural levels, the paper introduces and deﬁnes the concept of “green sensing”
as physical and virtual green sensing to enable triple bottom line (social, environmental
and economic) sustainability. This paper also highlights the importance of, and advocates
the need for, the development of methods and technologies to sense and measure social,
environmental and economic sustainability.
This perspective piece makes an invaluable contribution to the emerging ﬁeld of green
AI, as there is no scholarly literature that discusses the policy and infrastructural issues of
the given topic in an abstracted way. Our approach here allows readers to gain a holistic
understanding of the issues related to green AI via a relatively succinct perspective piece,
and presents prospective research and development directions.
We conclude the paper with the following remarks, as it is highly important to have
timely, effective and efﬁcient government policy in place for making AI greener and our
cities smarter.
Firstly, we underline that the ﬁeld of AI is growing rapidly; technological advance-
ments are exponential, and applications are disruptive [ 113,114]. In such a situation,
without appropriate government intervention, the business-as-usual scenario will create
extended negative risks and consequences for our society and the planet [ 115]. Unfortu-
nately, these risks and consequences have not yet been fully understood by governments,
which means they do not act upon them or take preventative measures [116].
Secondly, as evidenced in the literature, there are colossal policy challenges in the
way of making AI green [ 117]. Perhaps the most critical one is the need for governments
to develop legal and ethical frameworks for AI and its use [ 118]. Expanding on this
issue, Dwivedi et al. [ 65] listed fairness and equity, accountability and legal issues, ethics,
misuse protection, transparency and auditing, and digital divides and data deﬁcits as the
fundamental public and environmental policy challenges of AI. Another study, by Jobin
et al. [ 119], disclosed “the primary AI ethical principles as follows: transparency, justice
and fairness, non-maleﬁcence, responsibility, privacy, beneﬁcence, freedom and autonomy,
trust, sustainability, dignity, and solidarity”. These principles are critical to AI projects’
ability to deliver the desired outcomes to all.
Thirdly, up until now, no country has passed an AI law yet, and only a small number
of countries have attempted to introduce AI ethical frameworks and regulation guidelines—
such as the European Union’s AI ethics guidelines, intended to inform future regulation,
and other examples include AI ethical frameworks in Australia, Germany, Singapore
and the UK [ 120]. The most popular existing practice for most governments seems to
be adopting a “wait-and-see” approach to AI ethics and regulations [ 121]. Furthermore,
as stated by Hagendorff [ 122], in most cases, the existing ethics frameworks fail to serve
their purposes, as they lack any reinforcement mechanisms—in other words, there are no
consequences if these ethical principles are not followed.
Furthermore, having no regulation at present does not mean that the AI domain will
not be regulated in the near future—in this regard, we note the EU’s recently released
pioneering AI regulation [ 123]. It is very likely that, as has happened in cases of sharing
economy applications, e.g., Uber and AirBnB [ 124,125]—governments will eventually
regulate the AI practice to alleviate its undesired consequences [ 126]. As stated by Yara
et al. [ 87], “with the development of technology, changes are needed in the legal regulation
of AI so that the consequences of its use become useful for the whole society. Market forces
with their own resources will not ensure successful development for the whole population.
Thus, legal regulation of AI is inevitable.”