Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 6 of 14
tance of addressing the risks involved. For instance, studies emphasized the critical
importance of:
 Being supported by the necessary regulatory insight and oversight for AI-based
technologies to enable sustainable development, and avoid gaps in transparency,
safety and ethical standards [62];
 Going beyond the development of AI in sectorial areas, so as to understand the impacts
AI might have across societal, environmental and economic outcomes [63];
 Offering a constructive, rather than optimistic or pessimistic, outlook on AI for pro-
moting desired sustainable outcomes [75].
The most common negative effects of AI on the environment include increases in
electricity usage (computation and transmission power consumption) and the resulting
carbon emissions, along with errors in critical decisions due to user and data bias [ 76–78].
Given that global technology uptake is growing at an exponential rate, the impact of these
externalities is expected to be immense [ 79]. Just to give an example, cryptocurrency
mining in recent years has led to increased energy consumption globally.
As stated by Cuen [ 80], the bitcoin electricity consumption index of the University of
Cambridge indicates that “bitcoin miners are expected to consume roughly 130 Terawatt-
hours of energy (TWh), which is roughly 0.6% of global electricity consumption. This puts
the bitcoin economy on par with the CO 2emissions of a small developing nation like Sri
Lanka or Jordan”.
These undesired externalities call for a sustainable approach to AI that adopts a green-
based technological perspective, including switching to a sustainable AI infrastructure [ 81–85].
In their study on the climate cost of global computation, Dobbe and Whittaker [ 86] made the
following recommendations for tech-aware climate policy and climate-aware tech policy:
 Account for the entire tech ecosystem;
 Address AI’s impact on climate refugees;
 Curb the use of AI to extract fossil fuels;
 Integrate tech and climate policy;
 Make non-energy policy a standard practice;
 Mandate transparency;
 Watch for rebound effects.
Making AI green and sustainable, i.e., the green AI approach, requires a bias-free
(besides a reasonable environmental bias or positive discrimination), inclusive, trustworthy,
explainable, ethical and responsible approach to technology that aims to alleviate the
developmental challenges of the planet in a sustainable way [ 30,87]. This approach—using
AI to solve sustainability challenges and using AI in a more sustainable way—will also
serve as an enabler of smart city transformation [88,89].
4. Green Sensing, Communications and Computing
Now that we have discussed a number of policy and high-level issues related to green
AI, we will deﬁne and discuss issues that relate to the development of digital infrastructure
for green AI. Our intention is to discuss these infrastructural issues here, together with
the high-level issues, and to provide a holistic overview such that different communities
working in policy and infrastructure research can understand the cross-disciplinary issues,
and collaboratively devise holistic and globally optimum solutions.
Sensing, communications, and computing have never been so interdependent as they
are now due to the emergence and convergence of technologies, including the miniaturiza-
tion of sensors, Internet-of-Things (IoT), data-driven methods, AI-driven optimizations,
and cloud, fog and edge computing. The whole ecosystem of smart applications and
systems is converging due to the need for these applications to be intrinsically collaborative
and distributed.
These smart applications and systems require a certain level of smartness that enhances
our ability to engage, sense and act on our environments, analyze them, and make timely,