Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 7 of 14
effective and sustainable decisions [ 90]. The trend is an increase in the number of IoT
devices, expected to reach 25 billion by 2030 [ 91], which in turn increases the requirements
for data pre-processing, storage, communications, and processing. AI provides the brain of
the smartness, i.e., it undertakes the analyses and the decision-making processes. AI, while
requiring signiﬁcant computational resources (storage, communications and processing),
has the capability to improve the efﬁciency of the whole infrastructural ecosystem via the
holistic analysis and optimization of the system.
To aid in the development of green AI, both at the policy and the infrastructure level,
we herein introduce and define the concept of “green sensing” as physical and virtual green
sensing to enable triple bottom line (social, environmental and economic) sustainability . The
definition proposes the development of methods and technologies to sense and measure
social, environmental and economic sustainability. Sustainability is affected by challenges
such as security, privacy, the safety of people, ethical standards and compliance, and so on,
and therefore these are included in our definition of green sensing. These methods and
technologies should be green in terms of their efficiency and energy usage.
What are the potential examples of green sensing methods and technologies in the
broader sense of the term green sensing, as we have deﬁned it above? A physical sensor
to measure the sustainability of urban infrastructure and environmental pollution can
be considered a green sensor [ 92,93]. A virtual sensor, such as that using big data or
social media data to detect congestion on the road, can be considered a green sensor for
environmental sustainability, in the sense that it detects the environmental pollution that
may be caused by a high intensity of pollution in the geographical area where congestion
is happening [94].
The same can also be considered a green sensor for social sustainability (or a social sus-
tainability sensor) because it can detect people’s anguish, and the potential health-related
harms to the people living in or travelling through said geographical area [ 95]. AI-based
virtual sensors can be developed by analyzing various literature, news media, or govern-
ment regulations in order to understand their economic impacts and sustainability. The
possibilities are almost endless. Sensors ﬁt into two broad types: the ones that measure the
impact of phenomena directly (e.g., the power or gas/petrol consumption of a community,
or real-time or future crowd detection in public spaces) [ 96,97], and those that measure the
impact indirectly (e.g., via social media) [98,99].
The concept of green sensing used here is different from and much broader than
the earlier usage of this term, which refers to the methods used to save energy in the
sensing process. The earlier use of the term mostly appeared in the context of wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) [ 100]. A range of methods and technologies have been developed
under the umbrella of wireless sensor networks to reduce the energy usage of sensors.
These techniques have been naturally extended to the IoT paradigm. WSNs and IoTs have
been used for many applications, including for environmental monitoring and protection,
such as forest ﬁre detection, ambience monitoring, and so on. The main motivation for
developing these techniques has been to reduce the energy required by the sensing devices,
which are typically wirelessly connected and battery powered.
The techniques to save energy include duty cycling (periodically turning the radio
on/off to save energy), wake-up radio (on-demand radio on/off), sensor selection or
scheduling (selection or scheduling of a subset of sensors instead of all the sensors),
adaptive sampling (adapting the selection of sensors based on the context and application),
and more. These green sensing techniques can not only reduce the energy required for
sensing, but they also reduce the generated data, reducing the energy needed for data
storage or pre-processing. Energy harvesting techniques by all, or a selection of, sensors
using renewable energies or electric signals have also been proposed to make the sensing
process greener [101].
The data sensed through IoT and other media are usually transferred to a central loca-
tion, such as a master node or a cloud computing center, for their analysis. An astonishingly
large amount of energy is required to transfer data across networks. Naturally, a range