dif/uniFB01culty for a common user to correctly identify what legal con-
cepts are involved in a given case. This interpretation is also sup-
ported by the higher number of missing answers obtained by the
same item (9%). The overall percentage of negative answers ( i.e.
ranging from strongly disagree todisagree ) is about 5%. If this data is
grouped again by hypotheses, it is possible to see that the 1st one
has 9% of negative answers, the 2nd one has 1% of negative answers,
while the 3rd one has 3% of negative answers. By looking at both
the percentages of negative and positive answers, it seems that the
2nd hypothesis is the strongest one, thus positively validating the
work made both on the de /uniFB01nition and management of the legal
ontologies and on the generation of the learning paths.
Although the result is still positive, the 1st hypothesis seems to
be the weakest, while the 3rd one, which is dependent from the
preceding two, is in the middle. To analyze the data further, the
collected answers have been compared with the user statistics on
ages, educational levels and occupations.
The answers of each user have been summarized in an overall
score by attributing 1 to 5 points to each item according to the
provided answer (1 point for strongly disagree to 5 points for
strongly agree ) and mediating the score over the 8 items. The overall
average score is 4.05. Fig. 9 shows how the obtained scores have
been aggregated with respect to user statistics.
As it can be seen, the overall score decreases quite linearly when
age range increases (from 4.19 of the youngest to 3.91 of the
elderly). This could be related to a general greater familiarity of the
younger generations with technology. With respect to theeducational level we notice that, while undergraduates are more
uncritical with respect to system (average score of 4.33), the criti-
cisms rise as the level of education increases. When switching to
occupation, it is possible to see that unemployed people is the least
critical user category at all, with an average score of 4.63 but this is
due to the fact that, in our sample, this category is mainly composed
of young undergraduates that, as seen before, are among the most
enthusiastic users. Lawyers reach the second highest average score
(4.33) and this is particularly encouraging, given the familiarity that
this category of workers has with the legal issues addressed by the
system.
3.3. System usability
To measure the usability of the system, the System Usability
Scale (SUS) de /uniFB01ned in ( Brooke,1996 ) has been used. SUS is based on
a set of 10 questions whose answers are given on the same 5-point
Likert scale used for the perceived effectiveness (ranging from
strongly disagree tostrongly agree ). The 10 items that compose the
SUS questions are:
1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently;
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex;
3. I thought the system was easy to use;
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to
be able to use this system;
5. I found the various functions in this system were well
integrated;
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system;
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this
system very quickly;
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use;
9. I felt very con /uniFB01dent using the system;
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with
this system.
The SUS yields a single number representing a composite
measure of the overall usability of the system. To calculate the SUS
score it is necessary to sum the score contributions from each item.
For items 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 (having positive polarity) the score
contribution is the scale position minus 1. For items 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10
(having negative polarity), the contribution is 5 minus the scale
position. The /uniFB01nal score, ranging from 0 to 100 is obtained by
multiplying the sum of the scores by 2.5.
Fig. 10 summarizes the results obtained in the usability
Fig. 8. Answers to the questionnaire on perceived effectiveness.
Fig. 9. Correlation of average scores with user statistics.N. Capuano, D. Toti / Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467 465