Full length article
Experimentation of a smart learning system for law based on
knowledge discovery and cognitive computing
Nicola Capuanoa, Daniele Totib,*
aDepartment of Information, Electrical Engineering and Applied Mathematics, University of Salerno, Fisciano, SA, Italy
bDepartment of Sciences, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy
article info
Article history:
Available online 23 March 2018
Keywords:
Adaptive learning
Knowledge discovery
Cognitive computing
Natural language processing
Ontology integration
Online dispute resolutionabstract
This work presents a Smart Learning system based on Knowledge Discovery and Cognitive Computing
techniques aimed at citizens, legal students and experts alike, providing them with the possibility of
submitting legal cases expressed in natural language and obtaining legal insight and advice in return.
Advanced features implemented within the system include the automatic conceptualization and clas-
si/uniFB01cation of textual legal cases via natural language processing, the generation of learning paths by
relying upon legal ontologies, and additional features for managing legal knowledge bases, including
editing, versioning, integration and enrichment. The system has been experimented on a diversi /uniFB01ed
user-base and succeeded in obtaining a positive evaluation with respect to the aspects that were subject
of the investigation, including effectiveness, ef /uniFB01ciency and usability, thus paving the way to make the
system a successful cognitive learning platform for future law professionals and knowledgeable citizens.
©2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction and related work
Intelligent Technologies and research results from the /uniFB01eld of
Cognitive Computing , over the course of the last decades, have
steadily and progressively improved people ’s quality of life and
work. Whereas a number of activities have been or are on the verge
of being replaced by computer methods and technologies alto-
gether, a wide range of professions have bene /uniFB01ted from the latter
and are augmented by them in terms of both effectiveness and
ef/uniFB01ciency.
The legal area, historically one of the least prone to adopt and
use innovative technologies and solutions, is being tackled as well
by systems able to perform the so-called Alternative Dispute Reso-
lution processes, providing users with computational means to
assess their individual cases and preliminarily explore their options
before opting for a full- /uniFB02edged legal action.
Systems like these should in principle /uniFB01nd their usefulness not
only for common citizens before turning to (or throughout their
consultation with) human legal experts, but also for aspiring law-
yers and students of law who are still honing their skills and
competences and may be assisted in their studies and training. Assuch, these systems fall within the broader area of Smart Learning ,
with their aim to facilitate learning activities and improve their
ef/uniFB01cacy. Smart Learning systems are in fact technology-enhanced
systems that on one hand enable users to interact with digital
learning resources at any given time and place, and on the other
hand provide them with supporting tools, suggestions and guid-
ance to further improve the learning experience ( Hwang, 2014 ).
More speci /uniFB01cally, systems able to somewhat “understand ”cases
and needs expressed in natural language, and derive from them
domain-speci /uniFB01c hints, resources and knowledge are usually prod-
ucts from cutting edge research in the cognitive computing sub-
/uniFB01elds of Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Discovery ,
also exploiting formalisms and techniques originating from the
Semantic Web (Davies, Fensel, &van Harmelen, 2002 ) and repre-
senting dramatic enhancements for learners in a variety of subjects
and /uniFB01elds. As a matter of fact, semantic methodologies and tech-
nologies have recently become prominent in Technology-Enhanced
Learning , and a number of platforms using such techniques com-
bined with ontologies have been proposed and implemented for
ful/uniFB01lling the needs of both academia and industry ( Gaeta,
Mangione, Miranda, &Orciuoli, 2013 ;Gaeta, Loia, Orciuoli, &
Ritrovato, 2015 ;Miranda, Mangione, Orciuoli, Gaeta, &Loia, 2013 ;
Capuano, Dell ’Angelo, Orciuoli, Miranda, &Zurolo, 2009a ;Capuano,
Mangione, Pierri, &Salerno, 2014 ;Del Nostro, Orciuoli, Paolozzi,
Ritrovato, &Toti, 2013b ;Del Nostro, Gaeta, Paolozzi, Ritrovato, &*Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: ncapuano@unisa.it (N. Capuano), daniele.toti@
computationalbiology.it (D. Toti).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers in Human Behavior
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comphumbeh
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.03.034
0747-5632/ ©2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467