the number of relevant documents retrieved at each step l. The
micro-averaging of recall and precision (at the generic step l), is
de/uniFB01ned as follows:
Recl¼X
Qi/C12/C12/C12RQi∩Bl;Qi/C12/C12/C12
/C12/C12RQi/C12/C12Precl¼X
Qi/C12/C12/C12RQi∩Bl;Qi/C12/C12/C12
/C12/C12/C12Bl;Qi/C12/C12/C12
where RQiis the set of relevant resources for a given query Qi, and
Bl,Qiis the set of resources retrieved at the step lfor the query Qi.
Fig. 6 shows the tendency of the micro-average of recall/preci-
sion curve evaluated on the collection set, and compares the
approach used with the well-known keyword-based search engine
Lucene .4
It is important to stress out that the effectiveness and accuracy
of the semantic search is strongly dependent on the quality of the
underlying legal ontology, along with the enrichment mechanism.
The latter, as testi /uniFB01ed by the results, improves its effectiveness as
the length of the input text query increases, since the more infor-
mation is available, the better the tool is able to correctly under-
stand its context and come up with meaningful concepts.
3.2. Perceived effectiveness
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed system and of the
underlying models and methodologies, 35 potential users have
been involved in an experimental interaction with the prototype.
Such users (60% males, 40% females) belonged to different age
ranges, educational levels and occupational categories as summa-
rized in Fig. 7 . 71% of them had already heard about civil and
commercial mediation, while the remaining 29% did not know
what it was.
The interaction with the system was guided by 15 scenarios
covering three legal areas: motor liability, leases and e-commerce.
For each scenario, a simulated dispute (covering some concepts of
the related area) was described to the user. Then, each user was
asked to play one of the roles involved in a dispute for a subset of at
least three scenarios. For each selected role, the user had to interact
with the system (after a brief introduction to its functions) by
describing the case and the played role in natural language to
obtain information for the (judicial or extrajudicial) settlement of
the dispute. User feedback was collected and analyzed to determine
the level of ful /uniFB01llment of the following experimental hypotheses:
1. The resources provided by the system are coherent with the
user-de /uniFB01ned description of a case;
2. The resources provided by the system are coherent with the
selected legal ontology;
3. The resources provided by the system are suitable for support-
ing the user in dealing with the case.
The system was made available on-line and the users were left
free to schedule the time to dedicate to the experiment within two
days. By the end of the second day, they had to /uniFB01ll a questionnaire
made of the following set of items (where items 1 e3 tested the 1st
hypothesis, items 4 e5 tested the 2nd hypothesis, and items 6 e8
tested the 3rd hypothesis):
1. The legal concepts extracted from the case description are
related to it;
2. The suggested information resources are coherent with the
extracted concepts;3. The generated learning path is coherent with the extracted
concepts;
4. The learning path is presented by taking into account
prerequisites;
5. The same topics are never repeated in the learning path;
6. The learning resources are understandable even by inexperi-
enced users;
7. The quality and level of detail of learning resources are
appropriate;
8. The provided information is suitable for supporting the user in
dealing with the case.
Users had to specify their level of agreement or disagreement
with each questionnaire item based on the following scale: strongly
disagree (1),disagree (2),neither/nor (3),agree (4) and strongly agree
(5), corresponding to the 5 points of the Likert scale. Fig. 8 shows
the average students ’evaluation with respect to each item.
The collected data shows a general positive evaluation of pro-
totype effectiveness provided by potential users with an overall
percentage of about 75% of positive answers ( i.e.ranging from agree
tostrongly agree ).
If the obtained answers are grouped with respect to the tested
hypotheses, the overall percentage of positive answers is 72% for
the 1st hypothesis (items 1 e3) and about 76% for both the 2nd
(items 4 e5) and the 3rd (items 6 e8) hypotheses. The lower per-
formance is obtained by item 1 (66%), but this is probably due to the
Fig. 6. Micro-average of recall/precision in comparison with Lucene.
Fig. 7. Statistics about the potential users involved in the experimentation.
4http://lucene.apache.org .N. Capuano, D. Toti / Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467 464