Wikipedia knowledge base ( “Wikipedia Topics ”). By checking the
desired concepts (ticking their respective checkboxes) and clicking
the“Information ”button, legal resources ( e.g.rules, judgments,
etc.) related to the selected concepts are shown, each with a
hyperlinked reference to the original legal source; besides, the
rightmost part of the panel is updated by displaying the tree hier-
archy where such concepts are placed with respect to the whole
ontology. The “Training path ”button, instead, redirects users to the
learning area, where they can follow the online course dynamically
generated from the selected concepts as described in Section 2.3.
3. Experimental results
Two experiments have been performed to assess the system ’s
ef/uniFB01ciency, effectiveness and usability from both quantitative and
qualitative perspectives. The /uniFB01rst experiment was aimed atevaluating the ef /uniFB01ciency of the semantic search process performed
by the Knowledge Discovery and Learning component described in
Section 2. The detected performance has been then compared with
that of a standard search engine operating on the same document
corpus.
The second experiment was aimed at assessing both the effec-
tiveness and the usability of the system as perceived by the end
user. For this reason, 35 potential users have been involved,
diversi /uniFB01ed by age, educational level and occupation. Users have
interacted with the system guided by simulated legal scenarios.
Their feedback was collected and analyzed by using questionnaires
designed to cover the different aspects under investigation. The
following subsections present the experiments and the obtained
results. “Ef/uniFB01ciency of the search process ”reports the quantitative
results obtained in the /uniFB01rst experiment, whereas the other sub-
sections discuss the experiment with real users and the obtained
results with respect to both effectiveness ( “Perceived effective-
ness ”) and usability ( “System ’s usability ”).
3.1. Ef /uniFB01ciency of the search process
To evaluate the system ’s performance with respect to the se-
mantic search process described in section 2, 50 queries generated
from different input text have been analyzed. Generated queries
represent sample legal cases written in natural language like the
following: “I was traveling on the freeway with my car when I was
involved in an accident caused by a large drop of fuel on the road. I
reported physical injury and damage to the car. Can I claim damages to
the highway company? ”. The average number of concepts involved
in a sample query was 6 (with a minimum of 2 and a maximum of
16). The quality of the approach is assessed in terms of precision
and recall measures, considering the analysis through micro-
average of the individual precision-recall curves ( van Rijsbergen,
1979 ).
LetQ¼{Q1,Q2,…,Qn} be a set of queries and Dall the relevant
resources for the given set of queries Q. For each query Qi,l¼20
steps are considered, up to its maximum recall value, and measure
Fig. 4. Examples of eJRM storytelling learning resources.
Fig. 5. Screenshot of the panel for semantic search and learning path generation.N. Capuano, D. Toti / Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467 463