2.2. Semantic search
The eJRM system implements a methodology for analyzing
natural language text expressing a legal case and correlating it with
domain-speci /uniFB01c knowledge. The module, by evaluating the input
text, is able to both identify and extract the most relevant concepts
featured in it and to associate related topics not explicitly
mentioned. Speci /uniFB01cally, (i) relevant concepts are extracted from a
user-input text; (ii) extracted concepts are then enriched with
terms coming from external sources and (iii) classi /uniFB01ed according to
their correspondences with terms from the managed legal ontol-
ogies; /uniFB01nally (iv) a semantic search for related information among
available norms and sentences is performed, and the resulting
documents are returned to the user.
Step (i) is carried out by using a knowledge discoverymethodology incorporating part of the algorithm described and
implemented in ( Toti, Atzeni, &Polticelli, 2012a; Toti &Rinelli, 2016
On the road to speed-reading and fast learning with CONCEPTUM,
2016) and earlier derived from ( Atzeni, Polticelli, &Toti, 2011a ,
2011b ,2011c ,2011d ;Toti, Atzeni, &Polticelli, 2012b ); step (ii) is
performed by employing the mechanism already described in sub-
section 2.1, which relies on the external, common-sense knowledge
base of Wikipedia ; step (iii) is performed by calculating a weighted
combination of the standard measures of precision and recall as
detailed in ( Capuano, De Maio, et al., 2014; Capuano et al., 2015 );
step (iv) is obtained through connection to the repository of legal
documents of the Italian Supreme Court of Cassation .
Fig. 2 summarizes the processes of ontology enrichment with
terms coming from Wikipedia and the same process applied to
relevant terms extracted from the input text describing a legal case.Table 1
Summary of previous related work by the authors that laid the foundation of the present work.
Ref. Contribution Methods
(Capuano et al.,
2015 )Creation of an integrated legal ontology, de /uniFB01nition and implementation of a methodology for
generating learning courses from selected legal concepts.Ontology modelling, knowledge
matching and sequencing.
(Arosio et al., 2013 ) De /uniFB01nition of an ontological model for representing a legal case from natural language input, and
design of a reasoner able to provide automatic legal assistance by traversing the de /uniFB01ned
ontologies.Ontology modelling, natural language
processing and automatic reasoning.
(Capuano, De Maio,
Salerno, &Toti,
2014 )De/uniFB01nition and implementation of a methodology for the automatic classi /uniFB01cation of legal cases
within a learning and training platform for law.Natural language processing,
knowledge discovery, classi /uniFB01cation.
(Capuano et al.,
2014 )De/uniFB01nition of a learning model based on storytelling to teach legal concepts also to inexperienced
usersDigital storytelling, adaptive learning.
(Capuano, Gaeta,
et al., 2014 )Automatic construction of learning courses based on storytelling from selected legal concepts Knowledge matching and sequencing,
digital storytelling.
Fig. 1. Excerpt of a legal ontology including informative and educational relations.N. Capuano, D. Toti / Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467 461