Toti, 2013a ;Del Nostro, Orciuoli, Paolozzi, Ritrovato, &Toti, 2013c ).
A number of proposals have tried to foster the use of semantic
methodologies and technologies speci /uniFB01cally in the legal area
(Casanovas, Sartor, Casellas, &Rubino, 2008 ;Valente &Breuker,
1994 ;van Kralingen, 1997 ), but mainly targeting legal pro-
fessionals, experts and lawyers. Examples of related recent ap-
proaches include Estrella ( Rubino, Rotolo, &Sartor, 2006 ),
HARNESS ( van de Ven, Hoekstra, Breker, Wortel, &El-Ali, 2008 ),
LOIS ( Biasiotti, Sagri, &Tiscornia, 2005 ), DALOS ( Francesconi &
Tiscornia, 2008 ), MetaSearch ( Ferrer, Rivero, &Garcìa, 2008 ),
ICT4Law ( Ajani et al., 2009 ) and Ontomedia ( Poblet, Casanovas, &
Cobo, 2010 ), most of them proposing and employing information
resources in the form of speci /uniFB01cally-designed ontologies. Ap-
proaches like these are however less fruitful for learners and
common users, since the latter typically lack the speci /uniFB01c knowledge
required to get the most out of the proposed methods and systems.
More details on those systems were earlier mentioned in ( Capuano,
Longhi, Salerno, &Toti, 2015 ).
In this regard, the “electronic Justice Relationship Management ”
(eJRM) project, funded by the Italian Ministry of Education and
Research, was meant to bring about an integrated knowledge dis-
covery and learning system for supporting people (being them
either experts or common citizens and learners) on a number of
activities related to legal mediation and alternative dispute reso-
lution. In ( Arosio, Bagnara, Capuano, Fersini, &Toti, 2013 ;Capuano,
De Maio, Salerno, &Toti, 2014 ;Capuano et al., 2015 ), some of the
system ’s components and underlying methodologies for processing
cases written in natural language and generating learning paths
have been described.
The generated learning paths adopt a teaching approach based
onStorytelling . The educational potential of narration in the legal
/uniFB01eld is in fact widely recognized ( Blissenden, 2007 ;Capuano et al.,
2014 ;Posner, 1997 ;Wolff, 2014 ): it facilitates the understanding of
abstract concepts through realistic stories and creates emotional
and empathetic immersion through role-play. This is proven by the
fact that, especially in Anglo-American countries, law teaching is
heavily based on casebooks made of true or /uniFB01ctional stories as well
as on moot courts, i.e.simulated court proceedings. According to
(Blissenden, 2007 ), storytelling is an essential method of legal
practice, teaching, and thought and the idea that stories are a useful
method of provoking thinking about law has been currently shifted
to the legal academy.
In addition to traditional education, several examples of
computer-based learning environments for law that adopt story-
telling also exist. For example, CivilObiezion ( Steslow &Gardner,
2011 )! is a series of trial simulations in which students play the
role of lawyers; TLE ( Maharg, 2007 ), is a virtual simulation envi-
ronment used in professional legal practice; Fishbowl ( Douglas &
Johnson, 2010 ) is an educational game based on problem solving
for the development of legal skills. Leveraging these positive ex-
periences, a storytelling model for eJRM was proposed in ( Capuano
et al., 2014 ;Capuano, Gaeta, &Fratesi, 2014 ) ensuring a high degree
of involvement and skills development even for users inexperi-
enced with legal topics.
In this paper, a brief recap of the main theoretical and techno-
logical components of eJRM that were fully described and explored
in the other cited works is /uniFB01rst laid out. For convenience purposes,
Table 1 . Summary of previous related work by the authors that laid
the foundation of the present work reports a summary of the most
relevant related work that laid the foundation of the eJRM system
and that is cited throughout the paper. Afterwards, this paper
proceeds to describe the experimentation of the system ’s compo-
nent speci /uniFB01cally related to knowledge discovery and learning path
generation is reported, which has been carried out on a diversi /uniFB01ed
user-base. Results of such an experimentation highlight the prosand cons of the provided features as perceived by the system ’s
users, assessing its performance and effectiveness so that it may be
possible to polish and re /uniFB01ne it, with the purpose of making the
system a successful support and learning platform for future law
professionals and knowledgeable citizens.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2the main fea-
tures of the system for knowledge discovery and learning path
generation are brie /uniFB02y recapped and outlined. Section 3reports the
experimentation carried out. Finally, conclusions are drawn.
2. Outline of the eJRM system
The eJRM system is made up of a number of components
mutually interoperable meant to provide a plethora of features to
the users. Among them, the Knowledge Discovery and Learning
component, related to the management and the evolution of the
internal knowledge base as well as to the extraction of relevant
knowledge to ful /uniFB01ll users ’learning needs, plays a fundamental role,
and has been the subject of the experimentation reported in this
work. In the following subsections its core features and character-
istics are brie /uniFB02y recapped and outlined.
2.1. Management of the ontological knowledge base
The eJRM system adopts a conceptual management of available
resources based on legal ontologies, the latter resulting from the
enrichment of the EuroVoc ,1ItalGiure2and DeJure3thesauri with
common-sense knowledge coming from Wikipedia . The de /uniFB01ned
ontologies include about 13.000 concepts, mutually interconnected
both via informative relationships ( narrower term ,broader term ,
related term ), aimed at structuring the dictionary of legal terms, and
via educational relationships ( requires ,has part ,teaching order ),
aimed at introducing useful properties for learning. A small excerpt
of a legal ontology is shown in Fig. 1 .
The system includes functionalities for browsing the legal on-
tologies featured by the system and performing a number of op-
erations upon them including: (i) editing, i.e.updating and deleting
terms and relationships; (ii) versioning, i.e.saving and restoring
different versions of the ontologies; (iii) enrichment, i.e.increasing
the included information by associating further terms and topics
coming from external sources; (iv) matching and integration, i.e.
/uniFB01nding correspondences among terms from different ontologies
and producing an integrated ontology as a result.
Functions (i) and (ii) rely upon a graphical ontology manage-
ment system meant to be used not necessarily by domain experts,
which is further described in ( Toti &Longhi, 2015; Toti &Longhi,
2017 SEMANTO: a graphical ontology management system for
knowledge discovery, 2017). Function (iii) is based on an algorithm
described in ( Capuano, De Maio, Salerno, et al., 2014 ) meant to
automatically associate a set of weighted terms corresponding to
Wikipedia topics with each ontological concept. The addition of
common-sense meaning to legal concepts has the purpose of nar-
rowing the gap between the formal language used to describe legal
concepts and the informal and somewhat inappropriate jargon
used by common citizens querying the system. Function (iv) is
based upon an algorithm described in ( Capuano et al., 2015 ), where
a range of similarity criteria is applied to the ontological elements
in order to detect exact, approximate or partial matches among
them.1http://eurovoc.europa.eu/ .
2http://www.italgiure.giustizia.it/ .
3https://www.iusexplorer.it/ .N. Capuano, D. Toti / Computers in Human Behavior 92 (2019) 459 e467 460