Journal of Statistical Software 9
particular data point. By incorporating experimental interventions in this way, we are able
to orient the edges in a causal Bayesian network and thus distinguish between equivalent
DAGs. A similar strategy from a Bayesian perspective was ﬁrst adopted in Cooper and Yoo
(1999). Evidently, one advantage of this framework is its universal applicability to diﬀerent
data types and various likelihood models.
Since the program (7) is nonconvex it is generally regarded as infeasible to ﬁnd an exact global
minimizer of this problem. Indeed, score-based structure learning is known to be NP-hard
(Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004). Instead, we seek local minimizers of (7) through an
optimization scheme based on block coordinate descent. The method is based on the following
observation: The diﬃculty in solving (7) lies in enforcing the constraint B∈D, which is a
highly nonconvex and singular parameter constraint. Instead, if we consider (7) oneedge at a
time, the problem simpliﬁes considerably. This is the heuristic exploited by many score-based
methods (most notably greedy hill climbing). Unlike conventional methods, however, Fu and
Zhou (2013) propose a block-cyclic strategy and show that it outperforms existing approaches
based on greedy updates. This general observation has been exploited to construct the family
of fast algorithms implemented in sparsebn .
3.2. Algorithm details
Recalling that B= (βij), the high-level idea behind the method is the following:
1. Repeat outer loop until stopping criterion met:
2.Outer loop. For each pair (j,k),j/negationslash=k:
(a) Minimize (7) with respect to (βkj,βjk), holding all other parameters ﬁxed;
(b) If the edge k→j(resp.j→k) induces a cycle in the graph, set βkj←0(resp.βjk←0)
and then update βjk(resp.βkj);
(c) Repeat inner loop until convergence:
3.Inner loop. Fix the edge set Efrom the outer loop and minimize (7) by cycling
through the edge weights βkjfor(k,j)∈E.
Since the program (7) depends on the unknown regularization parameter λ, this value must
be supplied in advance to the algorithm. In practice, we wish to solve (7) for several values
of the regularization parameter, so instead of returning a single DAG estimate, the output of
this meta-algorithm is a solution path (also called a regularization path , Friedman et al.2010):
A sequence of estimates {/hatwideB(λmax),/hatwideB(λ1),...,/hatwideB(λmin)}for a pre-determined grid of values
λmax> λ 1>···> λ min. This is standard practice in the literature on coordinate descent
(Friedman et al.2007; Wu and Lange 2008), and is similar to the well-known graphical lasso
for undirected graphs (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2008).
Asλdecreases, there is less regularization, hence the resulting estimates/hatwideB(λm)become more
dense (i.e., contain more edges). Since our focus is on sparse graphs, in practice we use this
facttoterminatethealgorithmearlyifthesolutionpathbecomestoodense, i.e., ifthenumber
of edges in/hatwideB(λm)exceeds some user-deﬁned threshold. The default values used in sparsebn
are10pedges for continuous data and 3pedges for discrete data. The smaller threshold for
discrete data is due to the higher computational complexity of the underlying algorithm as
compared with the continuous case.