Journal of Statistical Software 15
The sparsebnData class is used to represent both continuous and discrete data with exper-
imental interventions. Observational data corresponds to the degenerate case where Xdoes
not contain any interventions, and is treated as such by the sparsebn package. The slots are:
•data: This is the original data as a data frame with nobservations and pvariables.
•type: Either "continuous" or"discrete" .
•levels: A list of levels for each variable. This is a list of length pwhosejth component
is a vector containing the levels of the jth variable.
•ivn: The list of interventions for each observations. This is a list of length nwhoseith
component is a vector of node names (or indices) that are under intervention for the
ith observation.
The sparsebnPath class represents a solution path, which is the output of the main function
estimate.dag . Internally, this is a listofsparsebnFit objects whose jth component cor-
responds to the jth value of λin the solution path, λmax>λ 1>···>λ min. Since this class
is essentially a wrapper for this list, it has no named slots.
The sparsebnFit class represents an individual graph estimate from a DAG learning algo-
rithm. The graph itself is stored as an edgeList object in the edgesslot, which is an internal
implementation of a child-parent edge list. Alternatively, this graph can also be stored in
a variety of other formats including graphNEL (from the graphpackage), igraph(from the
igraphpackage), and network (from the network package) by using the setGraphPackage
method (Section 4.5). The slots are:
•edges: A directed graph corresponding to the estimated network, stored internally as
anedgeList by default.
•nodes: A vector of node names for the graph.
•lambda: The value of λused to estimate the network.
•nedge: The total number of edges in the graph.
•pp, nn, time : The number of nodes, number of samples, and clock time to estimate
this network (these are mainly used internally by the package).
4.5. Compatibility
Unfortunately, there is no consistent standard in Rfor storing and representing graphs. As
a result, diﬀerent domains have adopted diﬀerent Rpackages as a de facto standard for
graph and network representation. For example, in biology the graphpackage (Gentleman,
Whalen, Huber, and Falcon 2011) seems to be the most popular, whereas in social science
and demography the network package (Butts 2008) is more popular. In other domains, the
igraphpackage (Csardi and Nepusz 2006) is popular, which has libraries in R,Python, and C.
For this reason, sparsebn does not provide its own mechanism for manipulating graphs, and
insteadprovidescross-compatibilitywitheachofthesethreepackages. Bydefault,allmethods