Journal of Statistical Software 5
This idea was ﬁrst explored by Rütimann and Bühlmann (2009) using the PC algorithm
(Section 2.3), and a similar idea using our methods is implemented in sparsebn . In many
situations, the DAG representation (B,Ω)encodes more conditional independence relations
than the inverse covariance matrix Γ, which is one of the motivations for learning DAGs from
observational data.
Discrete data
In a discrete Bayesian network, each Xjis a ﬁnite random variable with rjstates. Instead
of a traditional product multinomial model, sparsebn uses a multi-logit model for discrete
data. One of the advantages of this approach is a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of
parameters, and recent work suggests that this model serves as a good approximation to the
product multinomial model (Gu et al.2018). Here, we brieﬂy introduce the multi-logit model,
and describe how it is used for structure learning.
We use a standard form of the multi-logit model in which each variable Xjis encoded by
dj=rj−1dummy variables (Dobson and Barnett 2008). More speciﬁcally, given a reference
category (which may be arbitrary), the rjpossible values of Xjare encoded by a vector of
dummy variables zj= (zjk,k= 1,...,dj)∈{0,1}dj. LetI(·)denote the usual indicator
function, so that e.g., I(Xj=k) = 1ifXj=kandI(Xj=k) = 0otherwise. If we choose
the last category as the reference, then zjk=I(Xj=k)fork= 1,...,djso that the reference
category is coded as zj=0.
Under this parametrization, the conditional distributions take the form
P(Xj=u|pa(Xj)) =exp/parenleftbigβ0uj+/summationtext
i∈pa(Xj)z/latticetop
iβiuj/parenrightbig
/summationtextrj
m=1exp/parenleftbigβ0uj+/summationtext
i∈pa(Xj)z/latticetop
iβimj/parenrightbig, u= 1,...,rj, (5)
where βiuj∈Rdiis the coeﬃcient vector for variable Xito predict the uth level ofXjwith
interceptβ0uj. In this model, if Xi/∈pa(Xj)then we have equivalently βiuj=0for allu.
Letβij= (βi1j,...,βirjj)∈Rdirjbe the coeﬃcient vector for edge itoj. Therefore, by
estimating βij, we can infer the structure of a network. If βij=0, there does not exist an
edge fromXitoXj. For more details on this model, see Gu et al.(2018).
2.2. Causal DAG learning from interventions
DAGs are a popular model for causal networks, particularly when combined with experimen-
tal interventions in addition to observational data (Pearl 2000). Cooper and Yoo (1999);
Meganck, Leray, and Manderick (2006); Ellis and Wong (2008) proposed methods to learn
causal networks with a mixture of observational and experimental data, and Peér, Regev,
Elidan, and Friedman (2001); Pournara and Wernisch (2004) inferred gene networks with
perturbed expression data. Each of the methods in sparsebn can take experimental data as
input in order to learn the precise causal relationships in a system.
The following simple example illustrates how interventions can be used for learning causal
relations: Assume the true causal graph is G∗:X1→X2, i.e.,X1is a direct cause of X2.
This is observationally equivalent to the graph G:X1←X2– we cannot distinguish between
these two graphs using observational data alone. Instead, by manipulating X2experimentally
and ﬁxing its value, we can “cut oﬀ” the edge from X1toX2since the value of X2would no
longer be associated with (i.e., is independent of) X1. This is an example of an experimental