Journal of Statistical Software 11
4. The sparsebnpackage
Based on the framework described in Section 3, sparsebn implements four structure learning
algorithms that are each tailored to a speciﬁc type of data:
•Experimental, Gaussian data (Zhang 2016).
•Experimental, discrete data (Gu et al.2018).
•Observational, Gaussian data (Aragam and Zhou 2015).
•Observational, discrete data (Gu et al.2018).
By combining these approaches, sparsebn automatically handles datasets with mixed observa-
tionalandexperimentaldata. Eachalgorithmisimplementedin C++using Rcpp(Eddelbuet-
tel and François 2011; Eddelbuettel 2013). In addition to the main algorithms, the package
implements high-level methods for ﬁtting, plotting, and manipulating graphical models.
Furthermore, sparsebn is actually a family of Rpackages, designed to be cross-compatible
with minimal external dependencies. To date, sparsebn imports the following packages:
•ccdrAlgorithm , based on Aragam and Zhou (2015) and Fu and Zhou (2013).
•discretecdAlgorithm (Gu 2017), based on Gu et al.(2018).
•sparsebnUtils (Aragam, Gu, and Zhou 2017), for housing various common utilities and
classes.
The idea is that the codebase for each algorithm is housed inside its own package, allowing
for rapid development and convenient extensibility. This allows us to add new algorithms and
features rapidly without signiﬁcant dependency or compatibility constraints.
4.1. Speed and scalability improvements
sparsebn is designed to handle large, high-dimensional datasets with ppotentially in the
thousands. To illustrate this, Figure 2 provides a comparison of our methods with the PC
algorithm from the pcalgpackage and the MMHC algorithm from the bnlearnpackage. Due
to the higher computational workload for discrete algorithms in general, the results here are
for Gaussian data only. Furthermore, although these numbers are intended to be illustrative,
the interested reader may ﬁnd more extensive simulations corroborating these results for both
types of data in Aragam and Zhou (2015); Gu et al.(2018).
In order to provide a direct comparison, the times reported in Figure 2 reﬂect the total
time to learn graphs of the same complexity (number of edges), even though sparsebn is
capable of computing further into the solution path if desired. Note also that both the PC
and MMHC algorithms output only a single graph, whereas our method outputs a solution
path with multiple graph estimates. The results illustrate how sparsebn provides a more
favorable scaling when pis large: For the largest graph with 1090 nodes, sparsebn is 17x faster
compared to the PC algorithm in pcalgand 52x faster compared to the MMHC algorithm
inbnlearn. These computational improvements are made possible by the use of an eﬃcient
block coordinate descent algorithm that leverages warm starts and active set updates; for
more details see Section 3.2.