10 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
The detailed implementation of the algorithms uses several tricks from the literature on
coordinate descent in order to speed up the algorithm:
•Warm starts. Given the previous estimate/hatwideB(λm−1)in the solution path, we use
/hatwideB(λm−1)as the initial guess for the next iterate/hatwideB(λm). Furthermore, it is always
possible to choose λmaxso that/hatwideB(λmax) =0(i.e., the zero matrix), which is the default
implementation used by sparsebn .
•Active set iterations. In the inner loop above, the algorithm only updates the nonzero
parameters by solving at most ppenalized regression or multi-logit regression problems.
These subproblems are computationally tractable and can be solved eﬃciently, which
yields signiﬁcant performance improvements for large graphs.
•Block updates. Instead of updating each βjkone at a time, the algorithms update each
parameterasablock {βjk,βkj}. Thisisjustiﬁedbytheacyclicityassumption: If βjk/negationslash= 0
andβkj/negationslash= 0, then the acyclic constraint is violated, and this fact is exploited to update
both parameters simultaneously.
•Sparse data structures. Internally, everything is stored using sparse data structures for
representingdirectedacyclicgraphs. Thissavesmemoryandspeedsupthecomputation
of each update.
Compared with existing packages for structure learning, the main novelties of the present
methods are (1) The use of /lscript1and MCP regularization, (2) Block-cyclic (as opposed to
greedy, one-at-a-time) updates, and (3) The use of warm starts in computing the solution
path. Further details can be found in Fu and Zhou (2013) and Aragam and Zhou (2015).
3.3. Parameter estimation
After learning the structure of a Bayesian network, often it is of interest to then estimate
the parameters of the local conditional distributions associated with the learned structure.
For causal DAGs, these parameters determine the causal eﬀect sizes between the parents and
their children.
For Gaussian data, this is straightforward by regressing each node onto its parents, using
(unpenalized) least squares regression. Note that this requires that the maximum number of
parents is at most n, which is another motivation for leveraging sparsity in our algorithms.
This produces a weighted adjacency matrix/hatwideB= (/hatwideβij)(or more speciﬁcally, a solution path of
adjacency matrices). Given these weights, we can estimate the conditional variance of each
node given its parents by:
/hatwideω2
j:=VAR(xj−X/hatwideβj).
This yields a variance matrix/hatwideΩ = diag(/hatwideω2
1,...,/hatwideω2
p), and together (/hatwideB,/hatwideΩ)can be used to
estimate the covariance matrix Σ(see Section 2.1).
For discrete data, we regress each node onto its parents set using multi-logit regression via
theRpackage nnet(Venables and Ripley 2002). Note that for discrete data, instead of a
coeﬃcient matrix we get a 4-way array/hatwideB= (/hatwideβij), where/hatwideβijis a matrix and the (u,k)entry
of this matrix is the inﬂuence that level kofXihas on level uofXj.