12 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
C C C C C C C C C C
200 400 600 800 1000020406080100
p (number of nodes)Time (s)
P PPPPPPPPP
M MMMMMMMMM
Figure 2: Timing comparison (in seconds). Each point represents the total runtime to execute
an algorithm on simulated Gaussian data as a function of the number of nodes p= 109k
(k= 1,..., 10). The DAGs were constructed by tiling kindependent copies of the pathﬁnder
network(p= 109), andn= 50sampleswererandomlygeneratedforeachdataset. (solidblack
line) C = CCDr algorithm implemented in sparsebn , (dashed blue line) P = PC algorithm
implemented in pcalg, (dotted red line) M = MMHC algorithm implemented in bnlearn.
4.2. Experimental interventions
In addition to scalability, another feature that distinguishes sparsebn is its native sup-
port for mixed observational and experimental data. As discussed in Section 2.2, exper-
imental interventions allow observationally equivalent DAGs to be distinguished, thereby
uncovering the structure of the true causal DAG. To illustrate this, we ran two simula-
tion experiments, reported in Figures 3 and 4. To keep things simple, we focus on dis-
crete data. (Code to run these experiments on continuous data can be found at https:
//github.com/itsrainingdata/sparsebn-reproduce .) As in the previous subsection, a
more thorough evaluation of the eﬀect of interventions can be found in Gu et al.(2018);
Zhang (2016); Fu and Zhou (2013).
Figure 3 illustrates how the accuracy of reconstruction improves as interventions are added
to each node in the network. We can see that as we process more interventions per node
(denoted by m) withnheld ﬁxed, the true positive rate (TPR) increases. Further analysis
of these results indicates furthermore that the number of reversed edges decreases along with
the number of false positives, and as a result the overall structural Hamming distance (SHD)
– the total number of edge additions, deletions, and reversals needed to convert one directed
graph into another – decreases.
Figure4considersthemorepracticalscenarioinwhichonly k(k<p)nodesinthenetworkare
under intervention, and over time more interventions on more nodes are able to be collected.
This is common, for example, when reconstructing large networks in biological applications.
Again, weseethatoverallthetruepositiverateincreasesasmorenodesareunderintervention,
and further analysis shows that the SHD decreases as well.