14 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
4.3. Functions
The main purpose of the sparsebn package is estimation of graphical models, which is ac-
complished through the methods prefaced with “ estimate. ”. In this section, we present an
overview of the main estimation methods. In addition, sparsebn includes methods for gener-
ating random graphs, simulating random data, visualization, and conversion between various
graph classes, which are documented extensively in the package manual.
The main function is estimate.dag , which can be called as follows:
estimate.dag(data, lambdas = NULL, lambdas.length = 20, whitelist = NULL,
blacklist = NULL, error.tol = 1e-04, max.iters = NULL,
edge.threshold = NULL, concavity = 2, weight.scale = 1, convLb = 0.01,
upperbound = 100, adaptive = FALSE, verbose = FALSE)
The main arguments are data,lambdas, and lambdas.length . By default, the lambdas
argument is NULLand a standard sequence of L= 20regularization parameters is generated.
If desired, the user can pre-compute a vector of regularization parameters to be used instead,
in which case this vector should be passed through the lambdas argument. If there is prior
knowledge of (directed) edges that are known to be present in the network, these can be
speciﬁed via the whitelist argument. Similarly, if there is prior knowledge of (directed)
edges that are known to be absent from the network, these can be speciﬁed via the blacklist
argument. The rest of the arguments control the convergence of the internal algorithms, and
are intended for advanced users. This method returns a sparsebnPath object (Section 4.4),
which stores the solution path described in Section 3.2.
It is important to bear in mind that the objects returned by estimate.dag are graphs, and
in particular they do not include estimates of model parameters such as edge weights or con-
ditional variances. To obtain these parameters, sparsebn includes the estimate.parameters
method, which can be called as follows:
estimate.parameters(fit, data, ...)
where fitis the output of estimate.dag and datais the data to be used for parameter
estimation.
InadditiontoestimatingDAGs, sparsebn canestimatetheprecisionand/orcovariancematrix
for multivariate Gaussian data. The nonzero entries in the precision matrix in particular yield
the so-called Gaussian graphical model , which is an undirected graphical model for multivari-
ateGaussiandata. Thiscanbedoneviathe estimate.precision andestimate.covariance
methods:
estimate.covariance(data, ...)
estimate.precision(data, ...)
Internally, these methods call estimate.dag and use Equation 4 to compute the estimated
precision (or covariance) matrix. The ...argument here allows the user to specify any of
the optional arguments from estimate.dag .
4.4. Data structures
sparsebn uses three diﬀerent S3 classes in order to represent data ( sparsebnData ), graphs
(sparsebnFit ), and solution paths ( sparsebnPath ). For each of these classes, the usual
generics are deﬁned such as print,summary, and plot.