2 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
mechanisms (Bühlmann, Kalisch, and Meier 2014). While the past decade has witnessed
tremendous developments towards understanding undirected graphical models (Meinshausen
and Bühlmann 2006; Ravikumar, Wainwright, and Laﬀerty 2010; Yang, Ravikumar, Allen,
and Liu 2015), there has been less progress towards understanding directed graphical models
– also known as Bayesian networks (BNs) or structural equation models (SEM) – for high-
dimensional data with p/greatermuchn. A BN is represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
whose structure contains a richer and diﬀerent set of conditional independence relations than
an undirected graph. Moreover, DAGs are commonly used in causal inference where the
direction of an edge encodes causality. Consequently, there have been continuing eﬀorts in
structure learning of directed graphs from data.
Unlike their undirected counterparts, however, the structure learning problem for directed
graphical models is complicated by the nonconvexity, nonsmoothness, and nonidentiﬁability
of the underlying statistical problem. These issues have no doubt slowed progress towards
fast, scalable algorithms for learning in the presence of thousands – let alone tens of thousands
– of variables. Despite progress at the theoretical (Van de Geer and Bühlmann 2013; Aragam,
Amini, and Zhou 2015) and computational level (Schmidt, Niculescu-Mizil, and Murphy 2007;
Xiang and Kim 2013; Fu and Zhou 2013), there is still a lack of user-friendly software for
putting these modern tools into the hands of practitioners.
To bridge this gap we have developed sparsebn , a new R(RCore Team 2019) package for
structure learning and parameter estimation of large-scale Bayesian networks from high-
dimensional data. When experimental data are available, an estimated DAG from this
package has a natural causal interpretation. While there are many Rpackages for learning
Bayesian networks (Section 2.4), none that we are aware of are speciﬁcally tailored to high-
dimensional data with experimental interventions. The sparsebn package has been developed
from the ground up using recent developments in structure learning (Fu and Zhou 2013;
Aragam and Zhou 2015; Gu, Fu, and Zhou 2018) and statistical optimization (Friedman,
Hastie, Höﬂing, and Tibshirani 2007; Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2010; Mazumder,
Friedman, and Hastie 2011). In addition to methods for learning Bayesian networks, this
package also includes procedures for learning undirected graphs, ﬁtting structural equation
models, and is compatible with existing packages in R. All of the code for this package
is open-source and available through the Comprehensive RArchive Network (CRAN) at
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=sparsebn .
To brieﬂy illustrate the use of sparsebn , the code below learns the structure of the pathﬁnder
network (Heckerman, Horvitz, and Nathwani 1992):
R> library("sparsebn")
R> data("pathfinder")
R> data <- sparsebnData(pathfinder$data, type = "continuous")
R> dags <- estimate.dag(data)
R> plotDAG(dags)
This code estimates a solution path with 16 total estimates (see Section 3.2) and takes ap-
proximately one second to run. The ﬁrst four estimated networks with an increasing number
of edges are shown in Figure 1. This example is explored in more detail in Section 6.2.