Journal of Statistical Software 7
Suzuki 1993; Lam and Bacchus 1994), and entropy (Herskovits and Cooper 1990). One
of the classic score-based methods is the greedy hill climbing (HC) algorithm (Russell and
Norvig 1995). This algorithm is fast but tends to predict too many edges in high-dimensional
settings. For discrete networks, the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Herskovits 1992) is another
popular method, however, this method requires prior knowledge about the ordering of the
network which is often unavailable in applications. There are also Monte Carlo methods
(Ellis and Wong 2008; Zhou 2011; Niinimäki, Parviainen, and Koivisto 2016), which are quite
accurate but also computationally demanding. This limits Monte Carlo methods to smaller
networks with only tens of nodes. Each of the learning algorithms implemented in sparsebn
is a score-based method, and as such this package represents an attempt to resolve many of
the computational and statistical issues cited here with respect to these methods.
Hybrid methods
Finally, there are hybrid methods which combine constraint-based and score-based methods.
Hybrid methods ﬁrst prune the search space by using a constraint-based search, and then
learn an optimal DAG structure via score-based search (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis
2006; Perrier, Imoto, and Miyano 2008; Gámez, Mateo, and Puerta 2011). The max-min hill-
climbing (MMHC) algorithm proposed by Tsamardinos et al.(2006) is a powerful method of
this kind.
2.4. Existing Rpackages for structure learning
There are several existing Rpackages for learning and manipulating Bayesian networks. bn-
learnis a thorough and actively maintained package that implements a wide variety of clas-
sical approaches such as HC and MMHC (Scutari 2010, 2017). pcalgfocuses on the causal
interpretation of Bayesian networks, and implements the PC and FCI algorithms along with
methods for inferring causal eﬀects (Kalisch, Mächler, Colombo, Maathuis, and Bühlmann
2012). Other packages include dealfor mixed data (Boettcher and Dethlefsen 2003) and
gRain(Højsgaard 2012) for exact and approximate computations. For structural equation
models in particular, lavaanis a modern Rpackage that implements many of the standard
ﬁtting procedures for SEM (Rosseel 2012). There are also many software packages avail-
able on platforms besides R(for a more complete list see Murphy 2014) such as BEANDisco
(Niinimäki et al.2016, https://www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/tzniinim/BEANDisco/ ),AMIDST
(Masegosa et al.2017, http://www.amidsttoolbox.com/ ), and GOBNILP (Cussens, Haws,
and Studený 2017, https://www.cs.york.ac.uk/aig/sw/gobnilp/ ).
Motivated by applications to computational biology and machine learning, sparsebn was
designed for the following types of applications:
•Datasets with several thousand variables, which arise in computational biology and
machine learning,
•High-dimensional data with p/greatermuchn, which is common in genomics applications with
high-throughput datasets, such as gene expression data that have p∼20,000and
n∼100,
•Experimental data with interventions, which is also common in genomics applications.