8 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
Unfortunately, the aforementioned packages either do not scale to handle these types of
problems, or cannot process high-dimensional data at all. By contrast, the sparsebn package
was speciﬁcally designed to ﬁll this gap, with an orientation towards large, high-dimensional,
experimental data. In order to achieve this, the methods contained in this package rely on
a combination of novel methodology and algorithms in order to scale to larger and larger
datasets. Of course, these methods also gracefully degrade to handle simpler settings with
observational and/or low-dimensional data. Moreover, whenever possible, cross-compatibility
with the above mentioned packages has been provided (Section 4.5).
3. Learning with sparse regularization
To learn a Bayesian network from data, we use a score-based approach based on regularized
maximum likelihood estimation that allows for the incorporation of experimental data. In
this section we discuss these details as well as the block coordinate descent algorithm used to
approximate the resulting optimization problem.
3.1. Regularized maximum likelihood
Suppose X∈Rn×pis a matrix of observations, and let /lscriptdenote the negative log-likelihood
andρλbe some regularizer. For example, ρλmay be the /lscript1penalty (Tibshirani 1996), the
group norm penalty (Yuan and Lin 2006), or a nonconvex penalty such as the smoothly
clipped absolute deviation (SCAD, Fan and Li 2001) or minimax concave penalty (MCP,
Zhang 2010). Furthermore, we assume that Xdoes not contain any missing values. If the
data contains missing values, these should be imputed ﬁrst.
We consider the following program:
min
B∈D/lscript(B;X) +ρλ(B), (7)
where D⊂Rp×pis the set of weighted adjacency matrices that represent directed graphs
without cycles. The resulting problem (7) is a nonconvex program, where the nonconvexity
arises from (potentially) all three terms: The constraint D, the loss function /lscript, and the
regularizer ρλ.
For continuous data, we use a Gaussian likelihood derived from Equation 2 combined with
/lscript1or MCP regularization, and for discrete data we use a multi-logit model as in Equation 5
combined with a group lasso penalty. When some data are generated under experimental
intervention, we can derive the form of /lscript(B;X)using the strategy discussed in Section 2.2:
WhenXiisunderintervention, itsmarginaldistributionisknownandhencecanbeconsidered
constant in Equation 6. Let Ijbe the set of row indices of the data matrix Xwhere node Xjis
under intervention, and Oj={1,...,n}−Ijbe the collection of observations for which Xjis
not under intervention. Then, according to Equation 6, the negative log-likelihood factorizes
as
/lscript(B;X) =−p/summationdisplay
j=1/summationdisplay
h∈O jlogfβj(xhj|pa(xhj)), (8)
whereB= [β1|···|βp],fβjis the conditional density for the jth node, and xhjis the
value of node Xjat thehth data point. Note that multiple nodes may be intervened for a