JSS
 Journal of Statistical Software
November 2019, Volume 91, Issue 11. doi:10.18637/jss.v091.i11
Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks with the
sparsebnPackage
Bryon Aragam
University of ChicagoJiaying Gu
University of California,
Los AngelesQing Zhou
University of California,
Los Angeles
Abstract
Learning graphical models from data is an important problem with wide applications,
ranging from genomics to the social sciences. Nowadays datasets often have upwards
of thousands – sometimes tens or hundreds of thousands – of variables and far fewer
samples. To meet this challenge, we have developed a new Rpackage called sparsebn for
learning the structure of large, sparse graphical models with a focus on Bayesian networks.
While there are many existing software packages for this task, this package focuses on
the unique setting of learning large networks from high-dimensional data, possibly with
interventions. As such, the methods provided place a premium on scalability and consis-
tency in a high-dimensional setting. Furthermore, in the presence of interventions, the
methods implemented here achieve the goal of learning a causal network from data. Ad-
ditionally, the sparsebn package is fully compatible with existing software packages for
network analysis.
Keywords :Bayesiannetworks, causalnetworks, graphicalmodels, machinelearning, structural
equation modeling, multi-logit regression, experimental data.
1. Introduction
Graphical models are a popular tool in machine learning and statistics, and have been used
in a variety of applications including genetics (Gao and Cui 2015; Isci, Dogan, Ozturk, and
Otu 2014), computational biology (Jones, Buchan, Cozzetto, and Pontil 2012), oncology
(Chenet al.2015), medicine and health care (Nicholson, Cozman, Velikova, Van Scheltinga,
Lucas, and Spaanderman 2014), logistics (Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt 2015), ﬁnance
(Sanford and Moosa 2012), and even software testing (Dejaeger, Verbraken, and Baesens
2013). The widespread growth of high-dimensional biological data in particular has spurred
a renewed interest in the use of graphical models to aid in the discovery of novel biological