6 sparsebn : Learning Large-Scale Bayesian Networks
intervention. In doing so, the joint distribution factors as P(X1)P(X2). Instead, if we manip-
ulatedX1, the relation between X1andX2would stay the same, and the joint distribution
factors as P(X1)P(X2|X1). By exploiting these interventions, it is possible to uncover the
true causal structure in a physical system.
To see how this can be applied in a statistical setting, we now show how a general form of
the density function for experimental data can be derived from the pure observational joint
density function. Let M⊂{ 1,...,p}be the set of variables under intervention, so the joint
probability decomposes as
P(X1,...,Xp) =/productdisplay
i/∈MP(Xi|pa(Xi))/productdisplay
i∈MP(Xi|•), (6)
where P(Xi|•)is the marginal distribution of Xifrom which experimental samples are drawn.
Thus, experimental data sets generated from the true DAG Gcan be considered as data sets
generated from a DAG G/prime, whereG/primeis obtained by removing all directed edges in Gpointing
to the variables under intervention. Furthermore, we can see that when M=∅, Equation 6 is
the density function for observational data. For more details regarding causal DAG learning,
please refer to Pearl (2000) and the references therein.
2.3. Previous work
The various algorithms in the literature for structure learning of Bayesian networks fall into
three main categories: constraint-based methods, score-based methods and hybrid methods.
Constraint-based methods
Constraint-based methods rely on repeated conditional independence tests in order to learn
the structure of a network. The main idea is to determine which edges cannot exist in a
DAG using statistical tests of independence, a procedure which is justiﬁed whenever the
so-called faithfulness assumption holds. These algorithms ﬁrst use independence tests to
learn the skeleton of the network, and then orient v-structures along with the rest of the
edges. Because of the existence of Markov equivalent DAGs, the direction of some edges
may not be decided (for details, see e.g., Koller and Friedman 2009). The PC algorithm
proposed by Spirtes and Glymour (1991) is a well-known example of this kind of method.
Another example is the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) algorithm (Spirtes et al.2000; Colombo,
Maathuis, Kalisch, and Richardson 2012), which allows for latent variables in the network.
The output of these algorithms is a partially directed graph, which means that there may
be some undirected edges in the estimated graph. While the PC algorithm is a powerful
method to learn Bayesian networks in low-dimensions with nvery large, the performance
of the PC algorithm is less competitive in high-dimensions compared to recent score-based
methods (Aragam and Zhou 2015).
Score-based methods
Score-based methods rely on scoring functions such as the log-likelihood or some other loss
function. ThegoalofthesealgorithmsistoﬁndaDAGthatoptimizesagivenscoringfunction.
Some popular scoring functions include several Bayesian Dirichlet metrics (Buntine 1991;
Cooper and Herskovits 1992; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995), Bayesian information
criterion (Chickering and Heckerman 1997), minimum description length (Bouckaert 1993;