Source Reference Artetxe et al. (2018b) Proposed system
D’autres révélations ont fait
état de documents divulgués
par Snowden selon lesquels
la NSA avait intercepté des
données et des communica-
tions émanant du téléphone
portable de la chancelière alle-
mande Angela Merkel et de
ceux de 34 autres chefs d’État.Other revelations cited doc-
uments leaked by Snow-
den that the NSA moni-
tored German Chancellor
Angela Merkel’s cellphone
and those of up to 34 other
world leaders.Other disclosures have re-
ported documents disclosed
by Snowden suggested the
NSA had intercepted
communications and data
from the mobile phone of
German Chancellor Angela
Merkel and those of 32
other heads of state.Other revelations have
pointed to documents dis-
closed by Snowden that
the NSA had intercepted
data and communications
emanating from German
Chancellor Angela Merkel’s
mobile phone and those of
34 other heads of state.
La NHTSA n’a pas pu ex-
aminer la lettre d’information
aux propriétaires en raison de
l’arrêt de 16 jours des activités
gouvernementales, ce qui a
ralenti la croissance des ventes
de véhicules en octobre.NHTSA could not review
the owner notiﬁcation let-
ter due to the 16-day gov-
ernment shutdown, which
tempered auto sales growth
in October.The NHTSA could not con-
sider the letter of informa-
tion to owners because of
halting 16-day government
activities, which slowed the
growth in vehicle sales in
October.NHTSA said it could not ex-
amine the letter of informa-
tion to owners because of the
16-day halt in government
operations, which slowed ve-
hicle sales growth in Octo-
ber.
Le M23 est né d’une mu-
tinerie, en avril 2012,
d’anciens rebelles, essen-
tiellement tutsi, intégrés dans
l’armée en 2009 après un
accord de paix.The M23 was born of an
April 2012 mutiny by for-
mer rebels, principally Tut-
sis who were integrated
into the army in 2009 fol-
lowing a peace agreement.M23 began as a mutiny in
April 2012, former rebels,
mainly Tutsi integrated into
the national army in 2009
after a peace deal.The M23 was born into a
mutiny in April 2012, of for-
mer rebels, mostly Tutsi, em-
bedded in the army in 2009
after a peace deal.
Tunks a déclaré au Sun-
day Telegraph de Sydney que
toute la famille était «extrême-
ment préoccupée» du bien-
être de sa ﬁlle et voulait
qu’elle rentre en Australie.Tunks told Sydney’s Sun-
day Telegraph the whole
family was “extremely con-
cerned” about his daugh-
ter’s welfare and wanted
her back in Australia.Tunks told The Times of
London from Sydney that
the whole family was “ex-
tremely concerned” of the
welfare of her daughter and
wanted it to go in Australia.Tunks told the Sunday Tele-
graph in Sydney that the
whole family was “extremely
concerned” about her daugh-
ter’s well-being and wanted
her to go into Australia.
Table 4: Randomly chosen translation examples from French !English newstest2014 in comparison of those re-
ported by Artetxe et al. (2018b).
5.3 Qualitative results
Table 4 shows some translation examples from our
proposed system in comparison to those reported
by Artetxe et al. (2018b). We choose the exact
same sentences reported by Artetxe et al. (2018b),
which were randomly taken from newstest2014,
so they should be representative of the general be-
havior of both systems.
While not perfect, our proposed system pro-
duces generally ﬂuent translations that accurately
capture the meaning of the original text. Just in
line with our quantitative results, this suggests that
unsupervised machine translation can be a usable
alternative in practical settings.
Compared to Artetxe et al. (2018b), our transla-
tions are generally more ﬂuent, which is not sur-
prising given that they are produced by an NMT
system rather than an SMT system. In addition to
that, the system of Artetxe et al. (2018b) has some
adequacy issues when translating named entities
and numerals (e.g. 34!32,Sunday Telegraph!
The Times of London ), which we do not observe
for our proposed system in these examples.6 Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we identify several deﬁciencies in
previous unsupervised SMT systems, and pro-
pose a more principled approach that addresses
them by incorporating subword information, us-
ing a theoretically well founded unsupervised tun-
ing method, and developing a joint reﬁnement pro-
cedure. In addition to that, we use our improved
SMT approach to initialize a dual NMT model
that is further improved through on-the-ﬂy back-
translation. Our experiments show the effective-
ness of our approach, as we improve the previous
state-of-the-art in unsupervised machine transla-
tion by 5-7 BLEU points in French-English and
German-English WMT 2014 and 2016. Our code
is available as an open source project at https:
//github.com/artetxem/monoses .
In the future, we would like to explore learn-
able similarity functions like the one proposed by
(McCallum et al., 2005) to compute the character-
level scores in our initial phrase-table. In addition
to that, we would like to incorporate a language
modeling loss during NMT training similar to He