An Effective Approach to Unsupervised Machine Translation
Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre
IXA NLP Group
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
{mikel.artetxe, gorka.labaka, e.agirre}@ehu.eus
Abstract
While machine translation has traditionally re-
lied on large amounts of parallel corpora, a re-
cent research line has managed to train both
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) and Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (SMT) systems
using monolingual corpora only. In this pa-
per, we identify and address several deﬁcien-
cies of existing unsupervised SMT approaches
by exploiting subword information, develop-
ing a theoretically well founded unsupervised
tuning method, and incorporating a joint re-
ﬁnement procedure. Moreover, we use our im-
proved SMT system to initialize a dual NMT
model, which is further ﬁne-tuned through on-
the-ﬂy back-translation. Together, we obtain
large improvements over the previous state-
of-the-art in unsupervised machine transla-
tion. For instance, we get 22.5 BLEU points
in English-to-German WMT 2014, 5.5 points
more than the previous best unsupervised sys-
tem, and 0.5 points more than the (supervised)
shared task winner back in 2014.
1 Introduction
The recent advent of neural sequence-to-sequence
modeling has resulted in signiﬁcant progress in the
ﬁeld of machine translation, with large improve-
ments in standard benchmarks (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Edunov et al., 2018) and the ﬁrst solid
claims of human parity in certain settings (Has-
san et al., 2018). Unfortunately, these systems
rely on large amounts of parallel corpora, which
are only available for a few combinations of major
languages like English, German and French.
Aiming to remove this dependency on paral-
lel data, a recent research line has managed to
train unsupervised machine translation systems
using monolingual corpora only. The ﬁrst such
systems were based on Neural Machine Transla-
tion (NMT), and combined denoising autoencod-
ing and back-translation to train a dual model ini-tialized with cross-lingual embeddings (Artetxe
et al., 2018c; Lample et al., 2018a). Neverthe-
less, these early systems were later superseded
by Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) based
approaches, which induced an initial phrase-table
through cross-lingual embedding mappings, com-
bined it with an n-gram language model, and fur-
ther improved the system through iterative back-
translation (Lample et al., 2018b; Artetxe et al.,
2018b).
In this paper, we develop a more principled ap-
proach to unsupervised SMT, addressing several
deﬁciencies of previous systems by incorporat-
ing subword information, applying a theoretically
well founded unsupervised tuning method, and de-
veloping a joint reﬁnement procedure. In addition
to that, we use our improved SMT approach to ini-
tialize an unsupervised NMT system, which is fur-
ther improved through on-the-ﬂy back-translation.
Our experiments on WMT 2014/2016 French-
English and German-English show the effective-
ness of our approach, as our proposed system out-
performs the previous state-of-the-art in unsuper-
vised machine translation by 5-7 BLEU points
in all these datasets and translation directions.
Our system also outperforms the supervised WMT
2014 shared task winner in English-to-German,
and is around 2 BLEU points behind it in the rest
of translation directions, suggesting that unsuper-
vised machine translation can be a usable alterna-
tive in practical settings.
The remaining of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 ﬁrst discusses the related work in
the topic. Section 3 then describes our principled
unsupervised SMT method, while Section 4 dis-
cusses our hybridization method with NMT. We
then present the experiments done and the results
obtained in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes the
paper.arXiv:1902.01313v2  [cs.CL]  24 Jul 2019