2 Related work
Early attempts to build machine translation sys-
tems with monolingual corpora go back to statis-
tical decipherment (Ravi and Knight, 2011; Dou
and Knight, 2012). These methods see the source
language as ciphertext produced by a noisy chan-
nel model that ﬁrst generates the original English
text and then probabilistically replaces the words
in it. The English generative process is modeled
using an n-gram language model, and the chan-
nel model parameters are estimated using either
expectation maximization or Bayesian inference.
This basic approach was later improved by incor-
porating syntactic knowledge (Dou and Knight,
2013) and word embeddings (Dou et al., 2015).
Nevertheless, these methods were only shown to
work in limited settings, being most often evalu-
ated in word-level translation.
More recently, the task got a renewed inter-
est after the concurrent work of Artetxe et al.
(2018c) and Lample et al. (2018a) on unsuper-
vised NMT which, for the ﬁrst time, obtained
promising results in standard machine transla-
tion benchmarks using monolingual corpora only.
Both methods build upon the recent work on
unsupervised cross-lingual embedding mappings,
which independently train word embeddings in
two languages and learn a linear transformation to
map them to a shared space through self-learning
(Artetxe et al., 2017, 2018a) or adversarial train-
ing (Conneau et al., 2018). The resulting cross-
lingual embeddings are used to initialize a shared
encoder for both languages, and the entire sys-
tem is trained using a combination of denoising
autoencoding, back-translation and, in the case
of Lample et al. (2018a), adversarial training.
This method was further improved by Yang et al.
(2018), who use two language-speciﬁc encoders
sharing only a subset of their parameters, and in-
corporate a local and a global generative adversar-
ial network. Concurrent to our work, Lample and
Conneau (2019) report strong results initializing
an unsupervised NMT system with a cross-lingual
language model.
Following the initial work on unsupervised
NMT, it was argued that the modular architecture
of phrase-based SMT was more suitable for this
problem, and Lample et al. (2018b) and Artetxe
et al. (2018b) adapted the same principles dis-
cussed above to train an unsupervised SMT model,
obtaining large improvements over the originalunsupervised NMT systems. More concretely,
both approaches learn cross-lingual n-gram em-
beddings from monolingual corpora based on the
mapping method discussed earlier, and use them
to induce an initial phrase-table that is combined
with an n-gram language model and a distortion
model. This initial system is then reﬁned through
iterative back-translation (Sennrich et al., 2016)
which, in the case of Artetxe et al. (2018b), is pre-
ceded by an unsupervised tuning step. Our work
identiﬁes some deﬁciencies in these previous sys-
tems, and proposes a more principled approach to
unsupervised SMT that incorporates subword in-
formation, uses a theoretically better founded un-
supervised tuning method, and applies a joint re-
ﬁnement procedure, outperforming these previous
systems by a substantial margin.
Very recently, some authors have tried to com-
bine both SMT and NMT to build hybrid unsuper-
vised machine translation systems. This idea was
already explored by Lample et al. (2018b), who
aided the training of their unsupervised NMT sys-
tem by combining standard back-translation with
synthetic parallel data generated by unsupervised
SMT. Marie and Fujita (2018) go further and use
synthetic parallel data from unsupervised SMT to
train a conventional NMT system from scratch.
The resulting NMT model is then used to aug-
ment the synthetic parallel corpus through back-
translation, and a new NMT model is trained on
top of it from scratch, repeating the process it-
eratively. Ren et al. (2019) follow a similar ap-
proach, but use SMT as posterior regularization
at each iteration. As shown later in our experi-
ments, our proposed NMT hybridization obtains
substantially larger absolute gains than all these
previous approaches, even if our initial SMT sys-
tem is stronger and thus more challenging to im-
prove upon.
3 Principled unsupervised SMT
Phrase-based SMT is formulated as a log-linear
combination of several statistical models: a trans-
lation model, a language model, a reordering
model and a word/phrase penalty. As such, build-
ing an unsupervised SMT system requires learn-
ing these different components from monolingual
corpora. As it turns out, this is straightforward
for most of them: the language model is learned
from monolingual corpora by deﬁnition; the word
and phrase penalties are parameterless; and one