JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11
Heterophily Graph
Class1Class2Class3𝐇(")𝐗𝑨node featuregraph structure
𝐇($)
…𝐇(%)[	𝐇("),𝐇($),…, 𝐇(%)](2) JK-Net𝜶𝐇(%&")=𝛼𝐗+(𝟏−𝛼)𝐇(%)(3) GCNII𝜸(𝟏)𝜸(𝟐)𝜸(𝒎)𝜸(𝟏)𝐇(")+𝜸(𝟐)𝐇($)+…+𝜸(𝒎)𝐇(%)(1) GPR-GNN
Fig. 5: Illustration of typical inter-layer combination methods: (1) GPR-GNN [30]; (2) JK-Net [67]; and (3) GCNII [76].
is MWGNN [53], which models the node local distribution from
node feature, topological structure, and positional identity aspects
with the meta-weight. Then, based on the meta-weight, an adaptive
graph convolution is derived to conduct node-specific weighted
aggregation for boosted node representation learning.
Remark. On heterophilic graphs, an ego node is likely to be
dissimilar with its neighbors in terms of class labels. Hence,
encoding ego-node representations separately from the aggre-
gated representations of neighbor nodes would benefit distin-
guishable node embedding learning. In detail, ego-neighbor sep-
aration methods detach self-loop connections of the ego nodes
inAGGREGATE( ·). Meanwhile, they alter the UPDATE( ·)
as the non-mixing operations, e.g., concatenation, instead of the
mixing operation, e.g., “average” in vanilla GCN. H2GCN [24]
first proposes to exclude the self-loop connection and points out
that the non-mixing operations in the update function ensure
that expressive node representations would survive over multiple
rounds of propagation without becoming prohibitively similar.
Besides, WRGNN [77] imposes different mapping functions on
the ego-node embedding and its neighbor aggregated messages,
while GGCN [28] simplifies the mapping functions to learnable
scalar parameters to separately learn ego-neighbor representations.
Moreover, ACM [50] adopts the identity filter to separate the ego
embedding and then conducts the channel-level combination with
its neighbor information in the update function.
5.2 Inter-Layer Combination
Different from identifiable message aggregation methods focus-
ing on the fine-grained intra-layer design of GNN architectures
with heterophily, inter-layer combination methods consider layer-
wise operations to boost the representation power of heterophilic
GNNs. The intuition behind this strategy is that in the shallow
layers of GNNs, they collect local information, e.g., one-hop
neighbor locality in two-layer vanilla GCN, when the layers go
deeper, GNNs gradually capture global information implicitly via
multiple rounds of neighbor propagation. Due to the heterophily
characteristic, neighbors with similar information, i.e., class labels,
might locate in both local geometry and long-term global topology.
Hence, combining intermediate representations from each layer
contributes to leveraging different neighbor ranges with the con-
sideration of both local and global structural properties, resulting
in powerful heterophilic GNNs. Fig. 5 shows the formulation and
illustrations of the closely related methods.
The prior idea first comes from JK-Net [67] which flexibly
captures better structure-aware representation with different neigh-borhood ranges. The combination of features among different
layers is described as
ˆhv= LA( h(1),h(2), . . . ,h(L)), (23)
where LA(·)denotes the layer aggregation, such as column-wise
combination, max pooling, attention with LSTM, etc.
Compared with the methods using all previous intermediate
representations, GCNII [76] only integrates the first layer’s node
embedding at each layer with the initial residual connection,
defined as
h(l)
v=αh(0)
v+AGGREGATE(l)({(1−α)h(l−1)
v :u∈N(v)}),
(24)
where αis a hyperparameter that maintains a balance between the
node embedding of the first layer and the representation of the
current layer.
Instead of using the simple concatenation operation, GPR-
GNN [30] further assigns learnable weights to combine the rep-
resentations of each layer adaptively via the Generalized PageR-
ank (GPR) technique. PowerEmbed [68] employs an inception
network to learn the rich representations that interpolate from
local message-passing features to global spectral information.
Hence, inter-layer combination methods are able to conduct topo-
logical feature exploration and benefit from informative multi-
round propagation, making node features of heterophilic graphs
distinguishable.
6 H YBRID METHODS
Recently, researchers have recognized that simultaneously expand-
ing the non-local neighbor set and refining heterophily-guided
GNN architectures, can significantly facilitate heterophilic graph
representation learning. Generally, existing hybrid methods can
be categorized into two groups: (1) local-level incorporation,
which designs intra-layer heterophilic GNN message passing with
the neighbor extension; and (2) global-level incorporation, which
enhances effective inter-layer information transfer of heterophilic
GNNs with the neighbor extension. The diagram of two types of
hybrid methods is presented in Fig. 6.
The majority of methods fall into the category of local-
level incorporation, typically following a two-step process. First,
they establish a graph topology that emphasizes local homophily,
and then they design a message aggregation method based on
this homophilic topology. For instance, WRGNN [77] employs
the degree sequence of neighbor nodes as a metric for mea-
suring structural similarity between ego nodes. This is used to
reconstruct a multi-relational graph that captures homophily in
relational edges, followed by relational aggregation with explicit