JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16
the uncertainty of the GNN output to recognize heterophilic
nodes. Additionally, a probabilistic solution named Graph Topol-
ogy Uncertainty (GraphTU) is innovatively proposed in [48],
which enables the synthetic nodes to better catch the informative
characteristics from the topology space. For each source minor
node, Gao et al. [48] not only consider the feature but also the
valuable information from their crucial neighbors. Interestingly,
they observe that statistical variances in local neighborhoods can
be fully exploited to extend the training distribution for the minor
class in a non-parametric manner.
In conclusion, the relation between graph heterophily and
uncertainty modeling provides a rich landscape for exploration.
By delving into this connection, researchers can enhance their
understanding of how network structures influence uncertainty,
paving the way for improved models and strategies in various
applications, from social networks to biological systems.
Other Promising Heterophily Explorations. Recently, re-
searchers have sought to extend the design of heterophilic GNNs
beyond the semi-supervised paradigm, focusing on self-supervised
heterophilic GNNs [31], [112], [113]. It is noteworthy that He et
al. [112] identified commonalities between the establishment of
the Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) framework and the design
of heterophilic GNNs. In the GCL framework, the task involves
identifying additional positive samples belonging to the same
class, while in the design of heterophilic GNNs, the objective is
to identify other intra-class neighbors for each node. Recognizing
this similarity, they integrated the GCL sampling strategy with
homophily discrimination, creating a novel contrastive learning
framework to address these crucial challenges. This framework
draws inspiration from homophily, breaking traditional data en-
hancement strategies and providing a fresh perspective on estab-
lishing a GCL framework. Furthermore, it executes contrastive
learning by sampling homophily neighbors as positive examples,
offering innovative insights for the design of heterophilic GNNs.
To address the limitations imposed by the strong homophily
assumption and label dependency, Li et al. [113] introduced a
novel multi-task model named PairE with a contrastive learning
method. This model is designed to preserve information pertaining
to both homophily and heterophily by transcending the localized
node view. It achieves this by harnessing higher-level entities with
more expressive power, enabling the representation of feature
signals beyond homophily. In a similar vein and motivated by
comparable considerations, Liu et al. [31] propose an innovative
self-supervised Graph Representation Learning method called
Edge Heterophily Discriminating (GREET). By discriminating
edges, GREET obtains contrastive views with both homophilic
and heterophilic edges, leveraging them to learn expressive repre-
sentations.
8 F UTURE DIRECTIONS
GNNs for heterophilic graphs are fast developing in the past
few years. Beyond current research, there still remain several
open challenges and opportunities worthy of further attention and
exploration. In this section, we discuss the following directions to
stimulate future research.
Interpretable Heterophilic GNNs. Interpretability is a crucial
aspect of GNN models in risk-sensitive or privacy-related applica-
tion fields, e.g., healthcare and cybersecurity. Although there are
several studies on the interpretability [114]–[116] for homophilic
GNNs, how to explain the predictions of heterophilic GNNsis still under-explored. Heterophily makes interpretability more
challenging than homophily: since most local neighbor nodes are
not in the same class as the ego nodes, extracting explainable sub-
graphs from highly heterophilic graph data is much harder, where
both proximal and distant topological structures are required to
be discovered and exploited. For instance, ShapeGGen [116]
typically proposed a dataset generator that can automatically
generate a variety of benchmark datasets ( e.g., varying graph
sizes, degree distributions, homophilic and heterophilic graphs),
accompanied by ground-truth explanations From the data-centric
view of heterophilic graphs, how to extract explainable subgraphs
under complex similarity relationships between ego nodes and
their potential neighbors on heterophilic graphs for interpretability
is an open question. Moreover, from the model-centric view of
heterophilic GNNs, how to explain the model’s predictions on
graphs with different degrees of heterophily also deserves further
exploration.
Scalable Heterophilic GNNs. Current heterophilic GNNs are
generally trained on relatively small graphs, which significantly
limits their ability to model large-scale data and explore more
complicated heterophilic patterns. Although possible solutions to
tackle scalability can be borrowed from the mainstream graph
sampling strategies [117], [118] for homophilic GNNs, the
connections and relationships of heterophilic nodes would be
undermined by sampling only mini-batches, especially when sim-
ilar and dissimilar neighbors contribute differently to learning
the ego-node representations. LINKX [27] recently verifies that
even a simple MLP-based model could outperform GNNs for
mini-batch training on large-scale heterophilic graphs. Moreover,
HopGNN [49] introduces a hop interaction paradigm to address
the scalability and over-smoothing problem of GNNs simultane-
ously, where its core idea is to convert the interaction target among
nodes to pre-processed multi-hop features inside each node.
Hence, addressing the scalability problem of heterophilic graphs
requires exploring more relationships between ego-neighbor node
features and multi-hop information. How to keep the inherent
heterophily unchanged when conducting sampling on heterophilic
graphs is still an open question.
Theoretical Heterophily Exploration. Despite the notable
achievements of heterophilic GNNs across diverse tasks and
datasets, their efficacy lacks a solid theoretical foundation to sub-
stantiate their impact on enhancing graph representation learning.
Presently, many methods are predominantly designed based on
intuition and evaluated through empirical experiments. Notably,
a recent breakthrough by Ma et al. [119] has unveiled that,
under specific conditions, GCN can exhibit remarkable perfor-
mance on heterophilic graphs. This discovery has been supported
by comprehensive theoretical validation, outlining the distinctive
characteristics and conditions under which heterophilic graphs can
excel with GCN. The elucidation of these theoretical findings
poses a significant challenge to the current rationale underlying
the design of heterophilic GNNs. Consequently, there arises a
critical need for intensified theoretical exploration in the future.
This exploration should delve into aspects such as the impact
of heterophily on altering the trends of generalization bounds.
Bridging this explanatory gap is crucial for comprehending the
extent to which heterophily influences the performance constraints
of homophilic GNNs.
Diverse Heterophily Learning Tasks. The research on het-
erophilic GNNs has primarily demonstrated success in node-