JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10
attention with feature dissimilarity. In general, the hard attention
is learned on labels for a refined graph structure with fewer inter-
class edges so that the aggregation’s negative disturbance can be
reduced. The soft attention aims to learn the aggregation weights
based on features over the refined graph structure to enhance
information gains during message passing.
Recent research has shown a growing interest in the efficiency
of computing edge-aware weights for large-scale graphs. CGP [60]
introduces a graph pruning paradigm during training, enabling
the discovery of high-performing sparse GNNs within a single
training process. Additionally, a global graph transformer model
has been proposed for large-scale heterophilic node classification
tasks, known as GOAT [63]. GOAT samples potential neighbors
for each node from its k-hop neighbors. To distinguish between
neighbors based on topology information during the propagation
process, GOAT further incorporates a global attention module
designed to learn attention scores between potential neighbors and
source nodes.
5.1.2 Feature-Related Weight
Apart from the adaptive edge-aware weight learning, there is
another solution working on the neighbor representation learning
by revising h(l−1)
u inAGGREGATE(l)({a(l)
uvh(l−1)
u :u∈
N(v)}). Conventionally, the above-mentioned methods mainly
utilize the contextual node representations of neighbors; In con-
trast, this solution transforms contextual node embeddings h(l−1)
u
to other node-level properties that reflect the heterophily. In this
way, heterophilic GNNs learn node-level attention β(l)
v, which
is shared with each u∈ N (v), to capture the beneficial in-
formation of heterophily for distinguishable node representation
learning. As a result, the aggregation progress can be redefined
asAGGREGATE(l)({β(l)
vh(l−1)
u :u∈ N (v)}). Existing
methods mainly learn β(l)
vthrough two schemes based on ho-
mophily/heterophily prior knowledge and homophily attributes
attention.
Prior-Based. The prior-based method considers the incorporation
of homophily/heterophily prior knowledge in the process of fea-
ture transformation, primarily estimating the assignment weight
β(l)
vthrough class information. Typically, instead of propagating
original node feature representations, CPGNN [23] propagates a
prior belief estimation based on a compatibility matrix, so that
it can capture both heterophily and homophily by modeling the
likelihood of connections between nodes in different classes. The
feature-aware weight of embeddings h(l−1)
v with prior belief is
defined as
β(l)
v= Sinkhorn-Knopp( yv,Av,Bv), (21)
where Sinkhorn-Knopp denotes the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm
proposed in [73], which is to ensure that β(l)
vis doubly stochastic.
Bvdenotes an enhanced belief matrix for node v, depending on a
training mask matrix and a prior belief. Going beyond the uniform
GCN aggregation, NLGNN [74] and GPNN [75] consider the
sequential aggregation where the neighbors are ranked based on
the class similarity ( i.e., a homophily/heterophily prior belief) in
order. A regular 1D-convolution layer is applied to extract the
affinities between the sequential nodes whether the nodes are
close or distant in heterophilic graphs. GIND [55] extends the
linear isotropic diffusion to a more expressive nonlinear diffusion
mechanism, which learns nonlinear flux features between node
pairs before aggregation. This design of the nonlinear diffusionensures that more information can be aggregated from similar
neighbors and less from dissimilar neighbors by learning β(l)
v,
making node features less likely to over-smooth.
Attention-Based. The majority of research focuses on developing
diverse attention mechanisms for learning β(l)
v. A straightforward
approach involves learning attribute similarity and utilizing this
similarity to determine attention on node features. CGCN [28] uses
the cosine similarity to send signed neighbor features under certain
constraints of relative node degrees. In this way, the messages are
allowed to be optionally multiplied by a negative sign or a positive
sign, i.e., for node v, its message is described as
h(l+1)
v =σ
β(l)
0˜h(l)
v+β(l)
1(s(l)
v,pos⊙A(l)
v)˜h(l)
v
+β(l)
2(s(l)
v,neg⊙A(l)
v)˜h(l)
v
,(22)
where β(l)
0,β(l)
1, and β(l)
2are the l-th layer learned scalars.
s(l)
u,posands(l)
u,negrespectively indicate positive matrix and neg-
ative matrix, which are split from the matrix with sign in-
formation. Intuitively, signed messages consist of the negated
messages sent by neighbors of the opposing classes, and the
positive messages sent by neighbors of the same class. Sim-
ilarly, Du et al. [51] propose a method for defining positive
and negative correlation weights when modeling the similar-
ity and dissimilarity between node features. They introduce a
novel GNN model called GBK-GNN, which is based on a bi-
kernel feature transformation and a selection gate. The two
kernels capture homophily and heterophily information, and the
gate is used to determine which kernel should be applied to
a specific pair of nodes. Formally, the gate signal is described
asβ(l)
v=P
u∈N(v)Sigmoid
MLP( h(l−1)
v,h(l−1)
u;W(l−1)
v)
,
where MLP(·)is a multilayer perceptron. MMP [54] decouples
the messages into two parts, i.e., memory for propagation and self-
embedding for discrimination. The memory for propagation aims
to endow each node with a memory cell and sends messages from
the memory cell instead of hidden self-embedding. After propa-
gation, each node can leverage a learnable control mechanism to
adaptively update its self-embedding and memory cell according
to their recent states. CAGNNs [70] investigates the feature aggre-
gation of inter-class edges from an entire neighbor identifiable
perspective by a new metric based on von Neumann entropy.
Using an importance score β(l)
vobtained by a mixer combines dis-
criminant feature and neighbor information, which are decoupled
from embedding h(l−1)
v . To overcome the limitations of traditional
messaging methods, NCGNN [58] represents nodes as collections
of node-level capsules. Each capsule is responsible for extracting
distinct features from its associated node. For each node-level
capsule, a novel dynamic routing procedure is implemented to
intelligently select the most suitable capsules for aggregation
from a subgraph identified by the designed graph filter. NCGNN
exclusively aggregates advantageous capsules while constraining
irrelevant messages to prevent excessive feature mixing among
interacting nodes. As a result, this approach mitigates the problem
of oversmoothing and enables the learning of effective node
representations in graphs characterized by either homophily or
heterophily.
5.1.3 Hybrid Weight
Hybrid methods aim to calculate edge weights guided by node
features and edge information simultaneously. A typical method