JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
GNNs with 
Heter ophil yNon-local Ne ighbor Extension High-or der Ne ighbor Mi xing
Potential Ne ighbor Disco veryStructur e-based Distance
Featur e-based Distance
Hybrid Distance
GNN Ar chitectur e RefinementIdentifiabl e Message A ggregationEdge-r elated W eightSpectr al Perspectiv e
Spatial P erspectiv e
Featur e-related W eight
Hybrid W eight
Inter-la yer Comb ination
Hybrid Meth odsLocal-l evel Incorpor ation
Global-l evel Incorpor ation
Fig. 2: Categorization of Heterophily GNNs.
Np(v) ={u: dist( u, v)≤p}in the message aggregation
stage in Eq. (1), where dist(u, v)denotes the distance method
to measure the distance between nodes uandv.pis a threshold
to limit the number of neighbors. In particular, Np(v)can be
degenerated into N(v)when the metric function dist(·)is the
shortest distance and p= 1.
GNN Architecture Refinement Methods boost the expressive
ability of GNNs by facilitating message passing that distinguishes
between similar and dissimilar neighbors or by deeply fusing
multi-layer information. Specifically, focusing on the crafted ar-
chitecture design of message aggregation and feature updates,
these methods are categorized into identifiable message aggrega-
tion methods and inter-layer combination methods. Among these,
identifiable message aggregation methods have gained significant
attention. Their objective is to allocate appropriate weights in the
message aggregation process, aiming to strengthen the fusion of
homophilic information while mitigating the fusion of heterophilic
information. With a focus on weight assignment schemes from
various perspectives, existing methods can be further classified
into three types: edge-related weight, feature-related weight, and
hybrid weight.
Hybrid Methods can be taken as the combination of non-local
neighbor extension methods and GNNs architecture refinement
methods. Typically, hybrid methods first construct an appropriate
neighbor set through non-local neighbor extension, and then
refine the GNN architectures from two perspectives: (1) local-
level incorporation, that focuses on intra-layer heterophily-guided
message passing, and (2) global-level incorporation, that enhances
effective inter-layer heterophily information transfer throughout
the entire GNN architecture.
Discussion. Different heterophilic GNNs exhibit distinct proper-
ties. The fundamental concept of non-local neighbor extension
methods is quite straightforward and simple to implement, as it
directly models and captures the similarity relationships between
nodes to enhance the homophily of local neighborhoods; however,
for large-scale graphs, it can be memory-intensive to traverse the
entire graph in order to model the similarity between each pair of
nodes. GNN architecture refinement methods focus on mitigatingthe impact of local heterophilic information during the message
passing process. This primarily involves further refinement of mes-
sage aggregation and feature updates for the heterophilic design.
However, the challenge lies in how to customize the heterophilic
message passing mechanism with only a limited number of ob-
servable homophilic or heterophilic relationships. Hybrid methods
combine the advantages of both non-local neighbor extension and
GNN architecture refinement. Nevertheless, a major challenge is
devising a strategy for seamlessly integrating these approaches
into the message-passing process.
4 H ETEROPHILIC GNN SWITH NON-LOCAL
NEIGHBOR EXTENSION
Under the uniform message passing framework of homophilic
GNNs, the neighborhood is usually defined as the set of all
neighbors one-hop away ( e.g., GCN), which means only messages
from proximal nodes in a graph are aggregated. However, such
a local neighborhood definition might not be appropriate for
heterophilic graphs, where nodes belonging to the same class
exhibit high structural similarity but can be farther away from
each other. In light of these, current heterophilic GNNs attempt
to extend the local neighbors to non-local ones primarily through
two schemes: high-order neighbor mixing andpotential neighbor
discovery . As a result, the representation ability of heterophilic
GNNs can be improved significantly by capturing the important
features from distant and informative nodes. The pipelines of two
example methods are given in Fig. 3, and a summary of the non-
local neighbor extension works is illustrated in Table 2.
4.1 High-order Neighbor Mixing
Higher-order neighbor mixing allows the ego node to receive
latent representations from their local one-hop neighbors and from
further k-hop neighbors, so that the heterophilic GNNs can mix
latent information from neighbors at various distances. Formally,
thek-hop neighbor set is defined as
Nk(v) ={u: dist( u, v) =k}, (10)