JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
Heterophily Graph
Class1Class2Class3High-order Neighbor Mixing1-hop2-hop3-hop
Potential Neighbor Discovery Feat./Stru./Hybrid  Distance
Latent Space
Fig. 3: Schematic diagram of high-order neighbor mixing method and potential neighbor discovery method.
where dist(u, v)measures the shortest distance between nodes u
andv. In addition, how to mix the information from the different
k-hop neighbor sets is an important research point of higher-order
neighbor mixing methods.
Typically, MixHop [36] is a representative method that aggre-
gates messages from multi-hop neighbors. Apart from one-hop
neighbors, MixHop also considers two-hop neighbors for message
propagation. After that, the messages acquired from different hops
are encoded by different linear transformations and then mixed by
concatenation. The l-th layer MixHop for each node v∈ V can be
described as
m(l)
v,k= AGGREGATE(l)({h(l−1)
u :u∈ Nk(v)}),
h(l)
v,k= UPDATE(l)(h(l−1)
v,m(l)
v,k),
h(l)
v=∥k=2h(l)
v,k,(11)
where ∥means column-wise combination. It can be noted that
cross-level information fusion of MixHop is performed after the
feature aggregation and updating among the same hop neighbors.
Another perspective for cross-level information fusion is to
merge cross-hop neighbors before the feature aggregation stage,
and then aggregate and update multi-hop neighbors’ features
simultaneously. The most representative method is TDGNN [37],
which uses a tree decomposition method to disentangle neighbor-
hood information in different layers and focus on adjusting the
aggregation stage in Eq. (1) to promote information fusion among
different layers, modeled as
m(l)
v= AGGREGATE(l)({h(l−1)
u :u∈K[
k=1Nk(v)}),(12)
where Kis the highest-hop setting the collection neighbor sets.
Recently, Ordered GNN [38] proposes to order the messages
passing into the node representation, with specific blocks of
neurons targeted for message passing within specific hops. This is
achieved by aligning the hierarchy of the rooted-tree of a central
node with the ordered neurons in its node representation. Based
on simple design in the spectral domain, EvenNet [39] discards
messages from odd-order neighbors inspired by balance theory,
deriving a graph filter with only even-order terms, which can be
generalized to graphs of different homophily.In summary, the high-order neighbor mixing methods straight-
forwardly include higher-order neighbors in local neighbor sets
and devise an appropriate combination scheme to effectively
integrate multi-order neighborhood information. Its objective is
to alleviate the impact of local heterophily by incorporating richer
homophilic information from higher-order neighborhoods.
4.2 Potential Neighbor Discovery
Compared to high-order neighbor mixing methods directly uti-
lizing the inherent structural information from graphs, potential
neighbor discovery methods reconsider the definition of neighbors
in heterophilic graphs and build innovative structural neighbors
through the entire topology exploration with heterophily. Apart
from the original neighbor set, these methods construct a new
potential neighbor set that can be further formalized as
Nρ(v) ={u: dist( v, u)< ρ}, (13)
where dist(u, v)is a metric function that measures the distance
between nodes uandvin a specifically defined latent space and
ρis a threshold to limit the number of neighbors. It is evident that
distance measurement plays a pivotal role in identifying suitable
potential neighbors. Current methods can be categorized into three
main types based on the focal variables of distance measurement:
structure-based distance, feature-based distance, and hybrid dis-
tance.
4.2.1 Structure-based Distance
Structure-based distance methods typically search for potential
neighbors that meet measurement criteria within the geometric
relationship latent space, which is defined by prior information
about the graph topology. Typically, Geom-GCN [34] maps the
input graph to a continuous latent space and defines the geomet-
ric relationships, i.e., split 2D Euclidean geometry locations, as
the criteria to discover potential neighbors. Apart from inherent
neighbors in original input graphs, neighbors that conform to the
defined geometric relationships also participate in the message
aggregation of GCN. Specifically, based on the graph and latent
space, a structural neighborhood is built as ({N(v),Nρ(v)}, τ)
underlying the relational operator τ, where N(v)is the set of
adjacent nodes of vin the graph, Nρ(v)is the set of potential