JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9
Heterophily Graph
Class1Class2Class3𝐡𝟏𝐡𝟐𝐡𝟑𝐡𝟒𝐡𝟓𝛼&'𝛼&(𝛼&)𝛼&*𝛼)*lowhigh𝛼&'+𝛼&',Edge-Related Weight
𝐡𝟏-
𝐡𝟏𝐡𝟐𝐡𝟑𝐡𝟒𝐡𝟓Feat-Related Weight
𝐡𝟏-
𝛽&𝛽'
…𝛽.
Fig. 4: Illustration of identifiable message passing with edge-related weight and feature-related weight assignment schemes in GNN architecture
refinement methods.
In this way, different methods develop various weight assignment
schemes for a(l)
uvto model the importance of similar and dissimilar
neighbors during aggregation. In the following, we provide the de-
tails of weight assignment schemes adopted by existing methods,
which respectively work on node feature andedge related weights.
Fig. 4 provides the pipelines of two weight assignment schemes.
5.1.1 Edge-Related Weight
In general, edge-related methods simultaneously focus on spectral
domain and the spatial domain. To be concrete, spectral GNNs
leverage the theory of graph signal processing to design graph
filters, and spatial GNNs focus on the graph structural topology to
develop aggregation strategies.
Spectral Perspective. In contrast to Laplacian smoothing [71] and
low-pass filtering [72] to approximate graph Fourier transforma-
tion on homophilic graphs, spectral GNNs on heterophilic graphs
involve both low-pass and high-pass filters to adaptively extract
low-frequency and high-frequency graph signals. The essential
intuition behind this lies in that low-pass filters mainly retain the
commonality of node features, while high-pass filters capture the
difference between nodes.
Typically, FAGCN [25] adopts a self-gating attention mecha-
nism to learn the proportion of low-frequency and high-frequency
signals by splitting the a(l)
uvinto two components, i.e.,a(l,LP )
uv
anda(l,HP )
uv , corresponding to low-pass and high-pass filters,
respectively. Through adaptive frequency signal learning, FAGCN
could achieve expressive performance on different types of graphs
with homophily and heterophily. Formally, adaptive edge-aware
weights a(l)
uvare defined in FAGCN as
a(l)
uv=a(l,LP )
uv−a(l,HP )
uv√dudv, (18)
where duanddvrespectively denote the degree of node uandv,
a(l,LP )
uv−a(l,HP )
uv is the coefficient learned through a shared self-
gating mechanism tanh ( qT[hu;hv]), from which [; ]denotes the
concatenation operation, gcan be seen as a shared convolutional
kernel, tanh (·)is the hyperbolic tangent function, which can
naturally limits the value of a(l,LP )
uv−a(l,HP )
uv in[−1,1]. In a sim-
ilar fashion, RFA-GNN [61] captures edge-aware weights using
a relation-based frequency adaptive mechanism. This mechanism
takes into account higher-order contextual information compared
to FAGCN. It precisely defines edge-aware weights for a specific
relation. Specifically, the edge-aware weight of (l+ 1) -order
information between nodes uandvfor relation kis described
asa(l)
uvk= tanh ( qT
lk[h(l)
uk;h(l)
vk]), where qlkis the attention
coefficient for relation kin the l-th iteration.Apart from low-pass and high-pass filters, ACM [50] further
involve the identity filter, which is the linear combination of low-
pass and high-pass filters, i.e.,
a(l)
uv= Softmax
([a(l,LP )
uv , a(l,IP )
uv , a(l,HP )
uv ]/τ)W(l)
uv
,(19)
where τindicates a temperature parameter and W(l)
uv∈R1×3
is used to learn which filters is important or not for each
node. a(l,LP )
uv ,a(l,IP )
uv anda(l,HP )
uv respectively denotes low-pass,
identity and high-pass edge-aware weights, which learn from 3
channels features. AutoGCN [62] captures the full spectrum of
graph signals and automatically update the bandwidth of graph
convolutional filters. In addition, Mid-GCN [64] contains a mid-
pass filter determined by both low-pass and high-pass filters.
The robustness of signals passing through this mid-pass filter is
theoretically guaranteed by their analyses.
In this way, ACM, AutoGCN and Mid-GCN could adaptively
exploit beneficial neighbor information from different filter chan-
nels for each node; Meanwhile, their identity or mid-pass filters
could guarantee less information loss of the input signal.
Spatial Perspective. Heterophilic GNNs in the spatial domain
require the diverse topology-based aggregation of neighbors from
the same or different classes guided by the heterophily. There-
fore, the edge-aware weights of neighbors should be assigned
according to the spatial graph topology and node labels. Taking
node attributes as weak labels, DMP method [29] considers node
attribute heterophily for diverse message passing and specifies
every attribute propagation weight on each edge. Furthermore,
instead of the scalar weight a(l)
uvthat aggregates all the node
attributes with the same weight at the node level, DMP extends
the weight to a vector a(l)
uvthrough operating in the attribute
dimension, and this vector can be calculated by either relaxing
GAT [9] weights to real values or allowing an element-wise
average of neighbor weights.
Moreover, certain methods learn edge-aware weights based on
node labels. For instance, Chen et al. [59] introduce the concept
of graph decoupling attention Markov networks (GDAMNs).
This approach incorporates variational inference to model edge
uncertainty and employs both hard and soft attention mechanisms
on node labels to improve the learning of edge-aware weights,
represented as
a(l)
uv=ahard
uvexpδ(l−1)
uv
PN
v=1aharduvexpδ(l−1)
uv, (20)
where ahard
uv=Auv·˜yTwuv˜yis the hard attention with label
similarity and δ(l−1)
uv =−Cos(h(l−1)
u,h(l−1)
v)denotes the soft