JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1
Graph Neural Networks for Graphs with
Heterophily: A Survey
Xin Zheng, Yi Wang, Yixin Liu, Ming Li Member, IEEE , Miao Zhang, Di Jin, Philip S. Yu Fellow, IEEE ,
Shirui Pan Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Recent years have witnessed fast developments of graph neural networks (GNNs) that have benefited myriads of graph
analytic tasks and applications. In general, most GNNs depend on the homophily assumption that nodes belonging to the same class
are more likely to be connected. However, as a ubiquitous graph property in numerous real-world scenarios, heterophily, i.e., nodes
with different labels tend to be linked, significantly limits the performance of tailor-made homophilic GNNs. Hence, GNNs for
heterophilic graphs are gaining increasing research attention to enhance graph learning with heterophily. In this paper, we provide a
comprehensive review of GNNs for heterophilic graphs. Specifically, we propose a systematic taxonomy that essentially governs
existing heterophilic GNN models, along with a general summary and detailed analysis. Furthermore, we discuss the correlation
between graph heterophily and various graph research domains, aiming to facilitate the development of more effective GNNs across a
spectrum of practical applications and learning tasks in the graph research community. In the end, we point out the potential directions
to advance and stimulate more future research and applications on heterophilic graph learning with GNNs.
Index Terms —Graph neural networks, heterophily, graph representation learning, message passing.
✦
1 I NTRODUCTION
GRAPHS are pervasively structured data and have been widely
used in many real-world scenarios, such as social net-
works [1], [2], knowledge bases [3], traffic networks [4], and
recommendation systems [5], [6]. Recently, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have achieved remarkable success with powerful learning
ability and become prevalent models to tackle various graph
analytical tasks, such as node classification, link prediction, and
graph classification [3], [7]–[9].
While a large number of GNNs with diverse architectures
have been designed [10]–[15], the majority of them follow the
homophily assumption, i.e., nodes with similar features or same
class labels are linked together. For example, in citation networks,
a study usually cites reference papers from the same research
area [16]. However, real-world graphs do not always obey the
•Xin Zheng is with the Department of Software System and Cy-
bersecurity (SSC), Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. E-mail:
xin.zheng@monash.edu.
•Yi Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang Normal
University, Jinhua, China. E-mail: wangyi@zjnu.edu.cn.
•Yixin Liu is with the Department of Data Science and AI (DSAI), Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia. E-mail: yixin.liu@monash.edu.
•Ming Li is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology
and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Normal University, Jin-
hua, China. E-mail: mingli@zjnu.edu.cn.
•Miao Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China. E-mail:
zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn.
•Di Jin is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China. E-mail: jindi@tju.edu.cn.
•Philip S. Yu is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA. E-mail: psyu@uic.edu.
•Shirui Pan is with the School of Information and Communication Tech-
nology and Institute for Integrated and Intelligent Systems (IIIS), Griffith
University, Queensland, Australia. Email: s.pan@griffith.edu.au.
•Xin Zheng and Yi Wang contributed equally to this work.
•Corresponding Author: Shirui Pan.
CustomersFraudsters
Math.Paper
Stat.Paper
CSPaper
(a)HomophilicGraph(b)	HeterophilicGraphFig. 1: Examples of homophilic and heterophilic graphs (Left: (a) a
citation network; Right: (b) an online transaction network).
homophily assumption but show an opposite property, i.e.,het-
erophily that linked nodes have dissimilar features and different
class labels [17]–[21]. For instance, in online transaction networks,
fraudsters are more likely to build connections with customers
instead of other fraudsters [22]; in dating networks, most people
prefer to date with people of the opposite gender [23]; in molecular
networks, protein structures are more likely composed of different
types of amino acids that are linked together [24]. The examples
of homophilic and heterophilic graphs are provided in Fig. 1 to
illustrate their difference visually. Importantly, such heterophily
restricts the learning ability of existing homophilic GNNs on
general graph-structural data, resulting in significant performance
degradation on heterophilic graphs [23]–[25].
Core Challenges of GNNs for Heterophily. We attribute
the performance degradation to the uniform message passing
framework under the homophily setting. The procedure of this
framework can be summarized as: first aggregating the messages
extracted from local neighbor nodes, then updating the final ego
node (the current central node itself) representations with aggre-
gated neighbor messages. Nevertheless, due to the heterophily
property of graphs, this mechanism poses significant challengesarXiv:2202.07082v3  [cs.LG]  25 Feb 2024