JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
for the development of heterophilic GNNs, primarily manifesting
in two aspects:
•Challenge-1: Undiscovered Non-local Neighbors.
Guided by homophily, neighbor aggregation in homophilic
GNNs restricts information extraction to the proximal
local topology of graphs. When applied to graphs with
heterophily, it fails to explore non-local topology, where
heterophilic nodes of the same class are typically situated
at long-term distances. This poses a significant challenge
in identifying and learning informative nodes with high
structural and semantic similarities on heterophilic graphs.
•Challenge-2: Indistinguishable Node Representation
Learning. Homophilic GNNs employ uniform local
neighbor aggregation and update the central node rep-
resentation when they are typically similar and share
the same labels. Consequently, on heterophilic graphs,
the discrepancy between similar non-local neighbors and
dissimilar local neighbors can not be effectively captured.
This results in critical challenges in learning discrimina-
tive node representations with distinguishable heterophily
information through diverse customized message passing.
In light of these challenges, recently, an increasing number
of researchers have started turning their attention to the study of
GNNs with heterophily. The research focus is sufficiently broad,
from heterophilic graph data exploration [26]–[28] to various
technical algorithm development [17], [19], [21], [25], [29]–[31].
Importance of Developing Heterophilic GNNs. Heterophilic
graph learning with GNNs is becoming an upward trending
research topic and it shows closely tied connections with diverse
domains in graph research. The compelling significance of GNN
development for heterophilic graphs is underscored by the follow-
ing aspects:
•Enhancing the understanding of complex and diverse het-
erophily graphs. Graph-structure data with the heterophilic
property presents great complexity and diversity, and it is
prevalent across various real-world application scenarios,
ranging from daily-life personal relationships to scientific
chemical molecular study. A thorough and ongoing ex-
ploration of heterophily graph data would significantly
enhance the understanding of complex and diverse het-
erophily graphs, thereby providing valuable guidance for
the development of GNN models and advancements in
heterophily graph learning.
•Advancing heterophilic graph analysis and learning. Het-
erophilic graph analysis and learning tasks are still open
and promising research topics in development, while
numerous challenges need to be tackled for designing
heterophilic GNN models with expressive performance,
robustness, and generalization ability. The advancement
of heterophilic GNNs is pivotal for unlocking the full po-
tential of heterophilic graph analysis in addressing various
practical graph learning tasks covering both heterophilic
node representations and graph structures.
•Adapting with versatility in heterophilic GNN develop-
ment. As heterophilic graphs exist prevalently and show
close connections with various graph research domains,
e.g., over-smoothing and anomaly detection. Hence, de-
veloping specialized heterophilic GNN architectures and
learning techniques would be pivotal in expanding the ver-
satility and adaptability of GNN models, unleashing powerof heterophilic GNNs in cross graph research domains and
applications.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive and systematic
review of GNNs for heterophilic graphs, aiming to provide a gen-
eral blueprint of heterophilic graph research. It can be beneficial
to establish connections and make comparisons among different
heterophilic GNN methods, leading to an in-depth understanding
of how different methods tackle the challenges of heterophily
learning. We are expecting that our survey will significantly
inspire and facilitate the development of heterophilic graphs1.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
•Comprehensive Overview : We provide a comprehen-
sive overview of current heterophilic GNNs in terms of
data, algorithms, and applications. We provide detailed
descriptions of each model type, along with the necessary
comparison and the gist summary.
•Systematic Taxonomy : We provide a systematic taxon-
omy of heterophilic GNNs and categorize existing meth-
ods into three classes, i.e., non-local neighbor extension
methods, GNN architecture refinement methods, and hy-
brid methods.
•Thorough Discussion : We provide a thorough discussion
of the correlation between graph heterophily and various
graph research domains, including the relation between
graph heterophily and model robustness, over-smoothing,
and graph anomaly detection.
•Future Directions : We suggest promising future research
directions and discuss the limitations of existing het-
erophilic GNNs from multiple perspectives, namely inter-
pretability, robustness, scalability, and heterophilic graph
data exploration.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section
2 defines the related concepts and provides notations used in this
survey. Section 3 describes the framework of heterophilic GNNs
and provides the taxonomy. Section 4-6 review three categories
of heterophilic GNNs methods respectively. Section 7 discusses
heterophily GNNs on diverse graphs and the correlation between
heterophily and diverse graph research domains. Section 8 ana-
lyzes the unexplored challenges and potential future directions.
Section 9 concludes this article in the end. More details of real-
world heterophilic graph dataset benchmarks, open-source codes,
and the overall development timeline of heterophilic GNNs can be
found in the appendix.
2 P RELIMINARY
2.1 Notations
LetG= (V,E)be an undirected, unweighted graph where
V={v1,···, v|V|}is the node set and E ∈ V × V is the
edge set. The neighbor set of node vis denoted as N(v) =
{u: (v, u)∈ E} . The node features are represented by a
feature matrix X∈R|V|×d, where the i-th row xi∈Rdis
the feature vector of node vianddis the number of feature
dimensions. Connectivity is represented by the adjacency matrix
A∈ {0,1}n×n. For any matrix A, we use Auvto refer to the
scalar value at the (u, v)location. The graph Laplacian is defined
asL=D−A, where D∈Rn×nis the diagonal degree matrix.
1. Our preprint of this article [32] has attracted 110+ citations, showing a
strong uptrend of this research topic.