1. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 7
shown to be an eﬀective tool for studying the internal represent ation of a
deep neural network.
2.Explaining individual predictions : Other types of explanations provide
information about individual predictions, e.g., heatmaps visualizing wh ich
pixels have been most relevant for the model to arrive at its decision [60]
or heatmaps highlighting the most sensitive parts of an input [ 84]. Such
explanations help to verify the predictions and establish trust in the correct
functioning on the system. Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LR P) [9,58]
provides a general framework for explaining individual predictions, i.e., it is
applicable to various ML models, including neural networks [ 9], LSTMs [ 7],
Fisher Vector classiﬁers [ 44] and Support Vector Machines [ 35]. Section 4
gives an overview over recently proposed methods for computing in dividual
explanations.
3.Explaining model behaviour : This type of explanations go beyond the
analysis of individual predictions towards a more general understa nding of
model behaviour, e.g., identiﬁcation of distinct prediction strategie s. The
spectral relevance analysis (SpRAy) approach of [ 46] computes such meta
explanations by clusteringindividual heatmaps. Eachcluster then r epresents
a particular prediction strategy learned by the model. For instance , the au-
thors of [ 46] identify four clusters when classifying “horse” images with the
Fisher Vector classiﬁer [ 77] trained on the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset [ 22],
namely (1) detect the horse and rider, 2) detect a copyright tag in portrait
oriented images, 3) detect wooden hurdles and other contextual elements of
horsebackriding, and 4) detect a copyrighttag in landscape orient ed images.
Such explanations are useful for obtaining a global overviewover t he learned
strategies and detecting “Clever Hans” predictors [ 46].
4.Explaining with representative examples : Another class of methods
interpret classiﬁers by identifying representative training example s [41,37].
This type of explanations can be useful for obtaining a better unde rstanding
of the training dataset and how it inﬂuences the model. Furthermor e, these
representative examples can potentially help to identify biases in the data
and make the model more robust to variations of the training datas et.
3.3 Role
Besides the recipient and information content it is alsoimportant to c onsider the
purpose of an explanation. Here we can distinguish two aspects, na mely (1) the
intent of the explanation method (what speciﬁc question does the e xplanation
answer) and (2) our intent (what do we want to use the explanation for).
Explanations are relative and it makes a huge diﬀerence whether the ir intent
is to explain the prediction as is (even if it is incorrect), whether they aim to
visualize what the model “thinks” about a speciﬁc class (e.g., the tru e class) or
whether they explain the prediction relative to another alternative (“why is this
image classiﬁed as car and not as truck”). Methods such as LRP allow to answer
all these diﬀerent questions, moreover, they also allow to adjust t he amount of
positive and negative evidence in the explanations, i.e., visualize what s peaks