4 W. Samek and K.-R. M¨ uller
literature. For instance, [ 73] show that current deep neural networks are dis-
tinguishing the classes “Wolf” and “Husky” mainly by the presence of snow in
the image. The authors of [ 46] demonstrate that deep models overﬁt to padding
artifacts when classifying airplanes, whereas [ 63] show that a model which was
trained to distinguish between 1000 categories, has not learned du mbbells as
an independent concept, but associates a dumbbell with the arm wh ich lifts it.
Such “CleverHans” predictors perform well on their respective te st sets, but will
certainly fail if deployed to the real-world, where sailing boats may lie o n a boat
trailer, both wolves and huskies can be found in non-snow regions an d horses do
not have a copyright sign on them. However, if the AI system is a blac k box, it
is very diﬃcult to unmask such predictors. Explainability helps to dete ct these
types of biases in the model or the data, moreover, it helps to unde rstand the
weaknesses of the AI system (even if it is not a “Clever Hans” predic tor). In the
extreme case, explanations allow to detect the classiﬁer’s misbehav iour (e.g., the
focus on the copyright tag) from a single test image7. Since understanding the
weaknesses of a system is the ﬁrst step towards improving it, expla nations are
likely to become integral part of the training and validation process o f future AI
models.
2.2 Explanations Foster Trust and Veriﬁability
The ability to verify decisions of an AI system is very important to fos ter trust,
both in situations where the AI system has a supportive role (e.g., me dical diag-
nosis) and in situations whereit practicallytakesthe decisions (e.g., a utonomous
driving). In the former case, explanations provide extra informat ion, which, e.g.,
help the medical expert to gain a comprehensive picture of the patie nt in order
to takethe best therapydecision.Similarlyto aradiologist,whowrite sadetailed
report explaining his ﬁndings, a supportive AI system should in detail explain
its decisions rather than only providing the diagnosis to the medical e xpert. In
cases where the AI system itself is deciding, it is even more critical to be able to
comprehend the reasoning of the system in order to verify that it is not behav-
ing like Clever Hans, but solves the problem in a robust and safe manne r. Such
veriﬁcations are required to build the necessary trust in every new technology.
There is also a social dimension of explanations. Explaining the rationa le
behind one’s decisions is an important part of human interactions [ 30]. Explana-
tions help to build trust in a relationship between humans, and should t herefore
be also part of human-machine interactions [ 3]. Explanations are not only an in-
evitable part of human learning and education (e.g., teacher explains solution to
student), but also foster the acceptance of diﬃcult decisions and are important
for informed consent (e.g., doctor explaining therapy to patient). Thus, even if
not providing additional information for verifying the decision, e.g., b ecause the
patient may have no medical knowledge, receiving explanations usua lly make us
feel better as it integrates us into the decision-making process. A n AI system
which interacts with humans should therefore be explainable.
7Traditional methods to evaluate classiﬁer performance req uire large test datasets.