1. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 11
5 Evaluating Quality of Explanations
The objective assessment of the quality of explanations is an active ﬁeld of re-
search. Many eﬀorts have been made to deﬁne quality measures fo r heatmaps
which explain individual predictions of an AI model. This section gives an
overview over the proposed approaches.
A popular measure for heatmap quality is based on perturbation ana lysis
[9,75,6]. The assumption of this evaluation metric is that the perturbation o f
relevant (according to the heatmap) input variables should lead to a steeper
decline of the prediction score than the perturbation of input dimen sions which
are of lesser importance. Thus, the average decline of the predict ion score after
several rounds of perturbation (starting from the most relevan t input variables)
deﬁnes an objective measure of heatmap quality. If the explanatio n identiﬁes the
truly relevant input variables, then the decline should be large. The a uthors of
[75]recommendtouseuntargetedperturbations(e.g.,uniformnoise )toallowfair
comparison of diﬀerent explanation methods. Although being very p opular, it is
clear that perturbation analysis can not be the only criterion to eva luate expla-
nation quality, because one could easily design explanations techniqu es which
would directly optimize this criterion. Examples are occlusion methods which
were used in [ 94,50], however, they have been shown to be inferior (according to
other quality criteria) to explanation techniques such as LRP [ 8].
Other studies use the ‘pointing game” [ 95] to evaluate the quality of a
heatmap. The goal of this game is to evaluate the discriminativeness of the
explanations for localizing target objects, i.e., it is compared if the mo st rele-
vant point of the heatmap lies on the object of designated categor y. Thus, these
measures assume that the AI model will focus most attention on th e object of
interest when classifying it, therefore this should be reﬂected in th e explanation.
However, this assumption may not always be true, e.g., “Clever Hans ” predic-
tors [46] may rather focus on context than of the object itself, irrespec tively of
the explanation method used. Thus, their explanations would be eva luated as
poor quality according to this measure although they truly visualize t he model’s
prediction strategy.
Task speciﬁc evaluation schemes have also been proposed in the liter ature.
For example, [ 69] use the subject-verb agreement task to evaluate explanations
of a NLP model. Here the model predicts a verb’s number and the exp lana-
tions verify if the most relevant word is indeed the correct subject or a noun
with the predicted number. Other approaches to evaluation rely on human judg-
ment [73,66]. Such evaluation schemes relatively quickly become impractical if
evaluating a larger number of explanations.
A recent study [ 8] proposes to objectively evaluate explanation for sequential
data using ground truth information in a toy task. The idea of this ev aluation
metric is to add or subtract two numbers within an input sequence an d measure
the correlation between the relevances assigned to the elements o f the sequence
and the two input numbers. If the model is able to accurately perfo rm the ad-
dition and subtraction task, then it must focus on these two numbe rs (other