8 W. Samek and K.-R. M¨ uller
for (positive evidence) and against (negative evidence) the predic tion. Such ﬁne-
grained explanations foster the understanding of the classiﬁer an d the problem
at hand.
Furthermore, there may be diﬀerent goals for using the explanatio ns beyond
visualization and veriﬁcation of the prediction. For instance, explan ations can
be potentially used to improve the model, e.g., by regularization [ 74]. Also since
explanations provide information about the (relevant parts of the ) model, they
can be potentially used for model compression and pruning. Many ot her uses
(certiﬁcation of the model, legal use) of explanations can be thoug ht of, but the
details remain future work.
4 Methods of Explainable AI
This section gives an overviewover diﬀerent approaches to explaina ble AI, start-
ing with techniques which are model-agnostic and rely on a simple surro gate
function to explain the predictions. Then, we discuss methods which compute
explanations by testing the model’s response to local perturbation s (e.g., by uti-
lizing gradient information or by optimization). Subsequently, we pre sent very
eﬃcient propagation-based explanation techniques which leverage the model’s
internal structure. Finally, we consider methods which go beyond in dividual ex-
planations towards a meta-explanation of model behaviour.
This section is not meant to be a complete survey of explanation meth ods,
but it rather summarizes the most important developments in this ﬁe ld. Some
approaches to explainable AI, e.g., methods which ﬁnd inﬂuencial exa mples [37],
are not discussed in this section.
4.1 Explaining with Surrogates
Simple classiﬁers such as linear models or shallow decision trees are intr insically
interpretable, so that explaining its predictions becomes a trivial ta sk. Complex
classiﬁers such as deep neural networks or recurrent models on t he other hand
contain several layers of non-linear transformations, which large ly complicates
the task of ﬁnding what exactly makes them arrive at their predictio ns.
One approach to explain the predictions of complex models is to locally
approximate them with a simple surrogate function, which is interpre table. A
populartechniquefallingintothiscategoryisLocalInterpretableM odel-agnostic
Explanations (LIME) [ 73]. This method samples in the neighborhood of the
input of interest, evaluates the neural network at these points, and tries to ﬁt
the surrogate function such that it approximates the function of interest. If the
input domain of the surrogate function is human-interpretable, th en LIME can
even explain decisions of a model which uses non-interpretable feat ures. Since
LIME ismodel agnostic,it can be applied toanyclassiﬁer,evenwithou t knowing
its internals, e.g., architecture or weights of a neural network clas siﬁer. One
major drawback of LIME is its high computational complexity, e.g., fo r state-of-
the-art models such as GoogleNet it requires several minutes for c omputing the
explanation of a single prediction [ 45].