1. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 9
Similar to LIME which builds a model for locally approximating the functio n
of interest, the SmoothGrad method [ 85] samples the neighborhood of the input
to approximate the gradient. Also SmoothGrad does not leverage t he internals
of the model, however, it needs access to the gradients. Thus, it c an also be
regarded as a gradient-based explanation method.
4.2 Explaining with Local Perturbations
Another class of methods construct explanations by analyzing the model’s re-
sponse to local changes. This includes methods which utilize the grad ient infor-
mation as well as perturbation- and optimization-based approache s.
Explanation methods relying on the gradient of the function of inter est [2]
have a long history in machine learning. One example is the so-called Sen sitivity
Analysis (SA) [ 62,10,84]. Although being widely used as explanation methods,
SA technically explains the change in prediction instead of the predict ion itself.
Furthermore, SA has been shown to suﬀer from fundamental pro blems such as
gradient shattering and explanation discontinuities, and is therefo re considered
suboptimal for explanation of today’s AI models [ 60]. Variants of Sensitivity
Analysis exist which tackle some of these problems by locally averaging the
gradients [ 85] or integrating them along a speciﬁc path [ 88].
Perturbation-basedexplanationmethods[ 94,97,25]explicitlytestthemodel’s
response to more general local perturbations. While the occlusion method of [ 94]
measures the importance of input dimensions by masking parts of th e input, the
Prediction Diﬀerence Analysis (PDA) approachof[ 97] uses conditional sampling
within the pixel neighborhood of an analyzed feature to eﬀectively r emove infor-
mation. Both methods are model-agnostic, i.e., can be applied to any c lassiﬁer,
but are computationally not very eﬃcient, because the function of interest (e.g.,
neural network) needs to be evaluated for all perturbations.
The meaningful perturbation method of [ 25,26] is another model-agnostic
technique to explaining with local perturbations. It regards explan ation as a
meta prediction task and applies optimization to synthesize the maxim ally in-
formative explanations. The idea to formulate explanation as an opt imization
problem is also used by other methods. For instance, the methods [ 84,93,64]
aim to interpret what the model has learned by building prototypes t hat are
representative of the learned concept. These prototypes are c omputed within
the activation maximization framework by searching for an input pat tern that
produces a maximum desired model response. Conceptually, activa tion maxi-
mization [ 64] is similar to the meaningful perturbation approach of [ 25]. While
the latter ﬁnds a minimum perturbation of the data that makes f(x) low, activa-
tion maximization ﬁnds a minimum perturbation of the gray image that m akes
f(x) high. The costs of optimization can make these methods computat ionally
very demanding.