1. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 5
2.3 Explanations are a Prerequisite for New Insights
AI systems have the potential to discover patterns in data, which are not acces-
sible to the human expert. In the case of the Go game, these patte rns can be
new playing strategies [ 82]. In the case of scientiﬁc data, they can be unknown
associations between genes and diseases [ 51], chemical compounds and material
properties [ 68] or brain activations and cognitive states [ 49]. In the sciences,
identifying these patterns, i.e., explaining and interpreting what fea tures the AI
system uses for predicting, is often more important than the pred iction itself, be-
cause it unveils information about the biological, chemical or neural m echanisms
and may lead to new scientiﬁc insights.
This necessity to explain and interpret the results has led to a stron g domi-
nance of linear models in scientiﬁc communities in the past (e.g. [ 42,67]). Linear
models are intrinsically interpretable and thus easily allow to extract t he learned
patterns. Only recently, it became possible to apply more powerful models such
as deep neural networks without sacriﬁcing interpretability. Thes e explainable
non-linear models have already attracted attention in domains such as neuro-
science [87,89,20], health [ 33,14,40], autonomous driving [ 31], drug design [ 70]
and physics [ 78,72] and it can be expected that they will play a pivotal role in
future scientiﬁc research.
2.4 Explanations are Part of the Legislation
The inﬁltration of AI systems into our daily lives poses a new challenge f or the
legislation.Legaland ethical questionsregardingthe responsibility ofAI systems
and their level of autonomy have recently received increased atte ntion [21,27].
But also anti-discrimination and fairness aspects have been widely dis cussed in
the contextofAI[ 28,19].TheEU’sGeneralDataProtectionRegulation(GDPR)
has even added the right to explanation to the policy in Articles 13, 14 and 22,
highlighting the importance of human-understandable interpretat ions derived
from machine decisions. For instance, if a person is being rejected f or a loan by
the AI system of a bank, in principle, he or she has the right to know w hy the
system has decided in this way, e.g., in order to make sure that the de cision is
compatible with the anti-discrimination law or other regulations. Altho ugh it is
not yet clear how these legal requirements will be implemented in prac tice, one
can be sure that transparency aspects will gain in importance as AI decisions
will more and more aﬀect our daily lives.
3 Diﬀerent Facets of an Explanation
Recently proposed explanation techniques provide valuable informa tion about
the learned representations and the decision-making of an AI syst em. These
explanations may diﬀer in their information content, their recipient a nd their
purpose. In the following we describe the diﬀerent types of explana tions and
comment on their usefulness in practice.