12 W. Samek and K.-R. M¨ uller
numbers in the sequence are random) and this must be reﬂected in t he explana-
tion.
An alternative and indirect way to evaluate the quality of explanation s is to
use them for solving other tasks. The authors of [ 6] build document-level rep-
resentations from word-level explanations. The performance of these document-
level representations(e.g., in a classiﬁcation task) reﬂect the qua lity of the word-
level explanations. Another work [ 4] uses explanation for reinforcement learning.
Many other functionally-grounded evaluations [ 18] could be conceived such as
using explanations for compressing or pruning the neural network or training
student models in a teacher-student scenario.
Lastly, another promising approach to evaluate explanations is bas ed on the
fulﬁllment of a certain axioms [ 80,88,54,60,57]. Axioms are properties of an ex-
planation that are considered to be necessary and should therefo re be fulﬁlled.
Proposedaxiomsinclude relevanceconservation[ 60], explanationcontinuity[ 60],
sensitivity [ 88] and implementation invariance[ 88]. In contrastto the other qual-
ity measures discussed in this section, the fulﬁllment or non-fulﬁllmen t of certain
axioms can be often shown analytically, i.e., does not require empirical evalua-
tions.
6 Challenges and Open Questions
Although signiﬁcant progress has been made in the ﬁeld of explainable AI in the
last years, challenges still exist both on the methods and theory sid e as well as
regarding the way explanations are used in practice. Researchers have already
started working on some of these challenges, e.g., the objective ev aluation of
explanation quality or the use of explanations beyond visualization. O ther open
questions, especially those concerning the theory, are more fund amental and
more time will be required to give satisfactory answers to them.
Explanation methods allow us to gain insights into the functioning of th e
AI model. Yet, these methods are still limited in several ways. First, heatmaps
computed with today’s explanation methods visualize “ﬁrst-order” information,
i.e., they show which input features have been identiﬁed as being relev ant for the
prediction. However, the relation between these features, e.g., w hether they are
important on their own or only whether they occur together, rema ins unclear.
Understanding these relations is important in many applications, e.g., in the
neurosciences such higher-order explanations could help us to iden tify groups of
brain regions which act together when solving a speciﬁc task (brain n etworks)
rather than just identifying important single voxels.
Another limitation is the low abstraction level of explanations. Heatm aps
show that particular pixels are important without relating these rele vance values
to more abstract concepts such as the objects or the scene disp layed in the
image. Humans need to interpret the explanations to make sense th em and
to understand the model’s behaviour. This interpretation step can be diﬃcult
and erroneous.Meta-explanations which aggregateevidence fro m these low-level
heatmaps and explain the model’s behaviour on a more abstract, mor e human