6 W. Samek and K.-R. M¨ uller
3.1 Recipient
Diﬀerent recipients may require explanations with diﬀerent level of d etail and
withdiﬀerentinformationcontent.Forinstance,forusersofAIt echnologyitmay
be suﬃcient to obtain coarse explanations, which are easy to interp ret, whereas
AI researchers and developers would certainly prefer explanation s, which give
them deeper insights into the functioning of the model.
In the case of image classiﬁcation such simple explanations could coar sely
highlight image regions, which are regarded most relevant for the mo del. Several
preprocessingsteps, e.g., smoothing, ﬁltering or contrastnorma lization,could be
applied to further improve the visualization quality. Although discard ing some
information, such coarse explanations could help the ordinary user to foster
trust in AI technology. On the other hand AI researchers and dev elopers, who
aim to improve the model, may require all the available information, inclu ding
negative evidence, about the AI’s decision in the highest resolution ( e.g., pixel-
wiseexplanations),becauseonlythiscompleteinformationgivesdet ailedinsights
into the (mal)functioning of the model.
One can easily identify further groups of recipients, which are inter ested in
diﬀerent types of explanations. For instance, when applying AI to t he medical
domain these groups could be patients, doctors and institutions. A n AI system
which analyzes patient data could provide simple explanations to the p atients,
e.g., indicating too high blood sugar, while providing more elaborate exp lana-
tions to the medical personal, e.g., unusual relation between diﬀere nt blood
parameters. Furthermore, institutions such as hospitals or the F DA might be
less interested in understanding the AI’s decisions for individual pat ients, but
would rather prefer to obtain global or aggregated explanations, i.e., patterns
which the AI system has learned after analyzing many patients.
3.2 Information Content
Diﬀerenttypesofexplanationprovideinsightsintodiﬀerentaspect softhemodel,
ranging from information about the learned representations to th e identiﬁcation
of distinct prediction strategies and the assessment of overall mo del behaviour.
Depending on the recipient of the explanations and his or her intent, it may be
advantageous to focus on one particular type of explanation. In t he following we
brieﬂy describe four diﬀerent types of explanations.
1.Explaining learned representations : This type of explanation aims to
foster the understanding of the learned representations, e.g., n eurons of
a deep neural network. Recent work [ 12,38] investigates the role of single
neurons or group of neurons in encoding certain concepts. Other methods
[84,93,64,65] aim to interpret what the model has learned by building proto-
types that are representative of the abstract learned concept . These meth-
ods, e.g., explain what the model has learned about the category “c ar” by
generating a prototypical image of a car. Building such a prototype can
be formulated within the activation maximization framework and has b een