1. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 3
2 Need for Transparency and Trust in AI
Black box AI systems have spread to many of today’s applications. F or machine
learning models used, e.g., in consumer electronics or online translatio n services,
transparency and explainability are not a key requirement as long as the overall
performance of these systems is good enough. But even if these s ystems fail,
e.g., the cell phone camera does not recognize a person or the tran slation service
produces grammatically wrong sentences, the consequences are rather unspec-
tacular. Thus, the requirements for transparency and trust ar e rather low for
these types of AI systems. In safety critical applications the situ ation is very
diﬀerent. Here, the intransparency of ML techniques may be a limitin g or even
disqualifying factor. Especially if single wrong decisions can result in da nger to
life and health of humans (e.g., autonomous driving, medical domain) o r signiﬁ-
cant monetary losses (e.g., algorithmic trading), relying on a data-d riven system
whose reasoning is incomprehensible may not be an option. This intran sparency
is one reason why the adoption of machine learning to domains such as health is
more cautious than the usage of these models in the consumer, e-c ommerce or
entertainment industry.
In the following we discuss why the ability to explain the decision making o f
an AI system helps to establish trust and is of utmost importance, n ot only in
medical or safety critical applications. We refer the reader to [ 91] for a discussion
of the challenges of transparency.
2.1 Explanations Help to Find “Clever Hans” Predictors
Clever Hans was a horse that could supposedly count and that was c onsidered a
scientiﬁc sensation in the yearsaround 1900.As it turned out later , Hans did not
master the math but in about 90 percent of the cases, he was able t o derive the
correct answer from the questioner’s reaction. Analogous behav iours have been
recently observed in state-of-the-art AI systems [ 46]. Also here the algorithms
have learned to use some spurious correlates in the training and tes t data and
similarly to Hans predict right for the ‘wrong’ reason.
For instance, the authors of [ 44,46] showed that the winning method of the
PASCAL VOC competition [ 23] was often not detecting the object of interest,
but was utilizing correlations or context in the data to correctly clas sify an im-
age. It recognized boats by the presence of water and trains by t he presence
of rails in the image, moreover, it recognized horses by the presenc e of a copy-
right watermark6. The occurrence of the copyright tags in horse images is a
clear artifact in the dataset, which had gone unnoticed to the orga nizers and
participants of the challenge for many years. It can be assumed th at nobody
has systematically checked the thousands images in the dataset fo r this kind
of artifacts (but even if someone did, such artifacts may be easily o verlooked).
Many other examples of “Clever Hans” predictors have been descr ibed in the
6The PASCAL VOC images have been automatically crawled from ﬂ ickr and espe-
cially the horse images were very often copyrighted with a wa termark.