2 W. Samek and K.-R. M¨ uller
indispensable tools in the sciences for tasks such as prediction, simu lation or ex-
ploration [ 78,15,89,92]. These immense successes of AI systems mainly became
possible through improvements in deep learning methodology [ 48,47], the avail-
abilityoflargedatabases[ 17,34]andcomputationalgainsobtainedwithpowerful
GPU cards [ 52].
Despite the revolutionary character of this technology, challenge s still exist
which slow down or even hinder the prevailance of AI in some application s.
Examplar challenges are (1) the large complexity and high energy dem ands of
current deep learning models [ 29], which hinder their deployment in resource
restricted environments and devices, (2) the lack of robustness to adversarial
attacks [55], which pose a severe security risk in application such as autonomous
driving5, and (3) the lack of transparency and explainability [ 76,32,18], which
reduces the trust in and the veriﬁability of the decisions made by an A I system.
This paper focuses on the last challenge. It presents recent deve lopments in
the ﬁeld of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence and aims to foster awareness for the
advantages–and at times–also for the necessity of transparent decision making
in practice. The historic second Go match between Lee Sedol and Alp haGo [82]
nicely demonstrates the power of today’s AI technology, and hints at its enor-
mous potential for generating new knowledge from data when being accessible
for human interpretation. In this match AlphaGo played a move, whic h was
classiﬁed as “not a human move” by a renowned Go expert, but which was the
deciding move for AlphaGo to win the game. AlphaGo did not explain the m ove,
but the later playunveiled the intention behind its decision. With explain able AI
it may be possible to also identify such novel patterns and strategie s in domains
like health, drug development or material sciences, moreover, the explanations
will ideally let us comprehend the reasoning of the system and unders tand why
the system has decided e.g. to classify a patient in a speciﬁc manner o r asso-
ciate certain properties with a new drug or material. This opens up inn umerable
possibilities for future research and may lead to new scientiﬁc insight s.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2discusses the
need for transparencyand trust in AI. Section 3comments on the diﬀerent types
of explanations and their respective information content and use in practice.
Recent techniques of explainable AI are brieﬂy summarized in Section 4, includ-
ing methods which rely on simple surrogate functions, frame explana tion as an
optimization problem, access the model’s gradient or make use of the model’s
internal structure. The question of how to objectively evaluate t he quality of
explanations is addressed in Section 5. The paper concludes in Section 6with a
discussion on general challenges in the ﬁeld of explainable AI.
5The authors of [ 24] showed that deep models can be easily fooled by physical-wo rld
attacks. For instance, by putting speciﬁc stickers on a stop sign one can achieve that
the stop sign is not recognized by the system anymore.