this end, we investigate the inﬂuences of employ-
ing different in-context examples on the empiri-
cal results. Interestingly, we found that the in-
context examples that are closer to the test sample
in the embedding space consistently give rise to
stronger performance (relative to the farther ones).
Inspired by this observation and the recent success
of retrieval-augmented models (Hashimoto et al.,
2018), we propose to utilize nearest neighbors of a
given test sample (among all the training instances
available) as the corresponding in-context exam-
ples. The retrieved examples, along with the test
sample, are provided to GPT- 3for the ﬁnal predic-
tion.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method, we evaluate it on several natural language
understanding and generation tasks, including sen-
timent analysis, table-to-text generation and open-
domain question answering. It is observed that
the retrieval-based in-context examples unleash
the few-shot capabilities of GPT- 3much more ef-
fectively than a random sampling baseline. Even
with a smaller number of in-context examples,
the proposed strategy empowers GPT- 3to achieve
stronger performance. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the
speciﬁc sentence encoders employed for the re-
trieval procedure play a critical role. Thus, an ex-
tensive exploration regarding different pre-trained
encoders is conducted, and it is shown that en-
coders ﬁne-tuned on natural language matching
tasks serve as more effective in-context examples
selector on the QA task. Detailed analysis and
case study further validate the effectiveness of pro-
posed methods. In summary, our contributions in
this paper are as follows:
i) to the best of our knowledge, we take a ﬁrst
step towards understanding the sensitivity of GPT-
3’s few-shot capabilities with respect to the selec-
tion of in-context examples;
ii) to alleviate the sensitivity issue, an ad-
ditional retrieval module is introduced to ﬁnd
semantically-similar in-context examples of a test
instance to construct its corresponding input,
which greatly outperforms the baseline based on
random sampled examples;
iii) ﬁne-tuning the retrieval model on task-
related dataset(s) leads to even stronger empirical
results with GPT- 3;
iv) the performance of GPT- 3improves as the
number of examples available for retrieval in-
creases.
1234sourcetargetcontextpromptwatermelon == wassermelonesports car == sportwagenblue sky == blauer Himmelmountain ==   …………….Figure 1: The ﬁgure above shows how to perform in-
context learning with a language model. Three in-
context examples and the test prompt are concatenated
as a single string input for GPT- 3, with a special charac-
ter ”nn” inserted between two adjacent examples. GPT-
3keeps generating tokens until there is a special char-
acter ”nn”.
2 Method
2.1 GPT- 3for In-Context Learning
The in-context learning scenario of GPT- 3can be
regarded as a conditional text generation problem.
Concretely, the probability of generating a target
yis conditioned on the context C, which includes
kexamples, and the source x. Therefore, the pre-
dictionycorresponding to the source xcan be ex-
pressed as:
pLM(yjC;x) =TY
t=1p(ytjC;x;y<t) (1)
where LM denotes the parameters of the language
model, and C=fx1;y1;x2;y2;:::;xk;ykgis a
context string. In GPT- 3, theCis created by con-
catenatingktraining instances along with their
corresponding labels. As shown in the illustration
of Figure 1, GPT- 3is asked to translate “moun-
tain” to its German version based on the three ex-
amples given as part of the input.
For GPT- 3, this generation process is imple-
mented through a giant transformer-based model
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al.,
2020). Given the large size of the GPT-3 model,
it would be very computationally-involved to ﬁne-
tune it on task-speciﬁc samples. Thus, GPT- 3is
typically leveraged in a in-context learning man-
ner as described above. It has been shown that
GPT-3has powerful few-shot capabilities, where
it can perform quite well with only a small num-
ber of demonstrations provided. Unfortunately, as
shown in Table 1, the results of GPT tends to ﬂuc-
tuate signiﬁcantly with different in-context exam-
ples chosen. Here we aim to alleviate this issue via
judious in-context examples selection.