In contrast, KATE sst-2obtains the best accuracy,
showing that ﬁne-tuning on a similar task can ben-
eﬁt KATE’s performance. To verify that the gains
are not merely from the retrieval step, we further
compare KATE roberta with thekNN roberta . It turns
out that the performance of the kNN roberta method
is similar to random guessing. This observation is
consistent when one neighbor or three neighbors
are retrieved. Notably, with the embeddings of
the RoBERTa-large model ﬁne-tuned on the SST-
2 dataset, the accuracy of kNN sst-2is 92.46, which
is lower than that obtained with KATE sst-2. These
results suggest that the GPT-3 model is critical to
the ﬁnal results, and the retrieval module is com-
plementary to GPT- 3’s few-shot capabilities.
4.2 Table-to-text Generation
We utilize the ToTTo dataset to evaluate KATE
on the table-to-text generation task. The results
are shown in Table 5. The KATE method gives
rise to considerable gains over the random base-
line, according to both the BLEU and PARENT
scores. On a ﬁner scale, the evaluation can be
done on the overlap subset and the nonoverlap
subset. The overlap dev subset shares a signif-
icant number of header names with the training
set, while the nonoverlap one does not share any
header names. It can be observed that the KATE
method improves the results on both the overlap
and the nonoverlap subsets, meaning that the re-
trieval module is helpful for both situations where
the test set follows the distribution of the train-
ing set and where the test set is out of distribu-
tion of the training set. Similar to sentiment anal-
ysis, there is a slight drop in performance from
KATE roberta to KATE nliand KATE nli+sts-b . This is
due to the difference between the objectives of the
ToTTo dataset and NLI+STS-B datasets. The drop
from KATE nlito KATE nli+sts-b further validates the
idea that ﬁne-tuning on a dissimilar task can hurt
KATE’s performance. For the kNN baseline, it
performs much worse than the random selection
method and the KATE method, again suggesting
that the retrieval process and GPT-3 work together
collaboratively to achieve better results.
To understand how the retrieval mechanism
helps GPT- 3’s predictions, we conduct a case
study on the retrieved examples (see Table 6). By
retrieving relevant examples from the training set,
KATE provides useful detailed information within
the table, e.g., the number of points, rebounds, and
assists, to GPT- 3for more accurate description.On the other hand, the random selection method
has the issue of hallucination, where the generated
sequences contain information ( i.e., “senior year”
and “University of Texas”) not present in the table.
4.3 Questing Answering
We also evaluate KATE on the open-domain QA
tasks, as shown in Table 7. For the QA tasks,
we compare with some state-of-the-art methods
such as RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) and T5 (Raf-
fel et al., 2019). Both methods require ﬁne-
tuning on the speciﬁc datasets. The KATE method
again improves GPT- 3’s few-shot prediction ac-
curacies substantially across various benchmarks.
It is worth noting that the ﬁne-tuned transformer
models serve as better sentence encoders for re-
trieval purpose (compared with the RoBERTa-
large model without ﬁne-tuning). KATE nliand
KATE nli+sts-b improve upon KATE roberta because
this time ﬁne-tuning on NLI or STS-B datasets
is helpful for retrieving semantically similar ques-
tions from the QA datasets. Moreover, on the
NQ and TriviaQA datasets, further ﬁne-tuning on
the STS-B dataset improves KATE’s results. We
also try reducing the number of in-context ex-
amples to be as small as ﬁve for both the ran-
dom and KATE methods, where KATE outper-
forms the baseline as well. Therefore, the advan-
tage of KATE over the random baseline holds for
both small and large numbers of in-context exam-
ples. More details can be found in Section 5.1.
We evaluate the other baseline kNN roberta by using
the top- 1nearest neighbor. We also explore using
64 nearest neighbors (10 for TriviaQA) to deter-
mine the answer (by majority voting explained in
Section 3.2). The EM score tends to be similar to
retrieving the top- 1nearest neighbor. These kNN
baseline results again suggest that the retrieval
module and GPT- 3work together to achieve better
performance.
To investigate why the retrieval examples are
helpful, we further present a case study. Con-
cretely, the retrieved in-context examples from the
NQ dataset are shown in Table 8. For the ﬁrst and
second cases, the random baseline provides wrong
answers because GPT- 3is unable to recall the ex-
act detail. However, the in-context examples se-
lected by KATE contain the correct details, which
facilitates GPT- 3to answer the questions. For the
third test question, the random baseline leads GPT-
3to misinterpret the question as asking for a spe-
ciﬁc location. In contrast, KATE selects similar