set. The number of in-context examples is chosen
to be 3since adding more examples does not fur-
ther improve the performance.
Table-to-Text Generation Given a Wikipedia
table and a set of highlighted cells, this task fo-
cuses on producing human-readable texts as de-
scriptions. ToTTo (Parikh et al., 2020) is uti-
lized for evaluation due to its popularity. We use
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and PARENT (Dhin-
gra et al., 2019). metrics for evaluation. The
ToTTo code base contains both evaluation and
preprocessing scripts2. Due to the input length
limit of GPT- 3(currently the token limit is 2048),
we add an extra preprocessing step by deleting
the closing angle brackets such as </cell>and
</table>to save some space. The number of in-
context examples is set as 2.
Question Answering Given a factual question,
the model is asked to generate the correct answer.
Following prior studies, we use the Exact Match
(EM) score to measure the performance of GPT-
3on open-domain QA tasks. The EM score is
deﬁned as the proportion of the number of pre-
dicted answers being exactly the same as (one of)
the ground-truth answer(s). The matching is per-
formed after string normalization, which includes
article and punctuation removal. We conduct
experiments on three open-domain QA bench-
marks: Natural Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019), Web Questions (WQ) (Berant et al.,
2013), and Trivia Question Answering (Trivi-
aQA) (Joshi et al., 2017). For this task, we pick
the nearest 64 neighbors as the in-context exam-
ples for NQ and WQ and nearest 10 neighbors for
TriviaQA (The retrieved 64 examples could not ﬁt
into 2048 token limit for TriviaQA. For fair com-
parison, we set the number of in-context examples
to be 10 for TriviaQA for both the baseline and
KATE method). The evaluation is done on the test
sets of NQ and WQ and the dev set of TriviaQA.
3.2 Baseline Methods
Random Sampling For each test sentence, we
randomly select in-context examples from the
training set. We refer to this method as Random
in the experimental results. To have a fair compar-
ison with KATE, the number of in-context exam-
ples in this random baseline is the same as KATE
2The ToTTo code base can be found at https:
//github.com/google-research/language/
tree/master/language/tottoMethod Accuracy
Random 87.952.74
kNN roberta 50.20
KATE roberta 91.99
KATE nli 90.40
KATE nli+sts-b 90.20
KATE sst-2 93.43
Table 4: Accuracy of sentiment prediction for GPT- 3
on IMDB with different choices of in-context exam-
ples. In-context examples are from the SST-2 dataset.
to ensure fair comparison. On the test set, the ran-
dom baseline is repeated for ﬁve times to obtain
the average score and corresponding standard de-
viation.
k-Nearest Neighbor Additionally, to investi-
gate whether the retrieval module is complemen-
tary to GPT- 3’s few-shot learning ability, we
further consider a k-nearest neighbor baseline.
Speciﬁcally, for text generation tasks, the target
y1associated with the ﬁrst retrieved example is
considered as the predicted target for the test sam-
ple. As to the sentiment analysis and QA tasks, the
topkretrieved examples fy1;:::;ykgare utilized,
where the ﬁnal prediction is determined by major-
ity voting among the kexamples’ targets. If there
is a tie case, we take the target of the example that
is most similar to the test sentence as the predic-
tion. To ensure fair comparison, we compare the
baselinekNN and KATE under the same embed-
ding space of a pre-trained RoBERTa-large model.
This baseline is abbreviated as kNN roberta .
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Sentiment Analysis
We ﬁrst evaluate KATE on the sentiment anal-
ysis task. The results are shown in Table 4.
It can be observed that KATE consistently pro-
duces better performance relative to the random
selection baseline. Notably, there is no vari-
ance with the obtained results since the same set
of retrieved in-context examples are employed.
For the KATE method, when a pre-trained sen-
tence encoder is ﬁne-tuned on NLI or NLI+STS-
B datasets, the performance slightly decreases.
Since the objectives of the IMDB dataset and the
NLI+STS-B datasets are different, this shows that
ﬁne-tuning on a dissimilar task can hurt KATE’s
performance. Moreover, KATE nli+sts-b performs
worse than KATE nlibecause the sentence encoder
has been further ﬁne-tuned on the STS-B dataset.