What Makes Good In-Context Examples for GPT- 3?
Jiachang Liu1, Dinghan Shen2, Yizhe Zhang3, Bill Dolan3, Lawrence Carin1, Weizhu Chen2
1Duke University2Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI3Microsoft Research
1fjiachang.liu, lcaring@duke.edu
2;3fdishen, yizzhang, billdol, wzchen g@microsoft.com
Abstract
GPT-3(Brown et al., 2020) has attracted lots
of attention due to its superior performance
across a wide range of NLP tasks, especially
with its powerful and versatile in-context few-
shot learning ability. Despite its success, we
found that the empirical results of GPT- 3de-
pend heavily on the choice of in-context ex-
amples. In this work, we investigate whether
there are more effective strategies for judi-
ciously selecting in-context examples (relative
to random sampling) that better leverage GPT-
3’s few-shot capabilities. Inspired by the re-
cent success of leveraging a retrieval module
to augment large-scale neural network mod-
els, we propose to retrieve examples that are
semantically-similar to a test sample to for-
mulate its corresponding prompt. Intuitively,
the in-context examples selected with such a
strategy may serve as more informative in-
puts to unleash GPT- 3’s extensive knowledge.
We evaluate the proposed approach on sev-
eral natural language understanding and gen-
eration benchmarks, where the retrieval-based
prompt selection approach consistently out-
performs the random baseline. Moreover, it
is observed that the sentence encoders ﬁne-
tuned on task-related datasets yield even more
helpful retrieval results. Notably, signiﬁcant
gains are observed on tasks such as table-to-
text generation (41.9% on the ToTTo dataset)
and open-domain question answering (45.5%
on the NQ dataset). We hope our investigation
could help understand the behaviors of GPT- 3
and large-scale pre-trained LMs in general and
enhance their few-shot capabilities.
1 Introduction
GPT-3(Brown et al., 2020) is a new breakthrough
in NLP research. Previously, NLP models are pre-
trained on large quantities of data and ﬁne-tuned
Work was done during an internship at Microsoft Dy-
namics 365 AI.Trial 1 2 3 4 5
Accuracy 94.6 95.0 95.8 93.9 86.9
Table 1: Results of GPT- 3on the task of sentiment
analysis on the SST-2 dataset. Five different in-context
examples are randomly selected from the training set.
We observe different contexts induce different accura-
cies on the test set.
on a speciﬁc task and dataset. What sets GPT- 3
apart from other pre-trained language models is its
impressive “in-context” few-shot learning ability.
Provided with a few in-context examples, GPT- 3
is able to generalize to unseen cases without fur-
ther ﬁne-tuning. This opens up many new tech-
nological possibilities that are previously consid-
ered unique to human. For example, NLP systems
can be developed to expand emails, extract entities
from text, generate code based on natural language
instructions with a few demonstration examples.
Despite its powerful and versatile in-context
learning ability, GPT- 3has some practical chal-
lenges/ambiguities. The original paper (Brown
et al., 2020) utilizes task-relevant examples that
are randomly sampled from the training set to con-
struct the context. In practice, we observe that the
performance of GPT- 3tends to ﬂuctuate with dif-
ferent choices of in-context examples. As shown
in Table 1, the variance of the empirical results
with distinct in-context examples can be signiﬁ-
cant. The results are highly sensitive to the exam-
ples. Our work aims to carefully examine this is-
sue to gain a deeper understanding on how to bet-
ter select in-context examples to unleash GPT- 3’s
few-shot capabilities and further improve its per-
formance.
A brute-force approach would be to perform
combinatorial search over the entire dataset. Un-
fortunately, this strategy is computationally ex-
pensive and thus impractical in many cases. ToarXiv:2101.06804v1  [cs.CL]  17 Jan 2021