In-Context Examples Predictions
Question : The Mughal Gardens of Rashtrapati Bhavan is modelled on which garden?
The Mughal Garden of Rashtrapati Bhavan is modelled on? The Persian style of architecture Ground-truth : Persian garden
Who built the ﬁrst Mughal Garden in India? Babur KATE :The Persian gardens
The landscape design of the Gardens of Versailles is known as which style? French garden Random Baseline :Shalimar gardens
Question : What city was Zeus the patron god of?
What is the symbol of Zeus the Greek God? Bull Ground-truth : Olympia
Where did Zeus spend most of his time? Mount Olympus KATE :Olympia
Where was the statue of Zeus at Olympia located? In the Temple of Zeus Random Baseline Athens
Question : Where did the Dewey decimal system come from?
Where did the formula for area of a circle come from? Archimedes Ground-truth : Melvil Dewey
Where did the name jack russell come from? Reverend John Russell KATE :Melvil Dewey
Where did the letters of the alphabet come from? The Phoenician alphabet Random Baseline :the library of Congress
Table 8: Samples of retrieved in-context examples from the NQ dataset. Each block begins with a test question.
Three retrieved Q-A pairs are shown on the left. Predictions by the KATE method and useful details from in-
context examples are shown in Green . Gold-standard references are shown in Blue. Predictions by the random
selection method are shown in Red.
10 20 30 40 50 60
Number of In-context Examples25.027.530.032.535.037.540.0EM Score
EM Score vs. Number of In-context Examples
Random
KATEroberta
KATEnli+stsb
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
Size of Training Set28303234363840EM Score
EM Score vs. Size of Training Set
Random
KATEroberta
KATEnli+stsb
Figure 3: Left: Ablation study on the effect of number of in-context examples for GPT- 3for different selection
methods. Right: Ablation study on the effect of the size of training set for retrieval on KATE. Two representative
sentence encoders are used in the ablation study.
Trial 1 2 3 Default Reverse
EM Score 42.0 42.5 42.0 41.6 42.8
Table 9: Ablation study on the effect of in-context
example orders for GPT- 3on the NQ dataset using
KATE nli+sts-b . For the default order, the example Ais
to the left of example BifAis closer to the test prompt
xthanBin the embedding space. For the reverse order,
the example A is to the right of example B.
5.3 Order of In-context Examples
Moreover, we explore how the order of in-context
examples may affect KATE’s results. As men-
tioned in Section 2.3, under the standard set-
ting, the retrieved in-context examples are or-
dered such that d(xi;x)d(xj;x)whenever
i < j . Here, we randomly permute the order
of in-context examples in the NQ dataset for the
proposed KATE nli+sts-b method, and conduct theexperiments for 3different orders. Additionally,
we explore the reverse order where d(xi;x)
d(xj;x)wheneveri < j . The results are pre-
sented in Table 9. On this particular NQ dataset,
the reverse order performs the best. One possi-
ble explanation is that since tokens next to each
other have similar positional embeddings, putting
the most similar sentences close to the test ex-
ample may be helpful for GPT-3 to leverage the
corresponding information. However, we also did
the experiments on the WQ and TriviaQA and ﬁnd
that the default order performs slightly better than
the reverse order. Hence, the choice of orders is
data-dependent. Addtionally, it can be observed
that the variation among the NQ results tends to
be quite small (compared with the difference be-
tween the random baseline and KATE), indicating
that the example order does not have a signiﬁcant