XWhat county is Frederick, MD in?Training DataGPT-3Frederick CountyencodeTest Promptencodeselect nearest neighbors
What county is Duluth Minnesota in? 1What Olympic athlete has won the most medals? NencodeQ: What county is Duluth Minnesota in?A: St. Louis CountyQ: What county is Frederick, MD in?A: Figure 2: In-context example selection for GPT- 3. White dots: unused training samples; grey dots: randomly sam-
pled training samples; red dots: training samples selected by the k-nearest neighbors algorithm in the embedding
space of a sentence encoder.
2.2 The Impact of In-Context Examples
Given the observation that the empirical results of
GPT-3are sensitive to the chosen in-context ex-
amples, we look at the role of in-context examples
from an empirical perspective. Previous retrieve-
and-edit literatures usually retrieve prototypes that
are close to the test source xin some embedding
space. These examples and the test source xoften
share semantic or lexical similarities. This hints on
how we may select in-context examples for GPT-
3.
To this end, we examine the impact of the dis-
tance between in-context example and the test
sample on GPT- 3’s performance. Concretely, a
comparison is made on the the Natural Questions
(NQ) dataset between two in-context example se-
lection strategies. Given each test example, the
ﬁrst method utilizes the 10farthest training in-
stances to construct the context provided to GPT-
3, while the second employs the 10closest neigh-
bors. We use the CLS embeddings of a pre-trained
RoBERTa-large model as the sentence representa-
tions to measure the proximity of two sentences
(using the Euclidean distance).
For evaluation, 100test questions are randomly
sampled and the average Exact Match (EM) scores
with the two distinct strategies are reported in Ta-
Method Closest Farthest
Accuracy 46.0 31.0
Table 2: Comparison of the EM score on the closest 10
neighbors and farthest 10 neighbors on a subset of 100
test samples of the NQ dataset.ble 2. It can be observed that the nearest neigh-
bors, as the in-context examples, give rise to much
better results relative to the farthest ones. More-
over, the pre-trained RoBERTa model serves as ef-
fective sentence embeddings for the retrieval pro-
cedure.
2.3kNN-augmented In-Context Example
Selection
Based on the ﬁndings above, we propose KATE1,
a strategy to select good in-context examples for
in-context learning. The process is visualized
in Figure 2. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst use a certain
sentence encoder to convert sources in both the
training set and test set to vector representations.
For online prediction, we can convert the train-
ing set ﬁrst and encode each test source on the
ﬂy. Then, for each test source x, we retrieve its
nearestkneighborsx1;x2;:::;xkfrom the train-
ing set (according to the distances in the sentence
encoder’s embedding space). Given some pre-
deﬁned similarity measure dsuch as the cosine
similarity, the neighbors are ordered in such a way
thatd(xi;x)d(xj;x)wheni<j .
Afterwards, the ksources are concatenated with
their corresponding targets to form the context
C=fx1;y1;x2;y2;:::;xk;ykg, which is further
sent to GPT- 3along with the test input. The algo-
rithm chart is presented in Algorithm 1. Note that
different numbers of in-context examples can be
employed here, and we conduct ablation study on
its impact in a later section.
1KATE: Knn-Augmented in-con TextExample selection