impact on KATE’s performance.
6 Related Work
Pre-trained Language Models NLP systems
have made tremendous progress by pre-training
models on unlabeled text. For text classiﬁca-
tion tasks, notable models include BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019),
and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019). For text genera-
tion tasks, notable models include BART (Lewis
et al., 2019), T5 (Raffel et al., 2019), mT5 (Xue
et al., 2020), XLM (Lample and Conneau, 2019),
GPT (Radford et al., 2018), and GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019). These models encapsulate rich infor-
mation to facilitate a wide range of downstream
tasks ranging from natural language understand-
ing to generation. These models can be adapted
to many different tasks via ﬁne-tuning. GPT-
3(Brown et al., 2020), however, can be adapted
to many downstream tasks without ﬁne-tuning.
Given just a few in-context examples, GPT- 3is
able to quickly pick up patterns and produce an-
swers analogously both in terms of the answer
style and content. Thus, GPT- 3may be considered
as a pattern recognizer to perform in-context learn-
ing. People have just started trying to understand
GPT-3from different perspectives. As mentioned
in the introduction, (Hendrycks et al., 2020) stud-
ies which categories of questions GPT- 3is more
capable of answering. Our work focuses on how
to choose good in-context examples.
Retrieval-based Text Generation There is a
long history of applying information retrieval in
text generation (Sumita and Hitoshi, 1991). It is
very related to the exemplar-based learning (J ¨akel
et al., 2008; Ziyadi et al., 2020). The central idea is
to treat retrieved samples as exemplars/prototypes
and perform some editings on them. Some repre-
sentative applications in the ﬁeld of deep learning
include machine translation (Gu et al., 2018), sen-
timent transfer (Li et al., 2018; Guu et al., 2018),
QA (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2020),
dialogue generation (Yan et al., 2016; Cai et al.,
2018; Song et al., 2016; Pandey et al., 2018; We-
ston et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019), text summa-
rization (Cao et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2019), data-
to-text generation (Peng et al., 2019), and text-to-
code generation (Hashimoto et al., 2018). How-
ever, all these retrieve-and-edit frameworks re-
quire their decoders to be trained from scratch.
This makes the editor network task- and data-speciﬁc. In contrast, GPT- 3in one perspective can
be regarded naturally as a universal editor, adap-
tive to a wide range of tasks. Our work uniquely
examines how to maximize the advantage of using
GPT-3without ﬁne-tuning. For example, the more
semantically similar context we provide to GPT- 3,
the better results the model can generate. Other
editors or generators do not have this ability.
Improve NLP Systems with kNN A recent line
of work tries to incorporate nonparametric meth-
ods to improve a given model’s performance.
These methods ﬁrst access the test sample’s hid-
den representation and look for the nearest neigh-
bors of this test sample in the database. Once the
nearest neighbors are found, their labels are used
to augment the model’s prediction. For example,
the newly introduced kNN-LM (Khandelwal et al.,
2019),kNN-MT (Khandelwal et al., 2020), and
BERT-kNN (Kassner and Sch ¨utze, 2020) generate
the next token by retrieving the nearest kneigh-
bors from the datastore. Another related work
iskNN classiﬁcation model (Rajani et al., 2020),
where they use kNN as backoff when the con-
ﬁdence is low from the ﬁne-tuned classiﬁcation
model. There are two key differences between
our work and other approaches. First, other ap-
proaches modiﬁes the model’s next token distribu-
tion using the nearest kneighbors. However, we
only changes the conditional text using the nearest
kneighbors. Second, other approaches can access
the model’s parameters and embeddings which we
do not have access to. Instead, we use some other
independently pre-trained models to get the sen-
tence embeddings to retrieve nearest kneighbors.
7 Conclusion
This work presented a ﬁrst step towards investi-
gating the sensitivity of GPT- 3to in-context ex-
amples. To this end, we proposed KATE, a
non-parametric selection approach that retrieves
in-context examples according to their semantic
similarity to the test samples. On several natu-
ral language understanding and generation tasks,
the proposed method improves GPT- 3’s perfor-
mance, over the random sampling baseline, by a
signiﬁcant margin. Moreover, we found that ﬁne-
tuning the sentence embeddings for retrieval on
task-related datasets gave rise to further empirical
gains. Detailed ablation studies were conducted
to explore the robustness of KATE to different hy-
perprameters, such as the number of in-context ex-