A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
φ0 φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 φ7
Joint Policy−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5
Average Reward For AgentiIPD With Cooperating Peer Agent
(a)
φ0 φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 φ7
Joint Policy−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5
Average Reward For AgentiIPD With Defecting Peer Agent (b)
φ0 φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 φ7
Joint Policy0.00.20.40.60.8Average Reward For AgentiRPS (c)
φ0 φ1 φ2
Joint Policy100150200Average Reward For Agenti2-Agent HalfCheetah (d)
Figure 5. Adaptation performance during meta-testing in mixed incentive (( a) and ( b)), competitive ( c), and cooperative ( d) environments.
The results show that Meta-MAPG can successfully adapt to a new and learning peer agent throughout the Markov chain.
Question 2. How is adaptation performance affected by
the number of trajectories between changes?
We control the level of non-stationarity by adjusting the num-
ber of trajectories Kbetween updates (refer to Section 2.2).
The results in Figure 6ashows that the area under the curve
(AUC) (i.e., the reward summation during φ1:L) generally
decreases when Kdecreases in IPD. This result is expected
since the inner-loop updates are based on the policy gradient,
which can suffer from a high variance. Thus, with a smaller
batch size, policy updates have a higher variance and lead to
noisier policy updates. As a result, it is harder to anticipate
and inﬂuence the future policies of peers. Nevertheless,
Meta-MAPG achieves the best AUC in all cases.
Question 3. How does Meta-MAPG perform with decen-
tralized meta-training?
We compare the performance of Meta-MAPG with and
without opponent modeling (OM) in Figure 6b. We note
that Meta-MAPG with opponent modeling can infer policy
parameters for peer agents and compute the peer learning
gradient in a decentralized manner, performing better than
the Meta-PG baseline. However, opponent modeling in-
troduces noise in predicting the future policy parameters
of peer agents because the parameters must be inferred by
observing the actions they take alone without any supervi-
sion about the parameters themselves. Thus, as expected, a
meta-agent experiences difﬁculty in correctly considering
the learning process of a peer, which leads to lower perfor-
mance than Meta-MAPG with centralized meta-training.
Question 4. Can Meta-MAPG generalize its learning
outside the meta-training distribution?
We have demonstrated that a meta-agent can generalize well
and adapt to a new peer. However, we would like to inves-
tigate this further and see whether a meta-agent can still
perform well when the meta-testing distribution is drawn
from a signiﬁcantly different distribution in IPD. We thus
evaluate Meta-MAPG and Meta-PG using both in distribu-
tion (as in the previous questions) and out of distribution
personas for j’s initial policies (see Figures 7aand7bin
Appendix). Meta-MAPG achieves an AUC of 13.77±0.25
and11.12±0.33 for the in and out of distribution evaluation,
respectively. Meta-PG achieves an AUC of 6.13±0.05 and
7.60±0.07 for the in and out of distribution evaluation, re-
spectively. Variances are based on 5seeds and we leveragedK=64 for this experiment. We note that Meta-MAPG’s per-
formance decreases during the out of distribution evaluation,
but still consistently performs better than the baseline.
5.3. RPS Environment: Competitive
Question 5. How effective is Meta-MAPG in a fully
competitive scenario?
We have demonstrated the beneﬁt of our approach in the
mixed incentive scenario of IPD. Here, we consider another
classic iterated game, rock-paper-scissors (RPS) with a fully
competitive payoff table (see Figure 4b). In RPS, at each
time step agents iandjcan choose an action of either
(R)ock, (P)aper, or (S)cissors. The state space is deﬁned
ass0=∅andst=at−1fort≥1 . For meta-learning, we
consider a population of initial personas p(φ−i
0), including
the rock/paper/scissors persona (with a rock/paper/scissors
actions probability between1/3and1).
Figure 5cshows the adaptation performance during meta-
testing. Similar to the IPD results, we observe that the
baseline methods have effectively converged to win against
the opponent jin theﬁrst few trajectories. For instance,
agent ihas a high rock probability when playing against
jwith a high initial scissors probability (see Figures 13
to15in Appendix). This strategy, however, results in the
opponent quickly changing its behavior toward the mixed
Nash equilibrium strategy of (1/3,1/3,1/3) for the rock,
paper, and scissors probabilities. In contrast, our meta-agent
learned to lose slightly in theﬁrst two trajectories τφ0:1to
achieve much larger rewards in the later trajectories τφ2:7
while relying on its ability to adapt more efﬁciently than
its opponent (see Figure 16in Appendix). Compared to
the IPD results, we observe that it is more difﬁcult for our
meta-agent to shape j’s future policies in RPS possibly due
to the fact that RPS has a fully competitive payoff structure,
while IPD has a mixed incentive structure.
Question 6. How effective is Meta-MAPG in settings with
more than one peer?
Our meta-multiagent policy gradient theorem is general
and can be applied to scenarios with more than one peer.
To validate this, we experiment with 3-player and 4-player
RPS, where we consider sampling peers randomly from the
entire persona population. We note that the domain becomes