A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
4 8 16 32 64
# Of Trajectories Between Policy Updates0.02.55.07.510.012.5Area Under The CurveIPD Sample Complexity Analysis
Meta-MAPG
Meta-PGLOLA-DiCE
REINFORCE
(a)
Meta-MAPG Meta-MAPG (OM) Meta-PG
Adaptation Strategy0.02.55.07.510.012.5Area Under The CurveIPD Opponent Modeling (b)
2 Agents 3 Agents 4 Agents
Joint Policy01234Area Under The CurveRPS Varying Number Of Agents
Meta-MAPG
Meta-PG (c)
φ0 φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 φ7
Joint Policy0.00.20.40.60.8Average Reward For AgentiRPS Ablation Study
Meta-MAPG
No Peer Learning
No Own Learning (d)
Figure 6. (a) Adaptation performance with a varying number of trajectories. Meta-MAPG’s performance generally improves with a larger
K. (b) Adaptation performance with opponent modeling. Meta-MAPG with OM computes the peer learning gradient in a decentralized
manner. ( c) Adaptation performance with a varying number of agents, where Meta-MAPG achieves the best AUC in all cases. ( d)
Ablation study for Meta-MAPG. Meta-MAPG achieves signiﬁcantly better performance than the two ablated baselines.
harder as the number of agents nincreases, because the
state space dimension grows exponentially as a function
ofnand a meta-agent needs to consider more peers in
shaping their future policies. Figure 6cshows a comparison
against the Meta-PG baseline. We generally observe that
the peer agents change their policies toward the mixed Nash
equilibrium more quickly as the number of agents increases,
which results in decreased performance for all methods.
Nevertheless, Meta-MAPG achieves the best performance
in all cases and can clearly be easily extended to settings
with a greater number of agents.
Question 7. What happens if a meta-agent is trained
without the own learning gradient?
Our meta-multiagent policy gradient theorem inherently in-
cludes both the own learning and peer learning gradient, but
is it necessary to have both terms? To answer this question,
we conduct an ablation study and compare Meta-MAPG to
two methods: one trained without the peer learning gradi-
ent and another trained without the own learning gradient.
Note that not having the peer learning term is equivalent
to Meta-PG, and not having the own learning term is sim-
ilar to LOLA-DiCE but alternatively trained with a meta-
optimization procedure. Figure 6dshows that a meta-agent
trained without the peer learning term cannot properly ex-
ploit the peer agent’s learning process. Also, a meta-agent
trained without the own learning term cannot change its own
policy effectively in response to anticipated learning by peer
agents. By contrast, Meta-MAPG achieves superior perfor-
mance by accounting for both its own learning process and
the learning processes of peer agents.
5.4. 2-Agent HalfCheetah Environment: Cooperative
Question 8. Does considering the peer learning gradient
always improve performance?
To answer this question, we experiment with a fully coopera-
tive setting of the the 2-Agent HalfCheetah domain ( de Witt
et al.,2020 ), where theﬁrst and second agent control three
joints of the back and front leg with continuous action
spaces, respectively (see Figure 4c). Both agents receive a
joint reward corresponding to making the cheetah robot run
to the right as soon as possible. Note that two agents are cou-pledwithinthe cheetah robot, requiring close cooperation
and coordination between them.
For meta-learning, we consider a population of teammates
with varying degrees of expertise in running to theleftdi-
rection. Speciﬁcally, we pre-train a teammate jand build
a population based on checkpoints of its parameters during
learning. Figure 8in Appendix shows the distribution of
j’s expertise. Note that we construct the distribution with a
signiﬁcant gap to ensure that the meta-testing distribution is
sufﬁciently different from the meta-training/validation dis-
tribution. This allows us to effectively evaluate the ability
of our approach to generalize its learning. During meta-
learning, jis randomly initialized from this population of
policies. Importantly, jmust adapt its behavior in this set-
ting because the agent has achieved theoppositeskill during
pre-training compared to the true objective of moving to
the right. Hence, a meta-agent ishould succeed by both
adapting to differently initialized teammates with varying
expertise in moving the opposite direction, and guiding j’s
learning process to coordinate the eventual right movement.
Our results are displayed in Figure 5d. There are two notable
observations. First, inﬂuencing peer learning does not help
much in cooperative settings and Meta-MAPG performs
similarly to Meta-PG. The peer learning gradient attempts
to shape the future policies of other agents so that the meta-
agent can take advantage. In IPD, for example, the meta-
agent inﬂuenced jto be cooperative in the future such that
the meta-agent can act with a high probability of the defect
action and receive higher returns. However, in cooperative
settings, due to the joint reward, jis already changing its
policies in order to beneﬁt the meta-agent, resulting in a less
signiﬁcant effect with respect to the peer learning gradient.
Second, Meta-PG and Meta-MAPG outperform the other
approaches of LOLA-DiCE and REINFORCE, achieving
higher rewards when interacting with a new teammate.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced Meta-MAPG, a meta-
learning algorithm that can adapt quickly to non-stationarity
in the policies of other agents in a shared environment. The