A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn
in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Dong-Ki Kim1 2Miao Liu2 3Matthew Riemer2 3Chuangchuang Sun1 2Marwa Abdulhai1 2
Golnaz Habibi1 2Sebastian Lopez-Cot1 2Gerald Tesauro2 3Jonathan P. How1 2
Abstract
A fundamental challenge in multiagent reinforce-
ment learning is to learn beneﬁcial behaviors
in a shared environment with other simultane-
ously learning agents. In particular, each agent
perceives the environment as effectively non-
stationary due to the changing policies of other
agents. Moreover, each agent is itself constantly
learning, leading to natural non-stationarity in the
distribution of experiences encountered. In this
paper, we propose a novel meta-multiagent pol-
icy gradient theorem that directly accounts for
the non-stationary policy dynamics inherent to
multiagent learning settings. This is achieved by
modeling our gradient updates to consider both
an agent’s own non-stationary policy dynamics
and the non-stationary policy dynamics of other
agents in the environment. We show that our theo-
retically grounded approach provides a general so-
lution to the multiagent learning problem, which
inherently comprises all key aspects of previous
state of the art approaches on this topic. We test
our method on a diverse suite of multiagent bench-
marks and demonstrate a more efﬁcient ability to
adapt to new agents as they learn than baseline
methods across the full spectrum of mixed incen-
tive, competitive, and cooperative domains.
1. Introduction
Learning in multiagent settings is inherently more difﬁcult
than single-agent learning because an agent interacts both
with the environment and other agents ( Bus ¸oniu et al. ,2010 ).
Speciﬁcally, the fundamental challenge in multiagent rein-
forcement learning (MARL) is the difﬁculty of learning
optimal policies in the presence of other simultaneously
1MIT-LIDS2MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab3IBM-Research. Cor-
respondence to: Dong-Ki Kim <dkkim93@mit.edu >, Miao Liu
<miao.liu1@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).learning agents because their changing behaviors jointly af-
fect the environment’s transition and reward function. This
dependence on non-stationary policies renders the Markov
property invalid from the perspective of each agent, requir-
ing agents to adapt their behaviors with respect to potentially
large, unpredictable, and endless changes in the policies of
fellow agents ( Papoudakis et al. ,2019 ). In such environ-
ments, it is also critical that agents adapt to the changing
behaviors of others in a sample-efﬁcient manner as it is
likely that their policies could update again after a small
number of interactions. Therefore, effective agents should
consider the learning of other agents and adapt quickly to
their non-stationary behaviors. Otherwise, undesirable out-
comes may arise when an agent is constantly lagging in its
ability to deal with the current policies of other agents.
Our paper proposes a new framework based on meta-
learning to address the inherent non-stationarity of MARL.
Meta-learning (also referred to as learning to learn) was
recently shown to be a promising methodology for fast adap-
tation in multiagent settings. The framework by Al-Shedivat
et al. (2018 ), for example, introduces a meta-optimization
scheme in which a meta-agent can adapt more efﬁciently
to changes in a new opponent’s policy after collecting only
a handful of interactions. The key idea is to model the
meta-agent’s own learning process so that its updated policy
performs better than an evolving opponent. However, prior
work does not directly consider the learning processes of
other agents during the meta-optimization process, instead
treating the other agents as external factors and assuming
the meta-agent cannot inﬂuence their future policies. As a
result, prior work on multiagent meta-learning fails to con-
sider an important property of MARL: other agents in the
environment are also learning and adapting their own poli-
cies based on interactions with the meta-agent. Thus, the
meta-agent is missing an opportunity to inﬂuence the others’
future policies through these interactions, which could be
used to improve its own performance.
Our contributions. With this insight, we make the follow-
ing primary contributions in this paper:
1)New theorem: We derive a newmeta-multiagent pol-
icy gradient theorem (Meta-MAPG)that, for theﬁrst time,