A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Joint Policy 𝝓𝟎Trajectory Meta-Agent 𝒊
Peer Agent 𝒋
Joint Policy 𝝓𝟏
Joint Policy 𝝓𝑳
Distribution of Initial Peer Policy 
Parameters𝒑(𝝓𝟎−𝒊)
Figure 3. Experimental setup for meta-learning. A peer j’s policy
is initialized randomly from a population p(φ−i
0)and is updated
based on the policy gradient optimization, requiring a meta-agent
ito adapt to differently initializedjand its changing policy.
3)REINFORCE ( Williams ,1992 ): A simple policy gradi-
ent approach that considers neither an agent’s own learning
nor the learning processes of other agents. This baseline
represents multiagent approaches that assume each agent
leverages a stationary policy in the future.
Implementation. We implement each adaptation method’s
policy leveraging an LSTM and use the generalized advan-
tage estimation ( Schulman et al. ,2016 ) with a learned value
function for the meta-optimization. We also apply DiCE
during the inner-loop optimization ( Foerster et al. ,2018c ) to
compute the peer learning gradients, and we learn dynamic
inner-loop learning rates during meta-training as suggested
inAl-Shedivat et al. (2018 ). We refer to Appendices E, F,
G, I for the remaining details including hyperparameters.
Experiment complexity. We study various aspects of
Meta-MAPG based on two repeated matrix games (see Fig-
ures4aand4b). We note that the repeated matrix domains
we consider match the environment complexity of previous
work on the topic of peer learning awareness in MARL ( Fo-
erster et al. ,2018a ;c;Letcher et al. ,2019 ). We also consid-
ered the RoboSumo domain from Al-Shedivat et al. (2018 ).
However, the training performance was very sensitive to
the relative weights between the shaped reward functions
and we could not reproduce the results from Al-Shedivat
et al. (2018 ) with the default weights. Instead, we experi-
mented with another challenging environment leveraging
the multi-agent MuJoCo benchmark ( de Witt et al. ,2020 ) to
demonstrate the scability of Meta-MAPG. Speciﬁcally, the
environment shown in Figure 4chas high complexity: 1) the
domain has continuous and large observation/action spaces,
and 2) the agents are coupled within the same robot, result-
ing in a more challenging control problem than controlling
the robot alone with full autonomy.
5.2. IPD Environment: Mixed Incentive
Question 1. Is it essential to consider both an agent’s own
learning and the learning of others?
To address this question, we consider the classic iterated
prisoner’s dilemma (IPD) domain. In IPD, agents iandjactAgentjAgentiC D
C(0.5,0.5) (-1.5,1.5)
D(1.5,-1.5) (-0.5,-0.5)
(a) IPD payoff tableAgentjAgentiR P S
R(0,0) (-1,1) (1,-1)
P(1,-1) (0,0) (-1,1)
S(-1,1) (1,-1) (0,0)
(b) RPS payoff table
(c) 2-Agent HalfCheetah Benchmark
Figure 4.(a) IPD payoff table. (b)RPS payoff table. (c)2 -Agent
HalfCheetah benchmark, where two agents are coupled within the
robot and control the robot together: the red and blue agent control
three joints of the back and front leg, respectively.
by either (C)ooperating or (D)efecting and receive rewards
according to the mixed incentive payoff deﬁned in Figure 4a.
As in Foerster et al. (2018a ), we model the state space
ass0=∅andst=a t−1fort≥1 . For meta-learning,
we construct a population of initial personas p(φ−i
0)that
include cooperating personas (i.e., having a probability of
cooperating between 0.5and1.0at any state) and defecting
personas (i.e., having a probability of cooperating between
0and0.5at any state). Figure 7ain Appendix shows the
population distribution utilized for training and evaluation.
The adaptation performance during meta-testing when an
agent i, meta-trained with either Meta-MAPG or the base-
line methods, interacts with an initially cooperating or de-
fecting agent jis shown in Figure 5aand Figure 5b, respec-
tively. In both cases, our meta-agent successfully infers the
underlying persona of jand adapts throughout the Markov
chain obtaining higher rewards than the baselines. We ob-
serve that performance generally decreases as the number of
joint policy updates increases across all adaptation methods.
This decrease in performance is expected as each model is
playing with another reasonable agent that is also constantly
learning. As a result, jrealizes it could potentially achieve
more reward by defecting more often. Hence, to achieve
good adaptation performance in IPD, an agent ishould at-
tempt to shape j’s future policies toward staying cooperative
as long as possible such that ican take advantage, which
is achieved by accounting for both an agent’s own learning
and the learning of other peer agents in Meta-MAPG.
We explore each adaptation method in more detail by vi-
sualizing the action probability dynamics throughout the
Markov chain. In general, we observe that the baseline
methods have converged to initially defecting strategies, at-
tempting to get larger rewards than a peer agent jin the
ﬁrst trajectory τφ0. While this strategy can result in bet-
ter initial performance than j, the peer agent will quickly
change its policy so that it is defecting with high probability
as well (see Figures 9to11in Appendix). By contrast, our
meta-agent learns to act cooperatively in τφ0and then take
advantage by deceiving agent jas it attempts to cooperate
at future steps (see Figure 12in Appendix).