A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
that the meta-agent can decide how to shape other agents
with its own observations and rewards alone.
4. Related Work
The standard approach for addressing non-stationarity in
MARL is to consider information about the other agents and
reason about the effects of their joint actions ( Hernandez-
Leal et al. ,2017 ). The literature on opponent modeling,
for instance, infers opponents’ behaviors and conditions an
agent’s policy on the inferred behaviors of others ( He et al. ,
2016 ;Raileanu et al. ,2018 ;Grover et al. ,2018 ). Studies
regarding the centralized training with decentralized execu-
tion framework ( Lowe et al. ,2017 ;Foerster et al. ,2018b ;
Yang et al. ,2018 ;Wen et al. ,2019 ), which accounts for the
behaviors of others through a centralized critic, can also be
classiﬁed into this category. While this body of work allevi-
ates non-stationarity, it is generally assumed that each agent
will have a stationary policy in the future. Because other
agents can have different behaviors in the future as a result
of learning ( Foerster et al. ,2018a ), this incorrect assumption
can cause sample inefﬁcient and improper adaptation. In
contrast, Meta-MAPG models each agent’s learning process,
allowing a meta-learning agent to adapt efﬁciently.
Our approach is also related to prior work that considers
the learning of other agents in the environment. This in-
cludes Zhang & Lesser (2010 ) who attempted to discover
the best response adaptation to the anticipated future policy
of other agents. Our work is also related, as discussed pre-
viously, to LOLA ( Foerster et al. ,2018a ) and more recent
improvements ( Foerster et al. ,2018c ). Another relevant idea
explored by Letcher et al. (2019 ) is to interpolate between
the frameworks of Zhang & Lesser (2010 ) and Foerster et al.
(2018a ) in a way that guarantees convergence while inﬂu-
encing the opponent’s future policy. However, all of these
approaches only account for the learning processes of other
agents and fail to consider an agent’s own non-stationary
policy dynamics as in the own learning gradient discussed
in the previous section. Additionally, these papers do not
leverage meta-learning. As a result, these approaches may
require many samples to properly adapt to new agents.
Meta-learning ( Schmidhuber ,1987 ;Bengio et al. ,1992 ) has
recently become very popular as a method for improving
sample efﬁciency in the presence of changing tasks in the
deep RL literature ( Wang et al. ,2016a ;Duan et al. ,2016b ;
Finn et al. ,2017 ;Mishra et al. ,2017 ;Nichol & Schulman ,
2018 ). See Vilalta & Drissi (2002 ) and Hospedales et al.
(2020 ) for in-depth surveys of meta-learning. In particu-
lar, our work builds on the popular model-agnostic meta-
learning framework ( Finn et al. ,2017 ), where gradient-
based learning is used both for conducting so called inner-
loop learning and to improve this learning by computing
gradients through the computational graph. When we trainour agents so that the inner loop can accommodate for a
dynamic Markov chain of other agent policies, we are lever-
aging an approach that has recently become popular for
supervised learning called meta-continual learning ( Riemer
et al.,2019 ;Javed & White ,2019 ;Spigler ,2019 ;Beaulieu
et al. ,2020 ;Caccia et al. ,2020 ;Gupta et al. ,2020 ). This
means that our agent trains not just to adapt to a single set of
policies during meta-training, but rather to adapt to a set of
changing policies with Markovian updates. As a result, we
avoid an issue of past work ( Al-Shedivat et al. ,2018 ) that
required the use of importance sampling during meta-testing
(see Appendix F.1 for more details).
5. Experiments
We demonstrate Meta-MAPG’s efﬁcacy on a diverse suite
of domains, including the full spectrum of mixed incentive,
competitive, and cooperative settings. The code is available
athttps://git.io/JZsfg , and video highlights are available
athttp://bit.ly/2L8Wvch . The mean and 95% conﬁdence
interval computed for 10 seeds are shown in eachﬁgure.
5.1. Experimental Setup for Meta-Learning in MARL
Training protocol. In our experiments, we evaluate a meta-
agent i’s adaptability with respect to a peer agent jlearning
in the environment. Speciﬁcally, agent jis sampled from a
population of initial peer policy parameters p(φ−i
0). Then,
both agents adapt their behavior following the policy gra-
dient with a linear feature baseline ( Duan et al. ,2016a )
(see Figure 3). Importantly, the population captures diverse
behaviors of j, such as varying expertise in solving a task,
andj’s initial policy is hidden to i. Hence, a meta-agent
ishould: 1) adapt to a differently initialized agent jwith
varying behaviors and 2) continuously adapt with respect to
j’s changing policy.
During meta-training, a meta-agent iinteracts with peers
drawn from the distribution and optimizes its initial policy
parameters φi
0. At the end of meta-training, a new peer jis
sampled from the distribution, and we measure i’s perfor-
mance throughout the Markov chain.
Adaptation baselines. We compare Meta-MAPG with the
following baseline adaptation strategies for an agenti:
1)Meta-PG ( Al-Shedivat et al. ,2018 ): A meta-learning ap-
proach that only considers how to improve its own learning.
We detail our implementation of Meta-PG and a low-level
difference with the original method in Appendix F.1.
2)LOLA-DiCE ( Foerster et al. ,2018c ): An approach that
only considers how to shape the learning dynamics of other
agents in the environment through the Differentiable Monte-
Carlo Estimator (DiCE) operation. Note that LOLA-DiCE
is an extension of the original LOLA approach.