Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
I felt like a couple of things that I didn’t really think 
about just from a fundamental engineering standpoint 
of how the thing can actually be made. I think that was 
really benefcial. " P-F13 Interview 
7.4 Designers expect an AI tool to provide 
project-relevant work examples 
Designers frequently suggested that a co-creative tool should 
suggest similar task- and project-related examples created by 
other users. Such examples could help designers learn the system’s 
capabilities and provide creative inspiration, as suggested by this 
SimuLearn user: 
"Let’s say I’m modeling some form and in real-time, the 
tool is searching some sort of database to show me some 
possibilities that other people have previously done, just 
by the similarity of the shape, and then I’m like ‘yeah this 
shape can go there and go there. ’ So that’s actually a cre-
ative input that can help—a bit more like you’re designing 
with someone. It doesn’t necessarily have to generate, it 
can pull up from other people and tell you ’here is how 
some other designers work with this. ’” P-S10 Interview 
8 DISCUSSION 
Co-creative AI design tools have the potential to amplify the 
abilities of engineering and industrial designers. However, we found 
that designers face major challenges in (learning to) efectively 
co-create through understanding and adjusting system outputs, 
communicating design goals, and working "collaboratively" with 
the AI. Designers who overcame challenges did so by systematically 
exploring AI’s limitations and capabilities, and by explaining and 
refecting on their design issues. The observed support strategies of 
peer guides comprised step-by-step walk-through instructions, re-
acting to designers’ expressions of uncertainty, prompting designer 
refection on generated designs, suggesting alternative means and 
goals, and making use of screen annotations and mouse gestures to 
discuss design strategies. Overall, designers expected the AI system 
to have more contextual awareness about the design problem at 
hand, desired a more conversational form of interaction with the 
tool, asked for more support in thinking through design problems, 
and expected project-relevant work examples from the tool. 
We discuss our fndings in the context of prior research studying 
how users learn to work with complex software tools and relate our 
fndings to concepts and empirical fndings from research on human 
collaboration. We highlight design opportunities (Table 5) to better 
support designer-AI co-creation by scafolding designers in actively 
exploring the boundaries of AI capabilities and limitations, prompt-
ing designers to actively refect on design problems and observed AI 
behaviors, enhancing AI systems’ contextual awareness of designers’ 
tasks and objectives, and supporting more conversational forms 
of multi-modal communication between designers and AI systems. 
8.1 New learning challenges for 
human–AI co-creation 
Based on our fndings, we believe that the challenges designers faced 
when learning to co-create with the tools go beyond learning the tools’ interfaces. Firstly, all participants were experienced designers 
familiar with the CAD software’s interface and had watched a step-
by-step instructional video demonstrating the operation of the AI 
features. Furthermore, designers used diferent support resources, 
including tooltips, help fles, video tutorials, online user forums, and 
asking colleagues for help to overcome interface issues they faced. 
However, even with the help of these resources, most designers could 
not produce feasible and satisfying outcomes with AI assistance. 
While this result may have been due, in part, to the limitations of the 
AI tools themselves, it is clear that this was not the full story. Indeed, a 
few of our participants were able to overcome challenges and learned 
to co-create efectively with the AI features. Hence we believe that 
the challenges participants faced when working with the AI systems 
(such as communicating design goals or understanding AI outputs) 
were partly new learning challenges due to the tool’s more active role 
in the design process. These learning challenges go beyond learning 
the tool’s interface. For example, a major challenge we identifed 
relates to how designers specify all required parameters upfront 
instead of modeling and testing a part step-by-step. This workfow 
requires designers to think through the design problem in advance, 
which is challenging and diferent from the usual iterative design 
process. Our fndings suggest that these new learning challenges 
require new support strategies for example, by prompting designers’ 
refection in response to expressions of uncertainty or suggesting 
alternative design goals that align with the AI’s capabilities. 
8.2 Toward models of human collaboration 
as lenses for studying and designing 
co-creative systems 
Participants had trouble learning to predict how the AI might be-
have in response to the specifed parameters. They struggled to make 
sense of the AI system’s reasoning and struggled to correct unwanted 
design issues. Prior literature on group cognition suggests that to 
achieve efective collaboration group members should be able to in-
terpret each other’s reasoning and predict roughly how their partner 
might behave in response to their own actions [40]. Similarly, from a 
team learning perspective, our fndings suggest that designers who 
systematically explored the AI’s limitations and capabilities early on 
were better at predicting the tool’s actions in response to their own 
and produced more satisfactory results. This result is in line with stud-
ies on human-AI collaboration in decision-making, suggesting that 
users learn to better predict the machine’s behavior through induc-
tive mechanisms (i.e., via concrete examples and hands-on testing) 
than via general, declarative information about internal processes 
[11]. While explainable AI research focuses primarily on directly 
communicating information about the AI system to the user, recent 
research has suggested that more engaging and longer forms of learn-
ing and deliberate practice might improve human-AI collaboration 
[36]. However, in addition to supporting honing the user’s mental 
model of the AI’s capabilities and limitations, it is equally important 
for the AI system to have an understanding of the user’s capabilities, 
limitations, and task context to enable more efective human-AI 
collaboration. Hence, this would require the AI system to have better 
contextual awareness of the user and the current task at hand. We 
further discuss the resulting design opportunities in section 8.3.3.