Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
system behavior, hindering coordination and communication when 
completing “collaborative” tasks [10]. To address these issues, 
various strategies like explainable AI or intelligibility are aimed at 
helping users refne their mental models of AI systems [55, 70]. 
However, even as AI models become more intuitive for users, we 
expect that there will always remain a need for learning to work 
efectively with AI systems to, for example, develop shared mental 
models [35, 40]. Consequently, as we discuss in the next section, sup-
porting humans in learning to efectively co-create with AI requires 
bringing in additional theoretical lenses. 
2.3 Human-human collaboration 
as a lens for studying co-creative systems 
To design efective human–AI collaboration, researchers have sug-
gested drawing lessons from studying what makes human–human 
collaboration efective [5, 6, 10, 31, 40, 77, 78, 85]. While it remains 
an open question to what extent scafolds for human-AI collabo-
ration should mirror the designs of supports for human–human 
collaboration [77, 85], human-AI interaction researchers suggest 
that theories and fndings from psychology, education, and the 
learning sciences are currently underutilized. For instance, Koch 
and Oulasvirta [40] note that group cognition —the study of how 
agents relate to other agents’ decisions, abilities, beliefs, common 
goals, and understandings—provides powerful concepts for work 
on human–AI collaboration, yet is rarely referenced within this 
literature. Group cognition comprises phenomena such as grounding 
in communication [16] (creating mutual sense through verbal and 
non-verbal communication) and theory of mind [22] (the ability of 
agents to be aware of their own and the other’s beliefs, intentions, 
knowledge, or perspectives). Similarly, Kaur et al. [35] argue that 
like human-human collaboration, efective collaborations between 
humans and AI may require shared mental models between people 
and the AI to enable mechanisms such as adaptive coordination of 
actions among team members [16, 56]. These may include shared 
representations of the task to be accomplished, of each other’s 
abilities and limitations, or of each other’s goals and strategies 
[20, 25, 66, 74]. A line of work addressing these opportunities has 
begun to explore how humans might be supported in developing and 
maintaining more accurate mental models of an AI collaborator’s 
capabilities and limitations [5, 6, 41]. However, compared to 
concepts of human-human collaboration, honing only users’ mental 
models is not sufcient enough for efective collaboration, which 
requires shared mental models between the user and system [35]. 
To date, little work has explored how best to support humans 
in learning to collaborate with AI on authentic tasks, such as design 
tasks, despite growing recognition of the need for such supports 
[10, 45, 50, 85]. Design tasks represent compelling challenges for 
human–AI collaboration, given that design problems are often 
ill-defned and require teams to navigate and negotiate both the 
problem and solution space [21] through an iterative process of 
generating ideas, building prototypes, and testing [32]. 
In this study, we investigate human-AI collaboration for 
emerging manufacturing design tasks—an area where successful 
task performance sometimes requires human–AI collaboration, yet 
where efective collaboration may be challenging to achieve without 
strong supports [45, 85]. 2.4 Team learning 
While phenomena such as grounding in communication, theory of 
mind and shared mental models provide useful concepts to explain 
which cognitive and social phenomena enable collaboration among 
a group of agents [35, 40], these theories do not explain how groups 
of individual agents learn to efectively collaborate. To address this 
gap, team learning emerged to study what actions and conditions 
contribute to how human groups learn to efectively collaborate 
together [79]. For example, team learning studies suggest that the 
development of efective shared mental models is supported through 
an active process of negotiation between team members, involving 
“constructive” forms of confict, argumentation, and resolution 
[30, 34, 74]. However, to date, team learning has been under-utilized 
as a lens for studying human-AI co-creation. In this work, we 
draw upon concepts from team learning, such as active processes 
of communication, joint information processing, and coordination of 
actions [53], to study what actions and support strategies can help 
designers learn to co-create with AI-based design tools. 
3 STUDY 1: THINK-ALOUD DESIGN SESSIONS 
We conducted a series of think-aloud studies [75] with trained 
designers new to working with AI, where they worked with an AI 
design tool to complete a realistic advanced manufacturing design 
challenge. Think-aloud studies have people verbalize their thoughts 
while performing a task so that researchers can understand their 
cognitive processes (e.g., forming mental models [15], learning 
[82]). In our study, we use the think-aloud method to see how AI 
novices, who encounter a real learning challenge and are less biased 
than experts, learn to co-create with the AI tools. Participants frst 
completed a 30-minute moderated think-aloud session where a 
member of the research team observed them working and listened 
to what they said they were thinking and doing while working. 
Half of the participants had a mechanical engineering background 
and designed a light and strong mounting bracket for a ship 
engine while considering the optimal manufacturing method and 
material combination using Autodesk’s Fusion360 Generative 
Design (based on topology optimization that generates multiple 
options) [52]. The other half of the participants with a background 
in architecture or industrial design designed a bike bottle holder 
made with shape-changing materials—a complex design task that is 
challenging to complete without computational support. Designers 
working on the bottle holder task worked with SimuLearn [80], a 
machine learning-based research tool built on top of Rhino3d that 
helps designers create structures from shape-changing materials. 
After completing the design task, participants submitted their 
designs and joined a semi-structured interview to refect on their 
experience of working with the design tools. Across the study, we 
collect the following data: 
• Video and audio recordings and machine-generated 
transcripts of the open-ended think-aloud design sessions 
• Audio recordings and machine-generated transcripts of the 
post-task interviews 
• 3D designs created during the think-aloud sessions