CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
Furthermore, we seek inspiration from team learning [79] which 
models what actions help people learn to collaborate efectively with 
each other. 
To gain insights on improving human-AI design collaboration, 
we study how engineering and industrial designers without prior 
AI co-creation experience learn to work with AI CAD tools in the 
context of advanced manufacturing design tasks. We chose this 
domain because of its increasing design task complexity, for which 
designers often require AI assistance. Through our studies, we aim 
to generate insights to inform future support interfaces of AI design 
tools. In particular, we investigate the following research questions: 
RQ1a What challenges do designers face when learning to co-create 
with computational AI tools? 
RQ1b How do designers overcome these challenges? 
To answer these questions, we conducted a series of think-aloud 
studies observing how trained engineering and architectural design-
ers (tried to) learn to co-create with two diferent computational 
AI tools on complex manufacturing design tasks (Study 1). Based 
on analyses of their interactions with the systems and retrospective 
interviews, we found that they generally valued the AI’s assistance 
but faced challenges in learning to efectively co-create with the 
tools and interpret the design outputs. Those who were able to 
produce feasible and satisfying designs learned to co-create with 
the tool by systematically testing the boundaries of its capabilities 
early on, by self-explaining AI behaviors they observed, and by 
sketching and refecting on design issues. 
After learning about these challenges, we then explored how 
designers could be supported to better co-create by asking: 
RQ2 What are efective strategies to support designers in learning to 
co-create with computational AI tools? 
To answer this question, we took inspiration from prior work 
on human-human collaboration [9, 53, 68]. We conducted a human-
human collaboration study to see how human guides would assist 
new users of AI tools in learning to co-create and how the new 
users learned with human assistance (Study 2). The observed efec-
tive support strategies included providing step-by-step instructions, 
prompting design refection, and suggesting alternative strategies 
and goals for the design task. We also observed that the human 
guides relied heavily on multi-modal communication (e.g., screen 
annotations and mouse gesturing) to communicate more efectively 
with designers. 
Lastly, to inform design opportunities for new support tools we 
asked: 
RQ3 What are designers’ needs and expectations for human-AI co-
creation? 
Synthesizing the results from both studies, we learned that many 
participants felt unable to communicate their design goals with the 
AI and wished for more conversational interactions and contextual 
awareness from the tool. We discuss potential support implications 
and future work from these needs and expectations. 
In short, this study makes three main contributions: 
(1) providing a set of observed challenges that engineering and 
architectural designers face when learning to collaborate 
with AI on complex co-creation tasks in the context of 
advanced manufacturing design; (2) advancing our understanding of designers’ needs and 
expectations for human-AI co-creative tools; 
(3) highlighting design opportunities to better support designers 
in learning to co-create. 
2 RELATED WORK 
2.1 AI-based design tools for manufacturing 
AI-based design support tools use various computational methods 
for generating 2D and 3D design options based on constraints and 
objectives set by designers [1, 72]. In 3D architectural, industrial, 
and mechanical design, new generative design tools have helped 
designers create consumer goods [43], building layouts [60], and 
lightweight automotive and airplane components [ 59, 61]. In the 
context of emerging advanced materials, AI design tools assist 
designers in creating structures out of shape-changing or elasticity-
changing materials [29, 80]. Such AI tools use multiple techniques 
to generate designs from a set of goals and requirements, including 
constraint-based solvers [73], style transfer [2, 28], simulation and 
optimization [80], and genetic algorithms [59]. Such techniques 
are becoming commercially available in 3D CAD design tools such 
as Siemens NX, Solidworks, and Autodesk Fusion360 [3, 17, 69]. 
Many of these tools operate as black boxes where designers frst 
set objectives and then review generated designs. However, this 
interaction can make it hard for designers to quickly develop a 
mental model of how the tool works, limiting their creative use. 
Recent research has developed generative design interfaces for 
interactively exploring multiple design options [39, 52, 83] or more 
iterative engagement between the designer and the tool through 
real-time design generation and assessment [14, 19, 37]. However, 
few empirical studies exist that evaluate how engineers and 
designers learn to work with AI design tools on realistic tasks. Some 
existing work has measured the performance impact of AI agents on 
human engineering teams [84] while other work has investigated 
what role professional makers expect for involving AI in digital fab-
rication workfows [81]. This study provides empirical observations 
on how engineering, industrial and architectural designers learn 
to work and co-create with computational AI-based design tools. 
2.2 Learning complex software 
Prior HCI research has looked to evaluate and improve the 
learnability of complex software systems. Past studies explore how 
people of diferent ages learn a feature-rich notetaking tool [49], how 
professional engineers learn 3D design software [38], or how casual 
designers learn professional motion graphics software [33]. Often, 
people learn by searching web forums or asking knowledgeable 
colleagues for help [38]. Research on interfaces to support people 
in learning complex software has proposed dynamic feedforward 
tool tips [44], guided tutorial systems [24], and widgets that support 
self-directed trial and error learning [51]. 
While prior work has explored lenses such as self-directed 
learning for working with complex software [13], it remains an 
open question of how best to support self-directed learning for 
co-creation with AI systems that take an active role in the design 
process. For example, prior studies in Human-AI collaboration show 
that the black box nature of AI systems introduces new challenges 
where users grapple with non-transparent and non-intuitive