Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Table 3: Schematic overview of each participant’s learning process of design task-relevant features of the AI system. Left: Engine 
Bracket Task. Right: Bottle Holder Task. Correct use of input parameters or AI tools is shown with check marks. Increasing 
numbers of check marks from the frst iteration to the last iteration suggest participants learning to work with the AI system. 
Feature not used
XFeature incorrectly used
Feature correctly usedFirst Iteration Last Iteration
P-F01 X X X X X
P-F02 X XTask completed without AI assistance
P-F03 X X X X X X X
P-F04 X X X
P-F05 X X X X
P-F11 X X
P-F12 X X XStructural Constraints Structural Loads Obstacle Geometry    Bolt ClearanceObstacle Geometry     Boundary BoxStructural Constraints Structural Loads Obstacle Geometry    Bolt ClearanceObstacle Geometry     Boundary Boxometry 
y Box
First Feature Usage Last Feature Usage
P-S01 X X
P-S03
P-S04
P-S06 X X X
P-S07 X X
P-S10 X
P-S11ID ID Auto Optimizer Manual Actuator Setup Hybrid Optimizer Auto Optimizer Manual Actuator Setup Hybrid Optimizer
Engine Bracket Task Bottle Holder Task 
Furthermore, designers were unsure how to correct the generated 
designs (e.g., identifying the parameters that led to the problem). 
Some designers were hesitant to manually refne the generated 
geometry because they felt uncomfortable changing the optimized 
structure: 
"...I also realized that if I was making any change in the 
mesh maybe I was changing the stress that that area 
will have. So I didn’t feel very comfortable changing 
stuf because I knew that was optimized for my loads 
and my material. " P-F04 
Designers were also unable to make sense of apparent structural 
issues in the generated designs, like when the generated parts were 
unreasonably thin or thick, provided little clearance, or produced 
confusing grid transformations. As verbalized by this designer 
while evaluating a generated engine bracket: 
“it just doesn’t make sense that, like this region here, 
which is obviously pretty thick... well I guess it’s not. I 
just don’t think that it can hold up the weight. It says 
the factor of safety is fve. That just seems ridiculous to 
me. ” P-F01 Think-aloud 
At other moments, designers were uncertain whether the AI or the 
user was responsible for fxing the problem. In some cases, designers 
accepted imperfect results and attributed the faws to the system. On 
one occasion, a designer verbalized their concerns when evaluating 
a generated engine bracket with insufcient bolt hole clearance: 
"It’s a goofy-looking bracket. I would never design it like 
that, but this thing thinks it can do it like that [. . . ] It 
just seems [that there needs] to be bolt heads and stuf, 
so I just don’t see that bolt ftting in this area. But this 
is what it gave me, so I don’t have a problem with that. ” 
P-F13 Think-aloud 5.2.2 Challenges in working “collaboratively”. Designers 
frequently expressed challenges in sharing control with AI-based 
design tools, noting that it often felt like these tools were dominating 
the design process. In those situations, designers either gave up 
and accepted unsatisfying results, improvised ’hacky’ strategies 
to work around the AI or abandoned the AI assistance altogether 
and proceeded to work manually. For instance, one designer using 
SimuLearn expressed frustration about having insufcient control 
over the design process and decided to accept imperfect results: 
"I feel like the collaborative process [...] it seemed a 
little difcult to control. I felt that SimuLearn had more 
control over it than I did." P-S01 Interview 
Similarly, another participant pointed out the lack of participation 
opportunities and conversation throughout the design process: 
"I would say no, that it’s not co-creative. The whole 
program creates the thing but based on my limits. [...] 
I don’t feel like I interact in that creation of the shape. 
I just worked at the beginning and then I let the program 
do the rest. I missed that once there is one option, I cannot 
change anything, I cannot interact with the solutions 
that the program is giving me. " P-F04 Interview 
In other cases, designers developed their own ’hacky’ 
workarounds to attain feasible results. In Fusion360, this happened 
when designers tried to use simple boxes as obstacle geometries to 
limit the material growth within the specifed perimeter. However, 
the algorithm often found ways to “squeeze” in additional, unwanted 
material through the gaps between obstacle geometries. A Fusion360 
user expressed they felt like tricking the system when they were 
unsuccessful at blocking material generation: 
“I think the software did kind of dominate the design 
process a little bit in that I was making things to satisfy 
the software instead of it kind of adapting to my needs