CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
feedback from designers each time SimuLearn’s simulation or 
Fusion360’s solver had fnished. In those moments, peer guides 
often asked the designer “Is that what you envisioned?” or “Is that 
what you wanted?” or even “Yeah, there you go! Is that how you want 
it to bend?”. These prompts triggered designers to refect on the 
generated designs, which helped the guides better understand how 
to provide support. 
6.2.4 Guide suggesting alternative means and goals. Beyond 
supporting tool operation and technical troubleshooting, the guides 
frequently suggested alternative means and goals to the designer, 
as in this dialogue: 
DESIGNER: "It’s going for the green part, but it’s not 
able to fgure out like a perfect way to get there without 
like touching this obstacle geometry. " 
GUIDE: "Right, well I mean just make your obstacle 
geometry really long, say, all the way back past the 
connection to the ship, and then you’re saying ’no 
material is allowed to go here’ and that would make sure 
that you can always get a bolt in. See what I’m saying?" 
DESIGNER: "Yeah, I do" 
(Designer P-F13, Guide P-F11) 
Here the guide suggested an alternative way to achieve the de-
signer’s goal by enlarging the existing obstacle geometry. This strat-
egy helped designers to better communicate design goals to the AI 
system and develop an intuition for harnessing the AI’s capabilities. 
6.2.5 Guide and designer making use of screen annotations 
and mouse gesturing to discuss design strategy. An essential 
part of building understanding between the designer and the peer 
guide was through nonverbal communication, such as screen 
annotations, sketches, or mouse gestures. Guides frequently used 
the screen annotation feature built into Zoom to highlight elements 
they spoke about by circling or drawing arrows. We also observed 
that all designers naturally used the mouse cursor to emphasize 
design features through circling or pointing gestures when 
explaining something to the guide. Both behaviors are illustrated in 
this situation where the guide and the designer discussed a strategy 
to achieve a specifc bottle holder shape: 
GUIDE: "So in this case, maybe I suggest that you move 
these two points in particular more towards the center. " 
[Guide draws arrows from points towards the 
center of the grid] 
DESIGNER: "And this one seems to have dropped 
downwards. Even this point here... The beam seems to 
be going downward. " 
[Designer points with mouse at different 
beams] 
GUIDE: "oh this beam right here?" [Guide draws an 
arrow pointing at beam] 
DESIGNER: "Yeah. " 
(Designer: P-S08, Guide: P-S04) 
Many designers and guides also annotated generated designs 
and sketched to clarify or illustrate their ideas. In summary, 
diferent forms of nonverbal communication helped designers and 
peer guides develop better shared mental models of the task and 
collectively overcome design issues. 7 DESIGNERS’ NEEDS AND EXPECTATIONS 
FOR CO-CREATING WITH AI-BASED DESIGN 
TOOLS (RQ3) 
Based on our observations and interviews from both the unguided 
and guided sessions, we highlight four themes that capture the 
needs and expectations that designers expressed around co-creating 
with AI-based design tools (RQ3). 
7.1 Designers expect the AI system to have 
more contextual awareness about the design 
problem at hand 
In both systems, participants missed the kind of contextual 
awareness that a human collaborator might have about a design 
task, such as a part’s function or how the part interfaces with other 
elements in the environment. Such a lack of contextual awareness 
was one of the main reasons people thought working with the tool 
was not collaborative. This lack of context also meant that the tool 
could not support the designers more proactively like a human 
partner, as described by this participant: 
"Certainly it would have saved me some time if at the 
beginning the software would have said ’oh I see that 
these are your connection points. Can you actually get a 
bolt in there?’ [. . . ] Things like that would have felt really 
much more collaborative and helpful. " P-F11 Interview 
Others expected the tool to ofer more intelligent manufacturing 
and material suggestions or help them anticipate real-world design 
issues, as this participant expressed: 
"I would like to see a design tool that would show me 
simulations of the water bottle in action, like ’oh is there 
enough friction’ or ’will it actually stay in place while 
a cyclist is on the bike’ and then provide suggestions of 
how to alleviate those problems. " P-S04 Interview 
7.2 Designers desire a more conversational 
form of interaction with the tool 
Most participants complained about the lack of reciprocal interac-
tion between them and the tool. Participants compared designing 
with the AI systems to "programming" or "working with a skilled 
teammate who is not listening to you. " Participants wished for a more 
conversational interaction with the tools, as desired by this designer: 
“More like a tool that I can have a conversation with 
while I’m always sure that everything that I’m making 
is fulflling the expectation of the piece and the loads 
and materials and everything. ” P-F04 Interview 
7.3 Designers require support in thinking 
through design problems 
Across all guided sessions, designers appreciated that the peer guide 
helped them learn to operate the tool but also to think through 
design problems —a feature they would eventually also expect from 
a co-creative AI tool. As summarized by this designer who refects 
on working with their peer guide: 
"I think working together with the peer guide was 
actually really helpful because he had a lot of insight.