CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
Table 6: Interview protocol with questions of the semi-structured post-task interview. 
Theme Topic Question
Collaboration with 
the toolGeneral Experience Q3 Could you tell me what it was like to work with the design tool in 
general?
General Expectations Q4 Before starting this project, what role did you expect the design tool 
to take? 
And what role did it actually take during the design process? Did the 
design tool match your expectations?
Roles – Coordination Q5 Do you feel that there was a collaborative interaction between you 
and the design tool? Can you give us some specific examples?
Q6 Using your own words, what metaphors or analogies would you use to characterize the tool and the collaboration with it?
Q7 Would you say that the process of working with the design tool is co-
creative? Why?
Q8 How was the workflow with the design tool different from your 
workflow of working with a human teammate?
Roles – Expectations Q9 What role do you want the AI to take during your process?
Q10 How would you describe an ideal collaborative design tool for that 
task?
Q11 What would a design tool need to do so that you would perceive it as “collaborative” and “co-creative”?
Mental Model Q12 Do you remember situations in which you found the behavior of the 
design tool confusing or irritating?
Shared Mental Models Q13 Do you think the AI feature successfully understands your design intent and design practice?
Q14 Do you think the design tool collected enough information to support 
you most effectively? Why?
Shared Mental Model – 
ExpectationsQ15 Are there any aspects from your design process where you hope a 
design tool like this could learn more from you to better support you?
Communication Q16 How would you characterize the dialogue between you and the design tool?
Q17 Can you describe situations in which the communication worked 
well and not so well?
Q18 Do you find the interface helpful in guiding you through the whole process while getting started?
Conflict Resolution Q19 Do you remember situations of conflict with the design tool? How did 
you solve the conflict?
Timing / Flow Q20 How did the simulation time influence your design process?
Design Process Satisfaction with design outcomeQ21 Are you satisfied with the final design in general? How closely does 
it match the design brief?
Surprise Q22 Do you remember situations in which suggestions from the design 
tool surprised you? If so, could you give me an example of that? Do you find the 
surprises productive or not?
Design Negotiation Q23 How did you find that the design tool changed the way you design? 
Did you ever adjust your design goal/strategy according to the tool’s 
capabilities?
Exploration Q24 Did you explore more design options because of the design tool?
Productivity Q25 Do you think you can achieve the same output level (quality and 
quantity) without the help of an AI feature 
given the time constraints? Why?
Trust / reassurance Q26 How much do you trust the results from the design tool?
Q27 Is there any other sort of analysis you were hoping the software would do that it didn’t? Why?
Learning Process Learning Process Q28 How would you describe the learning process for using the tool and 
collaborating with it?
Q29 Which situations of the design process did require the most guidance?
Q30 How did you learn about the capabilities of the design tool?
Q31 Which aspects of the design tool were challenging to understand or 
learn about?
Learning Resources Q32 Which learning resources did you find most useful? Why?
Learning Expectations Q33 How could the tool better guide an experienced designer who is 
starting to use the tool?
Q34 What would the ideal collaborative learning process look like, in your opinion?
General 
ExpectationsQ35 What would you want the design tool to do more of?
Q36 What would you want the design tool to do differently?