CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
[...] I think for something that’s like supposed to be so 
smart and easy to use I wish it gave me more options 
instead of [me] trying to fnd these like little tricks. So 
I don’t want to use little tricks. I don’t want to use a 
hidden kind of ‘I’ll trick the software into thinking that 
it’s correct. ’" P-F05 Interview 
Finally, designers often avoided AI assistance when they could 
not learn to co-create with it efectively. This issue was particularly 
frequent when designers used SimuLearn, given that this tool 
explicitly allows designers to switch between diferent levels of AI 
assistance. When comparing which SimuLearn features designers 
used to complete the tasks, all designers learned over time to 
manually adjust, simulate, and iterate the design (see Table 3 right). 
However, only two designers (S04, S10) were able to work with the 
AI-assistance features (i.e., auto and hybrid optimizer) on the frst try. 
All others expressed that they could not make sense of the AI output, 
even when they used the feature correctly. These participants 
subsequently avoided using the AI features and continued to work 
manually with rapid simulation. 
5.2.3 Challenges in communicating design goals to the 
AI. Designers often had difculty communicating design goals 
to the AI system. For example, designers were unsure about the 
use and implication of certain parameters. Furthermore, many 
designers recognized their knowledge gaps of parameters that 
defned manufacturing processes or materials. E.g., a designer was 
unfamiliar with the specifcity of a manufacturing method and kept 
using default parameter values: 
"I’ll have to see if they have fve-axis milling... minimum 
tool diameter 10 millimeters... uh I don’t know, I’m not 
really a tooling guy... tool shoulder length... [laughs] 
minimum tool diameter... all right I guess I don’t know... 
I just hit okay on that. " P-F12 Think-aloud 
Designers often relied on the AI system’s default settings or made 
assumptions about their efect when they were unsure about the pa-
rameters’ meanings. Instead of seeking clarifcation from helpful re-
sources, they often tried to determine a parameter’s efect on the fnal 
result independently. However, it was oftentimes hard or impossible 
to notice and trace back parameter infuences from the fnal results. 
In the think-aloud sessions, we also observed several occasions 
where designers had diferent interpretations of the parameters. For 
example, in the Fusion360 task, half of the users made mistakes when 
converting the loads into the correct unit expected by the system. 
Similarly, when applying loads to multiple targets (i.e., bolt holes), the 
system applied the same load to each of the targets instead of equally 
distributing the load across the targets, which the designers had 
anticipated 1. This mismatch led to higher load assignments and un-
necessarily strong and bulky bracket designs. Interestingly, most de-
signers verbalized their uncertainty about the load distribution when 
specifying parameters, as exemplifed by this think-aloud comment: 
“All the loads... I remember being a little wonky... so... 
I said three... let’s see...what would be the case here? 
I don’t know if all of these three forces are the same... 
that’s the issue. I don’t know if this is applying to each 
1This is a known issue in Fusion360 that many users have discussed in the user forum. 
See [4]. one in particular... like if it’s 12,000 here, here, and here... 
or if it’s split evenly? I hope it’s being split evenly... that’s 
what I’m assuming. ” P-F03 Think-aloud 
Although participants were aware that the system might interpret 
the load assignments diferently, only a few were actually able to 
fgure out and correct the mistake. 
5.3 Learning strategies among successful 
designers (RQ1b) 
Here we present fndings related to how designers overcame the pre-
viously reported learning challenges (RQ1b). We observed that all 
designers (after watching the introduction tutorial video) tried to 
learn to work with the tools through an iterative trial-and-error 
process. We also observed that participants sporadically consulted 
diferent support resources, including software tooltips and help 
fles, and external resources like video tutorials, online user forums, 
and in some cases asking colleagues for help. Designers sought help 
from these support resources primarily after encountering interface 
or usability issues, which they often resolved. However, despite the 
available support resources, most designers struggled to learn to 
co-create with the tools efectively. Nonetheless, some designers 
employed successful strategies that helped them in learning to work 
better with the AI systems: 
5.3.1 Systematically exploring AI’s limitations and capabili-
ties. We observed that, early on in their interactions, two designers 
(P-F11, P-S10) deliberately and systematically experimented with the 
AI tools to develop a better intuition of the AI’s behavior, capabilities, 
and limitations. These designers conducted tests to understand 
what efects diferent parameter values would have on the fnal 
result and documented the value-result correspondence to create 
a mental model. For example, PS-10 realized that their initial design 
sketches were not feasible with SimuLearn and the shape-changing 
materials, thus decided to systematically test diferent extreme grid 
shapes to hone their mental model of the AI’s behavior: 
"Even though I tried sketching some stuf, I think it just 
didn’t work. So I thought it’s better if I just go into the 
tool and see if I will be able to do this. I tried stuf like 
folding one corner upwards and one corner downwards 
or stuf like that. I took lots of screenshots and those 
really helped me to understand like ’if I do this, then it’s 
gonna behave like that’ so I think initially it was a lot 
of trying to form a mental model and like what’s the 
capability of this tool. " P-S10 Interview 
5.3.2 Sketching, explaining and reflecting on design issues . 
Another strategy that helped designers overcome fawed outcomes 
was to actively abstract and explain the problem. In the think-aloud 
sessions, we observed when facing similar fundamental challenges 
like over-constraining the engine bracket (such that the loads had 
no efect), some designers were able to understand and overcome 
the issue by sketching out the bracket’s free-body diagram and 
explaining the acting forces and constraints to themselves. We 
observed similar strategies in SimuLearn, where participants under-
stood the signifcant infuence of gravity during the transformation 
process by explaining the process to themselves: