CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
Table 5: Overview of design opportunities and example applications in relation to group cognition and team learning. 
Support opportunity Example Application
Sca olding inductive learning of AI’s capabilities and limitations
Oer guided interactive mini/uni00A0  
experiments for exploring AI 
behavior  
Seen in 5.3.1 and 6.2.2System o ers designers explorative mini 
experiments to develop intuition of the AI’s responses to speci
c (extreme) parameter 
constellations.Rening mental model of AI’s behavior and 
capabilities through experiential, hands-on learning; Learning to predict the tool’s actions in response to own actions.
Present similar work produced by AI design tool/uni00A0
 
Seen in 7.4System proactively suggests task-related project examples of designers creations with  AI system as learning resource and source of inspiration.Re
ning mental model of AI’s capabilities and 
limitations by learning from examples; Aligning designer’s expectations with tool’s capabilities; Ge
ing inspired by co-creative AI’s suggestions.
Prompting designers' planning and re ection
Support designers in 
thinking through design problems
 
Seen in 6.2.4 and 7.3System asks designers questions to help reframe or further explore problem and solution space, like “Have you considered  other alternatives?”, “Could the bo
le holder 
also be placed at a di erent location on the 
bike?” System could also suggest alternative strategies and goals to designer.Helping designers to stay cognitively engaged in co-creative design process with AI.
Prompt designers’ feedback and re
ection  
Seen in 5.3.2 and 6.2.3Prompting designers’ feedback when evaluating generated designs, like “Is this design what you envisioned?” Based on the feedback, system could o
er support guidance 
on how to correct generated designs.Helping designers to identify their own mental state and communicate goal to AI system; Information pooling.
Improving co-creative AI tools' contextual awareness of designers' tasks and objectives
Equip AI with increased contextual awareness of designer, task, and project
 
Seen in 7.1System probes designers to share information about their background, skills and project, like high level design goals and manufacturing considerations.Fostering shared mental models of task and objectives by asking for explicit feedback or implicit social inference.
Respond to designers’ uncertainties/uni00A0
 
and knowledge gaps/uni00A0  
Seen in 6.2.2Enable designers to communicate uncertainties about parameters and own knowledge gaps to system by “
agging” 
parameters. System could track designers’ “level of certainty.”Foster shared mental models of each other’s knowledge and goals. Increasing the feeling of designers’ ownership of the mutual activity with AI system. 
Multi-modal interactive communication for human–AI co-creation
Allow a more interactive and conversational interaction between designer and AI system
 
Seen in 7.2Utilizing conversational agentive interfaces  for designer-AI co-creationFacilitating grounding in communication through turn-taking, acknowledgments, back-channeling, error correction;/uni00A0Mutual con
rmation of the 
reception and interpretation of objectives.
Enable non-verbal communication between designer and AI system/uni00A0
 
Seen in 6.2.5Designers provide feedback to AI system  by sketching design goals or annotating generated designs for re
nement (like in a 
design critique)Facilitating grounding in communication by  
selecting a domain and task-appropriate communication medium.
Relation to Models of Human-Human Collaboration /uni00A0
Most designers felt the tools were uncollaborative and had more 
control over the design process than they would have preferred. As a 
consequence, they accepted imperfect results, developed improvised 
workarounds, or avoided AI assistance altogether. Previous studies 
on group cognition and team learning suggest that group members 
feel more ownership of the mutual activity when the group learns 
to coordinate cognitive capabilities among participants—united by their interpretations of each other’s mental states [57]. Groups can 
reach this level of collaboration by an active process of communica-
tion, joint information processing, and coordination of actions [53]. 
Our fndings from the guided sessions show that the guides’ active 
communicative support strategies, such as reacting to designers’ un-
certainties and providing step-by-step instructions, helped designers 
learn to work confdently with the AI. Furthermore, when peer