Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Figure 1: The Fusion 360 design task and workfow. The task involves (A) designing an engine bracket that connects the engine 
to a damper. (B) A starter fle containing connection holes and bounding dimensions is provided to the users to initiate the 
design in (C) Fusions 360. The user is prompted to create (D) a viable design while minimizing weight. (E) The workfow involves 
fve steps, and based on the AI system’s solutions, the user may iterate the design by adjusting the design constraints and criteria 
to produce new solutions. (Image A: © Rolls-Royce Solutions America Inc.) 
technique is envisioned to reduce production waste and shipping 
costs (e.g., fat packaging, reduced support material). 
While new materials are being developed to manufacture shape-
changing structures, designing shape-changing components poses 
unique challenges that designers are ill-equipped to handle. Unlike 
2D and 3D design, designing with shape-changing materials involves 
a non-intuitive mismatch between the fnal target (3D shapes) and the 
design input (often 2D). Efectively designing for shape-changing ma-
terials requires an understanding of (often complex) spatiotemporal, 
self-assembling material behaviors that may push against the limits 
of what humans can mentally simulate. At the low level, designing 
such materials requires modifying volumes voxel-by-voxel, which is 
infeasible for complex structures if done manually. AI-driven tools 
allow designers to create complex artifacts that would otherwise be 
impossible to create by hand. SimuLearn aids the design process by 
providing real-time simulation and optimization to iterate designs 
toward the desired morphing behavior. 
In this task (Figure 2A-E), participants design a bike bottle holder 
using morphing grids. A starter fle containing the bottle and bike 
frame geometry was provided to contextualize the design. This 
task was more open-ended than the mechanical engineering task 
since each designer may assemble the morphed grids in diferent 
ways to create the holder. To use the tool (Figure 2F), the designer 
models the grid geometry and assigns bending actuator ratios. 
Next, participants simulate the design, observe the predicted 
transformation, and iterate the design by changing the grid model 
and actuator assignment. Alternatively, participants may opt to use 
functions to optimize the grids toward a targeted transformed shape. 
The optimization process can be either autonomous or interactive 
(i.e., the tool suggests edits for the user to choose from). To efectively work with the tool, users need to learn to work with the diferent 
levels of AI assistance to produce a satisfactory design iteratively. 
3.3 Choosing design tools 
We specifcally study these systems for two reasons. First, while 
both tools support advanced manufacturing tasks, they represent 
computational systems with distinct purposes and interaction 
paradigms. Fusion360’s Generative Design module assists engineer-
ing designers with the generally familiar task of creating light and 
structural solid parts. The AI system helps designers to navigate 
a large design space and explore opportunities while adhering to 
specifed requirements and constraints. SimuLearn, on the other 
hand, supports designers in working with an emerging material and 
manufacturing process unfamiliar to most designers. SimuLearn’s 
AI tool provides rapid simulations of the shape-changing material 
and ofers diferent levels of design assistance—from manual, over 
interactive, to autonomous optimization/iteration. 
Second, each tool represents a diferent interaction style and syn-
chronicity. In Fusion360, users follow a structured sequence of steps 
to set up the parameters and acquire solutions. It may take a few 
hours to generate new solutions, and the designer may export the 
generated models at any time or iterate the design by adjusting the 
parameters and rerunning the solver. By contrast, SimuLearn’s solver 
runs two to three magnitudes faster (5-180 seconds), and users inter-
act with the system without a predefned workfow. Participants may 
also freely switch between the three levels of AI support at any point.