CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
Figure 2: The SimuLearn design task. (A) The user is prompted to design a bike bottle holder using the provided (B) starter fle 
and (C) the SimuLearn tool to create (D) morphing grid structures. (E) The transformed grid should assemble into the holder 
and ft around the bottle and bike frame. (F) The SimuLearn tool provides three types of design workfows. After initializing a 
morphing grid design, the user can choose between AI-assisted optimization functions or rapid simulations to iterate the design. 
4 STUDY DESIGN 
4.1 Study procedure 
The study was structured into four phases (see Figure 3): 
1) On-Boarding: Before the frst session, participants received 
instructions by email on how to access the design tools running 
on a dedicated remote machine. They also watched a 25-minute 
Figure 3: Overview of Study 1 think-aloud design sessions 
procedure. Participants were frst introduced to the design 
tool and task, then worked while thinking aloud across 
multiple sessions. They completed an interview after turning 
in their design. video tutorial demonstrating the tools’ core functionalities with a 
step-by-step example. 
2) Intro Design Session: At the beginning of the frst session, a 
research team member introduced the participants to the study, de-
sign brief, task, and starter fle. Sessions were conducted over video 
conference (Zoom) with audio and video recording. Participants then 
worked while sharing their screens and thinking aloud. Participants 
were allowed to use all available support resources, such as internal 
help fles, external video tutorials, or user forums. The researcher qui-
etly observed the participants setting the parameters of the compu-
tational design system and took notes. Due to the complex and open-
ended nature of the tasks, the research team interrupted the task after 
30 minutes and asked participants to continue working on their own 
as a compensated "homework assignment" without any time limit. 
3) Homework Sessions: Following the initial session, partic-
ipants continued working independently for as long as needed to 
iterate and produce the fnal design submission. Participants used the 
same remote machine and joined a personalized video conference 
meeting with automatic recording to document their work while 
thinking aloud. We also deployed a simple web application to prompt 
the users to verbalize their thoughts. The application analyzed 
the speech input from the microphone and reminded the user to 
"keep talking" after twenty seconds of silence. Once the designer 
felt satisfed with the result, they submitted the 3D fles to our team. 
4) Post-Task Interview: Within two days of submitting their 
result, participants completed a one-hour semi-structured interview 
with a research team member. Participants were asked to refect