Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
on their experience working with the AI tool. The interviews were 
conducted remotely over video conferencing. The interviewer 
took notes, and the interview audio and video were recorded. The 
interview protocol contained 36 questions clustered into three 
topics: collaboration with the tool, design process, and learning process 
(see the Appendix for interview protocol). The topics and questions 
clustered under collaboration with the tool were inspired by measures 
from team learning literature on assessing collaboration quality and 
efectiveness of human teams [9, 34, 53, 74]. These include perceived 
team roles and coordination, communication between user and tool, 
confict resolution, timing, and (shared) mental models. 
4.2 Analysis 
To gain insight into research questions RQ1a What challenges do 
designers face when learning to co-create with computational AI tools? 
and RQ1b How do designers overcome these challenges? we (1) eval-
uated the design outcomes and analyzed more than 40 hours of 
think-aloud videos and 17 hours of interview recordings using (2) 
video interaction analysis of think-aloud videos, and (3) refexive 
thematic analysis of think-aloud sessions (videos, transcripts) and 
interview transcripts. 
4.2.1 Evaluation of design outcomes. We evaluated the 
efectiveness of Designer-AI collaboration by measuring the time 
required to complete the task and designer satisfaction with their 
results as rated on a three-point Likert scale (satisfed, neutral, 
unsatisfed) during the post-task interview. We also measured 
product feasibility for the mechanical engineering task by checking 
the designed engine brackets against the requirements in the design 
brief. The structural soundness was validated using fnite element 
analysis (FEA), and the used material was checked by measuring 
part volume. We also checked the models for shape requirements 
(i.e., clear bolt holes, body within the bounding box). Since the bottle 
holder was a more free-form and aesthetic design task, we only 
checked if the user submitted their design and primarily relied on 
their self-reported satisfaction with the outcome. 
4.2.2 Video interaction analysis. We used video interaction 
analysis [7] of the think-aloud recordings to understand partic-
ipants’ learning process while working with the AI features. To 
understand how well participants learned over time to use the 
AI features efectively, we tracked their interactions with the AI 
features relevant to the design task and documented whether the 
actions would produce satisfactory outcomes. For Fusion360, we 
tracked how participants specifed structural loads, mechanical 
constraints, and the obstacle geometry feature to control the 
bracket’s bolt clearance and overall size. For SimuLearn, we tracked 
how participants used diferent AI-assisted features (hybrid and 
automated optimization) throughout the think-aloud sessions. 
4.2.3 Reflexive thematic analysis. To understand participant’s 
challenges, needs, and expectations when learning to co-create with 
the AI system, we performed a refexive thematic analysis [8] of 
the interview data (transcripts) and the think-aloud sessions (video, 
transcripts). We followed an iterative inductive coding process and 
generated themes through afnity diagramming. We used ATLAS.ti 
to analyze transcripts, audio, and video. In the initial coding, the think-aloud and interview transcript data 
were equally distributed among two researchers who generated pre-
liminary codes utilizing both a semantic (what people said) and latent 
(our interpretations of the data) coding strategy. Next, the research 
team collectively identifed initial codes and themes. We generated 
themes in a bottom-up manner. However, we looked at the data with a 
mindset of collaboration between the designer and the tool—inspired 
by previous studies on human-human collaboration, co-creation, and 
team learning [9, 53]. We also tried our best to identify and separate 
usability issues from the codes and themes to avoid confoundment. 
The two researchers then coded the think-aloud recordings 
to document where designers specifed system parameters or 
evaluated design outcomes. These moments allowed us to fnd many 
of the problems that designers faced. We also coded non-verbal 
expressions like mouse gesturing or screen annotations that showed 
how designers attempted to communicate. 
Finally, we created summary videos highlighting specifc situ-
ations related to co-creation with the tool (e.g., designers confused 
by AI-generated outcomes). The video clips were annotated with 
a time code, participant ID, and a contextual description of the 
situation to share and discuss with the entire research team (for an 
example, please see the video fgure in the supplementary material). 
The research team collectively analyzed the think-aloud summary 
videos in a half-day session and discussed the themes. We completed 
the qualitative analysis by iteratively reviewing and revising codes 
and themes until we identifed a stable network of coherent and rich 
themes. 
Table 2: Evaluation of design outcomes for the engine 
bracket design task (left) and bottle holder design task 
(right). The designer’s satisfaction with the outcome is 
rated with green=satisfed, yellow=neutral, red=unsatisfed. 
For the engine bracket task, meeting structural and shape 
requirement checks are rated as X=fail, check mark=pass. 
IDDurat. 
Min.Des. 
Satisf.
P-S01 97
P-S03 190P-S04 225P-S06 166P-S07 63P-S10 189P-S11 151
Bottle Holder TaskIDDurat. 
Min.Num. 
Iter.Des. 
Satisf.Struct.  
Req.Shape  
Req.
P-F01 61 3 X
P-F02 85 2 X X
P-F03 54 2 X X
P-F04 105 9 X X
P-F05 140 6
P-F11 122 6 X X
P-F12 160 5 X X
Engine Bracket Task 
5 RESULTS 
Overall, participants expressed seeing potential value in the AI sys-
tems to support their design process—especially that the tools would 
enable them (at least in theory) to create and explore more complex 
designs in a shorter time than without AI. However, most faced 
unresolvable challenges in learning to efectively co-create with 
the tools. In the following subsections, we provide a brief overview 
of participants’ performance on the design tasks and then explore