CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Gmeiner, et al. 
Figure 4: Overview of engine bracket designs created by 
participants. P-F05 met both the shape and structural 
requirements. P-F01 only met the shape requirements (the 
bracket has holes for bolts with sufcient clearance and 
respects the specifed dimensions but is structurally too 
weak). All other brackets missed both requirements and were 
either too heavy, weak, larger than the specifed dimensions, 
or had not enough bolt clearance. For simplicity, we only 
show one design option per participant. Please see the 
Appendix for all submitted design options. 
Figure 5: Overview of bottle holder designs created by 
participants. Participants came up with diferent designs 
using the shape-changing grid material in various ways. 
Participant P-S01 was not able to control the shape as 
intended and improvised by stacking grids together. While 
some designs (P-S06, P-S07) would not be able to hold a bottle, 
some designers (P-S04, P-S10) utilized the shape-changing 
grid structure to create promising bottle holder designs. 
Participant P-S11 stopped working on the task out of 
frustration and did not submit a design. 
what challenges they faced in co-creating with them (RQ1a). We 
then highlight what some successful learning strategies looked like 
(RQ1b). 
5.1 Design Tasks Outcome Summary 
In the engine bracket task, all participants were familiar with de-
signing similar mechanical components by considering forces and constraints. Generally, such a task is a standard exercise in engineer-
ing education, and our task was comparable to the example provided 
by Autodesk in the introduction video that the participants watched. 
Participants required between 54 and 160 minutes (M=104, SD=39.7) 
to complete the task (see Table 2 left). No participant mentioned in 
the post-interview that the task itself was too difcult for them. Yet, 
only participant P-F05 was able to produce a self-satisfactory design 
that met both shape and structural requirements (see Figure 4 and 
Appendix for additional designs). P-F02 was also satisfed with their 
design but opted to manually refne the generated geometry that 
did not meet the requirements (i.e., using excessive materials and 
blocked bolt holes). We were surprised to fnd that few engineering 
participants produced satisfying results, even though they were fa-
miliar with the type of design task. Designers struggled to perform 
this otherwise familiar design task when they attempted to do so 
with AI assistance. 
For our industrial or architectural designers, designing a bot-
tle holder in 3D was not perceived as difcult. However, working 
with shape-changing material structures was new and everyone ex-
pressed in the post-interview that working with the shape-changing 
material was "unintuitive" and "challenging." Participants worked 
on the task between 63 and 255 minutes in total (M=154, SD=56.6). 
All but one participant submitted a bottle holder design (Figure 5). 
This participant stopped working on the project after 151 minutes 
because he felt he could not control the material well, even with the 
AI. In the end, almost all designers were either dissatisfed with their 
fnal design or had a neutral opinion (see Table 2). 
Table 3 shows that only a few designers understood how to set rel-
evant parameters for the design task to produce satisfying results on 
the frst attempt in both tasks. In Fusion360, most designers learned 
over time to successfully specify the structural constraints and obsta-
cle geometry for bolt clearances. However, many designers failed to 
correctly specify structural loads and the boundary box. As a result, 
some submitted designs were too heavy, weak, or larger than the spec-
ifed dimensions. In particular, one designer (P-F02) decided to manu-
ally refne the design after the frst iteration because they felt more in 
control this way. For SimuLearn, all participants quickly learned how 
to control the grid shape using manual adjustments and rapid sim-
ulations (Table 3 right). However, many avoided using the other two 
AI-assisted features after an unsuccessful frst attempt and continued 
to work manually (see Section 5.2.2 for further explanation). 
5.2 Challenges designers faced when learning 
to co-create with AI (RQ1a) 
We clustered challenges designers faced when learning to co-create 
into three themes: Understanding and fxing AI outputs, working 
“collaboratively” with the tools, and communicating their design goals 
to the AI. 
5.2.1 Challenges in understanding and adjusting AI outputs. 
Designers were often confused about the generated results and had 
difculty understanding the cause and remedy of “weird” outcomes. 
This often occurred when generated solutions contained minor 
aesthetic faws such as surface bumps, holes, or slightly twisted 
geometry. Designers wondered about the AI’s underlying design 
rationale and were unable to determine whether such design 
features were intended or caused by algorithmic glitches.