Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
guides prompted designers’ feedback and refection on generated 
designs, the designers were required to articulate their intentions ex-
plicitly. As a result, both the guides and designers were able to discuss 
and better coordinate further actions to improve the outcome. 
8.3 Design Opportunities and Future Work 
The following section highlights several design opportunities we 
identifed in our fndings to support designers in learning to co-create 
with computational AI tools. 
8.3.1 Scafolding inductive learning of AI’s capabilities and 
limitations . As discussed, some designers learned the AI system’s 
capabilities and limitations by testing and documenting the efectual 
correspondence between various parameters and the generated 
result (see 5.3.1). In the guided sessions, peer guides also frequently 
provided step-by-step instructions for setting up parameters or 
walked designers through the sequence of steps (see 6.2.2). These in-
ductive learning strategies helped designers to better predict the AI’s 
behavior and understand its capabilities. Previous work on novice-AI 
music co-creation has also found that users systematically tested AI 
limitations to hone their mental model of the system’s behavior [48]. 
Going further, to better support users in this learning activity, future 
co-creative systems may ofer designers a set of hands-on mini-
guided ‘experiments’ to better understand the system’s responses 
to specifc (extreme) parameter inputs [42]. Systems may also ofer 
designers opportunities to view sets of examples of input-output 
pairs to help designers develop useful mental models of an AI tool’s 
generative capabilities and limitations (cf. [58]). A co-creative tool 
may also proactively recommend similar tasks and project-related 
examples created by other human-AI teams (see 7.4) to help designers 
learn the system’s capabilities and provide creative inspiration. 
8.3.2 Prompting designers’ planning and reflection . 
Participants who were more successful at co-creating with the AI 
tools did so by abstracting and explaining their problems—either 
to themselves during think-aloud sessions or to the peer guides 
(see 5.3.2 and 6.2.3). Literature from the learning sciences shows 
that self-explanation positively afects understanding and problem-
solving [76]. In addition, participants from the guided sessions 
appreciated the guides’ prompt for refection on AI behaviors and 
their suggestions for alternative design goals or strategies (see 6.2.4 
and 7.3). Such actions helped designers think through the tasks 
and plan actions with AI tools. Conversely, designers who did not 
refect on the design problems were unable to learn to understand 
the system’s behavior, capabilities, and limitations well enough 
and failed to produce satisfactory outcomes. This observation was 
more prevalent in Fusion360 than in SimuLearn since Fusion360’s 
long simulation time doesn’t support the kind of rapid interactive 
adjustments as SimuLearn did, thus requiring the user to strategize 
their actions in advance. Hence, supporting users in thinking 
through the design problem for specifying parameters ahead would 
be especially benefcial for AI tools with longer processing time. 
One additional explanation for why participants failed to produce 
satisfactory outcomes might be that AI systems can lead designers 
to over-rely on their support, creating an “illusion of success” that 
reduces their efort in solving the design problem [84], something 
we saw when designers accepted results even when they appeared unfeasible (see Section 5.2.1). To compensate for this tendency, 
a co-creative system may help designers reframe the problem or 
further explore the solution space by suggesting alternative goals 
or asking generative design questions [23] like “What could other 
alternatives look like?”. Moreover, actively refecting on the design 
process is an essential part of professional design practices [67]. 
Much like the guides, a co-creative system could prompt feedback 
and active refection on observed AI behaviors or generated designs 
by asking deep reasoning questions about the results, such as “Is 
this generated design what you envisioned?” (cf. [12]). Based on the 
feedback, the system may then ofer support and help to coordinate 
further actions. This strategy would be complementary to the 
inductive learning support described in the previous section (8.3.1). 
8.3.3 Improving co-creative AI tools’ contextual awareness 
of designers’ tasks and objectives. Our results show that 
designers felt a lack of the tool’s awareness about the design context 
and therefore missed the kind of proactive support a human partner 
might provide (see 7.1). While building contextual awareness into 
AI systems has long been a tradition in HCI research, it also presents 
many technical challenges. However, in the context of co-creative 
design tools, promising directions are being explored. For example, 
the system could derive its user model through explicit and implicit 
mechanisms to develop a shared mental model of the context by 
asking the user for information about the specifc design task (i.e., 
parsing a written design brief for context and goals [71]) or infer 
design goals from user behaviors [46]. 
From a group cognition and team learning perspective, con-
textual awareness also includes an understanding of the other 
team member’s existing or missing knowledge about the design 
task. Based on our fndings (see 6.2.2), a co-creative tool might 
learn about the designers’ knowledge by responding to verbalized 
knowledge gaps such as “I don’t know” or responding to hedging 
expressions such as “maybe” or “I assume. ” This observation is in 
line with research showing student learning is positively afected 
by human tutors’ responses to their expressions of uncertainty [26]. 
Based on this phenomenon, literature has explored how intelligent 
tutoring systems can detect and respond to student hedging [26, 62]. 
A co-creative system may also allow designers to communicate 
uncertainties about parameters and their own knowledge gaps. For 
example, designers may fag an “???” checkbox next to a parameter’s 
input feld to signal uncertainty. The AI system could then track 
designers’ “level of certainty” for each parameter and provide 
reactive help or re-surface those parameters later in the design 
process to identify possible reasons for unexpected outcomes. 
8.3.4 Multi-modal interactive communication for human–AI 
co-creation. Our fndings show that designers felt communicating 
with the AI was like giving instructions without receiving much 
feedback (see 7.2). Results from the guided sessions show that peer 
guides used conversational strategies like confrming the reception 
of each other’s goals or asking for clarifcations when they were un-
sure about the other’s intentions. As conversation is widely seen as a 
vital mode of designing [67] and empirical work suggests that much 
of design work lies within conversations between collaborators and 
stakeholders [47], co-creative systems should consider using more 
back-and-forth conversation as an interaction interface. Further-
more, studies on team learning show that the forming of efective,