Exploring Challenges and Opportunities to Support Designers in Learning to Co-create CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
Table 4: Overview of Study 2: Learning with a Peer Guide participants. Six additional participants (3xFusion360, 3xSimuLearn) 
were paired with peer guides who had worked successfully with the AI design tools in Study 1. 
ID Group Age 
Years Gender Domain Occupation CAD Exp. 
Years Ind. Exp. 
Years Guided by 
Participant 
P-F07 Fusion360 27 M Mechanical Engineering Student / PhD >5 1 – 2 P-F05 
P-F08 Fusion360 27 M Mechanical Engineering Student / PhD >5 1 – 2 P-F05 
P-F13 Fusion360 19 M Mechanical Engineering Student / BA 2 – 4 0 P-F11 
P-S05 SimuLearn 26 F Architecture Student / MA >5 2 – 5 P-S04 
P-S08 SimuLearn 20 F Architecture Student / BA 2 – 4 0 P-S04 
P-S09 SimuLearn 23 F Architecture Student / BA 2 – 4 2 – 5 P-S04 
"Whoa, I was not expecting that at all... uh... is that just 
because of gravity? And there’s something crazy going 
on here... there’s a lot of gravity... oh is it because I made 
the thing so big? Yikes, that is not at all what I expected. " 
P-S11 Think-aloud 
6 STUDY 2: LEARNING WITH A PEER 
GUIDE (RQ2) 
To gain insights into how designers can be better supported in learn-
ing to co-create with computational AI tools (RQ2), we conducted 
additional think-aloud sessions where designers were paired with ex-
perienced peers to support them during the task (i.e., guided sessions). 
The guide had prior experience using the AI tools and provided sup-
port as needed to help participants to more efectively co-create 
with AI-driven features. Motivated by human-human collaboration, 
we aimed to derive insights into when and how to efectively sup-
port users in learning to co-create with AI by observing the support 
strategies, pedagogical moves, and communication patterns of the 
human guide. 
6.1 Method 
We recruited six additional participants (Table 4) following the 
same criteria as described in Section 3.1. The guides were recruited 
from the pool of participants who had completed Study 1 and 
demonstrated a thorough understanding of the domain, tool, and 
task (P-F05, P-F11, P-S04). We asked these guides to support the 
designers in learning to co-create with the tool. No script was 
provided to the guides because we intended to fnd possible support 
strategies from their natural interactions. 
All guided sessions followed the same procedure as that of the 
unguided sessions, except that the homework sessions were limited 
to 50 minutes and the guides were present to help the designers. The 
designers and the guides communicated with each other through 
audio, screen sharing, and screen annotations. A researcher quietly 
observed and took notes. After the design session, we conducted 
separate 15-minute semi-structured interviews with the guide and 
designer. All sessions and interviews were recorded (video and 
audio) and automatically transcribed. 
We conducted a refexive thematic analysis to identify situations 
and themes on how peer guides supported designers to overcome 
challenges in learning to work with AI tools. We specifcally 
focused on aspects of collaboration and knowledge transfer such 
as communication, joint information processing, and coordination of actions [53]. We coded the video, think-aloud transcripts, and 
interview transcripts then generated themes with a focus on 
communication and learning by analyzing the guide’s actions 
and support strategies that helped designers overcome challenges 
previously observed in Study 1. 
6.2 Results – Guided Sessions 
The guides supported the designer in using the tools, understanding 
the AI’s behaviors, capabilities, and limitations, and sometimes 
suggesting and discussing alternative design goals or strategies. 
Guides primarily reacted to designers’ verbalization and actions 
when they asked for help, expressed uncertainty, or when guides 
observed common mistakes. To get an impression of conversational 
dynamics, please see the video fgure in the supplementary material. 
We portray fve of the most common peer support strategies that 
helped designers to learn better to co-create with AI systems: 
6.2.1 Guide providing step-by-step walk-through in-
structions. Guides often provided designers with step-by-step 
instructions for setting specifc parameters. Such instructions 
were provided in response to designers’ actions, such as showing 
confusion or struggle, but sometimes designers also specifcally 
requested such assistance. 
6.2.2 Guide reacting to designers’ expressions of uncer-
tainty . We observed that guides were especially sensitive to 
moments when designers signaled uncertainty or when designers 
verbalized knowledge gaps with hedging expressions such as "I don’t 
know", "maybe", or "I assume. " In these situations, the guides often 
intervened and ofered support or suggested alternative design 
strategies. Here, the guide suggested creating an obstacle geometry 
in Fusion360 to prevent material build-up at the bottom of the part 
in response to the designer who was wondering how to keep the 
part within the specifed dimensions. 
DESIGNER: "...but because the bolt is not here, I don’t 
know where it would be... " 
GUIDE: "I mean maybe on the bottom face, right? That’s 
what’s resting on the body of the ship efectively. " 
DESIGNER: Yeah, let’s go ahead and choose that bottom 
face. " 
(Designer P-F13, Guide P-F11) 
6.2.3 Guide prompting designer reflection on generated 
designs. We often observed situations where the guides prompted