What would happen without re-training? The re-training is the most computationally expensive
aspect of ROAR. One should question whether it is actually needed. We argue that re-training is
needed because machine learning models typically assume that the train and the test data comes from
a similar distribution.
The replacement value ccan only be considered uninformative if the model is trained to learn it as
such. Without retraining, it is unclear whether degradation in performance is due to the introduction of
artifacts outside of the original training distribution or because we actually removed information. This
is made explicit in our experiment in Section 4.3.1, we show that without retraining the degradation
is far higher than the modest decrease in performance observed with re-training. This suggests
retraining has better controlled for artefacts introduced by the modiﬁcation.
Are we evaluating the right aspects? Re-training does have limitations. For one, while the
architecture is the same, the model used during evaluation is not the same as the model on which the
feature importance estimates were originally obtained. To understand why ROAR is still meaningful
we have to think about what happens when the accuracy degrades, especially when we compare it to
a random baseline. The possibilities are:
1.We remove input dimensions and the accuracy drops. In this case, it is very likely
that the removed inputs were informative to the original model. ROAR thus gives a good
indication that the importance estimate is of high quality.
2.We remove inputs and the accuracy does not drop. This can be explained as either:
(a)It could be caused by removal of an input that was uninformative to the model. This
includes the case where the input might have been informative but not in a way that is
useful to the model, for example, when a linear model is used and the relation between
the feature and the output is non-linear. Since in such a case the information was not
used by the model and it does not show in ROAR we can assume ROAR behaves as
intended.
(b)There might be redundancy in the inputs. The same information could represented in
another feature. This behavior can be detected with ROAR as we will show in our toy
data experiment.
Validating the behavior of ROAR on artiﬁcial data. To demonstrate the difference between
ROAR and an approach without re-training in a controlled environment we generate a 16 dimensional
dataset with 4 informative features. Each datapoint xand its label ywas generated as follows:
x=az
10+dη+ǫ
10, y = (z >0).
All random variables were sampled from a standard normal distribution. The vectors aanddare 16
dimensional vectors that were sampled once to generate the dataset. In aonly the ﬁrst 4 values have
nonzero values to ensure that there are exactly 4 informative features. The values η,ǫwere sampled
independently for each example.
We use a least squares model as this problem can be solved linearly. We compare three rankings: the
ground truth importance ranking, random ranking and the inverted ground truth ranking (the worst
possible estimate of importance). In the left plot of Fig. 2 we can observe that without re-training the
worst case estimator is shown to degrade performance relatively quickly. In contrast, ROAR shows
no degradation until informative features begin to be removed at 75%. This correctly shows that this
estimator has ranked feature importance poorly (ranked uninformative features as most important).
Finally, we consider ROAR performance given a set of variables that are completely redundant. We
note that ROAR might not decrease until all of them are removed. To account for this we measure
ROAR at different levels of degradation, with the expectation that across this interval we would be
able to detect inﬂection points in performance that would indicate a set of redundant features. If this
happens, we believe that it could be detected easily by the sharp decrease as shown in Fig. 2. Now
that we have validated ROAR in a controlled setup, we can move on to our large scale experiments.
4