Figure 2: A comparison between not retraining and ROAR on artiﬁcial data. In the case where the
model is not retrained, test-set accuracy quickly erodes despite the worst case ranking of redundant
features as most important. This incorrectly evaluates a completely incorrect feature ranking as being
informative. ROAR is far better at identifying this worst case estimator, showing no degradation until
the features which are informative are removed at 75%. This plot also shows the limitation of ROAR,
an accuracy decrease might not happen until a complete set of fully redundant features is removed.
To account for this we measure ROAR at different levels of degradation, with the expectation that
across this interval we would be able to control for performance given a set of redundant features.
4 Large scale experiments
4.1 Estimators under consideration
Our evaluation is constrained to a subset of estimators of feature importance. We selected these
based on the availability of open source code, consistent guidelines on how to apply them and the
ease of implementation given a ResNet-50 architecture [ 16]. Due to the breadth of the experimental
setup it was not possible to include additional methods. However, we welcome the opportunity to
consider additional estimators in the future, and in order to make it easy to apply ROAR to additional
estimators we have open sourced our code https://bit.ly/2ttLLZB . Below, we brieﬂy introduce
each of the methods we evaluate.
Base estimators are estimators that compute a single estimate of importance (as opposed to ensemble
methods). While we note that guided backprop and integrated gradients are examples of signal
and attribution methods respectively, the performance of these estimators should not be considered
representative of other methods, which should be evaluated separately.
•Gradients or Sensitivity heatmaps [33, 6] (GRAD) are the gradient of the output activa-
tion of interest Al
nwith respect to xi:
e=∂Al
n
∂xi
•Guided Backprop [36] (GB) is an example of a signal method that aim to visualize the input
patterns that cause the neuron activation Al
nin higher layers [ 36,39,19]. GB computes this
by using a modiﬁed backpropagation step that stops the ﬂow of gradients when less than
zero at a ReLu gate.
•Integrated Gradients [37] (IG) is an example of an attribution method which assign impor-
tance to input features by decomposing the output activation Al
ninto contributions from
the individual input features [ 5,37,22,31,19]. Integrated gradients interpolate a set of
estimates for values between a non-informative reference point x0to the actual input x.
This integral can be approximated by summing a set of kpoints at small intervals between
x0andx:
e= (xi−x0
i)×k/summationdisplay
i=1∂fw(x0+i
k(x−x0))
∂xi×1
k
The ﬁnal estimate ewill depend upon both the choice of kand the reference point x0. As
suggested by [37], we use a black image as the reference point and set kto be25.
5