pixels estimated to be most important with a ﬁxed uninformative value. This modiﬁcation (shown in
Fig. 1) is repeated for each image in both the training and test set. To measure the change to model
behavior after the removal of these input features, we separately train new models on the modiﬁed
dataset such that train and test data comes from a similar distribution. More accurate estimators
will identify as important input pixels whose subsequent removal causes the sharpest degradation in
accuracy. We also compare each method performance to a random assignment of importance and a
sobel edge ﬁlter [ 35]. Both of these control variants produce rankings that are independent of the
properties of the model we aim to interpret. Given that these methods do not depend upon the model,
the performance of these variants respresent a lower bound of accuracy that a interpretability method
could be expected to achieve. In particular, a random baseline allows us to answer the question: is the
interpretability method more accurate than a random guess as to which features are important? In
Section 3 we will elaborate on the motivation and the limitations of ROAR.
We applied ROAR in a broad set of experiments across three large scale, open source image datasets:
ImageNet [10], Food 101 [8] and Birdsnap [7]. In our experiments we show the following.
•Training performance is quite robust to removing input features. For example, after randomly
replacing 90% of all ImageNet input features, we can still train a model that achieves
63.53±0.13(average across 5independent runs). This implies that a small subset of
features are sufﬁcient for the actual decision making. Our observation is consistent across
datasets.
•The base methods we evaluate are no better or on par with a random estimate at ﬁnding
the core set of informative features. However, we show that SmoothGrad-Squared (an
unpublished variant of Classic SmoothGrad [ 34]) and Vargrad [ 2], methods which ensemble
a set of estimates produced by basic methods, far outperform both the underlying method
and a random guess. These results are consistent across datasets and methods.
•Not all ensemble estimators improve performance. Classic SmoothGrad [ 34] is worse than
a single estimate despite being more computationally intensive.
2 Related Work
Interpretability research is diverse, and many different approaches are used to gain intuition about the
function implemented by a neural network. For example, one can distill or constrain a model into
a functional form that is considered more interpretable [ 4,12,38,28]. Other methods explore the
role of neurons or activations in hidden layers of the network [ 24,26,23,42], while others use high
level concepts to explain prediction results [ 17]. Finally there are also the input feature importance
estimators that we evaluate in this work. These methods estimate the importance of an input feature
for a speciﬁed output activation.
While there is no clear way to measure “correctness”, comparing the relative merit of different
estimators is often based upon human studies [ 30,27,21] which interrogate whether the ranking is
meaningful to a human. Recently, there have been efforts to evaluate whether interpretability methods
areboth reliable and meaningful to human. For example, in [ 18] a unit test for interpretability
methods is proposed which detects whether the explanation can be manipulated by factors that are
not affecting the decision making process. Another approach considers a set of sanity checks that
measure the change to an estimate as parameters in a model or dataset labels are randomized [ 2].
Closely related to this manuscript are the modiﬁcation-based evaluation measures proposed originally
by [29] with subsequent variations [ 19,25]. In this line of work, one replaces the inputs estimated
to be most important with a value considered meaningless to the task. These methods measure the
subsequent degradation to the trained model at inference time. Recursive feature elimination methods
[15] are a greedy search where the algorithm is trained on an iteratively altered subset of features.
Recursive feature elimination does not scale to high dimensional datasets (one would have to retrain
removing one pixel at a time) and unlike our work is a method to estimate feature importance (rather
than evaluate different existing interpretability methods).
To the best of our knowledge, unlike prior modiﬁcation based evaluation measures, our benchmark
requires retraining the model from random initialization on the modiﬁed dataset rather than re-scoring
the modiﬁed image at inference time. Without this step, we argue that one cannot decouple whether
the model’s degradation in performance is due to artifacts introduced by the value used to replace
2