Figure 1: A single ImageNet image modiﬁed according to the ROAR framework. The fraction of
pixels estimated to be most important by each interpretability method is replaced with the mean.
Above each image, we include the average test-set accuracy for 5 ResNet-50 models independently
trained on the modiﬁed dataset. From left to right : base estimators (gradient heatmap (GRAD),
Integrated Gradients (IG), Guided Backprop (GB)), derivative approaches that ensemble a set of
estimates (SmoothGrad Integrated Gradients (SG-SQ-IG), SmoothGrad-Squared Integrated Gradients
(SG-SQ-IG), VarGrad Integrated Gradients (Var-IG)) and control variants (random modiﬁcation
(Random) and a sobel edge ﬁlter (Sobel)). This image is best visualized in digital format.
the pixels that are removed or due to the approximate accuracy of the estimator. Our work considers
several large scale datasets, whereas all previous evaluations have involved a far smaller subset of
data [3, 29].
3 ROAR: Remove And Retrain
To evaluate a feature importance estimate using ROAR, we sort the input dimensions according to the
estimated importance. We compute an estimate eof feature importance for every input in the training
and test set. We rank each einto an ordered set {eo
i}N
i=1. For the top tfraction of this ordered set, we
replace the corresponding pixels in the raw image with the per channel mean. We generate new train
and test datasets at different degradation levels t= [0.,10,...,100] (wheretis a percentage of all
features modiﬁed). Afterwards the model is re-trained from random initialization on the new dataset
and evaluated on the new test data.
Of course, because re-training can result in slightly different models, it is essential to repeat the
training process multiple times to ensure that the variance in accuracy is low. To control for this, we
repeat training 5times for each interpretabiity method eand level of degradation t. We introduce the
methodology and motivation for ROAR in the context of linear models and deep neural networks.
However, we note that the properties of ROAR differ given an algorithm that explicitly uses feature
selection (e.g. L1 regularization or any mechanism which limits the features available to the model at
inference time). In this case one should of course mask the inputs that are known to be ignored by
the model, before re-training. This will prevent them from being used after re-training, which could
otherwise corrupt the ROAR metric. For the remainder of this paper, we focus on the performance of
ROAR given deep neural networks and linear models which do not present this limitation.
3