SmoothGrad-Squared and VarGrad produce large gains in accuracy. In the right inset of Fig. 4,
we show that both VarGrad (V AR) and SmoothGrad-Squared (SG-SQ) far outperform the two control
variants. In addition, for all the interpretability methods we consider, V AR or SG-SQ far outperform
the approximate accuracy of a single estimate. However, while V AR and SG-SQ beneﬁt the accuracy
of all base estimators, the overall ranking of estimator performance differs by dataset. For ImageNet
and Food101, the best performing estimators are V AR or SG-SQ when wrapped around GRAD.
However, for the Birdsnap dataset, the most approximately accurate estimates are these ensemble
approaches wrapped around GB. This suggests that while the V AR and SG-SQ consistently improve
performance, the choice of the best underlying estimator may vary by task.
Now, why do both of these methods work so well? First, these methods are highly similar. If the
average (squared) gradient over the noisy samples is zero then V AR and SG-SQ reduce to the same
method. For many images it appears that the mean gradient is much smaller than the mean squared
gradient. This implies that the ﬁnal output should be similar. Qualitatively this seems to be the case
as well. In Fig. 1 we observe that both methods appear to remove whole objects. The other methods
removed inputs that are less concentrated but spread more widely over the image. It is important to
note that these methods were not forced to behave as such. It is emergent behavior. Understanding
why this happens and why this is beneﬁcial should be the focus of future work.
Squaring estimates The ﬁnal question we consider is why SmoothGrad-Squared SG-SQ dramatically
improves upon the performance of SmoothGrad SG despite little difference in formulation. The
only difference between the two estimates is that SG-SQ squares the estimates before averaging. We
consider the effect of only squaring estimates (no ensembling). We ﬁnd that while squaring improves
the accuracy of all estimators, the transformation does not adequately explain the large gains that we
observe when applying V ARor SG-SQ. When base estimators are squared they slightly outperform
the random baseline (all results included in the supplementary materials).
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose ROAR to evaluate the quality of input feature importance estimators.
Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that the commonly used base estimators, Gradients, Integrated Gradients and
Guided BackProp are worse or on par with a random assignment of importance. Furthermore,
certain ensemble approaches such as SmoothGrad are far more computationally intensive but do not
improve upon a single estimate (and in some cases are worse). However, we do ﬁnd that VarGrad and
SmoothGrad-Squared strongly improve the quality of these methods and far outperform a random
guess. While the low effectiveness of many methods could be seen as a negative result, we view
the remarkable effectiveness of SmoothGrad-Squared and VarGrad as important progress within the
community. Our ﬁndings are particularly pertinent for sensitive domains where the accuracy of a
explanation of model behavior is paramount. While we venture some initial consideration of why
certain ensemble methods far outperform other estimator, the divergence in performance between the
ensemble estimators is an important direction of future research.
Acknowledgments
We thank Gabriel Bender, Kevin Swersky, Andrew Ross, Douglas Eck, Jonas Kemp, Melissa Fabros,
Julius Adebayo, Simon Kornblith, Prajit Ramachandran, Niru Maheswaranathan, Gamaleldin Elsayed,
Hugo Larochelle, Varun Vasudevan for their thoughtful feedback on earlier iterations of this work. In
addition, thanks to Sally Jesmonth, Dan Nanas and Alexander Popper for institutional support and
encouragement.
References
[1]Abadi, Martín, Agarwal, Ashish, Barham, Paul, Brevdo, Eugene, Chen, Zhifeng, Citro, Craig,
Corrado, Greg S., Davis, Andy, Dean, Jeffrey, Devin, Matthieu, Ghemawat, Sanjay, Goodfellow,
Ian, Harp, Andrew, Irving, Geoffrey, Isard, Michael, Jia, Yangqing, Jozefowicz, Rafal, Kaiser,
Lukasz, Kudlur, Manjunath, Levenberg, Josh, Mané, Dandelion, Monga, Rajat, Moore, Sherry,
Murray, Derek, Olah, Chris, Schuster, Mike, Shlens, Jonathon, Steiner, Benoit, Sutskever, Ilya,
Talwar, Kunal, Tucker, Paul, Vanhoucke, Vincent, Vasudevan, Vijay, Viégas, Fernanda, Vinyals,
Oriol, Warden, Pete, Wattenberg, Martin, Wicke, Martin, Yu, Yuan, and Zheng, Xiaoqiang.
9