A Benchmark for Interpretability Methods in Deep
Neural Networks
Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Been Kim
Google Brain
shooker,dumitru,pikinder,beenkim@google.com
Abstract
We propose an empirical measure of the approximate accuracy of feature impor-
tance estimates in deep neural networks. Our results across several large-scale
image classiﬁcation datasets show that many popular interpretability methods pro-
duce estimates of feature importance that are not better than a random designation
of feature importance. Only certain ensemble based approaches—VarGrad and
SmoothGrad-Squared—outperform such a random assignment of importance. The
manner of ensembling remains critical, we show that some approaches do no better
then the underlying method but carry a far higher computational burden.
1 Introduction
In a machine learning setting, a question of great interest is estimating the inﬂuence of a given input
feature to the prediction made by a model. Understanding what features are important helps improve
our models, builds trust in the model prediction and isolates undesirable behavior. Unfortunately,
it is challenging to evaluate whether an explanation of model behavior is reliable. First, there is no
ground truth. If we knew what was important to the model, we would not need to estimate feature
importance in the ﬁrst place. Second, it is unclear which of the numerous proposed interpretability
methods that estimate feature importance one should select [ 6,5,43,30,37,33,39,36,19,22,11,
9,40,32,41,27,34,2]. Many feature importance estimators have interesting theoretical properties
e.g. preservation of relevance [ 5] or implementation invariance [ 37]. However even these methods
need to be conﬁgured correctly [ 22,37] and it has been shown that using the wrong conﬁguration
can easily render them ineffective [ 18]. For this reason, it is important that we build a framework to
empirically validate the relative merits and reliability of these methods.
A commonly used strategy is to remove the supposedly informative features from the input and
look at how the classiﬁer degrades [ 29]. This method is cheap to evaluate but comes at a signiﬁcant
drawback. Samples where a subset of the features are removed come from a different distribution
(as can be seen in Fig. 1). Therefore, this approach clearly violates one of the key assumptions
in machine learning: the training and evaluation data come from the same distribution. Without
re-training,it is unclear whether the degradation in model performance comes from the distribution
shift or because the features that were removed are truly informative [9, 11].
For this reason we decided to verify how much information can be removed in a typical dataset before
accuracy of a retrained model breaks down completely. In this experiment, we applied ResNet-50 [ 16],
one of the most commonly used models, to ImageNet. It turns out that removing information is
quite hard. With 90% of the inputs removed the network still achieves 63.53% accuracy compared to
76.68% on clean data. This implies that a strong performance degradation without re-training might
be caused by a shift in distribution instead of removal of information.
Instead, in this work we evaluate interpretability methods by verifying how the accuracy of a retrained
model degrades as features estimated to be important are removed. We term this approach ROAR ,
RemOveAndRetrain. For each feature importance estimator, ROAR replaces the fraction of the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.