4.3 Experimental results
4.3.1 Evaluating the random ranking
Comparing estimators to the random ranking allows us to answer the question: is the estimate
of importance more accurate than a random guess? It is ﬁrstly worthwhile noting that model
performance is remarkably robust to random modiﬁcation. After replacing a large portion of all
inputs with a constant value, the model not only trains but still retains most of the original predictive
power. For example, on ImageNet, when only 10% of all features are retained, the trained model
still attains 63.53% accuracy (relative to unmodiﬁed baseline of 76.68%). The ability of the model to
extract a meaningful representation from a small random fraction of inputs suggests a case where
many inputs are likely redundant. The nature of our input–an image where correlations between
pixels are expected – provides one possible readons for redundancy.
The results for our random baseline provides additional support for the need to re-train. We can
compare random ranking on ROAR vs. a traditional deletion metric [ 29], i.e. the setting where we
do not retain. These results are given in Fig. 3. Without retraining, a random modiﬁcation of 90%
degrades accuracy to 0.5%for the model that was not retrained. Keep in mind that on clean data
we achieve 76.68% accuracy. This large discrepancy illustrates that without retraining the model,
it is not possible to decouple the performance of the ranking from the degradation caused by the
modiﬁcation itself.
4.3.2 Evaluating Base Estimators
Now that we have established the baselines, we can start evaluating the base estimators: GB,
IG, G RAD. Surprisingly, the left inset of Fig. 4 shows that these estimators consistently perform
worse than the random assignment of feature importance across all datasets and for all thresholds
t= [0.1,0.3,0.5,0.7,0.9]. Furthermore, our estimators fall further behind the accuracy of random
guess as a larger fraction tof inputs is modiﬁed. The gap is widest when t= 0.9.
Our base estimators also do not compare favorably to the performance of a sobel edge ﬁlter S OBEL .
Both the sobel ﬁlter and the random ranking have formulations that are entirely independent of the
model parameters. All the base estimators that we consider have formulations that depend upon the
trained model weights, and thus we would expect them to have a clear advantage in outperforming
the control variants. However, across all datasets and thresholds t, the base estimators GB, IG, G RAD
perform on par or worse than S OBEL .
Base estimators perform within a very narrow range. Despite the very different formulations of base
estimators that we consider, the difference between the performance of the base estimators is in a
strikingly narrow range. For example, as can be seen in the left column of Fig. 4, for Birdsnap, the
difference in accuracy between the best and worst base estimator at t= 90% is only4.22%. This
range remains narrow for both Food101 and ImageNet, with a gap of 5.17% and3.62respectively.
Our base estimator results are remarkably consistent results across datasets, methods and for all
fractions of tconsidered. The variance is very low across independent runs for all datasets and
estimators. The maximum variance observed for ImageNet was a variance of 1.32% using SG-SQ-
GRAD at 70% of inputs removed. On Birdsnap the highest variance was 0.12% using VAR-GRAD
at90% removed. For food101 it was 1.52% using SG-SQ-GRAD at 70% removed.
Finally, we compare performance of the base estimators using ROAR re-training vs. a traditional
deletion metric [ 29], again the setting where we do not retain. In Fig. 3 we see a behavior for the
base estimators on all datasets that is similar to the behavior of the inverse (worst possible) ranking
on the toy data in Fig. 2. The base estimators appear to be working when we do not retrain, but they
are clearly not better than the random baseline when evaluated using ROAR. This provides additional
support for the need to re-train.
4.3.3 Evaluating Ensemble Approaches
Since the base estimators do not appear to perform well, we move on to ensemble estimators.
Ensemble approaches inevitably carry a higher computational approach, as the methodology requires
the aggregation of a set of individual estimates. However, these methods are often preferred by humans
because they appear to produce “less noisy” explanations. However, there is limited theoretical
understanding of what these methods are actually doing or how this is related to the accuracy of the
7