IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2022 9
Fig. 7. ROC Curve for the SIRST dataset. It’s worth noting that the IPI ROC
result is poor enough to be displayed.
obtained better detection results, which is consistent with the
quantitative results in Table III. Speciﬁcally, the proposed
method yielded optimal visual results, particularly for tightly
connected multiple objects (see the blue circles in the third
and fourth row of Fig. 6). But for ACM and MDvsFA-cGAN,
their visual results show adhesion or pixel loss (as shown in the
second and third-column in Fig. 6). Especially for MDvsFA-
cGAN, which is trained by a small dataset (SIRST), the visual
results are even worse than the model-based PSTNN method.
E. Results and Analysis on the Synthetic Data
Similarly, the quantitative detection performance on the
synthetic datasets are listed in Table IV, and the corresponding
visualization results are shown in Fig. 8.
In addition, we have added an experiment to verify whether
UIU-Net is overly dependent on the size of the dataset.
To answer this question, two sub-experiments are designed.
Speciﬁcally, 1) large-scale infrared training dataset: 6;200
images in the conﬁguration I am chosen and trained after
manually removing the ”poor” images. Here, the ”poor”
images are those that have null values or negative values
after pre-processing. 2) small-scale infrared training dataset:
500 images in 1) are randomly selected and reconstructed
into a small sample data. similar to the SIRST data, the
ﬁnal detection output is the smallest outer rectangle of the
optimal segmentation result, and the quantitative metrics for
the comparing methods are IoU, nIoU, and ROC curves.
1) Quantitative Comparison. To begin, we have given the
longitudinal comparison between datasets. Compared to the
real SIRST dataset as train data, the quantitative results for
the synthetic dataset in Table IV has demonstrated the worse
IoU and nIoU value. There are two main reasons for this:
1) resolution gap: the synthetic dataset has a resolution of
128128, which is lower than the SIRST dataset. Feature
distinction and context representation ability are limited due
to the lower image resolution. 2) reference labeling: the
object labeling range in the synthetic data was erroneouslyinﬂated, and this labeling way is especially unfriendly to
the quantitative evaluation of pixel-based methods. But the
referenced labeling in the SIRST data is more closely matched
to the real objects.
Secondly, we have shown a data volume comparison. The
ratio of large-scale to small-scale samples in the synthetic
dataset is 12 : 1 . Although the IoU and nIoU for the proposed
UIU-Nets have been decreased by about 4%, they are still
optimal. Furthermore, the results from the both two small-
scale datasets, including SIRST and small-scale synthetic data,
show that UIU-Net is robust for small-scale data. It also
indirectly indicates that UIU-Net is extremely friendly to
practical applications.
Finally, the ROC curves for the above-comparison ap-
proaches are shown in Fig. 10, the proposed method still
performs the best. Unfortunately, due to the complicated
background and object variability, as well as insufﬁcient image
quality, none of the model-driven methods can be exhibited
within the coordinate range. The detection performance of the
MDvsFA-cGAN with underﬁtting for a small sample dataset is
equally dismal. This emphasizes how important data volume
and model ﬁt are in data-driven methods.
2) Visual Comparison. For the visualization results in Fig.
8, the proposed UIU-Net has the highest similarity with the
reference label for the object indicated in the blue rectangular
box. However, as shown in the fourth line of Fig. 8, some
images have some missing detection even though the accuracy
is assured. For other data-driven methods, the ACM output
objects introduced erroneous bounds in comparison to its
reference label. Due to the inaccuracy of the reference labels,
MDvsFA-cGAN is unable to adequately balance the false
alarm rate and missed alert rate, even with large-scale samples
(as seen in the sixth column of Fig. 8). For the model-
driven methods, PSTNN achieves a rough object location, and
MGDWIE has a higher missed detection, false detection, and
lower accuracy.
F . Generalization Analysis
This section employs the detection model trained with
SIRST true infrared small objects to verify the generalization
capability of UIU-Net. It primarily consists of two parts of
experiments.
1) Synthetic data: As the same with section IV-E, 100
test images have been selected to verify the generalization
capability of UIU-Net, as shown in Table V. It shows that
the quantitative results of UIU-Net trained by 408SIRST data
exceed the model trained by 500 synthetic data, although being
lower than the results of training by 6;200synthetic data. In
addition, it exceeds the other compared methods in Table IV,
no matter 6;200or500trained data.
2) ATR Sequential Data: Due to the shortages of public
single-frame infrared small object datasets, we employ ATR
sequential data as the test data to verify the generalization
capability of UIU-Net. This inspired a question: how does the
proposed UIU-Net perform in terms of the video sequence
dataset? We sample data2, data6, and data7 segments for
visualization validation due to the limits of the center point