IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2022 4
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Object Segmentation
Image segmentation is a pixel-level classiﬁcation problem
that involves dense image prediction. The explosion of convo-
lutional neural networks (CNN) makes the image segmentation
mission transform from patch classiﬁcation [33], fully con-
volutional networks (FCN) [34], encoder-decoder framework
[35] to dilated/atrous framework [36]. Subsequently, new
semantic segmentation-based infrared small object detection
networks, including ACM [30], ALCNet [31], DNIM [32],
have begun arriving. This network’s detection performance
has improved tremendously compared to model-based and DL-
based detection methods. However, these methods mostly rely
on classiﬁcation backbone networks with a typical downsam-
pling scheme. Even novel down-sampling schemes updated
by some researchers [37], [38], the local and global contrast
information of the infrared small object has still been ignored.
Different from the above works, we design a multi-scale
depth supervision structure to resolve the conﬂict between
feature resolution and network depth, resulting in improved
global and local context representation, as well as improved
ﬁnal detection performance.
B. Attention Mechanism
The attention mechanism was ﬁrst proposed in the ﬁeld of
computer vision. Deepmind, a division of Google, created an
attention mechanism for image classiﬁcation in 2014 , allowing
neural networks to pay more attention to relevant input regions
while generating prediction missions. Subsequently, several
types of research on attention mechanisms [39]–[43] have
also been proposed and widely used in many ﬁelds, including
image classiﬁcation [40], [41], semantic segmentation [40],
object detection [42], and more, with good results. These
attention mechanisms embedded in general networks (e.g.,
classiﬁcation backbone) are not suited for detecting infrared
small objects because small-sized objects are frequently miss-
ing in deep semantic feature maps.
Different from previous works, the proposed interactive-
cross attention can ﬁrst encode pixel-based local contex-
tual features that enhance the detail information of infrared
small objects, and the encoded features are derived from
a resolution-maintaining deep supervision network that can
learn multi-scale and global features. The discriminability
of infrared small objects and backgrounds can be greatly
improved by this integration.
III. M ETHODS
In this section, we brieﬂy review the simple but effective
U-Net network for semantic segmentation and give a detailed
discussion of the proposed UIU-Net. Fig. 3 illustrates the
overall network architecture of UIU-Net. UIU-Net begins with
a resolution-maintenance deep supervision (RM-DS) network
to learn deep multi-scale features while improving global
context representation and then feeds them to the interactive-
cross attention (IC-A) module to further encode object local
context information. The IC-A module can also implement a
seamless connection with the MD-DS network.A. Network Overview
Review of U-Net Framework. To begin, we brieﬂy review
the classical U-Net, which was initially developed for semantic
segmentation, especially medical image segmentation. U-Net
performs multi-scale prediction and provides ﬁner segmenta-
tion features. The low-resolution feature map after multiple
downsampling in the encoder stage could obtain the global
semantic information of the segmented object. Skip connection
in the decoder stage ensures the ﬁnal reconstructed feature
map merges more low-level features and also blends multi-
scale features. However, multiple downsampling deteriorates
feature resolution and object contrast, which yielded a very
negative effect on infrared small object detection.
Network Overview. To address the above problem, and
ensure the detection performance of the infrared small objects.
In this paper, we have proposed an interactive-cross attention-
nested U-Net network with training from scratch, called U-Net
in U-Net (UIU-Net). UIU-Net is not depending on a classic
classiﬁcation backbone network and is ideal for infrared
small object detection. It begins with a resolution-maintenance
deep supervision module that learns deep multi-scale features
while improving global feature representation. The resolution
maintenance here refers speciﬁcally to the feature learned
throughout each stage of the encoder-decoder network. After
that, the learned features from each stage are then fed into the
interactive-cross attention module, which encodes objects’ lo-
cal features to increase the distinguishability ability of infrared
small objects. Finally, the multiple intermediate supervision
and the last layer are weighted and merged by minimizing a
typical cross-entropy loss.
B. Resolution-maintenance Deep Supervision (RM-DS) Mod-
ule.
Infrared images typically lack higher contrast due to their
own imaging condition, resulting in a very low distinguisha-
bility between the object and background. This, coupled with
the small size of the objects in the image, makes it difﬁcult to
precisely locate infrared small objects with a typical DL-based
detection network or backbone-based segmentation network.
In this section, we introduce a RM-DS network to overcome
the above dilemma. RM-DS network is built on the base of
U-Net. Multiple intermediate layers are utilized instead of just
the last layer to obtain complete and distinguishable features,
yielding better detection results. The output Oof RM-DS
network is deﬁned as
O=KX
k=0(Fk); (1)
whereFkdenotes the k-th layer feature, and Ois the ﬁnal
output of RM-DS network. ()denotessigmoid activation
function.
In order to trade off the network depth and the feature reso-
lution, the ReSidual U-blocks (RSU) module [44] is introduced
as the backbone network. The detailed structure is illustrated
in Fig. 4. RSU module is a type of U-Net. The difference is
that: 1) the RSU module takes intermediate feature maps rather