IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2022 1
UIU-Net: U-Net in U-Net for Infrared Small Object
Detection
Xin Wu, Member, IEEE, Danfeng Hong, Senior Member, IEEE, Jocelyn Chanussot, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —This is the pre-acceptance version, to read the ﬁnal
version please go to IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
on IEEE Xplore. Learning-based infrared small object detection
methods currently rely heavily on the classiﬁcation backbone
network. This tends to result in tiny object loss and feature
distinguishability limitations as the network depth increases.
Furthermore, small objects in infrared images are frequently
emerged bright and dark, posing severe demands for obtaining
precise object contrast information. For this reason, we in
this paper propose a simple and effective “U-Net in U-Net”
framework, UIU-Net for short, and detect small objects in
infrared images. As the name suggests, UIU-Net embeds a tiny U-
Net into a larger U-Net backbone, enabling the multi-level and
multi-scale representation learning of objects. Moreover, UIU-
Net can be trained from scratch, and the learned features can
enhance global and local contrast information effectively. More
speciﬁcally, the UIU-Net model is divided into two modules:
the resolution-maintenance deep supervision (RM-DS) module
and the interactive-cross attention (IC-A) module. RM-DS in-
tegrates Residual U-blocks into a deep supervision network to
generate deep multi-scale resolution-maintenance features while
learning global context information. Further, IC-A encodes the
local context information between the low-level details and
high-level semantic features. Extensive experiments conducted
on two infrared single-frame image datasets, i.e., SIRST and
Synthetic datasets, show the effectiveness and superiority of the
proposed UIU-Net in comparison with several state-of-the-art
infrared small object detection methods. The proposed UIU-
Net also produces powerful generalization performance for video
sequence infrared small object datasets, e.g., ATR ground/air
video sequence dataset. The codes of this work are available
openly at https://github.com/danfenghong/IEEE TIP UIU-Net.
Index Terms —Infrared small object, deep learning, deep multi-
scale feature, attention mechanism, local and global context
information, feature interaction.
I. I NTRODUCTION
INFRARED sensors [1] are widely used in civil and military
applications [2] since it is insensitive to the environment,
illumination, occlusion, and other conditions. Infrared object
detection mainly includes generic object detection (e.g., vehi-
cle detection, pedestrian detection [3] and re-identiﬁcation [4])
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62101045 and Grant 42271350. This work was also
supported by the MIAI@Grenoble Alpes (ANR-19-P3IA-0003) and the AXA
Research Fund. ( Corresponding author: Danfeng Hong. )
X. Wu is with the School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software
Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing 100876, China. (e-mail: xin.wu@bupt.edu.cn)
D. Hong is with the Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China. (e-mail: hongdf@aircas.ac.cn)
J. Chanussot is with the Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP,
GIPSA-Lab, 38000 Grenoble, France, also with the Aerospace Information
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China.
(e-mail: jocelyn@hi.is)
Fig. 1. The visual difference between traditional infrared object detection and
infrared small object detection.
and small object detection [5]. The visual difference between
them has been shown in Fig. 1. Different from the generic
objects, infrared images with small object acquisition often
come from a far distance, and the size of objects usually
covers less than 3030pixels. This inevitably occurs in rescue
and security missions, such as long-range maritime rescue
missions of people or ships, black-ﬂying drones, or airborne
ﬂoating objects. Not only are these objects in small size, but
they are often submerged in complex backgrounds, and lack
color and texture information, making detection challenging.
At present, there are two active research ﬁelds for infrared
small object detection: single frame image object detection and
video sequence image object detection. This paper focuses on
the former.
Early common methods for single-frame infrared small
object detection are model-based methods. It can be sum-
marized as a ﬁlter-based method, human vision system-based
method, and low-rank-based method. Among them, the ﬁlter-
based method is just for single and uniform scenes [6].
The human vision system-based method is perfectly adequate
for the object luminance is relatively large and presents a
more obvious difference with the surrounding background,
e.g., infrared patch image (IPI) [7], local contrast mechanism
(LCM) [8], and multi-scale patch-based contrast measure
(MPCM) [9]. The low-rank-based method, including local
low-rank [10] and non-local low-rank [5], is clearly appli-
cable to almost all kinds of complex and rapidly changing
backgrounds, but in practice it requires acceleration by GPUs,
etc., to make it meet the real-time needs. Recently, many new
model-based methods have been developed, such as multi-
scale gray difference weighted image entropy (MGDWIE)arXiv:2212.00968v1  [cs.CV]  2 Dec 2022