Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1763
explained via the training examples most similar to the most inﬂuential prototypes.
SEDC (Martens and Provost 2014 ) is a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer able
to provide counterfactual instances for documents. The approach proposed is basedon a best-ﬁrst search with pruning. The idea is that, given the words in the document,
the algorithm tries to predict the label by removing a single word at a time: if the
prediction changes, then it is added as an explanation. Then, also the combinations ofwords are considered. CAT, Contrastive Attributed explanations for Text (Chemmen-
gath et al. 2022 ) is a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer for NLP which returns
contrastive explanations through a data twist that guarantees semantically meaningfulexplanations. In particular, cat rely on a minimal perturbation approach regularized
using a BERT language model (Hoover et al. 2019 ) and an attribute classiﬁer trained
on available attributes on the text. POLYJUICE (Wu et al. 2021a ) is a local, post-hoc,
model-agnostic counterfactual generator that returns a set of realistic textual counter-
factuals that can be employed for explanation purposes. In particular, it accounts for
returning counterfactuals that are grammatically correct besides being minimal andrealistic. The generation makes use of a ﬁll-in-the-blank structure to specify where
the perturbation occurs and control codes like negation, delete, insert, shufﬂe, etc., to
specify how it occurs. GYC, Generate Your Counterfactuals (Madaan et al. 2021 ), is
a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic framework to generate diverse counterfactual texts
for testing automated decision-making systems. gyc returns plausible, diverse, goal-
oriented, and effective explanations through an approach based on constraints that can
be speciﬁed to guide the generation w.r.t. custom deﬁned class labels, name-entities,
topics, etc. Like polyjuice , also this approach is not speciﬁcally designed for XAI, but
it can be easily used for interpretability purposes. XSPELLS (Lampridis et al. 2020 )i s
a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer returning exemplars and counterexamples
sentences. In practice, it re-implements abele for text data by using LSTM layers in
the autoencoder. Exemplars and counter-exemplars are selected using rules extracted
from the decision tree learned in the latent space.
Prototype and counterfactual explainers comparison Counterfactuals and proto-
types explanations for text are very difﬁcult to generate. cat and sedc alter single
words to change the prediction of the model; the former is more advanced, substituting
words with an NLP model to make correct sentences. However, as seen previously,changing a single word hardly alters the meaning of the sentence and, therefore, the
black-box prediction. gyc and polyjuice are interactive tools in which human inter-
vention is needed, so they can be used for explanation purposes. xspell is the most
automatic approach, which seems to be also the best one among the others, but it
suffers from the same limitations of abele . The only prototype explanation method
we identiﬁed for text is prototex .
Prototype and Counterfactual explanations are very difﬁcult to generate for text
data due to the meaning of the sentences. Interactive methods such as polyjuice
and gyc are promising approaches that introduce the human cognitive process
that helps in the process of counterfactual generation.
123