Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1733
on the kind of explanation methods exploited. The majority of the explainers are
post-hoc and local, even if there are examples of methods that also provide global
explanations, allowing an in-depth analysis of the overall behavior of the machinelearning model ( shap ,dalex and ciu). Some explainers, such as lime and all its vari-
ants, create a synthetic neighborhood set used to train a surrogate model and extract
the features’ importance from it. These methods are suitable for context in which theexplanation is online, since they are very efﬁcient, as they use randomization tech-
niques and surrogate models that are very simple and quick to train. As a weak point,
the randomicity and the simplicity of the surrogate models may not best representthe data space under analysis. On the other hand, explainers that do not require the
creation of a surrogate model but are based on some mathematical procedure, such as
game theory for shap , the decomposition of predictions exploiting local gradients for
dalex , or Monte Carlo simulations for ciumight require a longer computational time
w.r.t. lime -like approaches. In addition, their internal workings may be difﬁcult to
understand, shifting the difﬁculty from understanding the machine learning model tounderstanding how the explanation method works. Among feature importance-based
explainers, model-speciﬁc explainers, such as nam and CoFrNets , are tailored for
explaining neural networks and aim at approximating the activation functions. Over-
all, these explanation methods are fast, except for the model-agnostic variants of shap
and dalex , because they might require a greater computing time due to their differ-
ent approximations. Unfortunately, the output provided by these explainers is usually
quite difﬁcult to understand for non-experts since there are several variables, and the
plots provided are usually non-self-explanatory. As an example, we can think of shap :
in the plots in output, each feature importance is given by the output value, the base
value, and, depending on the kind of explanator exploited, one or more arrays of feature
importance.
Feature importance explainers, due to their complexity in the understating of the
explanation, may be better suited for domain experts who know the meaning ofthe features employed, while they may be too difﬁcult for ordinary end-users,
especially when obtaining such importance values is complex.
5.2 Rule-based explanation
Decision rules give the end-user an explanation about the reasons that lead to the ﬁnal
prediction. A decision rule r, also called factual orlogic rule (Guidotti et al. 2019a ), has
the form p→y, in which pis a premise, composed of a Boolean condition on feature
values, while yis the consequence of the rule. In particular, pis a conjunction of split
conditions of the form x
i∈[v(l)
i,v(u)
i], where xiis a feature and v(l)
i,v(u)
iare lower and
upper bound values in the domain of xiextended with ±∞ . An instance x satisﬁes r ,
orr covers x , if every Boolean conditions of pevaluate to true for x. If the instance x
to explain satisﬁes p,t h er u l e p→yrepresents then a candidate explanation of the
decision g(x)=y. Moreover, if the interpretable predictor mimics the behavior of the
black-box in the neighborhood of x, we further conclude that the rule is a candidate
local explanation of b(x)=g(x)=y. We highlight that, in the context of rules, we
can also ﬁnd the so-called counterfactual rules (Guidotti et al. 2019a ). Counterfactual
123