Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1769
used methods but also among the most unstable, with lime much less stable than shap .
We observed that local explainers using surrogate models like lime suffer from a lack of
stability due to the high level of randomness in the neighborhood generation approach.The solid theoretical background of shap accounts for more faithful explanations. The
explanations returned by lime and shap are based on (individual) features importance,
an approach that is often hardly understandable, especially for tabular data. As a recenttrend, rule-based explanations and counterfactual explanations are gaining attention
since their logic formalization supports a deeper understanding of the model’s internal
decisions. Unfortunately, metrics to compare such types of models are still missingin the literature. For image data, there is a very wide variety of methods that provide
explanations through different implementations of saliency maps. According to our
experiments, the best approach is the masking method introduced by rise. Gradient
methods like intgrad ,/epsilon1-l r p and deeplift are very close runners-up in our ranking,
while segmentation methods like lime and xrai produce less convincing results.
Concept Attribution methods are extremely promising but also hard to validate, asthey require additional knowledge about involved concepts. Prototypes and counter-
exemplars have received increasing attention in recent years but suffer from a lack
of a validation framework and are difﬁcult to use in speciﬁc contexts of application.
Finally, we noticed that there are very limited explanation techniques for text data.
One of the pioneers is Sentence Highlight, that, similarly to feature importance fortabular data, gives weight to the portion of the input that contributed, positively or
negatively, to the outcome. This strategy, customized for text data, is not mature yet.
Across the different data types, different approaches tend to use similar strategies.
This is also evident if we look at the internals of these algorithms. For exam-
ple, several methods exploit the generation of a synthetic neighborhood around an
instance to reconstruct the local distribution of data around the point to investigate.This approach is prevalent when trying to produce counterfactual images. Another
widespread approach is to use the gradients of the black-box, if available. The best
results are obtained by combining the use of the gradients with a masking methodology.
In recent years the contributions in the Explainable AI area have constantly been
growing, particularly explainers for machine learning models and, to a minor extent,
novel explainable-by-design methods. To date, limited attention is devoted to the com-
parison of the explainers proposed, mostly using measures of the intrinsic, standalone
quality of an explainer, such as the metrics considered in this paper. A more holistic
validation approach is needed, that brings the user into the picture to assess whether aproposed explanation is meaningful to the user’s purpose and whether the interaction
with the AI system increases the user’s trust. This emerging approach requires the care-
ful design of user studies that evaluate the combined human-AI ecosystem, considering
the cognitive model of the user. As an early example along this line, a user study on
XAI-assisted clinical decision-making revealed that XAI-based advice yields higher(expert) user trust, compared to an AI-based advise (without explanation) (Panigutti
et al. 2022 ). Experiments like this also typically reveal the dissatisfaction of users
with the proposed explanation interface, a crucial aspect that suggests how AI-assisteddecision-making systems should be co-designed in a synergistic process where all rel-
evant stakeholders are involved from the beginning. While some preliminary results
are emerging (Guidotti 2021 ; Jeyakumar et al. 2020 ; Hase and Bansal 2020 ), there
123