Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1761
Sentence highlighting explainers comparison The SM-based explainers for images
can be applied to text with minor modiﬁcations, which is why it turns out to be the most
popular type of explanation also for textual data. As said for explanations on imagesin Sect. 6, these low feature explanations are helpful to check the model’s robustness,
not to give a valuable understanding for the ﬁnal inexpert user. In addition, removing
a single word from a sentence is typically not a good measure of the goodness ofan explanation since the sentence might lose its meaning. Among the methods tried,
intgrad is the fastest and most reliable due to its use of the gradients of the black-
box. deeplift also uses the gradients, but its calculation method fails and returns
an explanation very similar to the baseline, as reported in Fig. 14.lime is the only
model-agnostic method; however, NLP models tend to be very deep and are generally
gradient-based. Thus, lime results in being very slow, and its performance is clearly
inferior to gradient-based methods.
Methods that use gradients such as intgrad perform better on the textual data
since very deep ML models are usually implemented in the NLP ﬁeld.
7.2 Attention-based explainers
Attention was ﬁrst proposed for images in (Xu et al. 2015 ) to improve the model
performance. The authors managed to show through an attention layer which parts
of the image most contributed to realize the caption. Formally, the attention layer
is indeed a layer to put on top of the model that, for each word, ijof the sentence x
generates a positive weight α
ij, i.e., the attention weight. This value can be interpreted
as the probability that a word ijis in the right place to focus on producing the next word
in the caption. Attention mechanisms allow models to look over all the informationthe original sentence holds and learn the context (Wu and Ong 2021 ; Bahdanau et al.
2015 ). Therefore, it has caught the interest of XAI researchers, who started using
these weights as an explanation. The explanation eof the instance xis composed
of the attention values ( α), one for each feature x
i. Attention is nowadays a delicate
argument, and while it is clear that it augments the performance of models, it is less
clear if it helps gain interpretability and the relationship with model outputs (Jainand Wallace 2019 ). Attention Based Heatmap (Li et al. 2016 ) is a local, intrinsic,
model-speciﬁc explainer based on the attention mechanism. It produces a heatmap
explanation similar to the one used for SMs by using the weights of the black-box. Itcan only be applied to attention-based methods, such as BERT, in which the weights
α
ijof the attention layers are used as a score for every word in the sentence. The
higher the score, the more important the word; therefore, the redder the heatmap.
Attention Matrix (Cheng et al. 2016 ) looks at the dependencies between words for
producing explanations. It is a self-attention method, sometimes called intra-attention .
attention matrix relates different positions of a single sequence to compute its
internal representation. The attention of a sentence xcomposed of Nwords can be
understood as an N×Nmatrix, where each row and columns represent a word in
the input sentence. The values of the matrix are the attention values of every possible
combination of the tokens. This matrix is a representation of values pointing from each
word to every other word (Vaswani et al. 2017 )( s e eF i g . 15). We can also visualize
123