1740 F. Bodria et al.
considers x1=x+δ, where δis a perturbation applied to x.cem is formulated
as an optimization problem over the perturbation variable δ. C-CHV AE (Pawelczyk
et al. 2020 ) is a local model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that accounts for plausi-
bility when generating counterfactuals. Indeed, the loss function optimized controls
that counterfactuals are not local outliers and that are close to correctly classiﬁed
observations. Moreover, this method can generate counterfactuals without requiring adistance function for the input space at the cost of using a Variational AutoEncoder.
DICE, Diverse Counterfactual Explanations (Mothilal et al. 2020 ) is a model-agnostic
post-hoc explainer that solves an optimization problem with constraints to account forplausibility anddiversity evaluated through distance functions. Plausibility avoids the
generation of unfeasible counterfactuals, while diversity provides different ways of
changing the outcome class. FACE, Feasible and Actionable Counterfactual Expla-nations (Poyiadzi et al. 2020 ) is a model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that focuses on
returning actionable counterfactuals, i.e., records coherent with the input data distribu-
tion. In particular, face uncovers “feasible paths” for generating counterfactuals, i.e.,
the shortest path deﬁned via density-weighted metrics starting from the input instance.
Finally, it uses a shortest path algorithm to ﬁnd all the records that satisfy the require-
ments. CFX (Albini et al. 2020 ) is a model-speciﬁc post-hoc explainer for Bayesian
Network Classiﬁers. The explanations are built from relations of inﬂuence between
variables, indicating the reasons for the classiﬁcation. In particular, this method’s mainachievement is that it can ﬁnd pivotal factors for the classiﬁcation task that, if removed,
would lead to a different classiﬁcation.
Counterfactual-based explanations are gaining attention during the past few years
due to their ability to suggest what to do to achieve a different outcome w.r.t. the
one predicted by the black-box. There are several characteristics to consider in a
counterfactual, such as plausibility, which requires the explanations to be feasible,and actionability, so that the counterfactual can not suggest changing the values of
unfeasible variables, such as age or sex. Satisfying these characteristics is of utmost
importance because otherwise, the counterfactuals obtained may not be applicable orunderstandable by the end user. For example, a counterfactual might require chang-
ing age or height, factors that cannot be changed, thus making the counterfactual
unfeasible. Among the methods proposed, c- chvae deals with the plausibility of the
counterfactuals proposed, and face tackles both the plausibility and the actionability.
The majority of the algorithms proposed solves an optimization problem based on a
distance function and some perturbation of the original data ( cem,wach ,c- chvae )
and only a few methods exploit different approaches, such as V AE, as c- chvae .M o s t
of the proposed methods are local and post-hoc, with cfxand cem speciﬁcally designed
for certain models, while the others are agnostic. Among the methods proposed, cem
is a promising solution since it provides both prototypes and counterfactuals, allowing
for an in-depth analysis, such as mmd- critic and lore .
Counterfactuals-based explanations allow the users to understand what to do
to achieve a different outcome. This kind of reasoning is close to how human
reason, hence it is becoming quite popular. To make counterfactuals as realistic
as possible, they must meet criteria such as plausibility and actionability.
123