1724 F. Bodria et al.
TABULAR IMAGE TEXT TIME SERIES GRAPHS
Feature Importance (FI)
A vector containing a value
for each feature. Each value
indicates the importance of
the feature for the
classiﬁcation.Saliency Maps (SM)
A map that highlights the
contribution of each pixel at
the prediction.Sentence Highlighting
(SH)
A map that highlights the
contribution of each word to
the prediction.Series Highlighting
A score for every point in
the series, which highlights
the contribution to the
prediction.Node Highlighting
A score for every node in
the graph which highlights
the contribution of that
node to the prediction.
Rule-Based (RB)
A set of premises that the
record must satisfy in order
to meet the rule’s
consequence.
r=E d u c a t i o n ≤
College →≤ 50kConcept Attribution
(CA)
Compute attribution to a
target “concept” given by
the user. For example, how
sensitive is the output (a
prediction of zebra) to a
concept (the presence of
stripes)?Attention Based (AB)
This type of explanation
gives a matrix of scores
which reveals how the words
in the sentence are related
to each other.Attention Based
This type of explanation
gives a matrix of scores that
reveal how the points in the
series are related to each
other.Edge Highlighting
A score for every edge in
the graph which highlights
the contribution of edges to
the prediction.
Prototypes (PR)
The user is provided with a series of examples that characterize a class of the black box
p=A g e ∈[35,60],
Education ∈
[College ,Master ]→“≥50k”p=→
“cat”p= “... not bad ...” →
“positive”Graph Prototypes
Identifying which part of
the graph has inﬂuenced
the prediction
Counterfactuals (CF)
The user is provided with a series of examples similar to the input query but with diﬀerent class prediction
q=Education ≤College →
“≤50k”
c=Education ≥Master →
“≥50k”q= →“3”
c= →“8”q= The movie is not bad
→“positive”
c= The movie is that bad
→“negative”
Fig. 1 Explanation-based taxonomy with examples divided for different data types
Fig. 2 Existing taxonomy for the classiﬁcation of explanation methods
Gilpin et al. 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Samek et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 ) in order
to provide the reader a complete overview of the proposed explanation-based cate-
gorization of explanation methods. In the following, we summarize the fundamental
distinctions adopted to annotate the methods in Fig. 2:
–INtrinsically (IN) explainable methods are explainable by design methods that
return a decision, and the reasons for the decision are directly accessible becausethe model is transparent.
–Post-Hoc (PH) explanation methods provides explanations for a black-box model.
–Global (G) explanation methods aim at explaining the overall logic of a black-box
model. Therefore the explanation returned is a global, complete explanation valid
for any instance;
–Local (L) explainers aim at explaining the reasons for the decision of a black-box
model for a speciﬁc instance.
–Model-Agnostic (A) explanation methods can be used to interpret any type of
black-box model;
–Model-Speciﬁc (S) explanation methods that can be used to interpret only a speciﬁc
type of black-box model.
123