1750 F. Bodria et al.
of the image in order of decreasing importance. CXPlain (Schwab and Karlen 2019 )
frames the task of providing explanations as a causal learning task. It trains a causal
explainer that learns to estimate to what degree certain inputs cause outputs in anothermodel.
RISE (Petsiuk et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer for image
data. To produce a SM for an image x,rise generate Nrandom mask M
i∈[0,1]from
Gaussian noise. The input xis element-wise multiplied with these masks Mi, and the
result is fed to the base model. The SM is obtained as a linear combination of the masks
Miwith the predictions from the black-box corresponding to the respective masked
inputs. The intuition behind this is that b(x⊙Mi)is high when pixels preserved by
mask Miare essential.
Saliency maps-based explainers comparison Saliency Maps (SM) are the most
diffused explanations for images. The literature presents a multitude of explainers that
are capable of producing such a type of explanation. As seen in Fig. 7,lime can lead
to useless SM for mnist andcifar as it segments the images in superpixels big as
the whole image in some cases. On the other hand, those produced by xrai are much
more clear. lime computes the segmentation at the very beginning of the algorithm
on the raw images. Thus, for low-resolution images, segmentation algorithms are
more difﬁcult to calibrate. xrai instead ﬁrstly compute intgrad values and then
agglomerate them using segmentation. This result seems to be much clearer, evenwith very small images. In general, we observe that segmentation methods work best
for high-resolution images where the concept of the image can be easily separated.
For instance, in the SM of the “seashore” image produced by xrai is very clear how
the method selected three parts of the image: the horizon, the sea, and the promontory.
Since pixel wise-methods produce SMs in terms of single pixels, which are low-level
features, they are useful only for an expert user who wants to check the robustnessof the black-box. Overall, we deduce that SMs returned by the segmentation methods
are more human-friendly than the ones returned by pixel-wise methods.
Pixel based explainers like deep- shap ,grad- shap ,deeplift ,intgrad , and/epsilon1-
lrp, typically return very similar results. deeplift and/epsilon1-l r p return similar results,
probably due to their similarity in the computation of the SM values. However,
deeplift is model-agnostic, while /epsilon1-l r p is model-speciﬁc, and it needs adjustments
for nonstandard neural networks. In conclusion, deeplift result to be the best com-
petitor. grad- cam ,grad- cam++ , and rise return SMs that could resemble those
returned by segmentation-based explainers. This is due to the fact that scores of theseexplainers are computed on smaller layers with lower resolution and then interpolated
on the original data resolution. grad- cam++ produces better images than grad-
cam due to the usage of the second order derivative. Another problem with SMs is
the conﬁrmation bias, i.e., a user can hardly realize if a SM is a good explanation or
only shows what the user wants to see (Adebayo et al. 2018 ).smoothgrad and most
guided methods that use the target label to alter the SM suffer from this bias, moving
the salient values from the background to the subject.
Analyzing the images by dataset: in cifar we notice that all the methods highlight
the background of the images in particular in the “deer” class. This result is a problem
in the learning phase of the black-box and should not be referred to as problems of
the explainers. On the other hand, for imagenet , we observe very different SMs.
123