1736 F. Bodria et al.
and Shavlik 1995 ) is a model-speciﬁc global explainer tailored for neural networks.
Given a neural network b,trepan generates a decision tree gthat approximates the
network by maximizing the gain ratio and the model ﬁdelity. In particular, to leverageabstraction, trepan adopts n-of-m decision rules on which only nout of mconditions
must be satisﬁed in order to ﬁre the rule. DecText is a global model-speciﬁc explainer
tailored for neural networks (Boz 2002 ).dectext resembles trepan with the differ-
ence that it considers four different splitting methods. Moreover, it also considers a
pruning strategy based on ﬁdelity to reduce the ﬁnal explanation tree’s size. In this
way, dectext can maximize the ﬁdelity while keeping the model simple. Both trepan
and dectext are presented as model-speciﬁc explainers, but they can be practically
employed to explain any black-box as they do not use any internal information of neural
networks. MSFT (Chipman et al. 1998 ) is a global, post-hoc, model-speciﬁc explainer
for random forests that returns a decision tree. msft is based on the observation that,
even if random forests contain hundreds of different trees, they are quite similar, dif-
fering only for a few nodes. Hence, it adopts dissimilarity metrics to summarize therandom forest trees using a clustering method. Then, for each cluster, an archetype is
retrieved as an explanation. CMM, Combined Multiple Model procedure (Domingos
1998 ), is another global, post-hoc, model-speciﬁc explainer for tree ensembles. The
key point of cmm is the data enrichment. Given an input dataset X,cmm ﬁrst modiﬁes
itntimes. On the nvariants of the dataset, it learns a black-box. Random records are
generated and labeled using a bagging strategy on the black-boxes. The authors were
able to increase the size of the dataset to build the ﬁnal decision tree. STA, Single
Tree Approximation (Zhou and Hooker 2016 ), is another global, post-hoc, model-
speciﬁc explainer tailored for random forests. In sta, the decision tree is constructed
by exploiting test hypothesis on the trees in the forest to ﬁnd the best splits.
The explainers proposed are tailored for a speciﬁc machine learning model: trepan
and DecText explain neural networks, while cmm and sta are tailored for random
forests and msft is for any ensemble method. Among them, some explainers exploit an
enrichment of the data to improve the extraction of the tree ( cmm ,trepan ,DecText ),
while the others exploit the training dataset by applying some strategies based on
dissimilarity metrics ( msft ) or test hypothesis ( sta). Among the different methods,
only DecText and trepan apply some strategies with the goal of maximizing the
model ﬁdelity, even if they are tailored for small feed-forward neural networks. The
exploitation of trees to explain the global behavior of a more complex machine learning
model have several beneﬁts, such as fast computation and a simple process to extractexplanations based on transparent strategies. However, the trees extracted may be
very deep, making the explanation model difﬁcult to understand even in cases of
simple datasets. Furthermore, the effectiveness of such explanations for very deepfeed forward networks has not been judged yet.
Global tree-based explainers produce a transparent model allowing the under-
standing of the general behavior of the black-box. Depending on the complexity
of the tree, the actual ease of understanding of the explanation could be affected
by this.
Global rule-based explainers In this section, we present global explainers that do
not extract decision trees as a global interpretable model but as lists or sets of rules. The
123