1744 F. Bodria et al.
Table 5 continued
Type Name References Data type IN/PH G/L A/S
CF l2x Chen et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L A
cem Dhurandhar et al. ( 2018 )I M G P HL A
guided proto Looveren and Klaise ( 2021 )I M G P H L A
abele Guidotti et al. ( 2020a )I M G P H L A
piece Kenny and Keane ( 2021 )I M G P H L S
sedc Vermeire et al. ( 2022 )I M G P H L A
ecinn Hvilshøj et al. ( 2021 )I M G P H L A
PR mmd- critic Kim et al. ( 2016 ) ANY IN G A
influence functions K o ha n dL i a n g( 2017 ) ANY PH L A
protopnet Chen et al. ( 2019 )I M G I N G S
prototree Nauta et al. ( 2021 )I M G I N G S
deformable protopnet Donnelly et al. ( 2022 )I M G I N G S
For every method is indicated if it is possible to use it for images (IMG) only or for ANY type of data, if it
is an Intrinsic (IN) or a Post-Hoc (PH) model, Local (L) or Global (G), and if it is model-Agnostic (A) ormodel-Speciﬁc (S)
linear layers, while for imagenet , we decided to use the VGG16 network (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2015 ).
6.1 Saliency maps
ASaliency Map (SM) is an image in which a pixel’s brightness represents how salient
the pixel is. Formally, a SM is modeled as a matrix S, which dimensions are the
sizes of the image for which we want to explain a decision, and the values sijare the
saliency values of the pixels ij. The greater the value of sij, the bigger the saliency
of that pixel. To visualize a SM, divergent color maps are typically used with colors
ranging, for instance, from red to blue. A positive value (red) means that the pixel
ijhas contributed positively to the classiﬁcation, while a negative one (blue) means
that it has contributed negatively. Examples of SM are reported in Fig. 7. There are
two big families of methods for creating SMs. The ﬁrst one assigns to every pixel a
saliency value. The second one segments the image into different pixel groups using asegmentation method, and then it assigns a saliency value for each segmented group.
We underline that, from a pure interpretability perspective, SMs are the correspondent
of FI for images. Indeed, as shown in the following, data-agnostic approaches that can
be used for extracting FI explanations on tabular data can also be used for extracting
SM on images.
LIME is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer (already presented in Sect. 5)
that can also be used to retrieve SM for image classiﬁers. In particular, lime returns
segmentation-based SM where each segment is called superpixel . After the input
image segmentation, lime adopts a one-hot vector representation of the image where
the input image is a vector composed of mones if mis the number of segments
identiﬁed. Then, it creates the synthetic neighborhood by randomly substituting the
123