1730 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 3 TOP :lime application on the same record for adult (a/b), german (c/d): a/c are the LG model
explanation and b/d the CAT model explanation. All the models correctly predicted the output class. BOT-
TOM : Force plot returned by shap explaining XGB on two records of adult : (e), labeled as class 1
(>50K) and, (f), labeled as class 0 ( ≤50K). Only the features that contributed more (i.e. higher values)
to the classiﬁcation are reported
three properties: (i) local accuracy , meaning that g(x)matches b(x); (ii) missingness ,
which allows for features xi=0 to have no attributed impact on the shap values; (iii)
stability , meaning that if a model changes so that the marginal contribution of a feature
value increases (or stays the same), the shap value also increases (or stays the same).
The construction of the shap values allow to employ them both locally , in which each
observation gets its own set of shap values, and globally , by exploiting collective
shap values. We highlight that shap can be realized through different explanation
models that differ in how they approximate the computation of the shap values. In
particular, there are ﬁve strategies: KernelExplainer is the model-agnostic one, while
LinearExplainer ,TreeExplainer ,GradientExplainer , and DeepExplainer are model-
speciﬁc. Besides, similarly to lime ,shap can be used on other data types. We applied
LinearExplainer to LG, TreeExplainer to XGB, and KernelExplainer to CAT. In Fig. 3
(lower part), we report the application of shap onadult through the force plot
showing each feature contributes to push the output value away from the base value,
which is an average among the training dataset’s output values. The red features are
pushing the output value higher, while the ones in blue are pushing it lower. For eachfeature, it is reported the actual value for the record under analysis. Only the features
with the highest shap values are shown in this plot. In the ﬁrst force plot, the features
that are pushing the value higher are contributing more to the output value: from a base
value of 0 .18, it is reached an actual output value of 0 .79. In the force plot on the right,
the output value is 0 .0, and Age,Relationship , and Hours Per Week are contributing to
pushing it lower. Figure 4(left and center) depicts the shap values through a decision
plots : the contribution of all the features are reported in decreasing order of importance.
The line represents the feature importance for the record under analysis, and it startsat its actual output value. In the ﬁrst plot, predicted as >50k,Occupation is the
most important feature, followed by Age andRelationship . For the second plot, Age,
Relationship , and Hours Per Week
are the most important ones. shap also offers a
123