Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1755
Fig. 12 Explanation on mnist .acem: input on the center PN left and PP right. bguidedproto : left to
right, input, the closest counterfactuals labeled as 6, and 8. cabele : on the left the input query and on the
right the counterfactual with 8 as target class
as the counterfactual explanation on mnist . However, from a human perspective, this
approach might seem much more adversarial than useful for an explanation (Guidotti
2022 ). An extension of CEM to resolve this problem is presented in (Luss et al. 2021 ),
where the authors leverage the usage of latent features created by a generative modelto produce more trustful perturbations. L2X (Chen et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc
model-agnostic explanation method that searches for the minimal number of pixels
that change the classiﬁcation. It is based on learning a function for extracting a subsetof the most informative features for each given sample using Mutual Information.
l2x adopts a variational approximation to efﬁciently compute the Mutual Informa-
tion and gives a value for a group of pixels called patches . If the value is positive,
a group contributed positively to the prediction. Otherwise, it contributed negatively.
Guided Prototypes, Interpretable Counterfactual Explanations Guided by Prototypes(guidedproto ) (Looveren and Klaise 2021 ) proposes a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc
explainer that perturbs the input image by using a loss function L=cL
pred+βL1+L2
optimized using gradient descent. The ﬁrst term, cLpred, encourages the perturbed
instance to predict another class then x, while the others are regularisation terms.
In Fig. 12, we show the application of guidedproto onmnist . It is interesting to
notice that the counterfactuals unveil how easy it is to change the class with very fewpixels. However, this kind of explanation is not easily human understandable because
the few pixels modiﬁed can barely be noticed by human eyes. ABELE, Adversarial
black-box Explainer generating Latent Exemplars) (Guidotti et al. 2019b ), is a local
post-hoc model-agnostic explainer that produces explanations composed of: (i) a set
of exemplars and counter-exemplar images, i.e., prototypes and counterfactuals, and
(ii) a SM. abele exploits an adversarial autoencoder (AAE) to generate the synthetic
images used in the neighborhood to train the surrogate model used to explain x. Indeed,
it builds a latent local decision tree that mimics the behavior of band selects prototypes
and counterfactuals from the synthetic neighborhood exploiting the tree. Finally, theSM is obtained by a pixel-by-pixel difference between xand the exemplars. In Fig. 12,
we report an example of the application of abele onmnist .
Counterfactual-based explainers comparison The goal of counterfactual explainers
is to produce examples similar to the input but with a different predicted class. They are
more intuitive than the other types of explanations because counterfactual thinking istypical from the human cognitive point of view. There is a wide offer of counterfactual
explainers (Guidotti 2022 ), and it is difﬁcult to deﬁne which counterfactual explainer
is better than the others for the image domain. If the priority is the execution time,then cem is the fastest method. Methods such as abele and guided prototypes
create more realistic counterfactuals but require training additional models such as
autoencoders which are notoriously difﬁcult to train (Doersch 2016 ).
123