1752 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 10 tcav scores for three concepts: ice, Hockey player, and cheering people (fans) for the class puck
ofimagenet . On the left is the query image; on the center, some samples of the image tested in tcav as
concepts, and on the right is the histogram of the scores with errors. The hockey players has been classiﬁed
as apuck , but the SMs are very different alongside methods. In the histogram on the left, it is possible to see
that the iceand the hockey players are important concepts, while the background fans are not signiﬁcant
which the concepts are tested. Inputs containing concepts and random inputs are fed
into the black-box to obtain predictions that will be used by tcav to test the ability of
the machine learning model to capture a particular concept. Then, a linear classiﬁer
is trained to distinguish the activation of the network due to concept-containing vs.
random inputs. The result of this training is concept activation vectors (CAVs) . Once
CA Vs are deﬁned, the directional derivative of the class probability along CA Vs canbe computed for each instance that belongs to a class. The “concept importance” for a
class is computed as a fraction of the class instances that get positively activated by the
concept containing inputs vs. random inputs. In Fig. 10, we report an example of tcav
explanation. We remark that to obtain this explanation, the user must collect concepts
like “ice”, “hockey player” and “fans”. Then tcav computes the scores unveiling
which one has more impact on the prediction.
Several extensions of tcav are present in the literature. ACE, Automated Concept-
based Explanation (Ghorbani et al. 2019 ), is the evolution of tcav , and it does not
require concepts in input as it can automatically discover them. A set of images fromthe same class is segmented with multiple resolutions resulting in a pool of segments
all coming from the same class. Then the activation space of one bottleneck layer of a
CNN classiﬁer is used as a similarity space. After that, similar segments are clusteredin the activation space, and, for each concept, its tcav importance score is computed
given its examples segments. ConceptSHAP (Yeh et al. 2020 ) is an evolution of SHAP
which tries to deﬁne an importance score for each concept discovered. conceptshap
ﬁnds the importance of each individual concept from a set of mconcept vectors
C
s={c1,c2,..., cm}by utilizing Shapley values. Similar to ace,conceptshap
aims at having concepts clustered to certain coherent spatial regions. CaCE, Causal
Concept Effect (Goyal et al. 2019 ) is another variation of tcav that looks at the causal
effect of the presence or absence of high-level concepts on the black-box prediction.Indeed, tcav can suffer from confounding concepts that could happen if the training
data instances have multiple classes, even with a low correlation. PACE (Kamakshi
et al. 2021 ) is a variation of ace that introduce the use of the black-box for identifying
concepts by automatically extracting small sub-regions of the image, called concepts,
relevant to the black-box prediction. In (Shen et al. 2021 ) is presented ICNN, an
interpretable method to modify traditional CNNs into interpretable CNN . In an inter-
123