Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1767
reasonable choice of Nis the number of layers in the GNNs. Then a nonlinear surrogate
model is employed to ﬁt the local neighborhood. Finally, based on the weights of
different features in the surrogate model, it selects important features to explain thepredictions. XGNN (Yuan et al. 2020a ) (eXplainable GNN) is a global, post-hoc,
model-speciﬁc explainer that proposes graph patterns as explanations to investigate
which structure in the graph maximizes a speciﬁc prediction. Speciﬁcally, they traineda graph generator to generate small graphs, which pattern can be used to explain GNN
behavior. The graph generator uses reinforcement learning that starts from an empty
graph and, at each step, determines how to add an edge or node and form a new graph.This graph generator is trained based on feedback from trained graph models using a
policy gradient algorithm. CF-GNNExplainer (Lucic et al. 2022 ) is a local, post-hoc,
model-speciﬁc explainer for GNNs. It aims at ﬁnding the minimal perturbation to thegraph such that the prediction changes. In particular, cf- gnnexplainer iteratively
removes edges from the original adjacency matrix based on a matrix sparsiﬁcation
technique, keeping track of the perturbations that lead to a change in prediction andreturning the perturbation with the smallest change w.r.t. the number of edges. For
more information on explaining black-box models for graphs, we remand the reader
to the following survey (Prado-Romero et al. 2022 ; Yuan et al. 2020c ).
GNN explainers comparison GNN models are becoming more and more com-
mon in literature (Wu et al. 2021b ), and due to their similarity to neural networks,
researchers are trying to adapt existing methods to this type of black-box. graphlime
and graphlrp) are two perfect examples of that, the former adapting lime while the
latter /epsilon1-l r p . Both methods return scores for nodes, but graphlime does not output
a score for the edges features as it totally ignores the graph structure, which is more
critical for graph data. xgnn and cf- gnnexplainer are more aimed at counterfac-
tual explanations. xgnn returns more robust counterfactuals due to the reinforcement
learning policy; however, it is much slower than cf- gnnexplainer for the same
reason.
9 Explanation toolboxes
A signiﬁcant number of toolboxes for ML explanation have been proposed during the
last few years. In the following, we report the most popular Python toolkits with abrief description of the explanation models they provide.
21
AIX360 (Arya et al. 2019 ) contains both intrinsic, post-hoc, local, and global
explainers, and it can be used with every kind of input dataset. Regarding local post-hocexplanations, different methods are implemented, such as lime (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ),
shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),cem (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ),cem- maf (Luss et al.
2019 ) and protodash (Gurumoorthy et al. 2019 )). Another interesting method pro-
posed in this toolkit is ted(Hind et al. 2019 ;D a s he ta l . 2018 ), which provides intrinsic
local explanations and provides global explanations based on rules. CaptumAI is a
21AIX360: https://github.com/Trusted-AI/AIX360 , CaptumAI: https://captum.ai/ , InterpretML: https://
github.com/interpretml/interpret , Alibi https://github.com/SeldonIO/alibi , FAT-Forensics: https://github.
com/fat-forensics/fat-forensics , What-If Tool: https://github.com/pair-code/what-if-tool , Shapash: https://
github.com/MAIF/shapash .
123