1754 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 11 Prototypes (left) and criticisms (right) returned by mmd- critic oncifar
back to its training data, thereby identifying training points most responsible for a
given prediction. Visualizing the training points most responsible for a prediction canbe useful for more in-depth insights into the black-box behavior. PROTOPNET (Chen
et al. 2019 ) is a global interpretable model for image data that aims at identifying
prototypical parts of images (named prototypes) and using them to implement an
interpretable classiﬁcation process. A special deep learning architecture is designed
to retrieve these prototypes. The network learns a limited number of prototypical partsfrom the training set and then identiﬁes parts on the test image that look like the pro-
totypical parts. Then, it predicts based on a weighted combination of the similarity
scores between parts of the image and the learned prototypes.
Prototype-based explainers comparison Prototype explanations are not widespread
as explanations for image classiﬁers. The explainers presented have very different
approaches: mmd- critic use the Maximum Mean Discrepancy measure to select the
prototype set, protopnet instead used part of the image as prototypes. mmd- critic
is faster than protopnet but the explanations provided are more obscure.
Explanation prototypes are not very common for images because the usefulness
of such explanations is not clear.
6.4 Counterfactual-based explanations
In parallel with prototypes, also counterfactuals are another widely adopted form of
explanation for images. In this setting, counterfactual explainers for images produce
images similar to the input image but with a different prediction from the black-
box under analysis. Therefore, also in this case, counterfactual methods are post-hocexplainers. Similarly to SM, we can distinguish between counterfactual explainers
altering single pixels against those altering the whole image or part of it. CEM, Con-
trastive Explanation Method ( cem) (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ), already presented in
Sect. 5, is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc counterfactual explainer that can also be
applied on image data. In this setting, Pertinent Positives (PP) or Pertinent Negatives(PN) are the pixels that lead to the same or a different class w.r.t. the original instance.
To create PP’s and PN’s, feature-wise perturbation is done by keeping the pertur-
bations sparse and close to the original instance through an objective function thatcontains an elastic net βL
1+L2regularizer and also consider an auto-encoder trained
to reconstruct images of the training set. As a result, the perturbed instance lies close
to the training data manifold. In Fig. 12, we can see that very few pixels are obtained
123