Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1729
the value of |ei|, the greater its contribution. Hence, when ei=0, it means that the
ithfeature is showing no contribution to the output decision. An example of a feature
based explanation is e={age=0.8,income =0.0,education =− 0.2},y=deny .
In this case, age is the most important feature for the decision deny ,income is not
affecting the outcome, and education has a small negative contribution.
LIME , Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ), is a
local model-agnostic explainer that returns explanations as feature importance vectors.
The main idea of lime is that the explanation may be derived locally from records gen-
erated randomly in the neighborhood of the instance that has to be explained. The keyfactor is that it samples instances both in the vicinity of x(which have a high weight)
and far away from x(low weight), exploiting π
x, a proximity measure able to capture
the locality. We denote bas the black-box and xas the instance we want to explain.
To learn the local behavior of b,lime draws samples weighted by πx. It samples these
instances around xby drawing nonzero elements of xuniformly at random. This gives
tolime a perturbed sample of instances {z∈Rd}to fed to the model band obtain b(z).
They are then used to train the explanation model g(·): a sparse linear model on the
perturbed samples. The local feature importance explanation consists of the weights
of the linear model. A number of papers focus on overcoming the limitations of lime ,
providing several variants of it. dlime (Zafar and Khan 2019 ) is a deterministic ver-
sion in which the neighbors are selected from the training data by an agglomerativehierarchical clustering. ilime (ElShawi et al. 2019 ) randomly generates the synthetic
neighborhood using weighted instances. alime (Shankaranarayana and Runje 2019 )
runs the random data generation only once at “training time”. kl- lime (Peltola
2018 ) adopts a Kullback–Leibler divergence to explain Bayesian predictive models.
qlime ( B r a m h a l le ta l . 2020 ) also consider nonlinear relationships using a quadratic
approximation. As presented in the following, lime can also be used on other data
types. In Fig. 3(upper part) are reported examples of lime
12explanations relative to
our experimentation on adult (a/b) and german (c/d).13We predicted the same
record using LG and CAT, and then we explained it. Interestingly, for adult (plots
a/b), lime considers a similar set of features as important (even if with different values
of importance) for the two models: on 6 features, only one differs. A different scenario
is obtained applying lime ongerman (plots c/d): different features are considered
important by the two classiﬁers. However, the conﬁdence of the prediction between
the two classiﬁers is quite different: both of them predict the output correctly, but CAT
has a higher value, suggesting that this could be the cause of differences between thetwo explanations.
SHAP , SHapley Additive exPlanations (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ), is a local model-
agnostic explanation method computing features importance by means of Shapley
values,
14a concept from cooperative game theory. The explanations returned by shap
areadditive feature attributions and respect the following deﬁnition: g(z/prime)=φ0+/summationtextM
i=1φiz/prime
i, where z/prime≈xas a real number, z/prime∈[0,1],φi∈Rare effects assigned
to each feature, while Mis the number of simpliﬁed input features. shap retains
12We refer to the original version of lime .
13For reproducibility reasons, we ﬁxed the random seed.
14We refer the interested reader to: https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/shapley.html .
123