1756 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 13 Example of insertion (left) and deletion (right) scores performed for the SM returned by lime .T h e
area under the curve is 0.215 for deletion and 0.594 for insertion
Counterfactual explanations are more user-friendly than prototypes and other
forms of explanations because they highlight the changes to make to obtain the
desired prediction.
6.5 Image explainers quantitative comparison
To quantitatively investigate the performance of the SM explainers analyzed, we com-
puted the deletion and the insertion metric, presented in Sect. 4. For the computation
of the deletion metric, we substitute with black pixels the original pixels in increasing
order of importance w.r.t. the scores given by the SM. On the other hand, for the inser-
tionmetric, we blur the whole image with a Gaussian Kernel, and then we slowly insert
highly salient pixels w.r.t the SM. For every substitution, we query the black-box with
the image, and we measure the performance. The ﬁnal score is obtained by taking thearea under the curve (AUC) (Hand and Till 2001 ) as a function of the percentage of
pixels removed/inserted. In Fig. 13, we show an example of these metrics computed
on an image of imagenet . Table 6reports the average results of the calculation
of these metrics for a set of 100 randomly selected images for every dataset. Inde-
pendently from the explainer adopted, we notice that insertion scores decrease while
augmenting the dataset dimensions because we have higher information and morepixels have to be inserted to increase the performance. On the other hand, the deletion
scores decrease. This might be tied to the fact that since we have more information, it
is easier to decrease the performance. The best explainers are highlighted in bold. Wenotice that rise is the best approach overall, followed by intgrad ,deeplift , and/epsilon1-
lrp. We notice that all these approaches are pixel-wise-based methods. Thus it seems
that this kind of evaluation can be advantageous for these explainers. On the contrary,
the segmentation-based explainers lime and xrai struggle in general and even more
when handling low-resolution images.
Table 7shows the runtime for the image explainers experimented with. For
imagenet , we only tested SMs methods due to the increasing computational costs
of the other explainers. On the contrary, we tested tcav only on imagenet astcav
needs to obtain different images representing different concepts, and this is difﬁcult
to do for very simple images like the one in mnist andcifar . From the results,
we notice that grad- cam and grad- cam++ are the fastest methods, especially for
123