Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1765
queried the text to the black-box, obtaining accuracy. The ﬁnal score is obtained by
taking the area under the curve (AUC) (Hand and Till 2001 ) of accuracy as a function of
the percentage of removed words. The results are shown in Fig. 14. We notice that the
highlighted words are very different among the various methods. intgrad and lime
are the ones who return more meaningful explanations, while deeplift struggles a lot
to diversify from the baseline. We also measured the deletion/insertion and reported
the results in Table 9. For both metrics, we have very poor performance among all
the methods. However, this metric is not ideal with text since removing a single word
barely changes the meaning of the sentence. On the other hand, concerning runtime,NLP models are usually very deep and large, resulting in poor performance in terms of
runtime. In particular lime is the slowest since it queries the black-box for prediction
multiple times. deeplift and intgrad are faster since they operate on the gradients
of the black-box. Finally, AB methods are instant since they only need to extract the
weights and do not need to perform any operation.
8 Explainers for other data types
As detailed in this survey, the state-of-the-art is mainly focusing on the explanation of
black-box trained on tabular data, images, and texts. However, other types of data arelargely available, and many models are built on top of them. In this section, we shortly
summarize some explainers, which are pillars for the explanations of black-boxes
trained for time series and graph classiﬁcation.
8.1 Explanations for time series
Due to the tremendous amount of data generated by sensors over time, there is a
widespread diffusion of ML models working on time series (Theissler 2017 ). A time
series x ={t
1,t2,..., tm}∈ Rm×dis an ordered set of mreal-valued observations (or
time steps), with dimensionality d. We say that a time series is univariate when d=1,
while when d>1, we name xamultivariate time series . There are areas such as the
medical or ﬁnancial ﬁeld where temporal data is of particular importance and whereblack-box ML models are applied to provide support on decision-making for various
tasks. For this reason, recently, we have been assisting with the emerging proposal for
explainability related to time series (Theissler et al. 2022 ).
Many explainers for time series can be categorized with the taxonomy introduced in
Sect. 3. The most important difference with the other types of data relies on the type of
explanation produced. Shapelet is the most characteristic explanation for time series
data. They are time series subsequences that are maximally representative of a class.
Shapelets are more interpretable, faster, and more accurate than k-Nearest Neighbors(kNN) (Cover and Hart 1967 ), which is a traditional approach to perform time series
classiﬁcation (Lee et al. 2012 ). As usual, SMs can be used to highlight which part
of the series has contributed the most to the classiﬁcation. Finally, also the attentionmethods illustrated for text in Sect. 7.2can also be applied to time series data. In the
following, we brieﬂy illustrate some peculiar explainers for time series classiﬁcation.
123