1720 F. Bodria et al.
Keywords Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence ·Interpretable machine learning ·
Transparent models ·Benchmarking
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has become one of the most important scientiﬁc and tech-
nological areas, with a tremendous socio-economic impact in many aspects of modern
society. The impressive performance of AI systems is often reached by adopting
sophisticated Machine Learning (ML) models, whose complexity hides the logic of
their internal processes (Miller 2019 ). For this reason, such models are referred to as
“black-box models” (Freitas 2013 ; Pasquale 2015 ). Well-known examples of black-
box models used within current AI systems include deep learning models and ensemble
models such as bagging and boosting (Guidotti et al. 2019c ). The high performance
of such models in terms of accuracy comes together with a high degree of opaqueness
that might cause developers and users to overlook issues that the models may inherit
by training data due to different forms of hidden biases (Kurenkov 2020 ).
There is an inherent risk that relying on opaque models may lead to adopting
decisions that we do not fully understand or, even worse, violate ethical principles
or legal norms. These risks are particularly relevant in high-stakes decision-makingscenarios, such as medicine, justice, ﬁnance, recruitment, access to public beneﬁts, and
so on (Rudin 2019 ); the lack of transparency and trust may explain the relatively low
adoption rate of current AI-based decision support systems in the mentioned areas.Moreover, companies that embed black-box ML models in their AI products and
applications risk incurring a potential loss of safety and trust (Chouldechova 2017 ).
In 2018, the European Parliament introduced in the GDPR
1a set of clauses for auto-
mated decision-making in terms of a right of explanation for all individuals to obtain
“meaningful explanations of the logic involved” when automated decision making
takes place. Also, in 2019, the High-Level Expert Group on AI presented the ethics
guidelines for trustworthy AI,2where explainability is indicated as one of the fun-
damental requirements for trustworthiness. Today, the same principle has become acornerstone of the AI Act, the proposed new EU regulation establishing standardized
rules on artiﬁcial intelligence.
3Indeed, there is a widespread and increasing consensus
on the urgency of implementing appropriate explanation tools, although it represents ascientiﬁc challenge that is still largely open. Meaningful explanations are fundamental
for debugging models, unveiling possible biases, tackling ethical issues, and fostering
trust and collaboration between humans and their AI assistants.
Unsurprisingly, as a reaction to the mentioned concerns, we have witnessed in the
last years the rise of a plethora of explanation methods for black-box models (Guidotti
et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Theissler et al. 2022 ;
Guidotti 2022 ; Yuan et al. 2020b ) both from academia and industries. eXplainable
1https://ec.europa.eu/justice/smedataprotect/ .
2https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai .
3https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-
artiﬁcial-intelligence .
123