Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1747
averaging intgrad to different baselines. A different variation of intgrad is called
Adversarial Gradient Integration (AGI) . An adversarial example of an image is the
image with a different class, most similar to the original one. AGI (Pan et al. 2021 )
integrates the gradients from adversarial examples of different classes to the target
example along the curve of the steepest ascent. The contributions from the different
examples are then summed up to obtain the ﬁnal SM. By not relying on the choice ofreferences, it is possible to reduce the sparsity of intgrad .
DEEPLIFT (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ), is local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer for
differentiable models. It computes SMs in a backward fashion, similarly to /epsilon1-l r p ,
but it uses a baseline reference like intgrad .deeplift exploits the slope, instead
of the gradients, which describes how the output y=b(x)changes as the input x
differs from a baseline x
/prime.L i k e /epsilon1-l r p , an attribution value ris assigned to each unit
iof the neural network going backward from the output y. This attribution represents
the relative effect of the unit activated at the original network input xcompared to
the activation at the baseline reference x/prime.deeplift computes the starting values
of the last layer Lby the difference between the output of the input and baseline.
Then, it uses the following recursive equation to compute the attribution values of
layer lusing the attributions of layer l+1 to obtain the values of the starting layer:
r(l)
i=/summationtext
jaji−a/prime
ji/summationtext
iaji−/summationtext
ia/prime
jir(l+1)
j,aji=w(l+1,l)
jix(l)
i,a/prime
ji=w(l+1,l)
jix/prime(l)
iwhere wl+1,l
ij
are the weights of the network between the layer land the layer l+1, and aare the
activation values. As for intgrad , picking a baseline is not trivial and might require
domain experts. From Fig. 7, we notice that the SMs obtained with deeplift are very
similar to those obtained with /epsilon1-l r p .
SMOOTHGRAD (Smilkov et al. 2017 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explana-
tion method. Since SMs tend to be noisy, especially for pixel-wise SMs, smoothgrad
tries to overcome produce less noisy SM through smoothing . Usually, a SM is created
directly on the gradient of the black-box output w.r.t. the input ∂y/∂x.smoothgrad
augments this process by smoothing the gradients with a Gaussian noise kernel. More
in detail, it takes the image x, applies Gaussian noise to it, and retrieves the SM
for every perturbed image, using the gradient. The ﬁnal SM is an average of theseperturbed SMs. Formally, given a saliency method f(x)which produces a SM s, its
smoothed version ˆfcan be expressed as: ˆf=
1
n/summationtextn
1f(x+N(0,σ2))where nis
the number of samples, and N(0,σ2)is the Gaussian noise. In (Adebayo et al. 2018 ,
2020 ), some weaknesses of smoothgrad are shown: people tend to evaluate SMs on
what they are expected to see. For example, in a bird image, we want to see the shape
of a bird. However, this does not mean that this is what the network is looking at. Fig-
ure8highlights this problem. We obtained the SMs taking the gradient of the output
w.r.t. the input, and then we used smoothgrad . We observe that the SMs completely
changed their behavior, moving in the direction of the subject.
SHAP provides two versions that can be employed for deep networks tailored for
image classiﬁcation: deep- shap and grad- shap . Therefore, even though shap is a
local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer, the deep- shap and grad- shap versions are
model-speciﬁc implementations. deep- shap is a high-speed approximation algorithm
for shap values in deep learning models that builds on a connection with deeplift .
The implementation is different from the original deeplift by using as baseline a dis-
123