Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1749
presented. Like all segmentation methods, xrai performs best when high-resolution
images are available. However, because the segmentation is performed on the values
obtained from intgrad and not on the raw image, good results are obtained even with
low-resolution images.
GRAD-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer
for image data. It uses the gradient information ﬂowing into the last convolutionallayer of a CNN to assign saliency values to each neuron for a particular decision.
Convolutional layers naturally retain spatial information in fully-connected layers,
so it assumes that the last convolutional layers have the best compromise betweenhigh-level semantics and detailed spatial information. To create the SM, grad- cam
takes the feature maps created at the last layer of the convolutional network a. Then,
it computes the gradient of an output of a particular class y
cfor every feature map
activations k, i.e., ∂yc/∂ak. This equation returns a tensor of dimensions [k,v,u]
where kis the number of features maps and uandvare the height and the width of the
image. grad- cam compute the saliency value for every feature map by pooling the
dimensions of the image. The ﬁnal heatmap is calculated as a weighted sum of these
values. This results in a coarse heatmap of the same size as the convolutional feature
maps. An up-sampling technique is applied to the ﬁnal result to produce a map of the
initial image dimension. From Fig. 7is clear that this coarse grain heatmap style is
very characteristic of grad- cam . These heat maps highlight very different parts of
the image compared to other methods.
GRAD-CAM++ (Chattopadhay et al. 2018 ) extends grad- cam solving the
following issue. The spatial footprint in an image is essential for grad- cam ’s visu-
alizations to be robust. Hence, if multiple objects have slightly different orientations
or views, different feature maps may be activated with differing spatial footprints.
The one with lesser footprints fades away in the ﬁnal sum. grad- cam++ ﬁx this
problem by taking a weighted average of the pixel-wise gradients. In particular, grad-
cam++ reformulates grad- cam by explicitly coding the structure of the weights αc
k
as:αc
k=/summationtext
i/summationtext
jwkc
ij·ReLU/parenleftBig
∂yc/∂ak
ij/parenrightBig
where ReLU is the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
activation function, and wkc
ijare the weighting co-efﬁcients for the pixel-wise gradi-
ents for class cand convolutional feature map ak. The idea is that wc
kcaptures the
importance of a particular activation map ak, and positive gradients are preferred to
indicate visual features that increase the output neuron’s activation rather than thosethat suppress it. Besides grad- cam++ , there are many variations of pixel masking
methods based on grad- cam .Score-CAM (Wang et al. 2020 ) gets rid of the depen-
dence on gradients by obtaining the weight of each activation map through its forwardpassing score on the target class, the ﬁnal result is obtained by a linear combination
of weights and activation maps. Eigen-CAM (Muhammad and Yeasin 2020 ) extracts
the importance scores by projecting the last convolutional layer into the ﬁrst eigen-
vector extracted from the same layer. The scores produced appear more uniform and
less sparse. Ablation-CAM (Desai and Ramaswamy 2020 ) uses ablation analysis, i.e.,
setting activation value to zero, to determine the importance of individual feature map
units with respect to class. Extreme Perturbation (Fong et al. 2019 ) are regions of an
image that, for a given area, maximally affect the activation of a class in the last layerof a neural network. As the perturbation area increases, the explainer reveals more
123