1732 F. Bodria et al.
occupation are the most important features that positively contributed to the prediction
for both plots. In contrast, Sexis positively important for Shapley values but negatively
important for the Breakdown plot. In this case, there are important differences in the
feature considered most important by the two methods: for the Shapley values, Age
and Relationship are the two most important features, while in the Breakdown plot
Hours Per Week is the most important one.
MAPLE (Plumb et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer that
can also be used as a transparent model due to its internal structure. It combines
random forests with feature selection methods to return feature importance basedexplanations. In particular, maple is based on SILO , employed for obtaining a local
training distribution based on the random forest leaves, and on DStump used to rank
the features by importance. maple considers the best kfeatures from DStump to solve
a weighted linear regression problem. Similarly to lime , it returns these coefﬁcients
as features explanation.
CIU , Contextual Importance and Utility (Anjomshoae et al. 2020 ) is a local, post-
hoc, model-agnostic explainer based on the idea that a feature that might be important
in a context may be irrelevant in another one. ciuexplains the model’s outcome based
on the contextual importance (CI) approximating the overall importance of a feature
in the current context, and on the contextual utility (CU) estimating how good the
current feature values are for a certain output class. CI and CU are calculated throughMonte Carlo simulations.
EBM , Explainable Boosting Machine (Nori et al. 2019 ) is an intrinsic local and
global model speciﬁc method. ebm is a variant of a Generalized Additive Model
(gam ) (Hastie and Tibshirani 1990 ), i.e., a generalized linear model that incorporates
nonlinear forms of the predictors. For each feature, ebm uses a boosting procedure to
train the generalized linear model: it cycles over the features in a round-robin fashionto train one feature function at a time and mitigate the effects of co-linearity. In this
way, the model learns the best set of feature functions, which can be exploited to
understand how each feature contributes to the ﬁnal prediction.
NAM , Neural Additive Models (Agarwal et al. 2021 ) is a local model-speciﬁc
explainer deﬁned as a variant of gam but tailored for neural networks. nam aims at
combining the performance of deep neural networks with the inherent intelligibilityofgam .nam is able to learn graphs that describe how the prediction is computed by
training multiple deep neural networks in an additive fashion such that each network
attends to a single feature.
CoFrNets Continued Fractions Nets (Puri et al. 2021 ) is similar to nam , but instead
of approximating activations using neural networks, it uses continued functions. The
output of a neuron is calculated as a continuous fraction of the previous one until it
gets to the input layer. The propriety of continued fractions to represent every possible
real number allows CoFrNets to express any possible function as in Neural Networks.On the other hand, since it is a simple fraction calculation, it is possible to compute
the contribution of each input to the ﬁnal output and produce feature importance
explanations.
Features Importance-based Explainers Comparison. Feature importance-based
explanation methods provide an importance value for each feature of the record inthe input. The importance of the features is computed in different ways, depending
123