Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1739
ones is mmd- critic because it outputs both prototypes and criticisms. In this setting,
we can also ﬁnd a novel application, namely ppe, which produces privacy-protected
prototypes, creating a link between two crucial ethical concepts: transparency andprivacy. Indeed, using prototypes as explanations, although it may be useful for end-
user understanding, may release sensitive information about the users in the training
set when the explanation method exploits the training dataset.
Prototype-based explanations allow the users to reason by similarity and differ-
ences. Most of the methods in this setting are tailored to explain the data in inputand not the black-box decisions.
5.4 Counterfactual-based explanations
Counterfactual explanations suggest what should be different in the input instance to
change the outcome of the black-box model (Wachter et al. 2017 ; Lucic et al. 2020 ),
i.e., they describe a dependency on the attributes that led to a particular decision.
Counterfactual explanations can be considered as prototypes’ opposite. Thus, also
counterfactuals are local explanations. In (Guidotti 2022 ), counterfactual explana-
tions are formalized as follows. Given a black-box model bthat outputs the decision
y=b(x)for an instance x, a counterfactual explanation consists of an instance x
/prime
such that the decision for bonx/primeis different from y, i.e., b(x/prime)/negationslash=y, and such that the
difference between xandx/primeisminimal . The different values between xand a counter-
factual x/primereveal what should have been different in xfor having a different outcome.
An ideal counterfactual is minimal because it should alter the values of the variables
as little as possible to ﬁnd the closest setting under which yis returned instead of ¬y.
Concerning counterfactual explanations, there are many properties that are desired forthis kind of explanation and for the explanation methods returning them. Examples
are validity, minimality, similarity, plausibility, discriminative power, actionability,
causality, diversity, efﬁciency, robustness, etc. (Wachter et al. 2017 ; Karimi et al.
2020a ; Kanamori et al. 2020 ). To better understand the complex context and the many
available possibilities, we refer the interested reader to (Guidotti 2022 ; Artelt and
Hammer 2019 ; Verma et al. 2020 ; Byrne and Johnson-Laird 2020 ) while we brieﬂy
present only the most representative methods in this category. W ACH (Wachter et al.
2017 ) is among the ﬁrst paper to propose a counterfactual explainer and probably the
most famous one. The loss function minimized by (Wachter et al. 2017 ) is deﬁned
asλ(b(x
/prime)−y/prime)2+d(x,x/prime)where the ﬁrst term is the quadratic distance between
the desired outcome y/primeand the classiﬁer prediction on x/prime, and the second term is the
distance dbetween xand x/prime.λbalances the contribution of the ﬁrst term against the
second term. The distance function dadopted is a crucial characteristic in any counter-
factual explainer. In (Wachter et al. 2017 ) is adopted the Manhattan distance weighted
with the inverse median absolute deviation of each feature. CEM, Contrastive Expla-
nations Method (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ), is a post-hoc and model-speciﬁc explainer
tailored for neural networks. In particular, cem can return Pertinent Positives (PP) ,
which can be seen as prototypes and are the minimal and sufﬁcient factors that have
to be present to obtain the output y; and Pertinent Negatives (PN) , which are coun-
terfactuals factors, that should be minimally and necessarily absent. Given x,cem
123