1762 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 15 Attention based heatmap matrix generated from the method presented in (Cheng et al. 2016 ). The
row and the columns of the matrix correspond to the words in the sentence: “Read the book, forget themovie!”. Each value of the matrix shows the attention weight α
ijof the annotation of the i-th word w.r.t. the
j-th
Fig. 16 Attention based representation of BERT for a sentence taken from imdb using the visualization
of (Hoover et al. 2019 ). The greater the attention between two words, the bigger the line. Here is selected
only the attention related to the word “sucks”
this matrix with a focus on the connection between words (Hoover et al. 2019 )a si n
Fig.16, where the thickness of the lines is the self-attention value between two tokens.
Attention based explainers comparison Attention is a mechanism good for improv-
ing the performance of the model but is not usable as an explanation. As described
in (Jain and Wallace 2019 ), it is unclear what relationship exists between attention
weights and model outputs. Learned attention weights are frequently uncorrelatedwith gradient-based measures of feature importance, and it is possible to identify very
different attention distributions that nonetheless yield equivalent predictions. There-
fore we might suggest focusing on other types of explanations for text data.
It is unclear if attention can be considered a valid explanation. We suggest focus-
ing on other types of explanations.
7.3 Prototype and counterfactual-based explainers
Counterfactual and prototype explanations are not very common explanations for text
data. The richness of meaning in the textual data makes it complex to generate explana-
tions since changing even a single word can deeply alter the meaning of the sentence.In this section, we report the main existing methods that attempt counterfactual or
prototype explanations for text data.
PROTOTEX (Das et al. 2022 ) is a local, intrinsic, model speciﬁc NLP classiﬁca-
tion architecture based on prototype network (Li et al. 2018 ).prototex faithfully
explains model decisions based on prototype tensors. At inference time, classiﬁcation
decisions are based on the distances between the input text and the prototype tensors,
123