Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1723
3 Explanation-based taxonomy
The goal of this survey is to provide the reader with a guide to map a problem set-
ting with a certain data type and black-box model to a set of compatible explanation
methods. Thus, in this section, we present a novel taxonomy of XAI methods based
on the type of explanation returned. To collect the papers presented in the followingsections, we opted for a semi-systematic literature review (Snyder 2019 ): (i) we con-
ducted a systematic search on Scopus using a set of XAI search terms like “explain*”
or “interpretab*” in title or abstracts; (ii) we conducted a dynamic search to uncoveradditional papers in the different subﬁelds (i.e., by collecting papers citing the once
we found with the ﬁrst search); (iii) the collected papers were analyzed by the authors
based on the number of citations, venue, and availability of an open-source library.
6
In particular, we focus our survey on explanations and explanation methods acting
on the three principal data types recognized in the literature: tabular data, images and
text(Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Miller 2019 ). For each data type,
we have distinguished different types of explanations illustrated in Fig. 1. A reader
should use Fig. 1as follows. First, she should identify through the column header
the data type of her problem setting. After that, each row offers an alternative type of
explanation with an example. For instance, if we are interested in images, we should
look to the second column. Here we can ﬁnd saliency maps and concept attribution asimage-speciﬁc explanation types. The last rows reports visualizations and examples of
prototypes and counterfactuals, i.e., instance-based explanations, which are available
independently from the data type analyzed. Finally, once the reader has selected thedesired/most-suitable explanation type on Fig. 1, she can ﬁnd in the corresponding sec-
tion an overview of the most well-known and used explanation methods able to return
that kind of explanation. For the sake of completeness, other types of data, increasinglypresent in literature, such as graphs (Yuan et al. 2020b ) and time series (Theissler et al.
2022 ), have been included in a separate section. A Table appearing at the beginning
of each subsequent section summarizes the explanation methods by grouping themaccordingly to the classiﬁcation illustrated in Fig. 1. Besides, in every section, we
present the meaning of each type of explanation. The acronyms reported in capital
letters in Fig. 1, in this section and in the following, are used in the remainder of the
work to quickly categorize the various explanations and explanation methods.
In the rest of this section, we recall the existing taxonomy and classiﬁcation of
XAI methods present in the literature (Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ;
6In particular, we adopted the following criteria. First, contributions with working implementation There
are several publications in the ﬁeld of XAI, but the majority of them do not have a working implementation.Since the goal of this survey is also to provide a quantitative comparison among different XAI methods,
the availability of an implementation is a key factor. Second, contributions with a high number of citations .
In this survey, we discuss and also present some works that do not have implementations. These works are
still considered due to the fact that they have a great number of citations (more than 150); hence, in our
opinion, they are pillars of this ﬁeld. Third, XAI pillars . We also considered some works that do not have
working implementations, but they were published several years ago with a great number of citations. For
this reason, we considered them pillars of this research ﬁeld, and we added them to the survey. Fourth,
works considering ethical aspects . Lastly, we considered works that tackle ethical aspects, such as privacy.
This choice is due to the fact that the GDPR and the AI Act are changing the focus of the works in XAI:
during the last few years, the concept of trustworthy AI is gaining a lot of interest, leading up to many worksthat consider not only the aspect of explanation, but also fairness, privacy, and accountability.
123