1768 F. Bodria et al.
library built for PyTorch models. CaptumAI divides the available algorithms into
three categories: Primary Attribution , in which there are methods able to evaluate the
contribution of each input feature to the output of a model: intgrad (Sundararajan
et al. 2017 ),grad- shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),deeplift (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ),
lime (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ),grad- cam (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ).Layer Attribution ,i n
which the focus is on the contribution of each neuron: e.g. grad- cam (Selvaraju et al.
2020 ) and layer- deeplift (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ).Neuron Attribution , in which
is analyzed the contribution of each input feature on the activation of a particular
hidden neuron: e.g. neuron- intgrad (Sundararajan et al. 2017 ),neuron- grad-
shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ). InterpretML22( N o r ie ta l . 2019 ) contains intrinsic
and post-hoc methods for Python and R. InterpretML is particularly interesting due
to the intrinsic methods it provides: Explainable Boosting Machine ( ebm), Decision
Tree, and Decision Rule List. These methods offer a user-friendly visualization of the
explanations, with several local and global charts. InterpretML also contains the most
popular methods, such as lime and shap . DALEX (Lipovetsky 2022 ) is an R and
Python package that provides post-hoc and model-agnostic explainers that allow local
and global explanations. It is tailored for tabular data and can produce different kinds
of visualization plots. Alibi provides intrinsic and post-hoc models. It can be used with
any type of input dataset andboth for classiﬁcation and regression tasks. Alibi provides
a set of counterfactual explanations, such as cem, and, interestingly, an implementa-
tion of anchor (Ribeiro et al. 2018 ). Regarding global explanation methods, Alibi
contains ale (Accumulated Local Effects) (Apley and Zhu 2016 ), which is a method
based on partial dependence plots (Guidotti et al. 2019c ). FAT-Forensics takes into
account fairness, accountability and transparency . Regarding intrinsic explainability,
it provides methods to assess explainability under three perspectives: data, models,
and predictions. For accountability , it offers a set of techniques that assesses privacy,
security, and robustness .F o r fairness , it contains methods for bias detection . What-If
Tool is a toolkit providing a visual interface from which it is possible to play without
coding. Moreover, it can work directly with ML models built on Cloud AI Platform
(https://cloud.google.com/ai-platform ). It contains a variety of approaches to get fea-
ture attribution values such as shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),intgrad (Sundararajan
et al. 2017 ), and smoothgrad (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ). Shapash is a Python library
that aims to make machine learning interpretable and understandable by everyone. It
provides several types of interpretable visualization that display explicit labels that
everyone can understand. Shapash offers different types of interactive visualization,from feature importance graphs to contributions ones.
10 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a survey of the latest advances in XAI methods,
following a categorization based on the data type and explanation type. A subset of
widely adopted explainers has been benchmarked with a quantitative and qualitativecomparison. Among those explainers, lime and shap are probably the most widely
22https://github.com/interpretml/interpret .
123