1738 F. Bodria et al.
Rules-based explanation methods extract rules exploiting different approaches,
which may require a longer time w.r.t. feature importance methods, making them
more suitable to ofﬂine settings. However, rules-based methods are tailored forcommon end-users due to their logical structure and simplicity.
5.3 Prototype-based explanations
A prototype, also called archetype or artifact, is a record highlighting the characteris-
tics which identify a group of objects belonging to the same class. Prototypes serve as
examples, i.e., the user can understand the black-box reasoning by looking at records
similar to the prototype. Thus, a prototype is a local explanation. A prototype can be
(i) a record of the training set close to the input data x, (ii) a centroid of a cluster to
which the input xbelongs to, or (iii) even a synthetic record generated following an
ad-hoc process. Depending on the explanation method considered, different deﬁni-
tions and requirements to ﬁnd a prototype can be considered. MMD-CRITIC (Kimet al. 2016 )i sa before the model explanation method which produces prototypes and
criticisms as explanations using Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) measure. While
prototypes explain the dataset’s general behavior, criticisms represent records that arenot well explained by the prototypes. mmd- critic selects prototypes by measuring
the difference between the distribution of the instances and the instances in the whole
dataset. The set of instances nearer to the data distribution are called prototypes, andthe farthest are called criticisms. ProtoDash (Gurumoorthy et al. 2019 ) is a variant
ofmmd- critic . However, differently from mmd- critic ,protodash also returns
non-negative weights which indicate the importance of each prototype. PS, PrototypeSelection ( ps) (Bien and Tibshirani 2011 ) seeks a set of prototypes that better represent
the data under analysis by solving a set cover optimization problem with constraints
on the properties of the prototypes. After that, the prototypes are employed to learn a
nearest neighbor rule classiﬁer to be used as a model. TSP, Tree Space Prototype (Tan
et al. 2020 ), is a local post-hoc explainer tailored for explaining tree ensemble meth-
ods. The goal of tspis to ﬁnd prototypes for each class in the tree space of the tree
ensemble bw.r.t. a given notion of proximity between trees. Privacy-Preserving Expla-
nations( ppe) (Blanco-Justicia et al. 2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer
that outputs prototypes and shallow trees as explanations while considering the con-
cept of privacy in explainability while producing privacy protected explanations .T h e
trade-off between privacy and comprehensibility is obtained through micro aggrega-
tion of the data, i.e., clustering. The clusters’ centroids are used as prototypes for the
ﬁnal explanation/prediction.
The strength of prototypes is the possibility of analyzing black-box behavior by
comparison between the record under analysis and its analogs, which is a type of
reasoning widely used by humans. Moreover, they allow data analysis before and
after the black-box is applied. For this reason, in this section, we may ﬁnd explanationmethods that are before the model , i.e., they explain the dataset without considering the
black-box model, such as mmd- critic ,psand protodash . On the other hand, local
post-hoc explainers, such as tspand ppe, provide prototypes based on the decisions of
the black-boxes. Among the different methods proposed, one of the most promising
123