Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1751
For instance, for the ice hockey image in Fig. 7, the class in the dataset is “puck”, i.e.,
the hockey disk. lime highlights the ice as important, while xrai and grad- cam++
highlight the stick of the player, grad- cam highlights the fans while rise the hockey
player. Thus, for the same image, we can obtain very different explanations, further
highlighting the fragility of the SMs. Regarding the second image of imagenet (the
second from the right), we can observe that all the methods capture the same pattern. Astraw hat in the background triggered the class “shower cap” while the correct one was
“mask”. Finally, in the “seashore” of imagenet ,w eh a v ea ni s l a n di nt h es e a .T h e
top three predicted classes are seashore (0 .91), promontory (0 .04), and cliff (0 .01).
Half of the tested methods like lime ,smoothgrad ,rise, and grad- cam were fooled
that the promontory is important to the class “seashore”. We can conclude that SMs
are very fragile when we have multiple classes in the image, even if these classes havea very low predicted probability.
Segmentation methods are more human-understandable than pixel-wise meth-
ods. Guided propagation methods can hardly be trusted due to conﬁrmation bias,
and therefore it is better not to adopt them.
6.2 Concept attribution
Most ML models are designed to operate on low-level features like edges and lines
in a picture that does not correspond to high-level concepts that humans can easily
understand. In (Adebayo et al. 2018 ; Yang and Kim 2019 ), the authors pointed out that
feature-based explanations applied to state-of-the-art black-box models can yield non-
sensible explanations. For example, we can consider SM as low-level explanations for
images, as they assign to every pixel a saliency value. Although it is possible to look atevery pixel and infer their numerical values, these make little to no sense to humans: we
do not say that the 5th pixel of an image has a value of 28. On the other hand, Concept
Attribution (CA) methods quantify, for instance, how much the concepts “stripes” has
contributed to the class prediction of “zebra”. Indeed, CA-based explanation methods
construct the explanation based on human-deﬁned concepts rather than representing
the inputs based on features and internal model (activation) states. Hence, this ideaof high-level features might be more familiar to humans, that can be more likely to
accept it (Hartmann et al. 2022 ; Renard et al. 2019 ). Formally, given a set of images
belonging to a concept [x
(1),x(2),..., x(i)]with x(i)∈C, CA methods can be thought
as a function f:(b,[x(i)])→ewhich assign a score eto the concept Cbasing on
the predictions and the values of the black-box bon the set [x(i)].
TCA V , Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (Kim et al. 2018 ) is a global
post-hoc model-agnostic explainer for image classiﬁers that provides a quantitative
explanation of how important a concept is for the prediction. In tcav , every concept is
represented by a particular vector called Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) created by
interpreting an internal state of a neural network in terms of human-friendly concepts.
tcav uses directional derivatives to quantify the degree to which a user-deﬁned concept
isvital to a classiﬁcation result. For example, how sensitive a prediction of “zebra” is to
the presence of “stripes”. tcav requires two main ingredients: (i) concept-containing
inputs and negative samples, i.e., random inputs, and (ii) pre-trained ML models on
123