1722 F. Bodria et al.
second distinction in (Guidotti et al. 2019c ) further classiﬁes the black-box explana-
tion problem into model explanation, outcome explanation, and black-box inspection.
Model explanation, achieved by global explainers (Craven and Shavlik 1995 ), aims
at explaining the whole logic of a model. Outcome explanation, achieved by local
explainers (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ; Lundberg and Lee 2017 ), understands the reasons for
a speciﬁc prediction. Finally, the aim of the black-box inspection is to retrieve a visualrepresentation for understanding how the black-box works. Another crucial distinction
highlighted in (Martens et al. 2007 ; Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ;
Došilovi´ ce ta l . 2018 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 ) is between model-speciﬁc and model-
agnostic explanation methods. This classiﬁcation depends on whether the technique
adopted to explain can work only on a speciﬁc black-box model or can be adopted on
any black-box.
In (Gilpin et al. 2018 ), the focus is to propose a uniﬁed taxonomy to classify the
existing literature. The following key terms are deﬁned: explanation ,interpretability ,
andexplainability . Interpretability consists of describing the internals of a system in a
way that is understandable to humans. A system is called interpretable if it produces
descriptions that are simple enough for a person to understand using a vocabulary
that is meaningful to the user. An alternative classiﬁcation of deﬁnitions is presented
in (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), with a speciﬁc taxonomy for explainers of deep learning mod-
els. The leading concept of the classiﬁcation is Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence,i.e., a methodology for the large-scale implementation of AI methods in real organi-
zations with fairness, model explainability, and accountability at its core. Similarly
to (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), in (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), the term interpretability (or trans-
parency) is used to refer to a passive characteristic of a model that makes sense for
a human observer. On the other hand, explainability is an active characteristic of a
model, denoting any action taken with the intent of clarifying or detailing its internalfunctions. Further taxonomies and deﬁnitions are presented in (Murdoch et al. 2019 ;
Carvalho et al. 2019 ). Another branch of the literature review focuses on the quanti-
tative and qualitative evaluation of explanation methods (Samek et al. 2019 ;C a r v a l h o
et al. 2019 ). Also, we are recently witnessing to XAI surveys devoted to speciﬁc topics
such as XAI methods for time series classiﬁcation (Theissler et al. 2022 ), or counter-
factual explanations (Guidotti 2022 ; Karimi et al. 2020b ). Finally, we highlight that
the literature reviews related to explainability are focused not just on ML and AI but
also on social studies (Miller 2019 ; Byrne 2019 ), recommendation systems (Zhang and
Chen 2020 ), model-agents(Anjomshoae et al. 2019 ), and domain-speciﬁc applications
such as health and medicine (Tjoa and Guan 2019 ).
In this survey, we propose an alternative view w.r.t. the taxonomy introduced
in (Guidotti et al. 2019c ) but starting from the data perspective. In light of the works
mentioned above, we believe that an updated systematic categorization of explanation
methods based on the type of explanation returned and their comparison is still miss-ing in the literature and might be beneﬁcial for end users. Indeed, users requiring an
explanation ﬁrst know which data type they are dealing with, then the type of explana-
tion they can have for that data type, and ﬁnally, they can select the best XAI methodthat can be used to obtain such explanation among the available ones comparing the
properties offered by the method as well as a ﬁrst general evaluation.
123