Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1737
majority of the methods described in the following extract rules by exploiting ensemble
methods or rule-based classiﬁers. The explainers considered are all agnostic. Skope-
Rules is a global, post-hoc, model-agnostic15explainer on the rulefit (Friedman and
Popescu 2008 ) idea to deﬁne an ensemble method and then extract the rules from it.
skope- rules employs fast algorithms such as bagging or gradient boosting decision
trees. After extracting all the possible rules, skope- rules removes rules redundant
or too similar by a similarity threshold. Differently from rulefit , the scoring method
does not solve the L1 regularization. Instead, the weights are given depending on the
precision score of the rule. Scalable-BRL (Yang et al. 2017 ) is an interpretable rule-
based model that optimizes the posterior probability of a Bayesian hierarchical model
over the rule lists. The theoretical part of this approach is based on (Letham et al.
2015 ). GLocalX (Setzu et al. 2021 ) is a global model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that
adopts the local to global paradigm, i.e., to derive a global explanation by subsuming
local logical rules. GLocalX starts from an array of local explanation rules and fol-
lows a hierarchical bottom-up approach merging similar records expressing the sameconditions. This small section comprises global explanation methods that extract rules
in entirely different ways: either they exploit an ensemble method ( skope- rules ),
a rule-based model ( scalable- BRL ) or several local explanations ( GLocalX ). In
terms of goodness of explanations, skope- rules and scalable- BRL are tailored
for an overall explanation of the machine learning model, focusing mostly on the datain input. GLocalX , instead, exploits local explanations and hence is able to tackle
the problem from a different point of view, merging several local explanations. The
output of these methods is a list of rules, and even if there are techniques to ﬁlter outmeaningless rules, the complexity of the explanation produced may be huge.
Global rule-based explainers produce sets of rules describing the overall behavior
of the model for each target class. Depending on the ﬁlters applied, the list of
rules extracted may be long and difﬁcult to understand.
Rules-based explainers comparison In this section, we presented a great variety
of methods that provide logical rules as explanations exploiting different strategies.
Independently from the strategy, due to the simplicity of the rules, they are often the
preferred explanation for non-expert people. The majority of the explainers presentedin this section are based on the extraction of decision trees as surrogate models ( lore ,
trepan ,cmm ,sta,dectext ,msft ), or ensemble methods based on decision trees,
such as skope- rules . The remaining methods that do not rely on decision trees extract
the rules in other ways, such as rule-based classiﬁers (again a surrogate model), as
in the case of anchor ,scalable- brl and of rulematrix . To further increase the
comprehensibility of the explanation, some explainers correlate the explanations by
graphical visualizations, such as rulematrix ,anchor , and skope- rules . Overall,
the majority of the explainers require a long computing time due to the differentenrichment of the data or the use of rule-based classiﬁers, which are among the longest
interpretable models to train. Hence, they may be better ﬁtted for ofﬂine explanations.
Depending on the complexity of the machine learning model in input, the explanationsmay be complex, such as deep trees or long lists of rules.
15https://skope-rules.readthedocs.io/en/latest/skope_rules.html .
123