Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1725
Moreover, to provide the reader with a self-contained review of XAI methods,
we complete this section by reporting the deﬁnitions of explanation, interpretability,
transparency, and complexity present in the literature:
–Explanation (Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Guidotti et al. 2019c )i sa n interface between
humans and an AI decision-maker that is both comprehensible to humans and anaccurate proxy of AI. Consequently, explainability is the ability to provide a valid
explanation.
–Interpretability (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), or comprehensibility (Gleicher 2016 ), is
the ability of stakeholders to understand relevant aspects of the modeling pro-
cess. Interpretability and comprehensibility are tied to the evaluation of the model
complexity.
–Transparency (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), or equivalently understandability or intelligi-
bility, is the capacity of a model to be interpretable itself. Thus, the model allows
a human to direct understand its internal mechanism and its decision process.
–Complexity (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017 ) is the degree of effort required by a user
to comprehend an explanation. The complexity can consider the user background
or eventual time limitation necessary for the understanding.
Finally, the same taxonomy and categorization adopted in the survey are exploited in
aXAI Live Survey
7where the existing methods are further analyzed and continuously
updated with emergent approaches.
4 Evaluation measures for explanations
There is a wide debate on how to evaluate the quality of the explanation methods.
Often it is formulated as properties of the returned explanations aimed at capturingconcepts as goodness and usefulness of explanations (Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and
Berrada 2018 ; Gilpin et al. 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Samek et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al.
2019 ). In the following, we describe a selection of established methodologies for the
evaluation of explanation methods both from the quantitative and qualitative point of
view which are typically used to judge the output of XAI methods.
Quantitative evaluation focuses on the performance of the explainer and on the
goodness of the explanations returned. In the following, we present the general idea
of each metric used later on for benchmarking. Since every metric may vary in its
application depending on data type, further details are provided in the various sections.
–Fidelity aims to evaluate how good is fat mimicking b. There are different imple-
mentations of ﬁdelity, depending on the type of explanator under analysis (Guidotti
et al. 2019a ). For example, in methods where there is a creation of a surrogate model
gto mimic b, ﬁdelity compares the prediction of bandgon the instances used to
train g.
–Stability aims at validating if similar instances obtain similar explanations. Stability
can be evaluated through the Lipschitz constant (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018 )
asL
x=max/bardblex−ex/prime/bardbl
/bardblx−x/prime/bardbl,∀x/prime∈Nxwhere xis the instance, exthe explanation and
Nxis a neighborhood of instances similar to x.
7https://kdd-lab.github.io/XAISurvey/ .
123