1748 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 8 Visual Comparison of SMs obtained by taking the gradient of the output yw.r.t. the input image x
(center) and smoothgrad (bottom). In the three images in the center, the SM changes drastically. In all
three cases, it focuses on the subject of the image, completely changing the original values. This is also true
for the seashore image on the far right
Fig. 9 Explanations of deep- shap onmnist (top), grad- shap onimagenet (bottom)
tribution of background samples instead of a single value and using Shapley equations
to linearise non-linear components of the black-box such as max, softmax, products,
divisions, etc. grad- shap , instead, is based on intgrad and smoothgrad (Sun-
dararajan et al. 2017 ; Smilkov et al. 2017 ).intgrad values are a bit different from
shap values and require a single reference value to integrate. As an adaptation to make
them approximate shap values, grad- shap reformulates the integral as an expectation
and combines that expectation with sampling reference values from the background
dataset as in smoothgrad . Examples of explanations of deep- shap and grad- shap
are shown in Fig. 9.grad- shap produces a single SM, while deep- shap produces a
SM for each class in the input image. Even if more expensive to compute, having a
SM for each class could be useful to compare the importance of the predicted class
with different classes.
XRAI (Kapishnikov et al. 2019 ) is based on intgrad and inherits its properties.
Differently from intgrad ,xrai ﬁrst over-segments the image. It iteratively tests each
region’s importance, fusing smaller regions into larger segments based on attribution
scores. xrai follows three steps: segmentation ,get attribution , and selecting regions .
The segmentation is repeated several times with different segments to reduce thedependency on image segmentation. For attribution, xrai uses intgrad with black and
white baselines averaged. Finally, to select regions, xrai leverages the fact that, given
two regions, the one that sums to the more positive value should be more importantto the black-box. Thus, xrai starts with an empty mask and then selectively adds the
regions that yield the maximum gain in the total attributions per area. From Fig. 7,
we notice how the SMs obtained by xrai are very different from the others already
123