Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1721
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) (Miller 2019 ) emerged as a broad and very active research
area, investigating methods that provide many different types of explanations, each
capturing diverse aspects of a black-box model.
The objective of this work is to provide a fresh account of the ideas and tools
of the current generation of explanation methods, or explainers, from the perspec-
tive of the different types of explanations, that such methods produce as an output.4
To this purpose, we provide a comprehensive ontology of the explanations returned,
taking into account the most popular data formats: tabular data, images, and text,
with an account also of time series and graphs. We mainly focus on the most recentapproaches of post-hoc explainers but also consider some promising intrinsic explain-
ers (“explainable-by-design” models).
While presenting the plethora of existing XAI methods, we provide more details
on solid, pioneering approaches but try to discuss also less known recent methods. In
any case, further information can be found by the reader in the companion website
of this paper, the XAI Live Survey
5that we are maintaining to keep pace with newly
emergent methods. We report extensive examples of the various explanations for each
data type, highlighting similarities and discrepancies of returned explanations through
their visual appearance. Finally, a subset of methods, selected among the most robust
and widely adopted, are benchmarked with respect to a collection of quantitative
metrics, assessing faithfulness, stability, robustness, and execution time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2summarizes existing sur-
veys on XAI and highlights the differences between this work and previous ones.
Section 3presents the proposed explanation-based taxonomy of explanation methods,
while Sect. 4illustrates and formalizes existing evaluation measures typically used to
benchmark explanation methods. Sections 5,6and 7present the details of the most
recent and widely adopted explanation methods, together with examples and quanti-tative comparison. Finally, Sect. 10summarizes the crucial aspects that emerged from
the analysis of state of the art, and brieﬂy discusses future research directions.
2 Related works
The widespread need for XAI in the last years caused an explosion of interest in the
design of explanation methods (Goebel et al. 2018 ). The books (Molnar 2022 ; Samek
et al. 2019 ) present in detail a restricted set of the best-known methodologies to make
general ML models interpretable (Molnar 2022 ) and to explain the outcomes of deep
neural networks (Samek et al. 2019 ).
In (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), the classiﬁcation is based on four categories of prob-
lems, and the explanation methods are classiﬁed according to the problem they are
able to solve. The ﬁrst distinction is between explanation by design [(also named
intrinsic interpretability), and black-box explanation (also named post-hoc inter-
pretability (Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Murdoch et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 )]. The
4This work extends and completes “A Survey Of Methods For Explaining Black-Box Models” appeared
in ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(5), 1–42 (Guidotti et al. 2019c ).
5https://kdd-lab.github.io/XAISurvey/ .
123