1760 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 14 Example of sentence highlighting, on top, we have the score produced by intgrad and below we
have in order, lime ,deeplift and the baseline, which consists of multiplying the input with the gradient
w.r.t. input. The sentence is taken from imdb
7.1 Sentence highlighting
As seen in Sect. 6.1, saliency-based explanations are prevalent because they present
visually perceptive explanations. Saliency Highlighting (SH) can be seen as a version
of SMs applied to text. Indeed, it practically consists of assigning to every word (or
set of words) a score based on the importance that that word (or set of words) had in
the ﬁnal prediction. Formally, Sentence Highlighting (SH) is modeled as a vector s
that explains a classiﬁcation y=b(x)of a black-box bonx. The dimensions of sare
the words present in the sentence xwe want to explain, and the value siis the saliency
value of the word i. The greater the value of si, the greater the importance of that
word. A positive value indicates a positive contribution towards y, while a negative
one means that the word has contributed negatively. Examples of SH explanations are
reported in Fig. 14.
To obtain such an explanation, it is possible to adapt some of the SMs methods
presented in Sect. 6.1. LIME (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ), presented in Sect. 5, can be applied
to text with a modiﬁcation to the perturbation of the original input. Given an input
sentence x,lime creates a neighborhood of sentences by replacing one or multiple
words with empty spaces. Another possible variation is to insert a stop word instead of
removing it to maintain the meaning of the sentence. INTGRAD (Sundararajan et al.
2017 ), presented in Sect. 6, can also be exploited to explain text classiﬁers. Indeed,
gradient-based methods are challenging to apply to NLP models because the vector
representing every word is usually averaged into a single sentence vector. Since a mean
operation gradient does not exist, the explainer cannot redistribute the signal back tothe original vectors. On the other hand, intgrad is immune to this problem because the
saliency values are computed as a difference with a baseline value. intgrad computes
the saliency value of a single word as a difference from the sentence without it. For a
fair comparison, we substituted the words with spaces as done for lime and also for
intgrad . DEEPLIFT (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ), presented in Sect. 6, can also be applied
to text following the same principle of intgrad . For the experiments, we adopt the
same preprocessing used for lime and intgrad . L2X (Chen et al. 2018 ) can produce
a SH explanation for text. In particular, for text, the patches adopted are a group ofwords. Finally, a baseline for text explainers is formed by gradient ×input that uses
the black-box gradient of the input w.r.t to the output and multiply these value by the
input values.
123