Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1735
LORE , LOcal Rule-based Explainer (Guidotti et al. 2019a ), is a local model-
agnostic explainer that provides explanations in the form of rules and counterfactual
rules. lore is tailored explicitly for tabular data. It exploits a genetic algorithm to
create the neighborhood of the record to explain. Such a neighborhood produces a
more faithful and dense representation of the vicinity of xw.r.t. lime . Given a black-
box model band an instance x, with b(x)=y,lore ﬁrst generates a synthetic set Z
of neighbors through a genetic algorithm. Then, it trains a decision tree classiﬁer gon
this set labeled with the black-box outcome b(Z).F r o m g, it retrieves an explanation
that consists of (i) a factual decision rule, that corresponds to the path on the decision
tree followed by the instance xto reach the decision y, and (ii) a set of counterfactual
rules, which have a different classiﬁcation w.r.t. y. These counterfactual rules show
the conditions that can be varied on xin order to change the output decision. In
Fig.6, we report the factual and counterfactual rules of lore for the explanation of
the same records showed for anchor . It is interesting to note that, differently from
anchor and the other models proposed above, lore explanations focus more on the
Education Num ,Occupation ,Capital Gain andCapital Loss , while the features about
the relationship are not present.
RuleMatrix (Ming et al. 2019 ) is a model-agnostic explainer that provides both
local and global explanations speciﬁcally tailored for the visualization of the rules
extracted. Given a training dataset and a black-box, rulematrix executes a rule
induction step, in which a rule list is extracted by sampling the input data and their
predicted label by the black-box. Then, the rules extracted are ﬁltered based on thresh-
olds of conﬁdence and support. Finally, it outputs a visual representation of the rules.
Local rule-based explainers comparison The rule-based methods presented are all
based on creating a surrogate model from which to extract the rules. In this category,
we ﬁnd anchor and rulematrix , which provide both local and global explana-
tions by relying on simple rule extraction methods. The simplicity of these methods
makes them efﬁcient even if, as in the case of lime -like approaches, they may suffer
in terms of the goodness of explanations provided. lore is the only explainer that
provides only local explanations. Differently from the other methods, does not require
to have access to the original training data, and, due to its synthetic generation pro-
cess, provides more faithful explanations. Therefore it may be good in settings wherethe black-box training dataset is unavailable, while rulematrix and anchor need
to access the training data. Rule-based explanations are considered closer to human
reasoning w.r.t. the feature importance-based explanations. In addition, they exploiteasy to understand mechanisms, allowing users of different backgrounds to under-
stand how the explanation method works, increasing trust. However, these explainers
usually require a greater running time w.r.t. the feature importance ones.
Local rule-based explainers produce logical rules which are close to human
reasoning and make them suitable for non-experts.
Global tree-based explainers One of the most popular ways to generate explanation
rules is by extracting them from a decision tree. In particular, due to the method’s sim-plicity and interpretability, decision trees explain black-box models’ overall behavior.
Some explanation methods acting in this setting are model-speciﬁc explainers exploit-
ing structural information of the black-box model under analysis. TREPAN (Craven
123