1766 F. Bodria et al.
In (Geler et al. 2020 ), introduced a transparent by design method named Weighted-
kNN that extends the classic majority-voting kNN by proposing weighting schemes.
By emphasizing the nearer neighbors using a weighting scheme, it is possible toimprove the kNN classiﬁer’s quality and stability. The nearest neighbors are considered
part of the prototypical explanation. LASTS, Local Agnostic Shapelet-based Time
Series explainer ( lasts ) (Guidotti et al. 2020b ), is a variation of abele for time
series. As explanation lasts returns exemplars and counterexamples composed of
subseries with a shapelet-based rule. An example of a rule is: “if these shapelets are
present and these others not, then xis classiﬁed as y”. DOCTORXAI (Panigutti et al.
2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer acting on sequential data in the
medical setting. In particular, it exploits a medical ontology to perturb the data and
generate neighbors. doctorxai is designed on healthcare data, but it can theoretically
be applied to every type of sequential data with an ontology. For more information on
explaining black-box models for time series, we remand the reader to the following
survey (Rojat et al. 2021 ; Theissler et al. 2022 ).
Time series explainers comparison For time series data, kNN weighting schemes
are the most common approach. Shaplet-based explanations are promising, and new
approaches using autoencoders or ontologies are being developed to improve time
series explanations.
8.2 Explanations for graphs
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become increasingly popular since many real-
world data are represented as graphs, such as social networks, chemical molecules,and ﬁnancial data. A graph can be used for speciﬁc tasks like link prediction (Cai and Ji
2020 ) or node labeling (Calamoneri 2006 ). However, many advanced GNN operations
are also proposed to improve the performance of classiﬁcation models, for example,
in graph convolution models (Kipf and Welling 2017 ). Compared with image and text
domains, the explainability of black-box models working on graphs is less explored,but it is critical for understanding to behavior of GNN.
The types of explanations available for graphs are various. The most common
one is node relevance which derives from feature relevance methods. It consists ofassigning a value to every node of the graph that represents how much that node
has contributed to the prediction. Since graphs are composed of nodes and edges,
the same operation can be accomplished with edges. The focus of the explanation isshifted toward the interactions between the nodes instead of the nodes themselves.
There are different ways to do this. The most common one is to backpropagate the
signal from the prediction to the input graph in lrp style. Other approaches learn a
surrogate model to assign values as done by lime . LRP (for Graphs) (Schwarzenberg
et al. 2019 ) extends the original LRP method for GNN. It decomposes the output
prediction score into different node importance scores. The score decomposition ruleis developed based on the hidden features and weights. GraphLIME (Huang et al. 2020 )
extends the lime for GNN and studies the importance of different node features for
node classiﬁcation tasks. Given a target node in the input graph, graphlime considers
its N-hop neighboring nodes and their predictions as its local neighborhood, where a
123