1726 F. Bodria et al.
–Deletion and Insertion (Petsiuk et al. 2018 ) are metrics that remove the features
that the explanation method ffound important and see how the performance of b
degrades. The intuition behind deletion is that removing the “cause” will force theblack-box to change its decision. Among the deletion methods, there is the Faith-
fulness (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018 ). It aims to validate if the relevance
scores indicate true importance: we expect higher importance values for attributesthat greatly inﬂuence the ﬁnal prediction.
8Given a black-box model band the
feature importance eextracted from an importance-based explanator f, the faith-
fulness method incrementally removes each of the attributes deemed important by
f. At each removal, the effect on the performance of bis evaluated. In general, a
sharp drop and a low area under the probability curve mean a good explanation.
On the other hand, the insertion metric takes a complementary approach. Typi-cally, insertion and deletion evaluations are tailored for speciﬁc types of explainers
called Feature Importance explainers for tabular data, Saliency Maps for image
data, and Sentence Highlighting for text data.
–Monotonicity (Luss et al. 2021 ) can be seen as an implementation of an insertion
method: it evaluates the effect of bby incrementally adding each attribute in order
of increasing importance. In this case, we expect that the black-box performance
increases by adding more and more features, thereby resulting in monotonically
increasing model performance.
–Running Time : the time needed to produce the explanation is also an important
evaluation.
It is worth noting that, to the best of our knowledge, there are currently no objec-
tive evaluation measures that can select the best explainer. A different approach to
evaluating explainers consists in generating synthetic ground truth explanations andcomparing them with those returned by the explainers (Guidotti 2021 ). However, this
evaluation with synthetic explanations cannot be transferred to an objective evalua-
tion of real data because we would not need an explainer if we knew the ground truthexplanation. Qualitative evaluation is important to understand the actual usability of
explanations from the point of view of the end-user: they satisfy human curiosity, ﬁnd
meanings, safety, social acceptance, and trust. In (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017 ), the
evaluation criteria for the qualitative evaluation are systematized into three categories:
–Functionally-grounded metrics aim to evaluate interpretability by exploiting some
formal deﬁnitions that are used as proxies. They do not require humans for valida-
tion. The challenge is to deﬁne the proxy to employ, depending on the context. Asan example, we can validate the interpretability of a model by showing the improve-
ments w.r.t. to another model already proven to be interpretable by human-based
experiments.
–Application-grounded evaluation methods require human experts to validate the
speciﬁc task under analysis (Williams et al. 2016 ; Suissa-Peleg et al. 2016 ). They
are usually employed in speciﬁc settings. For example, if the model is an assistant
in the decision-making process of doctors, the validation is done by the doctors.
–Human-grounded metrics evaluate the explanations through humans who are not
experts. The goal is to measure the overall understandability of the explanation in
8An implementation of faithfulness is available in aix360 presented in Sect. 9.
123