Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1753
pretable CNN, each ﬁlter in a high convolutional layer represents a speciﬁc object
part. An interpretable CNNs use the same training data as ordinary CNNs without
additional annotations of object parts or textures for supervision. The interpretableCNN automatically assigns each ﬁlter in a high convolutional layer with an object
part during the learning process. The explicit knowledge of interpretable CNN can
help people understand their logic, i.e., what patterns are memorized by the CNN forprediction.
Concept attribution-based explainers comparison SMs are the best known and
most widely used type of explanation. However, they are very fragile and suffer frominterpretation problems as their usage from a cognitive perspective is unclear. On the
other hand, the usage of concepts is a new approach that seeks to overcome SMs
problems by producing high-level explanations that are more understandable by theend user. Concept-based explanations are a very recent type of explanation for images,
and they have potential improvements. It is the ﬁrst step in the direction of human-like
explanations. Human-friendly concepts make it possible to build straightforward andvaluable explanations. Humans still need to map images to concepts, but it is a small
price to pay to augment human–machine interaction. Generally, concept attribution
explainers compute a score that evaluates the probability that a selected concept has
inﬂuenced the prediction. The main problem, for now, is that this concept has to
be manually selected. tcav is the most advanced algorithm. However, the concepts
need to be provided as a set of images reﬂecting the selected concept, e.g., a set of
ice images, a set of people, and a set of stripes. Several variations of tcav have been
introduced to automate the concept selection phase. PACE is the most advanced search
when looking for concepts concerning black-box behavior. Researchers are focusing
on ﬁnding concepts in an automated way, but for the time being, there is no explainer
to ensure ﬁnding a concept that is humanly understandable.
There is a need to build an explanation in terms of higher features called concepts
for a general audience.
6.3 Prototype-based explanations
Another valid explanation type for images is a set of prototypical images that repre-
sent a particular class. Human reasoning is often prototype-based, using representative
examples as a basis for categorization and decision-making. Similarly, prototypeexplanation models use representative examples to explain and cluster data. MMD-
CRITIC (Kim et al. 2016 ), already presented in Sect. 5, is an interpretable approach
that can be applied to retrieve image prototypes and criticisms. In Fig. 11is presented
an application of mmd- critic oncifar . We can extract some interesting knowledge
from these methods. For example, from the prototype set, we can deduce that birdsusually stand on a tree or ﬂy in the sky, while, in the criticism images, we see that
planes are all on a white background or have a different shape from the usual one
used for passengers. Inﬂuence Functions (Koh and Liang 2017 ) is a global post-hoc
model-agnostic explainer that tries to ﬁnd the images most responsible for a given pre-
diction through inﬂuence functions. The usage of inﬂuence functions is a technique
from robust statistics to trace a model’s prediction through the learning algorithm and
123