(see Supplementary Video 2). Moreover, the speed of each motor
could be dynamically changed at any time, meaning that the
platform can be programmable on demand.
Using grids of discrete but ﬂuidically connected cells, we control
the propagation of wave patterns from a cell to a neighbouring
cell. The basic starting design for the platform comprised a 7 × 7
grid, where only the middle 5 × 5 cells were used. To control the
interaction between cells, we ﬁrst fabricated a prototype array of
BZ cell grid using a 3D printer which had a v-shaped opening
between cells. The BZ reaction volume used was 70 ml, which
ﬁlled the arena to three quarters of its height, well above the
v-shaped opening. With this design, it was found that oscillations
did not propagate to neighbouring cells and the platform acted
similarly to a display screen, where only the cells that were enabled
ﬂashed in blue, while the other ones remained red (Fig. 2a and
Supplementary Video 3). To facilitate improved interaction
between cells, we removed the v-shaped part of the opening,
leaving only the corners of each cell to de ﬁne it (Fig. 2b). This way
theﬂuid from an activated cell would propagate to its neighbourswhen stirred, and we could, for example, activate a cell that was
disabled by stirring (and therefore activating) its neighbours.
Pattern recognition using the BZ platform . The wave propa-
gation patterns described were found to be reproducible between
parallel experiments, which indicates that the BZ platform can
consistently convert an input pattern into a wave propagation
pattern. Detection and interpretation of such propagating pat-
terns were relatively easy with simple input patterns, but they
increasingly become more complicated to human interpreters as
the input patterns become complex. However, the complex pat-
terns generated were neither random nor impossible to distin-
guish between them, because the BZ system generates consistent
outputs in response to the same input pattern, and this is the basis
for programmability. To prove programmability we were able to
show that the global patterns being generated in the BZ reactor
grid depend on the history of different patterns being inputted
during execution as a function of time (see Fig. 3). Depending
on the concentration of potassium bromate, the number of
Chemical recurrent state Evolving microstatesRaw input Digital outputRead-out
Non- 
discretized
Cell
discretizedMacrostate chemical outputChemical domain
Processing statesDigital domain
User codeExperimental input
t = t 0k = 2
k = 3
k = 4
p = 2
p = 3
p = 4t = t 1
i Active cells (INPUTS)
ii Processing cells (PROCESS)
iii Inactive cells (CONTROL)Strong coupling
Weak couplingInput 
chemical states 
Process
chemical states 10
8 6 4 2 01058Input statesChemical states1048
1038
1028
1018
108
1068
1058
1048
1038
1028
1018
108
0.010.01
8 6
n (n2 reactor grid)
n (n2 reactor grid)4 2
Hydrodynamic
   couplingOscillation
state output
BZ
Medium
XS
Stirrer
inputUnrollBZ
Medium
X0S0
Time 0BZ
Medium
X1S1
Time 1S0ab c
def
Fig. 1 Chemical processor paradigm. a Digital domain: The user inputs the actions to perform via a 5-by-5 matrix. This digital matrix is read by a computer
and translated into machine code to mechanically actuate the stirrers at the user-de ﬁned speed. bChemical domain: Based on the speed at which the
stirrers rotate, the BZ reaction will oscillate between its two states, and oscillating waves will appear in the platform. If the arena does not contai n physical
boundaries between the cells, the oscillations will not localize and they would spread. If there are physical boundaries between the cells, the oscil lations will
localize at the speci ﬁc cells within the arena. cRead-out: Using a camera and image processing, the states of the chemical processor are read by a digital
computer. For every cell, the image processing algorithm will classify its state as on or off, depending on if the BZ reaction is oscillating on it. This step will
return a 5-by-5 digital matrix representing the state of the system at each cell. dThe Input States plot shows the scaling of the number of input states with
the number of BZ cells on the experimental platform at different PWM stirring inputs ( knxn, where kcan be 2, 3 and 4). The Chemical States plot shows
scaling of the number of chemical states (de ﬁned by the distinct measurable amplitudes of BZ oscillations; see Supplementary Information) with the
number of BZ cells on the experimental platform at a different number of measurable oscillation amplitudes (( p+1)nxnwhere pdescribes the different
detectable oscillation amplitudes and an additional one for no oscillation). eEvolving microstates: The cells in the arena are weakly connected; therefore,
their oscillations will convolve, and be able to perform complex calculations by controlling the stirring speeds into (i) active cells —fast stirring —for inputs,
(ii) process cells —slow stirring, (iii) inactive cells —no stirring (see Supplementary Information). fChemical recurrent state: Because the BZ oscillations
have memory, the global state of the medium not only depends on the input, but also on the state of previous iterations.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2020) 11:1442 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3