Over the last 50 years computers have become ubiquitous,
essential for many aspects of modern life. During this
period their processing power has increased manifold, but
the paradigm used has remained the same keeping the processorand memory separate
1,2, creating a data bottleneck; and using
binary state electronic switches3, which are limited by the fabri-
cation limits CMOS technology, and power dissipation4. Systems
based upon quantum effects promise to solve problems intractable
for conventional computers as the number of qubits increases5,6,
but they are yet to reach their full potential. However, nature
exploits the parallelism of collective networks7,8by developing
systems able to process information despite large amounts of
noise9. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that even non-
living chemical systems can implement computations10–15,y e t
their lack of programmability limits their practical use.
Most of the unconventional computational architectures are
based on coupled-oscillator systems at different length scales. These
include oscillator-based architectures that have been conceptualized
and implemented to a certain extent utilizing chemical16,c h e m o -
mechanical14,s p i n - t o r q u e17,18, or laser-based oscillators19.M a n y
oscillator-based computational architectures usually suffer from
weak coupling, generating non-synchronous phases, and external
noise effects. Substantial progress has been made to reduce these
problems. Chemical computation architectures utilizing reaction-
diffusion systems have demonstrated solutions to optimal paths for
labyrinths20,21,l o g i cg a t e s22and Boolean circuits23. In the particular
case of the BZ reaction, computational architectures using it have
been able to emulate logic gates24and complex circuits25,p e r f o r m
image processing26and pattern recognition27, solve optimization
problems28, control mechanical components29or soft matter30,a n d
create neuromorphic architectures31. All these problem-speci ﬁc
platforms utilize excitable chemical medium and observe time-
evolution of spatiotemporal oscillations as a computational logic for
information processing. Different possible architectures have been
conceptualized in single-phase two-dimensional architectures where
a problem is directly mapped16or in a multi-channel network32as
well as in multiphase interconnected droplets or vesicles33.W i t ht h e
advent of high-performance 3D printing architectures and fast
machine learning techniques for image processing, computation
capabilities utilizing chemical systems can be signi ﬁcantly improved
by introducing a hybrid approach. This includes using electronic
actuators as inputs for problem instantiation and chemical evolu-
tion and digital image processing as an information processing unit.
Herein, we show a chemical processor that utilizes individually
addressed, but fully interconnected cells of a chemical oscillating
Belousov –Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction as the data processing
medium34. Furthermore, we show that the system can be pro-
grammed to achieve ﬂexible and multi-purpose calculations by
addressing the individually controlled stirrers and adjusting the
stirring speeds (Fig. 1and Supplementary Video 1). Our pro-
cessor architecture relies on data storage and processing via
electron transfer between molecules of [Fe(Bpy) 3]2/3+as a cata-
lyst for the BZ reaction35and an indicator where the oxidized
regions containing Fe(III) are blue, and the reduced states con-
taining Fe(II) species are red. The output from the interconnected
cells is produced by recording a video of the BZ medium to
monitor the oscillation states of the reaction in the individual
cells. To achieve programmability, we design a platform that
controls the inputs as oscillations of the BZ reaction at local sites
in a grid (cells) by externally controlling the oscillations in each
cell with a magnetic stirrer, where cells are triggered when a
stirrer is turned on or when an off cell is surrounded by on cells
and the chemical oscillations transfer to it. The cells interact with
each other via hydrodynamic coupling arising from the ﬂuidﬂow
created by magnetic stirrers. As a result, by controlling the input
conﬁguration of the magnetic stirrers, the platform can beprogrammed to exploit the chemical states arising from interac-
tions between spatiotemporal excitation patterns. This is because
the chemical oscillators behave like the coupled-oscillator
model36, where the excited waves generated at a cell can propa-
gate to neighbouring cells by setting the local phase as well as the
oscillation frequency of the active cells. The oscillation frequency
can be controlled after an initiation time via the stirrer speed to
form a globally synchronized oscillating pattern. Moreover, the
stirring patterns can be individually changed at any time based on
user input. Therefore, the BZ processor described here can be
programmed at any point during its execution.
Results
BZ processing platform . The automated BZ platform is designed
so that it can be used as a programmable chemical processing
system, exploiting the excitability and bistability of the oscillating
chemical reaction. We demonstrate programmability by per-forming different processing tasks in our BZ platform, such as
memory and pattern recognition. Our digital-chemical processing
system consists of four components (see Fig. 1, Methods and
Supplementary Methods 1). (i) The BZ reactor cell grid can be
customized to the desired geometry depending on the experiment.
In addition, by changing the size of the opening gap between
neighbouring cells, it is possible to control the global propagation
of the BZ excitation. When the gap size is large enough, the whole
BZ medium generates coherent excitation wave patterns. (ii) A
magnetic stirrer array consisting of 25 motors to control the stirrer
bars within the BZ reactor cells. (iii) A control interface connected
to a computer and the magnetic stirrer array. The rotation speed
of each stirrer can be individually controlled; therefore, the local
oscillations of the BZ reaction at a given cell can be individually
addressed. (iv) The BZ reaction in the cells was monitored by a
camera mounted above the grid, and the camera was connected to
a computer enabling real-time analysis of the BZ. Each cell was
classi ﬁed as excited (blue) or non-excited state (red) as a function
of time (see Supplementary Methods 2).
Description of the BZ reaction . Ferroin, [Fe(Bpy)
3]2/3+, was
chosen as the sole catalyst since this gives simple oscillations and
the colour changes between the reduced form (red) and the
oxidized form (blue) which are distinct and easily tracked opti-
cally. The other chemical components used were sulfuric acid,
malonic acid and potassium bromate (see Methods and Supple-
mentary Methods 3 for a description of how the solutions were
prepared). To control the reaction, we exploit the fact that bulk
oscillations of the BZ reaction break down and may become
chaotic with short-lived or completely suppressed oscillations
when they are not stirred37,38. Thus, the excitation of an indivi-
dual BZ cell in the grid can be controlled by activating a stirrer
placed in the cell (see Supplementary Methods 4).
To stir cells and drive patterns in the resulting oscillations, the
platform described in Fig. 1is used, where each cell contained a
stirring bar and was directly placed above a motor with a pair of
opposing magnets attached to its shaft. Using this mechanism, the
stirring could be turned on and BZ oscillatory excitation waves
generated only in speci ﬁc cells. De ﬁning which cells were stirred
and which were not (i.e. input pattern) could then impact the
formation of excitation wave patterns on the chemical system.
This is because the stirred cells are more likely to generate
oscillatory excited waves, which propagated to neighbouring cells
and eventually formed a globally synchronized wave pattern. The
speed of stirrers in the grid could be individually controlled and
input patterns with different stirrer speeds could result in different
global wave patterns of BZ reaction. Once a cell oscillates by being
stirred, it will continue to oscillate long after the stirring is stoppedARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2020) 11:1442 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications