convolutional network (see Methods), the accuracy increases up
to 92.5%. This result suggests that the BZ system produces
consistent patterns upon a speci ﬁc input pattern that can be
distinguished by a machine learning algorithm (which may be too
complicated for human eye). In other words, the BZ system
satisﬁes the echo state property of reservoir computing40; i.e. each
cell within its reservoir neighbours produces a nonlinear response
signal which is combined into a desired output signal by means of
linear combinations of these response signals in the BZ grid. In
contrast, when using the reservoir system without the BZ
reaction, but replaced with pure water, the output NN is not
capable of classifying the patterns because the dynamics of the
water are not suf ﬁcient to project input patterns into a higher
dimensional space (see Supplementary Methods 4).
Experimental benchmark of the chemical encoder . To prove
that during the pattern recognition process our BZ platform acts
like a chemical processor, a similar experiment is performed, but
in this case the BZ platform is replaced by a digital encoder that
has been trained to digitally produce BZ oscillations from input
motor patterns (Fig. 4b). The digital encoder uses the different
motor patterns as inputs, and then digitally generates a BZ
oscillation. Finally, this BZ oscillation is classi ﬁed using the same
NN that was just used as part of the ‘reservoir computer ’. The
digital encoder is implemented following the architecture of an
Autoencoder Neural Network (see Methods), and we estimate
that, based on our architecture, it would require 60 million of logic
gates for a forward pass through the network (see Supplementary
Methods 6 –8). Assuming that our BZ platform using 1 min ofwindow data encodes similarly to the digital encoder, then it
decodes the equivalent of 1 million logic gates per oscillation.
This is effectively the same process detailed in Fig. 4a, but by-
passing the BZ medium and using a digital encoder instead. The
NN correctly labelled the different BZ oscillations, both the ones
generated through the BZ medium, and the ones generated with
the digital encoder. This unequivocally means that our platform is
acting like a chemical processor because it is developing the same
role as a digital encoder; speci ﬁcally, we can consider this to be
acting like a chemical encoder.
Discussion
In this work we have shown a programmable chemical processor
driven by the oscillating BZ reaction and a reaction array of
25 switchable cells addressed by magnetic stirrers. The cells are
ﬂuidically connected so that the stirrer states affect both the local
and global pattern. This means that information can be encoded
into the chemical oscillators by the action of the stirrers, and then
decoded by using video to record the states of the cells in the
array as being in the oscillating on or non-oscillating off state. We
showed how a near in ﬁnite number states can be used to both
encode and decode letters and numbers, and that the chemical
processor is able to recognize patterns with a low error rate.
The described chemical processor can serve as a sophisticated
system in which the dynamics or functions that are theoretically
difﬁcult to infer can be calculated within the processing space
deﬁned by our BZ-driven chemical processor. For example, the
system can be exploited as a chemical encoding device (see Fig. 4).
In our tests, the system could distinguish a total of 20 patterns
a
BZ encoding
Input
dataUnique
data BZ
codesInput BZ
codesE
N
I
G
M
ADecoded
data
EncoderDecoderConvolutional neural network
1st layer 3rd layer 2nd layer
Generation 
of
oscillationsSignal
decodingA
Motor
array
BDECODER
3Digital encoderChemical encoderb
Fig. 4 Pattern classi ﬁcation and data encoding by BZ reaction and machine learning. a Schematic showing the full working pipeline of our system.
Initially the user selects an input pattern, and this pattern is binarized in a 5-by-5 matrix. This matrix is used as a source for the PWM generator, and t his
will eventually generate a global oscillation. These oscillations are then decoded when needed for pattern recognition. bFlow diagram of the pattern
recognition process comparing the BZ oscillations produced by a digital encoder and by the BZ platform. The A path uses the BZ medium as described
above. The B path uses a digital encoder that has been trained beforehand in order to digitally produce BZ oscillations from motor patterns. Once the
oscillations are generated using the BZ platform or the digital encoder, they are correctly decoded using a decoder as shown in ( a). Both in ( a) and ( b), a
snapshot of an oscillation is shown. The vertical axis of this snapshot represents each of the 25 cells, while the horizontal axis represents time. Thi s
snapshot was made juxtaposing consecutive frames to better represent the temporal domain of the BZ oscillations.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2020) 11:1442 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15190-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5