Sensors 2020 ,20, 3113 2 of 18
networks that assist monitoring of vehicular pollution level in the city [ 2]. Wireless networks or
wireless sensor networks (WSNs) comprise modern sensors which operate on AI based monitoring
and controlling methods. Internet of things (IoT) devices are employed in WSNs for e ective waste
management, vehicle marking, temperature control, and pollution control. Therefore, modern methods
of environment monitoring are known as SEM systems, due to use of IoT, AI and wireless sensors [ 3].
Assessment of burned areas using multispectral data captured through satellite imaging and remote
sensing [ 4], mobile health monitoring systems and IoT based environment systems [ 5], smart marine
environment systems using multimodal sensing networks [ 6], and many other SME methods are
reported in current literature. When wireless devices are used over a WSN, then certain standards
and protocols are important for e ective implementation of SEM systems and thus studies are also
reported on developing protocols and standards for IoT based SEM systems [7].
The whole world is working in a comprehensive manner to protect the environment for sustainable
agriculture, growth and a healthy society and therefore the main aim of SEM is to address the challenges
due to undesirable e ects in the environment through smart monitoring so that all key indicators of
growth, including the health of society, are well regulated. The environment monitoring methods are
implemented for various applications, aiming to serve certain purposes, which may include weather
forecasting [ 8,9], air pollution control [ 10–12], water quality control and monitoring [ 1,13,14], and crop
damage assessment [ 14,15], for instance. The objective is to facilitate favorable environment conditions
either for agriculture or human beings, or any inhabitants on the earth. The technologies such as IoT
and wireless networks have made the monitoring of environment simple and AI controlled. The SEM
systems are reported in the literature using di erent types of smart sensors [8,16–19], wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) [ 11,14,18,20–22], and IoT devices [ 1,3,5,8,10,18,23,24]; these devices, communicating
through the networks, have helped the environment monitoring as a smart monitoring system, able to
address the challenges in variable conditions.
IoT, WSNs and suitable sensors are the backbone of the SEM systems. The WSNs provide the
connectivity of the data, captured by employing sensors and IoT devices, used to record, monitor and
control various environmental conditions, such as water quality, temperature, air quality, etc. A smart
environment system can be easily understood with the help of an example of a cloud based SEM system,
as shown in Figure 1. The example shown in this ﬁgure depicts monitoring of water contamination
and its control, by using a cloud based system that connects IoT devices and various suitable sensors.
The system can monitor, with the help of IoT devices, if the water is contaminated or clean since all
IoT devices have embedded the capability of AI and machine learning. The organization, which is
involved in monitoring the water quality of various water sources, has access to the cloud through the
data collected from various sensors, for example an aqua sensor, and is subjected to IoT based analysis
where the quality check is done.
One more example of a SEM system, highlighting a general purpose system with extended scope,
is shown in Figure 2., which shows how the system is addressing various issues related to environment
monitoring, such as humidity, temperature, radiation, dust, UV signal etc. The backbone of the system
is a WSN that is establishing the actual interface between IoT devices and data captured through
various types of smart sensors. This is a perfect example of a “smart city” [ 11,25,26], using a SEM
system that ensures healthy environment for its citizen.