Sensors 2020 ,20, 3113 4 of 18
agriculture monitoring system includes all such factors, controlled and monitored with the help of IoT
devices, suitable sensors capturing the agricultural data, then transmitted to the cloud through a WSN.
Sensors 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
4 
 By focusing on agriculture, as a relevant issue for the growth of any nation, it is easy to underline 
how SEM can play a significant role by providing a “smart or green agriculture” [14,20,27,28], that 
can deal with major challenges and factors involved in sustainable growth and enhancing 
productivity within the agriculture sector. One such smart agriculture scenario can be seen in Figure 3, where a SEM system is actually a smart agricultur e monitoring system. In this case, the health of 
soil, moisture analysis, water contamination level, water quantity level and several other factors are very important in obtaining sustainable productivity in the agriculture sector. We can see in Figure 3 that the smart agriculture monitoring system includes  all such factors, controlled and monitored with 
the help of IoT devices, suitable sensors capturing the agricultural data, then transmitted to the cloud 
through a WSN.  
 
Figure 3. Smart agriculture monitoring system using IoT devices and sensors. 
We attempted to study the existing contribution s by a critical survey on SEM methods; the 
literature suggests that the extensive reviews on  SEM methods which have discussed significant 
findings are not found. We could not find much literature that re views or surveys SEM techniques. 
A survey on smart agriculture syst ems [29], smart home technologies [30], smart health monitoring 
systems [31], environment monitori ng [32], an IoT based ecological system [33], IoT for marine 
environment monitoring [34], and a survey on pollu tion monitoring system [35], are a few of the 
survey and review related articles highlighting  different aspects of SEM. The environment is 
contaminated due to several factors, but water pollution, air pollution, radiation and sound pollution are mainly involved in most of the existing research. This motivates us to bring out an extensive review on SEM that covers all important factors affecting the health of the environment and 
predominant methods used to mitigate the challenges  due to these factors, such as IoT and sensor 
technologies.  
We have briefly discussed in this section the ma in issues related to environment monitoring, 
SEM, the role of IoT, AI and WSNs in implementing SEM. The next part of the paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 discusses related research and study; Section 3 presents comparative analysis of advances in SEM systems; Section 4 highlights the significance of the study and recommendations).   
2. Related Research and Study 
The current research suggests that environmen t monitoring systems are implemented smartly 
as SEM for various purpos es and using different methods. A huge  number of contributions on SEM, 
Figure 3. Smart agriculture monitoring system using IoT devices and sensors.
We attempted to study the existing contributions by a critical survey on SEM methods; the literature
suggests that the extensive reviews on SEM methods which have discussed signiﬁcant ﬁndings are
not found. We could not ﬁnd much literature that reviews or surveys SEM techniques. A survey on
smart agriculture systems [ 29], smart home technologies [ 30], smart health monitoring systems [ 31],
environment monitoring [ 32], an IoT based ecological system [ 33], IoT for marine environment
monitoring [ 34], and a survey on pollution monitoring system [ 35], are a few of the survey and review
related articles highlighting di erent aspects of SEM. The environment is contaminated due to several
factors, but water pollution, air pollution, radiation and sound pollution are mainly involved in most
of the existing research. This motivates us to bring out an extensive review on SEM that covers all
important factors a ecting the health of the environment and predominant methods used to mitigate
the challenges due to these factors, such as IoT and sensor technologies.
We have brieﬂy discussed in this section the main issues related to environment monitoring, SEM,
the role of IoT, AI and WSNs in implementing SEM. The next part of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 discusses related research and study; Section 3 presents comparative analysis of advances in
SEM systems; Section 4 highlights the signiﬁcance of the study and recommendations).
2. Related Research and Study
The current research suggests that environment monitoring systems are implemented smartly
as SEM for various purposes and using di erent methods. A huge number of contributions on
SEM, both based on purposes and types of methods, have been studied and therefore the related
research has been discussed in three main subsections, namely the study based on smart agriculture
monitoring systems (SAMs), smart water pollution monitoring systems (SWPMs), and smart air quality
monitoring systems (SAQMs). In this manuscript the authors have attempted to critically report
the major ﬁndings and limitations of the current research on SEM. Soil monitoring (SM) [ 14,15,36],
ocean environment monitoring (OEM), marine environment monitoring (MEM), air quality monitoring
(AQM) [ 10,11,37,38], water quality monitoring (WQM) [ 14,39], and radiation monitoring (RM) [ 1,36]
have been covered, by o ering a wide analysis of di erent application ﬁelds of SEM.