Sensors 2020 ,20, 3113 10 of 18
the sub-subsidiary applications of these three major studies. The recent research contributions were
the main focus of the study though a few important research studies, conducted and investigated
in last two decades, were also included. The contributions were reported on various SEM methods
used for several purposes, mainly air quality assessment [ 1,5,11,12,47,58,76,85,89,90]; water pollution
monitoring methods [ 1,13,14,39,64,66,71–73,91–97]; radiation monitoring methods [ 1,36]; and smart
agriculture monitoring systems [1,14,28,54,60,62,63,98–102].
The extensive study on SEM methods brings out the following major observations for the discussion:
 The research on SEM includes various purposes, mainly on SAM, SWPM and SAQM. The study
of water pollution, air quality, soil moisture and humidity can help in modeling and design of
healthy environment systems that would also help smart agriculture for sustainable growth of
the economy.
 The methods under each of the purposes are divided in terms of sensory data used, machine
learning methods used, IoT devices used, and types of sensors involved. The current study made
by us mainly focused on impact of existing research on water quality monitoring, air quality
assessment, applications of SEM and smart agriculture systems.
 In most of the SEM methods, especially SAM and SWPM, CNN based deep learning methods are
used by the researchers and other deep learning models are not very frequently used.
 The sensory data vary in most of the applications of SEM and there is no robust data over which
a maximum number of methods are operating. The data type and regions of interest are not the
same for various research work.
 The methods have been used for either classiﬁcation or prediction; for example, water is classiﬁed
as polluted or clean water; similarly, the water and air quality can be predicted (e.g., level of
degradation).
The studies reported for all purposes of SEM systems do not have any common challenges and
vary from application to application, but the major challenges observed are as follows:
 Wherever heterogeneous sensors are used, there is problem of interoperability in the analysis of
the data captured through di erent types of sensors.
 Sample size is limited in many of the contributions.
 Noisy data poses a challenge in analysis. Noise is present in the data captured through sensors
used for various purposes. The noise may be contributed by several internal and external factors.
 The machine learning methods which have been employed for training the data and for
classiﬁcation are mostly traditional methods of machine learning, such as SVM, neural network, etc.
 Fuzzy based methods and deep learning approaches are used in a few research studies and
implementations, but the research suffers with either big data issues or huge computational complexity .
 There is no robust approach of machine learning reported, that can be employed in addressing the
challenges of the environment irrespective of the purpose of the monitoring and control, types of
data, and types of sensors used.
Research trends were also analyzed to assess the quantum of research carried out in the area of
SEM [ 14,21,31,103–113] and Table 5 shows a summary of quantity of research in this case. The study of
trends was made by using a publication search in the Science Direct databases in year-wise manner.
In this analysis, the duration has been chosen from year 1995 to year 2020. It can be clearly seen
in Table 5 that the quantum of research on SEM has been increasing with the time in both the case,
namely the research employing IoT and WSN, as well as the research using IoT and machine learning.
An interesting fact is an outcome of the table: the research using modern machine learning methods is
still lagging behind those which do not use any machine learning. However, if IoT devices are used,
and deployed in a WSN, then the role of AI cannot be overlooked.