Citation: Zhang, Y.; Liu, J.; Shen, W.
A Review of Ensemble Learning
Algorithms Used in Remote Sensing
Applications. Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app12178654
Academic Editor: Rub én
Usamentiaga
Received: 11 July 2022
Accepted: 26 August 2022
Published: 29 August 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Review
A Review of Ensemble Learning Algorithms Used in Remote
Sensing Applications
Yuzhen Zhang1,*
, Jingjing Liu1and Wenjuan Shen2,3
1School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
Beijing 100083, China
2College of Forestry, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China
3Co-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry University,
Nanjing 210037, China
*Correspondence: yzhang@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract: Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in various remote sensing applications
due to their ability to identify nonlinear correlations. Ensemble algorithms have been included
in many practical applications to improve prediction accuracy. We provide an overview of three
widely used ensemble techniques: bagging, boosting, and stacking. We ﬁrst identify the underlying
principles of the algorithms and present an analysis of current literature. We summarize some
typical applications of ensemble algorithms, which include predicting crop yield, estimating forest
structure parameters, mapping natural hazards, and spatial downscaling of climate parameters and
land surface temperature. Finally, we suggest future directions for using ensemble algorithms in
practical applications.
Keywords: bagging; boosting; stacking; remote sensing applications; ensemble
1. Introduction
Remote sensing is widely used in applications such as military reconnaissance, analysis
of natural hazards, detection of land use and land cover change, measurement of sea ice
distribution, precision agriculture, and estimation and mapping of carbon stocks [ 1,2].
The primary properties of the target detected by the sensor in these applications are in
the form of spatial, spectral, temporal, and polarization signatures [ 3]. Many models
of physical processes have been developed that quantify the data relationships between
sensor and target. These models include radiative transfer models, radiosity models, ray-
tracing models, dynamic global vegetation models, and land surface microwave emission
models, among others [ 4–9]. However, it is generally difﬁcult to obtain the parametric
input required for a physical process model, especially at a large scale. Some studies
have coupled a physical process model with a statistical method or used a statistical
method with a machine learning algorithm to extract crucial predictions for a speciﬁc
application. Since the remote sensing signals often provide a nonlinear representation
of the target, machine learning and deep learning algorithms have been widely used in
remote sensing applications, because they are not based on some underlying assumption
regarding the distribution of the data and they have a potent capacity to capture nonlinear
correlations [ 10,11]. Support vector machines (SVM) and random forests (RF) are two well-
known nonparametric machine learning algorithms that are used in many studies [ 12–14].
Some studies have claimed that no single algorithm could outperform every other
machine learning algorithm under all situations (sometimes called the no free lunch the-
orem) [ 15]. The ensemble learning technique has been developed in response to this
claim [ 16,17]. Ensemble learning techniques create multiple hypotheses and combine them
to solve a given problem, in contrast to conventional machine learning techniques that aim
to learn a single hypothesis from training data. [ 18,19]. By combining multiple learners
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12178654 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci