Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 2 of 20
and taking full advantage of these learners, ensemble algorithms have produced improved
results and reduced the overﬁtting problem, and they possess the ﬂexibility to deal with
different tasks [ 17,20,21]. Bagging, boosting, and stacking are three well established en-
semble techniques, although there exist some variants and other ensemble algorithms that
have been used in practical applications [ 17]. Current implementations of these algorithms
in R and Python are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Implementation of ensemble learning algorithms using R and Python.
AlgorithmImplementation with R and Python
R Package Python Library
Bagging ipred scikit-learn
RF randomForest/caret scikit-learn
ERT extraTrees scikit-learn
AdaBoost Adabag/fastAdaboost scikit-learn
GBM gbm scikit-learn
XGBoost xgboost/plyr xgboost
LightGBM lightgbm lightgbm
CatBoost catboost catboost/scikit-learn
Stacking stacks vecstack/scikit-learn
We present a general overview of the bagging, boosting, and stacking ensemble
techniques used in remote sensing. We ﬁrst review the principles underlying the three
types of ensemble algorithms in Section 2 and describe our literature search for publications
about bagging, boosting, and stacking ensembles in Section 3. In Section 4, we focus on
several ﬁelds of study that widely use ensemble techniques for objectives such as crop
yield prediction, estimation of forest structure parameters, mapping natural hazards, and
spatial downscaling, as well as other applications. Finally, we examine the issues related to
ensemble algorithms and future directions.
2. Principles of Ensemble Learning Algorithms
2.1. Bagging Algorithms
Bagging is an ensemble technique that combines multiple learners trained on distinct
subsamples of the original data. To build a bagging model, we generate multiple datasets by
bootstrapping the training data and then develop models based on the individual datasets
and make predictions using these models. All the predictions are then combined to produce
a representative value such as the mean, median, or majority vote for classiﬁcation and
averaging, for regression, depending on the problem to be solved. Since an individual
learner is often sensitive to noise in the training data, bagging, by aggregating multiple
results in a single prediction, should provide stable and improved results with decreased
variance [22].
RF is a modiﬁed version of bagging, in which the classiﬁcation and regression trees
(CART) technique is often used as the individual learner. RF uses subsamples of the original
data to build trees and randomly selects a subset of variables to determine each split in
the tree [ 23]. RF excludes approximately 30% of training samples from the modeling
due to bootstrapping and random subspace techniques and is often used to compute the
out-of-bag (OOB) prediction error.
Many studies have shown that RF outperforms other machine learning and statistical
regression algorithms [ 13]. It has many advantages, some of which are the following. Both
classiﬁcation and regression issues can be resolved using RF. In addition, RF is insensitive
to noise or outliers in the training data because it bins them. RF trains rapidly since it
incorporates only part of the features for training. RF is easy to use since only one or
two hyperparameters (i.e., the number of trees in the forest and the number of predictor
variables to be randomly selected at each junction) are required to be tuned. In addition,
an intrinsic estimate of the generalization error (the OOB error) is given. RF provides