Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 12 of 20
4.3. Natural Hazards
Natural hazards such as droughts, hurricanes, tornadoes, ﬂoods, and landslides can
affect human life and property [ 101]. Accurate prediction or mapping the probabilities of
natural disasters is therefore of great importance for human survival. Machine learning
algorithms, particularly ensemble algorithms, have high prediction accuracy [ 85] and so
have become increasingly used in identifying areas of long term drought [ 63], mapping
landslide hazards [ 81,90], assessing the susceptibility of gullies to erosion [ 102,103] and
mapping land susceptible to subsidence [78].
Arabameri et al. [ 62] combined three meta classiﬁers (Real AdaBoost, Random Sub-
space, and MultiBoosting) into a hybrid ensemble framework to predict the likelihood of
ﬂooding in the Gorganroud River Basin, Iran. Band et al. [ 65] used multiple ensemble algo-
rithms (GBM, RF, parallel random forest (PRF), regularized random forest (RRF), and ERT)
to quantify the likelihood of ﬂash ﬂooding in Markazi Province, Iran and found that ERT
was the most accurate model with an area under curve (AUC) value of 0.82. Chapi et al. [68]
combined bagging with logistic model trees (LMT) and developed a bagging–LMT en-
semble model to map ﬂood susceptibility. The results showed that in terms of accurately
mapping ﬂood susceptibility, the bagging–LMT model performed better than LMT, logis-
tic regression, Bayesian logistic regression, and RF. Hakim et al. [ 78] compared logistic
regression, MLP and two meta ensemble machine learning algorithms (AdaBoost and
LogitBoost) in predicting likely subsidence based on a land subsidence inventory map
generated from Sentinel-1 synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data. The results showed that
AdaBoost gave the greatest prediction accuracy (81.1%), followed by MLP (80%), logistic
regression (79.4%), and LogitBoost (79.1%). Kalantar et al. [ 81] investigated the suitability
of ﬂexible discriminant analysis (FDA), generalized logistic models (GLM), GBM, and RF
for mapping landslide susceptibility. The test results showed that FDA was similar in pre-
diction accuracy to GLM but was less accurate than GBM, which was in turn less accurate
than RF. Rahman et al. [ 87] compared a Bayesian regularization back propagation neural
network (BRBP), CART, an evidence belief function (EBF) and their various combinations in
ensemble models to predict ﬂood likelihood in Bangladesh. They found that the ensemble
model that combined BRBP , CART, and EBF using weighted averaging was more accurate
(AUC > 90%) than other models. In another study, Rahman et al. [ 86] found that stacking
locally weighted linear regression (LWLR) and RF models increased the prediction accuracy
of ﬂood susceptibility maps in Bangladesh, with R2= 0.967–0.999, MAE = 0.022–0.117,
RMSE = 0.029–0.148. Sachdeva et al. [ 90] used a majority voting ensemble technique to
predict landslide susceptibility and found that the ensemble model that combined logistic
regression, GBDT, and voting feature intervals produced predictions that were close in
accuracy to the predictions of widely used machine learning algorithms such as decision
trees, SVM, and RF.
4.4. Spatial Downscaling
Remote sensing data are often spatially downscaled to obtain ﬁne resolution (FR) data
from coarse resolution (CR) remote sensing data. The ﬁner resolution data provide more
spatial details and thus bridge the gap between what CR data provide and what regional
applications require. Statistical downscaling methods have frequently been used in several
domains to obtain FR parameters since they require less computation and running time, and
are more accurate than other downscaling methods such as dynamic downscaling [104].
The statistical downscaling procedure for retrieving FR data from CR data is as follows:
(1) develop models relating CR parameters and predictor variables or ancillary variables at
a coarse resolution; (2) apply the CR models to the FR data, assuming that the relationships
between target parameters and predictor variables remain unchanged at different spatial
scales; and (3) obtain the target FR parameters from the models and FR predictor variables
at a ﬁne resolution. A variety of machine learning algorithms, especially the increasingly
used ensemble learning algorithms, have been used as the relationships between target
parameters and predictor variables are often nonlinear and complex.