Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 11 of 20
4.2. Estimation of Forest Structure Parameters and Biomass
Forest structure parameters (e.g., forest height) and forest biomass are critical indica-
tors of carbon stocks and are increasingly important in ﬁelds related to the carbon cycle
and climate change [ 100]. Garc ía-Guti érrez et al. [ 76] compared a multiple linear regression
(MLR) model, a neural network, SVR, kNN, and RF in estimating forest parameters in the
province of Lugo (Galizia, Spain) from lidar data and found that MLR was outperformed
by ML algorithms and that SVR with Gaussian kernels outperformed the other algorithms.
Corte et al. [ 69] used SVR, ANN, RF, and XGBoost to estimate tree dendrometry parameters
such as volume, height and diameter at breast height from UAV-lidar point clouds. Their
results showed that all models were robust, with relative RMSE <29% for volume, <9% for
height and <15% for diameter at breast height; SVR performed the best in terms of minimal
error rates. SVR outperformed the ensemble algorithms in both studies and gave the most
accurate predictions.
Various ensemble algorithms have been developed to estimate forest parameters.
For example, Cartus et al. [ 67] used a two-stage model to derive forest canopy height
and growing stock volume (GSV) in Chile from a combination of airborne laser scanner
(ALS), PALSAR and Landsat data. They developed an RF model of canopy height and
GSV using ALS-derived values that were validated with in situ measurements and then
used a second RF model that used multitemporal PALSAR and Landsat data as predictor
variables and ALS-based estimates as response variables. At three test sites, the retrieval
of canopy height and GSV reached good accuracies with the R2of 0.70–0.85. Xu et al. [ 96]
developed a two-stage ensemble approach to increase the accuracy of forest GSV estimation.
They selected variables using a collinearity test and ran four base learners (CART, kNN,
SVR, and ANN) and combined them ﬁrst using bagging and then using AdaBoost to
generate eight ensemble models. The eight ensemble models were then aggregated using a
weighted average method in which the weights were determined by the validated relative
RMSE values of the eight ensemble models. The experimental results showed that the
combined ensemble approach signiﬁcantly reduced the uncertainty of GSV mapping from
the Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-2A data, with relative RMSE values in the range 18.89–21.34%.
Dube et al. [ 73] used stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) to estimate the stand volume
of eucalyptus plantations in South Africa from multisource data and found that SGB
accurately predicted stand volume, with R2= 0.78 and RMSE = 33.16 m3/ha. These results
were more accurate than the results given by RF or stepwise regression. Zhang et al. [ 28]
comprehensively assessed the performance of eight algorithms (SVR, MARS, MLP , RF,
ERT, SGB, GBRT, and CatBoost) in predicting forest biomass using several remote sensing
datasets. Their results indicated that ﬁve ensemble algorithms (RF, ERT, SGB, GBRT and
CatBoost) produced more accurate predictions than the other three individual algorithms
and that CatBoost obtained slightly more accurate results than the other four ensemble
algorithms, with R2= 0.72 and RMSE = 45.63 t/ha. In a subsequent study, they developed
a stacking model to combine several accurate base learners to further increase the accuracy
of biomass prediction, and the results indicated that the stacking ensemble increased
prediction accuracy; in particular, it decreased the biases [ 58]. Ghosh et al. [ 77] used a
stacked set of ensemble algorithms (RF, GBM, and XGBoost) to predict the aboveground
biomass of Indian mangroves from Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 time series. The results
indicated that stacking increased AGB prediction accuracy with RMSE = 72.864 t/ha and
relative RMSE = 11.38%.
Du et al. [ 72] developed a CNN model using ALS data and Landsat imagery and found
that CNN was more accurate than an extreme learning machine (ELM), a backpropagation
neural network, a regression tree, RF, SVR, KNN, and other standard machine learning
techniques. The stacking algorithm signiﬁcantly increased prediction accuracy when
compared with base models.