Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 14 of 20
Ensemble algorithms are essentially black box models that carry the risk of overﬁtting,
and the underlying physical mechanisms can be obscure [ 108]. It is therefore critical to
identify important variables by selecting features before training a model; ﬁlter, wrapper,
and embedded algorithms are just a few of the feature selection techniques that have been
proposed [106,109].
Some studies have highlighted the importance of combining feature selection with
ensemble learning algorithms in practical applications. For example, Luo et al. [ 43] found
that recursive feature elimination (RFE) for feature selection in combination with a Cat-
Boost model produced the most accurate prediction of forest biomass for all forests in Jilin
province, China with RMSE = 25.77 t/ha. There have also been studies that used a variance
inﬂation factor (VIF) to quantify multicollinearity between independent variables, and only
variables with VIF values < 10 were ﬁnally included for modeling [ 62,110]. Of the three
types of ensemble learning methods, tree-based bagging and boosting algorithms have
identiﬁed important variables mainly by permutation importance [ 111,112]. Some other
indicators, such as mean decrease in accuracy and mean decrease in impurity, have also
been used in association with tree-based algorithms (e.g., RF) [ 113]. In contrast, stacking en-
semble algorithms appear to have difﬁculty in selecting important variables due to working
with a set of models rather than an individual model, and it can be difﬁcult to interpret the
ensemble results [ 88,114]. Feature selection should thus be implemented with care when
stacking, but this aspect of the technique has been little explored in published studies.
5.2. Other Ensemble Learning Algorithms
In this study, we primarily reviewed bagging, boosting and stacking ensemble algo-
rithms. Other ensemble learning algorithms have been developed in addition to these
well-known algorithms, such as dynamic ensemble learning [ 115] and Bayesian additive
regression trees [ 116]. The dynamic ensemble method, unlike static ensemble algorithms
which combine ﬁxed base learners, selects the single best learner or combines a subset of
learners from the pool using a just-in-time condition that depends on the particular input
pattern from which a prediction is to be made when making a prediction [117–119].
Blending is another ensemble technique that is derived from stacking. Blending differs
from stacking in that it does not use k-fold cross-validation to generate training data for
the meta learner but instead uses a one-holdout set. This technique results in only a small
portion of the training dataset being used to generate predictions to be used as inputs to a
meta model [93,120].
5.3. Deep Learning Algorithms
Deep learning algorithms are used in many ﬁelds, including agriculture and remote
sensing. The base learners in current ensemble models are mostly statistical and conven-
tional ML methods, and the possibility of combining deep learning models in several ways
is worthy of investigation. Deep learning algorithms have been used as base learners in
some studies with the intention of increasing prediction accuracy. For example, de Oliveira
e Lucas et al. [ 70] used three CNNs to predict reference evapotranspiration time series and
developed ensemble models consisting of the three CNNs. The CNN ensembles produced
predictions with high accuracy and low variance. Lv et al. [ 47] developed a heterogeneous
ensemble learning approach that combined three deep learning models (a deep belief net-
work (DBN), a CNN and a deep residual network (ResNet)) to map landslide susceptibility
in the Three Gorges reservoir area in China.
Deep learning algorithms well capture nonlinear relationships between target and
sensor signals, so an ensemble of various deep learning algorithms should produce more
accurate predictions than a single algorithm. The three principal ensemble methods we
described in this study, particularly stacking, provide a framework for leveraging differ-
ent algorithms. Future studies will investigate optimal combinations of deep learning
algorithms in various applications.