Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 15 of 20
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we reviewed bagging, boosting, and stacking ensemble learning algo-
rithms and their typical applications in the use of remote sensing data. RF was the most
often adopted algorithm in several ﬁelds that used remote sensing data. In contrast, the
other ensemble algorithms were often not considered for speciﬁc applications. Despite
recent progress in increasing the prediction accuracy of ensemble algorithms, there are still
some gaps in our knowledge, such as how to effectively combine feature selection with
ensemble algorithms and how to incorporate deep learning algorithms in an ensemble to
increase prediction accuracy. The understanding of ensemble algorithms deserves to be the
main focus of future study and will enable us to incorporate more advanced and diverse
algorithms in practical applications.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41801347
and 32001251), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200781).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Nomenclature
AdaBoost adaptive boosting
ANN artiﬁcial neural networks
ARMA autoregressive–moving-average
ARIMA autoregressive integrated moving average
BPNN back propagation neural network
BRT boosted regression tree
CART classiﬁcation and regression trees
CatBoost categorical boosting
CNN convolutional neural networks
DBN deep belief network
DL deep learning
DT decision tree
EBF evidence belief function
ELM extreme learning machine
ENR elastic net regression
ERT extremely randomized trees
FDA ﬂexible discriminant analysis
GBDT gradient boosting decision tree
GBRT gradient boosting regression tree
GLM generalized logistic models
GP Gaussian process
kNN k-nearest neighbor
LMT logistic model tree
LR linear regression
LSSVM least square support vector machine
LWLR locally weighted linear regression
MADT multiclass alternating decision trees
MARS multivariate adaptive regression splines
MLP multilayer perceptron
MLR multiple linear regression
PRF parallel random forest
REPT reduced error pruning tree
ResNet residual neural network
RF random forest
RR ridge regression
RRF regularized random forest
RT regression tree