Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 13 of 20
RF has been widely used to upscale large-scale precipitation, land surface temperature
(LST), and soil moisture remote sensing data. For example, Shi et al. [ 91] established
nonparametric relationships between precipitation and six indicators (EVI, altitude, slope,
aspect, latitude, and longitude) using RF and spatially downscaled annual precipitation for
2001–2012 from 0.25pixels to 1 km pixels over the Tibetan Plateau. Zhao et al. [ 97] used
RF to downscale the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) monthly precipitation
product from 25 km resolution to produce monthly precipitation data for China at 1 km
resolution. Hutengs and Vohland [ 80] developed a model relating LST to digital elevation
data, land cover type, and surface reﬂectance in the red and near-infrared bands using
RF; they downscaled the spatial resolution of LST from 1 km to 250 m, with the RMSEs
from 1.41 to 1.92 K. When compared to the widely-adopted TsHARP sharpening method,
downscaling accuracy using RF improved up to 19%. Karami et al. [ 83] created an RF-based
regression tree to downscale the daily SMAP soil moisture product at 9 km resolution
and created a 1 km soil moisture product using Sentinel-1 data, MODIS NDVI, land cover,
and auxiliary topography and soil properties. Xu et al. [ 94] combined wavelet analysis
with machine learning algorithms to create a wavelet support vector machine (WSVM)
and a wavelet random forest (WRF) algorithm to downscale North American multimodel
ensemble (NMME) precipitation forecasts. Their results showed improvement over quantile
mapping, with an average decrease in RMSE of 18–40 mm (21–33%).
Several ensemble boosting algorithms have also been used for spatial downscaling.
Wei et al. [ 92] created high resolution soil moisture maps covering the entire Tibetan
Plateau using GBRT with SMAP soil moisture data and related variables derived from
MODIS and DEM. Using GBRT, Asadollah et al. [ 64] yielded a signiﬁcant improvement
in downscaling global climate model predictions, compared to SVR that was previously
found as the most suitable for downscaling climate in Iran. Xu et al. [ 95] developed a
multifactor geographically weighted machine learning algorithm using Sentinel-2A data
that combined the results from three base learners (XGBoost, MARS, and Bayesian ridge
regression) and downscaled LST at 30 m resolution to 10 m resolution.
4.5. Other Applications
Other applications have used ensemble learning algorithms. In this section, we brieﬂy
mention some studies that recognized the importance of stacking.
Wu et al. [ 93] developed a two-layer stacking and blending ensemble method to predict
daily reference evapotranspiration in which level 0 models included RF, SVR, multilayer
perceptron neural network (MLP), and kNN. Both stacking and blending were signiﬁcantly
more accurate than the base models, and this approach is thus highly recommended for
predicting reference evapotranspiration. Cho et al. [ 46] used a stacking model to predict
daily maximum air temperature that consisted of multiple linear regression (MLR) and
support vector regression (SVR), and RF was optimized by SVR. The stacking ensemble
method produced more accurate predictions than cokriging, three distinct data-driven
methods, and a simple average ensemble model. Divina et al. [ 71] showed that stacking was
a suitable approach for short term electricity consumption forecasting. Healey et al. [ 79]
showed that stacking increased the accuracy of detection of forest change. They investigated
a stacking model using both parametric and RF-based image fusion rules as the meta learner
to combine several forest disturbance detection algorithms and found that stacking using
an RF model to build the meta learner reduced the rates of errors of omission and errors
of commission by 50% in some instances when compared to individual change detection
methods and by 25% when compared with stacking using a logistic regression model as
the meta learner.
5. Discussion and Future Directions
5.1. Combining Feature Selection with Ensemble Learning
Many studies have shown that using selected important features or variables instead
of using all extracted variables can result in more accurate and robust predictions [ 105–107].