Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 5 of 20
We then constructed a co-occurrence network by identifying keywords in the searched
ensemble literatures, calculating the frequencies of their co-occurrences, and analyzing the
networks to ﬁnd central words and clusters of themes in the network (Figure 2). The con-
structed network showed that studies of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly related
to classiﬁcation, and studies of ensemble method use or ensemble models were primarily
concerned with RF. In addition, the co-occurrence network suggested that applications
concerning crop yield, biomass, rainfall, landslides, and satellite products were connected
to ensemble algorithms.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 19  
We then constructed a co -occurrence network by identifying keywords in the 
searched ensemble literatures, calculating the frequencies of their co -occurrences, and an-
alyzing the networks to find central words and clus ters of themes in the network (Figure 
2). The constructed network showed that studies of ensemble learning algorithms were 
mainly related to classification, and studies of ensemble method use or ensemble models 
were primarily concerned with RF. In addition, the co -occurrence network suggested that 
applications concerning crop yield, biomass, rainfall, landslides, and satellite products 
were connected to ensemble algorithms . 
 
Figure 2. Co-occurrence network of keywords in ensemble literature.  
4. App lications of Ensemble Learning Algorithms  
The co -occurrence network (Figure 2) combined with our reading of the ensemble 
literature shows that typical applications of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly 
concerned with the following issues: yield predi ction, forest structure and biomass esti-
mation, mapping of natural hazards (e.g., land susceptibility to natural disasters), and 
spatial downscaling of land surface temperature and rainfall (Table 2). RF was the most 
frequently used ensemble algorithm (30 times) in the 43 applications listed in Table 2, 
followed by stacking (13 times), while boosting algorithms were less frequently used (Ta-
ble 3). Only seven studies used XGBoost;  GBRT and AdaBoost were used four times. MLP 
and kNN often served as reference models to evaluate the performance of an ensemble 
algorithm.  
  
Figure 2. Co-occurrence network of keywords in ensemble literature.
4. Applications of Ensemble Learning Algorithms
The co-occurrence network (Figure 2) combined with our reading of the ensemble
literature shows that typical applications of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly
concerned with the following issues: yield prediction, forest structure and biomass estima-
tion, mapping of natural hazards (e.g., land susceptibility to natural disasters), and spatial
downscaling of land surface temperature and rainfall (Table 2). RF was the most frequently
used ensemble algorithm (30 times) in the 43 applications listed in Table 2, followed by
stacking (13 times), while boosting algorithms were less frequently used (Table 3). Only
seven studies used XGBoost; GBRT and AdaBoost were used four times. MLP and kNN
often served as reference models to evaluate the performance of an ensemble algorithm.