Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 4 of 20
Diversity is a measure of the dependence or complementariness among learners [ 51]. That
base learners have high diversity implies that they are skilled in different ways, and thus
stacking them could lead to improved results. There are many measures of diversity,
such as Q-statistics in classiﬁcation, and the variance of ensemble predictions around their
weighted mean in regression [ 52]; no one measure has been shown to be the best [ 51,53,54].
In addition to the diversity and accuracy of base learners, the number of base learners also
affects the performance of stacking. More base learners are not always associated with
more accurate predictions, but they do require additional memory usage and computing
time [ 55]. Some studies have suggested that three to four base learners stacked together are
a suitable choice [ 56], and some action should be taken to ensure that an optimal subset of
base learners is used in stacking.
A two-layer stacking model is often adopted in practical applications, although stack-
ing models with more than two layers are sometimes used to further improve results [57].
A two-layer stacking model is constructed as follows (Figure 1). A k-fold cross-validation
is initially used to create k veriﬁcation datasets on all the base learners. The cross-validated
predictions are then used as new training data for the meta learner in the second layer; the
number of base learners in the ﬁrst layer is equal to the number of predictors in the second
layer, and the test data are created by adding the averages of the k-fold predictions of the
base learners [ 47,58]. In some classiﬁcation studies, class probabilities were used instead of
predicted classes as input attributes for the meta learner, which provided an effective way
of combining base model conﬁdences [ 20]. The inclusion of engineered original features in
stacking has been shown to give better performance [ 58,59]. There have also been studies
that used weighted stacking to improve results [60].
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 19  
an individual base learner, whether using majority voting or weighted averaging [20,46–
48]. 
Generally, stacking consists of several base learners (level 0) and a meta learner (level 
1), in which the outputs of base learners serve as  inputs of the meta learner. Both the pre-
cision and variety of base learners affect the performance of a stacking algorithm [49,50] . 
Diversity is a measure of the dependence or complementariness among learners  [51]. That 
base learners have high diversity implies that they are skilled in different ways, and thus 
stacking them could lead to improved results. There are  many measures of diversity, such 
as Q -statistics in classification, and the variance of ensemble predictions around their 
weighted mean in regression [52]; no one measure has been shown to be the best 
[51,53,54] . In addition to the diversity and accuracy of base learners, the number of base 
learners also affects the performance of stacking. More base learners are not always asso-
ciated with more accurate predictions, but they do require additional memory usage and 
computing time [55]. Some studies have suggested that three to four  base learners stacked 
together are a suitable choice [56], and some action should be taken to ensure that an op-
timal subset of base learners is used in stacking.  
A two -layer stacking model is of ten adopted in practical applications, although stack-
ing models with more than two layers are sometimes used to further improve results [57]. 
A two -layer stacking model is constructed as follows (Figure 1). A k -fold cross -validation 
is initially used to create k verification datasets on all the base learners. The cross -vali-
dated predictions are then used as new training data  for the meta learner in the second 
layer; the number of base learners in the first layer is equal to the number of predictors in 
the second layer, and the test data are created by adding the averages of the k -fold pre-
dictions of the base learners [47,58] . In some classification studies, class probabilities were 
used instead of predicted classes as input attributes for the meta learner, which prov ided 
an effective way of combining base model confidences [20]. The inclusion of engineere d 
original features in stacking has been shown to give better performance [58,59] . There 
have also been studies  that used weighted stacking to improve results [60]. 
 
Figure 1. Statistics of ensemble literature in the refined areas.  
3. Literature Search and Analysis  
We conducted a literature survey of the ISI Web of Science database using the search 
term TOPIC ensemble AND TOPIC remote sensing. The search was then refined to in-
clude research areas Remote Sensing, Geography, Agriculture, Forestry and Environmen-
tal Sciences Ecology and document types Articles, Meeting , and Review articles. This 
yielded a total of 2247 results that we refer to as ensemble literature.  
Research article s accounted for 84% of the records returned, conference papers for 
14% and review articles for 2% (Figure 1). The publication years of the refined search rec-
ords returned ranged from 1979 to 2022. In 2015 –2022, more than 100 papers meeting the 
search crite ria were published annually (Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Statistics of ensemble literature in the reﬁned areas.
3. Literature Search and Analysis
We conducted a literature survey of the ISI Web of Science database using the search
term TOPIC ensemble AND TOPIC remote sensing. The search was then reﬁned to include
research areas Remote Sensing, Geography, Agriculture, Forestry and Environmental
Sciences Ecology and document types Articles, Meeting, and Review articles. This yielded
a total of 2247 results that we refer to as ensemble literature.
Research articles accounted for 84% of the records returned, conference papers for 14%
and review articles for 2% (Figure 1). The publication years of the reﬁned search records
returned ranged from 1979 to 2022. In 2015–2022, more than 100 papers meeting the search
criteria were published annually (Figure 1).