static; thus, models may still achieve outstanding
performance on tasks but fail on simple challenge
examples and falter in real-world scenarios. We
leave this as future works to construct a platform
including dataset creation, model development, and
assessment, leading to more robust and informative
benchmarks.
D CBLUE Background
Standard datasets and shared tasks have played es-
sential roles in promoting the development of AI
technology. Taking the Chinese BioNLP commu-
nity as an example, the CHIP (China Health Infor-
mation Processing) conference releases biomedical-
related shared tasks every year, which has exten-
sively advanced Chinese biomedical NLP technol-
ogy. However, some datasets are no longer avail-
able after the end of shared tasks, which has raised
issues in the data acquisition and future research of
the datasets.
In recent years, we can obtain state-of-the-art
performance for many downstream tasks with the
help of pre-trained language models. A signiﬁcant
trend is the emergence of multi-task leaderboards,
such as GLUE (General Language Understanding
Evaluation) and CLUE (Chinese Language Un-
derstanding Evaluation). These leaderboards pro-
vide a fair benchmark that attracts the attention of
many researchers and further promotes the develop-
ment of language model technology. For example,
Microsoft has released BLURB (Biomedical Lan-
guage Understanding & Reasoning Evaluation) at
the end of 2020 in the medical ﬁeld. Recently, the
Tianchi platform has launched the CBLUE (Chi-
nese Biomedical Language Understanding Evalua-
tion) public benchmark under the guidance of the
CHIP Society. We believe that the release of the
CBLUE will further attract researchers’ attention to
the medical AI ﬁeld and promote the development
of the community.
CBLUE 1.015comprises the previous shared
tasks of the CHIP conference and the dataset from
Alibaba QUAKE Search Engine, including named
entity recognition, information extraction, clinical
diagnosis normalization, single-sentence/sentence-
pair classiﬁcation.
15We release the benchmark following the CC BY-NC 4.0
license.E Detailed Task Introduction
E.1 Chinese Medical Named Entity
Recognition Dataset (CMeEE)
Task Background As an essential subtask of
information extraction, entity recognition has
achieved promising results in recent years. Biomed-
ical texts such as textbooks, encyclopedias, clinical
trials, medical literature, electronic health records,
and medical examination reports contain rich med-
ical knowledge. Named entity recognition is the
process of extracting medical terminologies, such
as diseases and symptoms, from the above men-
tioned unstructured or semi-structured texts, and
it can help signiﬁcantly improve the efﬁciency of
scientiﬁc research. CMeEE dataset is proposed for
this purpose, and the original dataset was released
at the CHIP2020 conference.
Task Description This task is deﬁned as given
the pre-deﬁned schema and an input sentence to
identify medical entities and to classify them into
9 categories, including disease (dis), clinical symp-
toms(sym), drugs (dru), medical equipment (equ),
medical procedures (pro), body (bod), medical ex-
amination items (ite), microorganisms (mic), de-
partment (dep). For the detailed annotation instruc-
tions, please refer to the CBLUE ofﬁcial website,
and examples are shown in Table 7.
Annotation Process The annotation guide was
conducted by two medical experts from Class A
tertiary hospitals and optimized during the trail
annotation process. A total of 32 annotators had
participated in the annotation process, including 2
medical experts who are also the owner of the an-
notation guideline, 4 experts from the biomedical
informatics ﬁeld, 6 medical M.D., and 22 master
students from computer science majors. The anno-
tation lasts for about three months (from October
2018 to December 2018), as well as an additional
month’s time for curation. The total expense is
about 50,000 RMB.
The annotation process was divided into two
stages.
•Stage1: This stage was called the trail annota-
tion phase. The medical experts gave training
to the annotators to make sure they had a com-
prehensive understanding of the task. Two
rounds of trail annotation were conducted by
the annotators, with the purpose of getting
familiar with the annotation task as well as