the task is to classify each of them into one of 11
medical intent categories deﬁned in KUAKE-QIC.
Those include diagnosis, etiology analysis, treat-
ment plan, medical advice, test result analysis and
others.
KUAKE-QTR For this task, the dataset is used
to estimate the relevance of the title of a query
document. Given a query (e.g., “Symptoms of
vitamin B deﬁciency”), the task aims to ﬁnd the
relevant title (e.g., “The main manifestations of
vitamin B deﬁciency”).
KUAKE-QQR For this task, the dataset is used
to evaluate the relevance of the content expressed
in two queries. Similar to KUAKE-QTR, the task
aims to estimate query-query relevance, which is an
essential and challenging task in real-world search
engines.
3.3 Data Collection
Since machine learning models are mostly data-
driven, data plays a critical role, and it is pretty
often in the form of a static dataset (Gebru et al.,
2018). We collect data for different tasks from di-
verse sources, including clinical trials, EHRs, med-
ical books, and search logs from real-world search
engines. As biomedical data may contain private in-
formation such as the patient’s name, age, and gen-
der, all collected datasets are anonymized and
reviewed by the IRB committee of each data
provider to preserve privacy. We introduce the
data collection details followingly.
Collection from Clinical Trials
Clinical trial eligibility criteria text is collected
from ChiCTR, a non-proﬁt organization that pro-
vides information about clinical trial registration
for public research use. In each trial registry ﬁle, el-
igibility criteria text is organized as a paragraph in
the inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria. Some
meaningless texts are excluded, and the remain-
ing texts are annotated to generate the CHIP-CTC
dataset.
Collection from EHRs
We obtain the ﬁnal diagnoses of the medical
records from several Class A tertiary hospitals and
sample a few diagnosis items from different medi-
cal departments to construct the CHIP-CDN dataset
for research purposes. The diagnosis items are
randomly sampled from the items which are not
covered by the common medical synonyms dict.No privacy information is involved in the ﬁnal
diagnoses.
Collection from Medical Forum and Textbooks
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, online consulta-
tion has become more and more popular via the
Internet. To promote data diversity, we select the
online questions by patients to build the CHIP-STS
dataset. Note that most of the questions are chief
complaints. To ensure the authority and practicabil-
ity of the corpus, we also select medical textbooks
of Pediatrics (Wang et al., 2018), Clinical Pedi-
atrics (Shen and Gui, 2013) and Clinical Practice4.
We collect data from these sources to construct the
CMeIE and CMeEE datasets.
Collection from Search Engine Logs
We also collect search logs from real-world search
engines like the Alibaba KUAKE Search Engine5.
First, we ﬁlter the search queries in the raw search
logs by the medical tag to obtain candidate med-
ical texts. Then, we sample the documents for
each query with non-zero relevance scores (i.e.,
to determine if the document is relevant to the
query). Speciﬁcally, we divide all the documents
into three categories, namely high, middle, and tail
documents, and then uniformly sample the data
to guarantee diversity. We leverage the data from
search logs to construct KUAKE-QTC, KUAKE-
QTR, and KUAKE-QQR datasets.
3.4 Annotation
Each sample is annotated by three to ﬁve domain
experts , and the annotation with the majority of
votes is taken to estimate human performance. Dur-
ing the annotation phase, we add control questions
to prevent dishonest behaviors by the domain ex-
perts. Consequently, we reject any annotations
made by domain experts who fail in the training
phase and do not adopt the results of those who
achieved low performance on the control tasks.
We maintain strict and high criteria for approval
and review at least 10 random samples from each
worker to decide whether to approve or reject all
their HITs. We also calculate the average inter-
rater agreement between annotators using Fleiss’
Kappa scores (Fleiss, 1971), ﬁnding that ﬁve out
of six annotations show almost perfect agreement
(= 0:9).
4http://www.nhc.gov.cn/
5https://www.myquark.cn/