(a) CMeEE
SentenceRelation type Relation subtype (b) CMeIE
Figure 1: Analysis of the named entity recognition and information extraction datasets. (a) illustrates the entity
(coarse-grained) distribution in CMeEE and the impact of data distribution on the model’s performance. We set
entity type Body with the maximum number of entities to 1.0, and others to the ratio of number or F1 score to
Body. (b) shows the relation hierarchy in CMeIE.
3.5 Characteristics
Utility-preserving Anonymization Biomedical
data may be considered as a breach in the pri-
vacy of individuals because they usually contain
sensitive information. Thus, we conduct utility-
preserving anonymization following (Lee et al.,
2017) to anonymize the data before releasing the
benchmark.
Real-world Distribution To promote the gener-
alization of models, all the data in our CBLUE
benchmark follow real-world distribution with-
out up/downsampling. As shown in Figure 1(a),
our dataset follows long-tail distribution following
Zipf’s law and will inevitably be long-tailed. How-
ever, long-tail distribution has no signiﬁcant effect
on performance. Further, some datasets, such as
CMedIE, have label hierarchy with both coarse-
grained and ﬁne-grained relation labels, as shown
in Figure 1(b).
Diverse Tasks Setting Our CBLUE benchmark
includes eight diverse tasks, including named en-
tity recognition, relation extraction, and single-
sentence/sentence-pair classiﬁcation. Besides the
independent and i.i.d. scenarios, our CBLUE
benchmark also contains a speciﬁc transfer learn-
ingscenario supported by the CHIP-STS dataset,
in which the testing set has a different distribution
from the training set.3.6 Leaderboard
We provide a leaderboard for users to submit their
own results on CBLUE. The evaluation system will
give ﬁnal scores for each task when users submit
their prediction results. The platform offers 60
free GPU hours from Aliyun6to help researchers
develop and train their models.
3.7 Distribution and Maintenance
Our CBLUE benchmark was released online on
April 1, 2021. Up to now, more than 300 re-
searchers have applied the dataset, and over 80
teams have submitted their model predictions to our
platform, including medical institutions (Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, etc.), universities
(Tsinghua University, Zhejiang University, etc.),
and companies (Baidu, JD, etc.). We will continue
to maintain the benchmark by attending to new
requests and adding new tasks.
3.8 Reproducibility
To make it easier to use the CBLUE benchmark,
we also offer a toolkit implemented in PyTorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) for reproducibility. Our toolkit
supports mainstream pre-trained models and a wide
range of target tasks.
6https://tianchi.aliyun.com/
notebook-ai/