Intent Sentences
病情诊断
disease diagnosis最近早上起来浑身无力是怎么回事？
Why do I always feel weak after I get up in the morning?
我家宝宝快五个月了，为什么偶尔会吐清水带？
Why does my 5-month-old baby occasionally vomit clear liquid?
注意事项
precautions哮喘应该注意些什么
What should patients with asthma pay attention to?
孕妇能不能吃榴莲
Can a pregnant woman eat durians?
柿子不能和什么一起吃
Which food cannot be eaten together with persimmons?
糖尿病人饮食注意什么啊？
What should patients with diabetes pay attention to about their diet?
就医建议
medical advice糖尿病该做什么检查？
What examination should patients with diabetes receive?
肚子疼去什么科室？
Which department should patients with stomachache visit?
Table 12: Examples in KUAKE-QIC
Query Title Level
缺维生素b的症状
Symptoms of Vitamin B deﬁciency维生素b缺乏症的主要表现
What are the major symptoms of
Vitamin B deﬁciency?3
大腿软组织损伤怎么办
How can I treat a soft tissue
injury in the thigh?腿部软组织损伤怎么办
What’s the treatment for a soft tissue
injury in the leg?2
小腿抽筋是什么原因引起的
What causes lower leg cramps?小腿抽筋后一直疼怎么办
How can I treat pains caused by lower
leg cramps?1
挑食是什么原因造成的
What is the cause of picky eating?挑食是什么原因造成的
What is the cause of picky eating?0
Table 13: Examples in KUAKE-QTR
Similar to the KUAKE-QIC task, the KUAKE-
QTR annotation process was divided into three
steps with minor changes:
The training and examination stage: The seven
annotators got trained by the two FTE (full-time
employee) experts to understand the tasks, then
each one was given 200 records to label, which
have ground-truth answer annotated by FTE ex-
perts. The precision must be above 85% to get past
the test.
The second step was the formal annotation step,
and Each annotator was given 3,000 records to la-
bel, among which 100 were with golden labels. Theannotation tools would automatically evaluate the
annotation quality by comparing the label between
the annotators’ ones and the golden ones. Help
would be given to the annotators if necessary. Only
the precision exceeding the threshold 0.85 would
be handed to the next round.
The last step was the quality control step, the
sampling strategy was adopted, and 100 records
were sampled for validation by the FTE medical
experts; bad cases would be returned to the crowd-
sourcing annotators to be ﬁxed.