PII and IRB The corpus is collected from user
queries from the KUAKE search engine, and it
doesn’t refer to the ethics, which has been checked
by the IRB committee of the provider.
During the annotation step, sentences with PHI
information or offensive information (like sexual
queries) are discarded by the annotators manually.
The dataset also got passed the data disclosure pro-
cess of Alibaba.
The CBLUE team has also validated the dataset
record by record to guarantee there is no PII in-
cluded. One record with the NULL label was dis-
carded with the permission of the provider.
Evaluation Metrics Same as the KUAKE-QIC
task, accuracy is used for the evaluation of this task.
Dataset Statistic This task has 24,174 training
set data, 2,913 validation set data, and 54,65 test
set data.
Dataset Provider This dataset is provided by Al-
ibaba QUAKE Search Engine.
E.8 KUAKE - Query Query Relevance
Dataset (KUAKE-QQR)
Task Background KUAKE Query-Query Rele-
vance is a dataset that evaluates the relevance be-
tween two given queries to resolve the long-tail
challenges for search engines. Similar to KUAKE-
QTR, query-query relevance is an essential and
challenging task in real-world search engines.
Task Description The correlation between
Query and Title is divided into 3 levels (0-2), 0
is the worst, and 2 stands for the best correlation.
For the detailed annotation instructions, please re-
fer to the CBLUE ofﬁcial website. Examples are
shown in Table 14.
Annotation Process The same as KUAKE-QTR
except for the expense, which is 22,000 RMB in
total.
PII and IRB The same as KUAKE-QTR.
Evaluation Metrics Same with the KUAKE-
QIC and KUAKE-QTR tasks, accuracy is used for
the evaluation metrics.
Dataset Statistic This task has 15,000 training
set data, 1,600 validation set data, and 1,596 test
set data.
Dataset Provider This dataset is provided by Al-
ibaba QUAKE Search Engine.F Experiments Details
This section details the training procedures and
hyper-parameters for each of the data sets. We
utilize Pytorch to conduct experiments, and all run-
ning hyper-parameters are shown in the following
Tables. There are two stages in CMeIE, namely,
entity recognition (CMeEE-ER) and relation clas-
siﬁcation (CMeEE-RE). So we detail the hyper-
parameters in CMeEE-ER and CMeEE-RE, respec-
tively.
Requirements
• python3
• pytorch 1.7
• transformers 4.5.1
• jieba
• gensim
Hyper-parameters for Speciﬁc Task is shown
in Table 15-26
G Error Analysis for Other Tasks
We introduce the error deﬁnition as follows and
illustrate some error cases for other tasks in Table
27 to 32.
Ambiguity indicates that the instance has a sim-
ilar context but different meaning, which mislead
the prediction.
Need domain knowledge indicates that there
exist biomedical terminologies in the instance
which require domain knowledge to understand.
Need syntactic knowledge indicates that there
exists complex syntactic structure in the instance,
and the model fails to understand the correct mean-
ing.
Entity overlap indicates there exist multiple
overlapping entities in the instance.
Long sequence indicates that the input instance
is very long.
Annotation error indicates that the annotated
label is wrong.
Wrong entity boundary indicates that the in-
stance has the wrong entity boundary.
Rare words indicates that there exist low-
frequency words in the instance.
Multiple triggers indicates that there exist mul-
tiple indicative words which mislead the prediction.
Colloquialism (very common in the search
queries) indicates that the instance is quite different