or procedures; for example, “heart tack” and “MI”
both stand for the standard terminology “myocar-
dial infarction”. The goal of this task is to ﬁnd
the standard phrases (i.e., ICD codes) for the given
clinical term. With the help of the standard code,
it can help ease the burden of researchers for the
statistical analysis of clinical trials; also, it can be
helpful for the insurance companies on the DRGs
or DIP-related applications. This task is proposed
for this purpose, and the originally shared task was
released at the CHIP2020 conference.
Task Description The task aims to standardize
the terms from the ﬁnal diagnoses of Chinese elec-
tronic medical records. No privacy information is
involved in the ﬁnal diagnosis. Given the original
terms, it is required to predict its corresponding
standard phrase from the standard vocabulary of
“International Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD-10)
for Beijing Clinical Edition v601”. For the detailed
annotation instructions, please refer to the CBLUE
ofﬁcial website. Examples are shown in Table 9.
Annotation Process The Chinese Diagnostic
Normalization Data Set (CHIP-CDN) was anno-
tated by the medical team of Yidu Cloud. They are
all composed of people with medical backgrounds
and clinician qualiﬁcation certiﬁcates. This work
took about 2 months, and since the work was done
by internal staff, the estimated cost was around
100,000 RMB in total.
The Chinese Diagnostic Normalization Data Set
(CHIP-CDN) is completed by one round of label-
ing, one round of full audit, and one round of ran-
dom quality inspection. Labeling and review are
completed by ordinary labeling personnel with clin-
ical qualiﬁcations, and random quality inspections
are completed by high-level terminology experts.
PII and IRB The corpus is collected from
EMR(electronic medical records), and only the ﬁ-
nal diagnoses part is chosen for research purposes.
The dataset does not refer to ethics.
As shown in the example table, the ﬁnal diagno-
sis has no PII included.
The original dataset format is a self-deﬁned xlsx
format. To unify the data pre-processing step, the
CBLUE team has converted the data format to
the JSON format with the permission of the data
provider.
Evaluation Metrics The F1 score is calculated
with (original diagnosis terms, standard phrases)pairs. Say, if the test set has mgolden pairs, and
the predicted result has npairs, where kpairs are
predicted correctly, then:
P=k=n;R =k=m;F 1 = 2 PR=(P+R):
(1)
Dataset Statistic 8,000 training instances and
10,000 testing instances are provided. We split
the original training set into 6,000 and 2,000 for
the training and validation set, respectively.
Dataset Provider The dataset is provided by
Yidu Cloud Technology Inc.
E.4 Clinical Trial Criterion Dataset
(CHIP-CTC)
Task Background Clinical trials refer to scien-
tiﬁc research conducted by human volunteers to
determine the efﬁcacy, safety, and side effects of a
drug or a treatment method. It plays a crucial role
in promoting the development of medicine and im-
proving human health. Depending on the purpose
of the experiment, the subjects may be patients or
healthy volunteers. The goal of this task is to pre-
dict whether a subject meets a clinical trial or not.
Recruitment of subjects for clinical trials is gener-
ally done through manual comparison of medical
records and clinical trial screening criteria, which
is time-consuming, laborious, and inefﬁcient. In
recent years, methods based on natural language
processing have got successful in many biomed-
ical applications. This task is proposed with the
purpose of automatically classifying clinical trial
eligibility criteria for the Chinese language, and
the original task is released at the CHIP2019 con-
ference. All the data comes from real clinical trials
collected from the website of the Chinese Clinical
Trial Registry (ChiCTR)16, which is a non-proﬁt
organization providing registration for public re-
search use. Each
Task Description A total of 44 pre-deﬁned se-
mantic categories are deﬁned for this task, and the
goal is to predict a given text to the correct category.
For the detailed annotation instructions, please re-
fer to the CBLUE ofﬁcial website. Examples of
labeled data are shown in Table 10.
Annotation Process The CHIP-CTC corpus was
annotated by three annotators. The ﬁrst annotator
is Zuofeng Li, a principal scientist in Philips Re-
search China, with more than a decade of research
16http://chictr.org.cn/