Question1 Question2 Label
糖尿病吃什么？
What should patients with diabetes eat?糖尿病的食谱？
What is the recommended dietary
for patients with diabetes?label:1
乙肝小三阳的危害？
What is the harm of hepatitis B
(HBsAg/HBeAb/HBcAb-positive)?乙肝大三阳的危害？
What is the harm of hepatitis B
(HBsAg/HBeAg/HBcAb-positive)?label:0
Table 11: Examples in CHIP-STS
tions, please refer to the CBLUE ofﬁcial website.
Examples are shown in Table 12.
Annotation Process The KUAKE-QIC corpus
was annotated by six annotators who graduated
from medical college; they were employed by Al-
ibaba as full-time employees for the KUAKE de-
partment. They must get past the test for the spec-
iﬁed annotation tasks before the annotation starts.
This task cost about 2 weeks, and the annotation
fee was 6,600 RMB with 22,000 labeled records,
that’s to say, 0.3 RMB / per record.
The annotation process was divided into three
steps:
The ﬁrst step was the trail annotation step; 2,000
records were selected for this stage. The annotators
were grouped into 2 groups, each with 3 persons.
The data provider had a strict metric for quality
control, say, the IAA between the three persons
within the same group must exceed 0.9.
The second stage is the formal annotation phase,
and during this stage, 6 annotators were divided
into three groups, each with 2 persons. A total of
20,000 records were annotated; IAA for this step
was 0.9230.
The last step was the quality control step, the
sampling strategy was adopted, and 300 records
were sampled for validation; some common anno-
tation problems were raised by the medical experts,
and the data would be ﬁxed in a batch mode. In
addition, some disagreed cases were made ﬁnal
decisions by the medical experts.
PII and IRB The corpus is collected from user
queries from the KUAKE search engine, and it
doesn’t refer to the ethics, which has been checked
by the IRB committee of the provider.
During the annotation step, sentences with PHI
information or offensive information (like sexual
queries) are discarded by the annotators manually.The dataset also got passed the data disclosure pro-
cess of Alibaba.
The CBLUE team has also validated the dataset
record by record to guarantee there is no PII in-
cluded.
Evaluation Metrics Accuracy is used for the
evaluation of this task.
Dataset Statistic This task has 6,931 training set
data, 1,955 validation set data, and 1,994 test set
data.
Dataset Provider The dataset is provided by Al-
ibaba QUAKE Search Engine.
E.7 KUAKE- Query Title Relevance Dataset
(KUAKE-QTR)
Task Background KUAKE Query Title Rele-
vance is a dataset for query document (title) rel-
evance estimation. For example, give the query
“Symptoms of vitamin B deﬁciency”, the relevant
title should be “The main manifestations of vitamin
B deﬁciency”.
Task Description The correlation between
Query and Title is divided into 4 levels (0-3), 0
is the worst, and 3 stands for the best match. For
the detailed annotation instructions, please refer to
the CBLUE ofﬁcial website. Examples are shown
in Table 13.
Annotation Process The KUAKE-QTR corpus
was annotated by a total of nine annotators, among
which seven were from third-party crowd-sourcing
undergraduates from medical colleges, and two
were from Alibaba full-time employees with medi-
cal backgrounds. The crowd-sourcing annotators
were required to get trained and pass the annotation
test before they could execute the task. The annota-
tions lasted for 2 weeks, and a total of 28,000 RMB
was used.