Sentence Word Label RO MB
血液生化分析的结果显示维生素B缺乏率
约为12%～19%。血液生化分析 Ite Pro Pro
The results of blood biochemical analysis
show that vitamin B lack rate is about 12%
to 19%.blood biochemical analy-
sisIte Pro Pro
皮疹可因宿主产生特异性的抗毒素抗体而
减少。抗毒素抗体 Bod O Bod
The rash can be reduced by the host producing
speciﬁc anti-toxin antibodies.anti-toxin antibodies Bod O Bod
根据遗传物质的结构和功能改变的不同，
可将遗传病分为五类：1.染色体病指染色
体数目异常，或者染色体结构异常，包括
缺失、易位、倒位等缺失,易位,倒位 Sym, Sym,
SymO Sym, Sym,
Sym
According to the structure and function of ge-
netic material, genetic diseases are divided
into ﬁve categories: 1. Chromosomal dis-
eases refer to abnormal chromosome number
or chromosome structure abnormalities, in-
cluding deletions, translocations, inversions...deletions, translocations,
inversionsSym, Sym,
SymO Sym, Sym,
Sym
Table 5: Case studies in CMeEE. We evaluate roberta-wwm-ext and PCL-MedBERT on 3 sampled sentences, with
their gold labels and model predictions. Ite (medical examination items), Pro (medical procedure), Bod (body),
and Sym (clinical symptoms) are labeled for medical named words. O means that the model fails to extract the
entity from sentences. RO=roberta-wwm-ext, MB=PCL-MedBERT.
QueryModelGold
BERT BERT-ext MedBERT
请问淋巴细胞比率偏高、中性细胞比率偏
低有事吗？病情诊断病情诊断指标解读指标解读
Does it matter if the ratio of lymphocytes is high
and the ratio of neutrophils is low?Diagnosis Diagnosis Test results
analysisTest results
analysis
咨询：请问小孩一般什么时候出水痘？ 其他 其他 其他疾病表述
Consultation: When do children usually get
chickenpox?Other Other Other Disease
description
老人收缩压160，舒张压只有40多，是什么
原因？怎么治疗？病情诊断病情诊断病情诊断治疗方案
The systolic blood pressure of the elderly is 160,
and the diastolic blood pressure is only more
than 40. What is the reason? How to treat?Diagnosis Diagnosis Diagnosis Treatment
Table 6: Case studies in KUAKE-QIC. We evaluate the performance of baselines with 3 sampled instances. The cor-
relation between Query and Title is divided into 3 levels (0-2), which means ‘ poorly related or unrelated ’, ‘related ’
and ‘ strongly related ’. BERT = BERT-base, BERT-ext = BERT-wwm-ext-base, MedBERT = PCL-MedBERT.
而减少(Rash can be reduced by the host produc-
ing speciﬁcanti-toxin antibodies. )”, ROBERTA and
PCL-MedBERT obtain different predictions. The
reason is that there exist medical terms such as
“抗毒素抗体(anti-toxin antibodies )”. ROBERTA
can not identify those tokens correctly, but PCL-
MedBERT, pre-trained on the medical corpus, can
successfully make it. Moreover, PCL-MedBERT
can extract entities “ 缺失,易位,倒位(eletions,
translocations, inversions )” from the long sen-
tences, which is challenging for other models.We further show some cases on KUAKE-QIC
in Table 6. In the ﬁrst case, we notice that both
BERT and BERT-ext fail to obtain the intent label
of the query “ 请问淋巴细胞比率偏高、中性细
胞比率偏低有事吗? (Does it matter if the ratio
of lymphocytes is high and the ratio of neutrophils
is low? )”, while MedBERT can obtain the correct
prediction. Since “ 淋巴细胞比率(ratio of lympho-
cytes )” and “中性细胞比率(ratio of neutrophils )”
are biomedical terms, and the general pre-trained
language model has to leverage domain knowledge
to understand those phrases.