CBLUE: A Chinese Biomedical Language Understanding Evaluation
Benchmark
Ningyu Zhang1, Mosha Chen2, Zhen Bi1, Xiaozhuan Liang1, Lei Li1, Xin Shang3
Kangping Yin2, Chuanqi Tan2, Jian Xu2, Fei Huang2, Luo Si2, Yuan Ni4, Guotong Xie4;5;6
Zhifang Sui7;13, Baobao Chang7;13, Hui Zong8;14, Zheng Yuan9, Linfeng Li10, Jun Yan10
Hongying Zan11;13, Kunli Zhang11;13, Buzhou Tang12;13y, Qingcai Chen12;13y
1Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies, Zhejiang University
2Alibaba Group,3School of Mathematical Science, Zhejiang University,4Pingan Health Technology
5Ping An Health Cloud Company Limited6Ping An International Smart City Technology Co., Ltd
7Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education, Peking University
8School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University9Tsinghua University,
10Yidu Cloud Technology Inc11School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
12Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)13Peng Cheng Laboratory,14Philips Research China
Abstract
With the development of biomedical language
understanding benchmarks, Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence applications are widely used in the
medical ﬁeld. However, most benchmarks
are limited to English, which makes it chal-
lenging to replicate many of the successes
in English for other languages. To facili-
tate research in this direction, we collect
real-world biomedical data and present the
ﬁrst Chinese Biomedical Language Under-
standing Evaluation (CBLUE) benchmark: a
collection of natural language understanding
tasks including named entity recognition,
information extraction, clinical diagnosis
normalization, and an associated online
platform for model evaluation, comparison,
and analysis. To establish evaluation on
these tasks, we report empirical results with
the current 11 pre-trained Chinese models,
and experimental results show that state-
of-the-art neural models perform far worse
than the human ceiling1. Our benchmark is
released at https://tianchi.aliyun.
com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=
95414&lang=en-us .
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence is gradually changing the
landscape of healthcare, and biomedical research
(Yu et al., 2018). With the fast advancement of
biomedical datasets, biomedical natural language
processing (BioNLP) has facilitated a broad range
Equal contribution and shared co-ﬁrst authorship.
yCorresponding author.
1Code available in https://github.com/
CBLUEbenchmark/CBLUEof applications such as biomedical text mining,
which leverages textual data in Electronic Health
Records (EHRs).
A key driving force behind such improvements
and rapid iterations of models is the use of general
evaluation datasets and benchmarks (Gijsbers et al.,
2019). Pioneer benchmarks, such as BLURB (Gu
et al., 2020), PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019), and
others, have provided us with the opportunity to
conduct research on biomedical language under-
standing and developing real-world applications.
Unfortunately, most of these benchmarks are devel-
oped in English, which makes the development of
the associated machine intelligence Anglo-centric.
Meanwhile, other languages, such as Chinese, have
unique linguistic characteristics and categories that
need to be considered. Even though Chinese speak-
ers account for a quarter of the world population,
there have been no existing Chinese biomedical
language understanding evaluation benchmarks.
To address this issue and facilitate natural lan-
guage processing studies in Chinese, we take the
ﬁrst step in introducing a comprehensive Chinese
Biomedical Language Understanding Evaluation
(CBLUE ) benchmark with eight biomedical lan-
guage understanding tasks. These tasks include
named entity recognition, information extraction,
clinical diagnosis normalization, short text classi-
ﬁcation, question answering (in transfer learning
setting), intent classiﬁcation, semantic similarity,
and so on. We evaluate several pre-trained Chi-
nese language models on CBLUE and report their
performance. The current models still perform by
far worse than the standard of single-human perfor-arXiv:2106.08087v6  [cs.CL]  7 Mar 2022