Original terms Normalization terms
右肺结节转移可能大
Possible nodule metastasis
in the right lung肺占位性病变##
Space-occupying Lesion of the Lung
肺继发恶性肿瘤##
Secondary Malignant Neoplasm of the Lung
转移性肿瘤
Metastatic Tumor
右肺结节住院
Hospitalization after detection
of nodules in the right lung肺占位性病变
Space-occupying Lesion of the Lung
左上肺胸膜下结节待查
Subpleural nodule in the left
upper lung to be examined胸膜占位
Space-occupying Lesion within the Pleural Space
Table 9: Examples in CHIP-CDN
ID Clinical trial sentence Category
S1年龄>80岁
Age: > 80Age
S2近期颅内或椎管内手术史
Recent intracranial/intraspinal surgeryTherapy or Surgery
S3血糖<2.7mmol/L
Blood glucose < 2.7 mmol/LLaboratory Examinations
Table 10: Examples in CHIP-CTC
experience in the biomedical domain. Other an-
notators were Zeyu Zhang (Ph.D. candidate) and
Jinxuan Yang (Ph.D. candidate) in the biomedi-
cal informatics ﬁeld from Tongji University. The
annotation started in July 2019 and took about 1
month. Further, the corpus was used in the CHIP
2019 shared task. The annotation was related to
the annotator’s research project, and no payment
was required.
One experienced biomedical researcher (Z.L)
and two raters (Z.Z and J.Y , Ph.D. candidate for
biomedical informatics) of biomedical domains la-
beled the CHIP-CTC corpus with the 44 categories.
First, they studied these categories’ deﬁnitions, in-
vestigated a large number of expression patterns
of criteria sentences, and chose criteria examples
of each category. Next, the two raters indepen-
dently annotated the same 1000 sentences, then
they checked annotations and discussed contradic-
tions with Z.L until consensus was achieved. This
step repeated 20 iterations, and 20000 criteria sen-
tences were annotated, which were later used to cal-culate the inter-annotator agreement score (0.9920
by Cohen’s kappa score). Finally, the remaining
18341 sentences were assigned to the two raters for
annotation.
PII and IRB The corpus is collected from the
Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR) website,
which is a non-proﬁt organization providing regis-
tration for public research use. For each registered
clinical trial case on this website, it is already ap-
proved by the ethics committee of the organization.
In addition, the annotation and corpus have also
been reviewed and approved by Internal Commit-
tee on Biomedical Experiments (ICBE) in Philips.
It is encouraged to use the corpus for academic
research.
For each registered clinical trial report, no PII is
included.
The original dataset format is a self-deﬁned csv
format. To unify the data pre-processing step, the
CBLUE team has converted the data format to
the JSON format with the permission of the data