mance, leaving room for future improvements. We
also conduct a comprehensive analysis using case
studies to indicate the challenges and linguistic
differences in Chinese biomedical language under-
standing. We intend to develop a universal GLUE-
like open platform for the Chinese BioNLP com-
munity, and this work helps accelerate research in
that direction. Overall, the main contributions of
this study are as follows:
•We propose the ﬁrst Chinese biomedical lan-
guage understanding benchmark, an open-
ended, community-driven project with diverse
tasks. The proposed benchmark serves as a
platform for the Chinese BioNLP community
and encourages new dataset contributions.
•We report a systematic evaluation of 11 Chi-
nese pre-trained language models to under-
stand the challenges derived by these tasks.
We release the source code of the baselines as
a toolkit for future research purposes.
2 Related Work
Several benchmarks have been developed to eval-
uate general language understanding over the past
few years. GLUE (Wang et al., 2019b) is one of the
ﬁrst frameworks developed as a formal challenge
affording straightforward comparison between task-
agnostic transfer learning techniques. SuperGLUE
(Wang et al., 2019a), styled after GLUE, introduce
a new set of more difﬁcult language understanding
datasets. Other similarly motivated benchmarks
include DecaNLP (McCann et al., 2018), which
recast a set of target tasks into a general question-
answering format and prohibit task-speciﬁc param-
eters, and SentEval (Conneau and Kiela, 2018),
which evaluate explicitly ﬁxed-size sentence em-
beddings. Non-English benchmarks include Rus-
sianSuperGLUE (Shavrina et al., 2020) and CLUE
(Xu et al., 2020), which is a community-driven
benchmark with nine Chinese natural language un-
derstanding tasks. These benchmarks in the general
domain provide a north star goal for researchers
and are part of the reason we can conﬁdently say
we have made great strides in our ﬁeld.
For BioNLP, many datasets and benchmarks
have been proposed (Wang et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2016; Wu et al., 2019) which promote the biomedi-
cal language understanding (Beltagy et al., 2019;
Lewis et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). Tsatsaroniset al. (2015) propose biomedical language under-
standing datasets as well as a competition on large-
scale biomedical semantic indexing and question
answering. Jin et al. (2019) propose PubMedQA, a
novel biomedical question answering dataset col-
lected from PubMed abstracts. Pappas et al. (2018)
propose BioRead, which is a publicly available
cloze-style biomedical machine reading compre-
hension (MRC) dataset. Gu et al. (2020) create
a leaderboard featuring the Biomedical Language
Understanding & Reasoning Benchmark (BLURB).
Unlike a general domain corpus, the annotation of
a biomedical corpus needs expert intervention and
is labor-intensive and time-consuming. Moreover,
most of the benchmarks are based on English; ig-
noring other languages means that potentially valu-
able information may be lost, which can be helpful
for generalization.
In this study, we focus on Chinese to ﬁll the gap
and aim to develop the ﬁrst Chinese biomedical
language understanding benchmark . Note that
Chinese biomedical text is linguistically different
from English and has its domain characteristics,
necessitating an evaluation BioNLP benchmark de-
signed explicitly for Chinese.
3 CBLUE Overview
3.1 Design Principle
CBLUE consists of 8 biomedical language under-
standing tasks.The task descriptions and statistics
of CBLUE are shown Table 1. Unlike CLUE
(Xu et al., 2020) as shown in Table 2, CBLUE
has a diverse data source (the annotation is expen-
sive), richer task setting, thus, more challenging for
NLP models. We introduce the design principle of
CBLUE as follows:
1)Diverse tasks : CBLUE contain widespread
token-level, sequence-level, sequence-pair tasks.
2)Variety of differently distributed data :
CBLUE collect data from various sources, includ-
ing clinical trials, EHRs, medical forum, textbooks,
and search engine logs with a real-world distribu-
tion.
3)Quality control in long-term maintenance : We
asked domain experts (doctors from Class A ter-
tiary hospitals) to annotate datasets and carefully
review data to ensure data quality.