data. The corpus contains 938 ﬁles and 47,194
sentences. The average number of words contained
per ﬁle is 2,355. The dataset contains 504 common
pediatric diseases, 7,085 body parts, 12,907 clinical
symptoms, and 4,354 medical procedures in total.
Dataset Provider The dataset is provided by:
•Key Laboratory of Computational Linguis-
tics, Peking University, Ministry of Education,
China
•Laboratory of Natural Language Processing,
Zhengzhou University, China
•The Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
•Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen,
China
E.2 Chinese Medical Information Extraction
Dataset (CMeIE)
Task Background Entity and relation extraction
is an essential information extraction task for nat-
ural language processing and knowledge graph
(KG), which is used to detect pairs of entities and
their relations from unstructured text. The tech-
nology of this task can apply to the medical ﬁeld.
For example, with entity and relation extraction,
unstructured and semi-structured medical texts can
construct medical knowledge graphs, which can
serve lots of downstream tasks.
Task Description Given the schema and sen-
tence, in which deﬁnes the relation (Predicate)
and its related Subject and Object, such as
(“subject_type”: “ 疾病 ”，“predicate”: “ 药物
治疗”，“object_type”: “ 药物”). The task re-
quires the model to automatically analyze the
sentence and then extract all the Triples =
[(S1;P1;O1);(S2;P2;O2):::]in the sentence.
Table 8 shows the examples in the data set, and
53 SCHEMAs include 10 kinds of genus rela-
tions, 43 other sub-relations. The details are in
the 53_schema.json ﬁle. For the detailed annota-
tion instructions, please refer to the CBLUE ofﬁcial
website, and examples are shown in Table 8.
Annotation Process The annotation guide was
conducted by two medical experts from Class A
tertiary hospitals and optimized during the trail
annotation process. A total of 20 annotators had
participated in the annotation process, including 2medical experts who are also the owner of the an-
notation guideline, 2 experts from the biomedical
informatics ﬁeld, 4 medical M.D., and 14 master
students from computer science majors. The anno-
tation lasts for about four months (from October
2018 to December 2018), which contains the anno-
tation time as well as the curation time. The total
expense is about 40,000 RMB.
Similar to the CMeEE dataset, the annotation
process for CMeIE also contains the trail annota-
tion stage and the formal annotation stage follow-
ing the same process. Besides, an additional step
called the Chinese segmentation validation step
was added for this dataset. The data provider has
developed a segmentation tool for the medical texts
which could generate the segment as well as the
POS tagging, and some speciﬁed POS types (like
’disease,’ ’drug’) could help validate if there were
potential missing named entities for this task auto-
matically, which could help assist the annotators
to check the missing labels. The ﬁnal IAA for this
dataset is 0.83, which could satisfy the research
purpose.
PII and IRB The corpus is collected from autho-
rized medical textbooks or Clinical Practice, and
no personally identiﬁable information or offensive
content is involved in the text.
No PII is included in the above-mentioned re-
sources. The dataset does not refer to ethics, which
has been checked by the IRB committee of the
provider.
Evaluation Metrics The SPO results given by
the participants need to be accurately matched. The
strict Micro-F1 is used for evaluation.
Dataset Statistic This task has 14,339 training
set data, 3,585 validation set data, 4,482 test set
data. The dataset is from the pediatric corpus and
common disease corpus. The pediatric corpus origi-
nates from 518 pediatric diseases, and the common
disease corpus is derived from 109 common dis-
eases. The dataset contains nearly 75,000 triples,
28,000 disease sentences, and 53 schemas.
Dataset Provider The dataset is provided by:
•Key Laboratory of Computational Linguis-
tics, Peking University, Ministry of Education,
China
•Laboratory of Natural Language Processing,
Zhengzhou University, China