IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 1
A Survey on Multi-Task Learning
Yu Zhang and Qiang Y ang
Abstract —Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a learning paradigm in machine learning and its aim is to leverage useful information
contained in multiple related tasks to help improve the generalization performance of all the tasks. In this paper, we give a survey for
MTL from the perspective of algorithmic modeling, applications and theoretical analyses. For algorithmic modeling, we give a deﬁnition
of MTL and then classify different MTL algorithms into ﬁve categories, including feature learning approach, low-rank approach, task
clustering approach, task relation learning approach and decomposition approach as well as discussing the characteristics of each
approach. In order to improve the performance of learning tasks further, MTL can be combined with other learning paradigms including
semi-supervised learning, active learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, multi-view learning and graphical models.
When the number of tasks is large or the data dimensionality is high, we review online, parallel and distributed MTL models as well as
dimensionality reduction and feature hashing to reveal their computational and storage advantages. Many real-world applications use
MTL to boost their performance and we review representative works in this paper. Finally, we present theoretical analyses and discuss
several future directions for MTL.
Index Terms —Multi-Task Learning, Machine Learning, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
HUMAN can learn multiple tasks simultaneously and during
this learning process, human can use the knowledge learned
in a task to help the learning of another task. For example,
according to our experience in learning to play tennis and squash,
we ﬁnd that the skill of playing tennis can help learn to play
squash and vice versa. Inspired by such human learning ability,
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [1], a learning paradigm in machine
learning, aims to learn multiple related tasks jointly so that the
knowledge contained in a task can be leveraged by other tasks,
with the hope of improving the generalization performance of all
the tasks at hand.
At its early stage, an important motivation of MTL is to
alleviate the data sparsity problem where each task has a limited
number of labeled data. In the data sparsity problem, the number
of labeled data in each task is insufﬁcient to train an accurate
learner, while MTL aggregates the labeled data in all the tasks in
the spirit of data augmentation to obtain a more accurate learner
for each task. From this perspective, MTL can help reuse existing
knowledge and reduce the cost of manual labeling for learning
tasks. When the era of “big data” comes in some areas such as
computer vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP), it is
found that deep MTL models can achieve better performance than
their single-task counterparts. One reason that MTL is effective
is that it utilizes more data from different learning tasks when
compared with single-task learning. With more data, MTL can
learn more robust and universal representations for multiple tasks
and more powerful models, leading to better knowledge sharing
among tasks, better performance of each task and low risk of
overﬁtting in each task.
MTL is related to other learning paradigms in machine learn-
ing, including transfer learning [2], multi-label learning [3] and
Y. Zhang is with Department of Computer Science and Engineering, South-
ern University of Science and Technology and Peng Cheng Laboratory. Q.
Yang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology.
E-mail: yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, qyang@cse.ust.hk
Corresponding author: Yu Zhang.multi-output regression. The setting of MTL is similar to that of
transfer learning but with signiﬁcant differences. In MTL, there is
no distinction among different tasks and the objective is to improve
the performance of all the tasks. However, transfer learning is to
improve the performance of a target task with the help of source
tasks, hence the target task plays a more important role than
source tasks. In a word, MTL treats all the tasks equally but in
transfer learning the target task attracts most attentions. From the
perspective of the knowledge ﬂow, ﬂows of knowledge transfer in
transfer learning are from source task(s) to the target task, but in
multi-task learning, there are ﬂows of knowledge sharing between
any pair of tasks, which is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Continual
learning [4], in which tasks come sequentially, learns tasks one by
one, while MTL is to learn multiple tasks together. In multi-label
learning and multi-output regression, each data point is associated
with multiple labels which can be categorical or numeric. If we
treat each of all the possible labels as a task, multi-label learning
and multi-output regression can be viewed in some sense as a
special case of multi-task learning where different tasks always
share the same data during both the training and testing phrases.
On the one hand, such characteristic in multi-label learning and
multi-output regression leads to different research issues from
MTL. For example, the ranking loss, which enforces the scores
(e.g., the classiﬁcation probability) of labels associated with a
data point to be larger than those of absent labels, can be used
for multi-label learning but it does not ﬁt MTL where different
tasks possess different data. On the other hand, this characteristic
in multi-label learning and multi-output regression is invalid in
MTL problems. For example, in a MTL problem discussed in
Section 2.7 where each task is to predict the disease symptom
score of Parkinson for a patient based on 19 bio-medical features,
different patients/tasks should not share the bio-medical data.
In a word, multi-label learning and multi-output regression are
different from multi-task learning as illustrated in Fig. 1(b) and
hence we will not survey literature on multi-label learning and
multi-output regression. Moreover, multi-view learning is another
learning paradigm in machine learning, where each data point is
associated with multiple views, each of which consists of a setarXiv:1707.08114v3  [cs.LG]  29 Mar 2021