IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 3
form of to make an implicit choice.
‘What to share’ needs to determine the form through which
knowledge sharing among all the tasks could occur. Usually, there
are three forms for ‘what to share’, including feature, instance and
parameter. Feature-based MTL aims to learn common features
among different tasks as a way to share knowledge. Instance-
based MTL identiﬁes useful data instances in a task for other
tasks and then shares knowledge via the identiﬁed instances.
Parameter-based MTL uses model parameters (e.g., coefﬁcients
in linear models or weights in deep models) in a task to help
learn model parameters in other tasks in some ways, for example,
the regularization. Existing MTL studies mainly focus on feature-
based and parameter-based methods, and only a few works belong
to the instance-based method. A representative instance-based
method is the multi-task distribution matching method proposed
in [7], which ﬁrst estimates density ratios between probabilities
that each instance as well as its label belongs to both its own
task and a mixture of all the tasks and then uses all the weighted
training data from all the tasks based on the estimated density
ratios to learn model parameters for each task. Since the studies
on instance-based MTL are few, we mainly review feature-based
and parameter-based MTL models.
After determining ‘what to share’, ‘how to share’ speciﬁes
concrete ways to share knowledge among tasks. In feature-based
MTL, there is a primary approach: feature learning approach. The
feature learning approach focuses on learning common feature
representations for multiple tasks based on shallow or deep mod-
els, where the learned common feature representation can be a
subset or a transformation of the original feature representation.
In parameter-based MTL, there are four main approaches: low-
rank approach, task clustering approach, task relation learning
approach and decomposition approach. The low-rank approach
interprets the relatedness of multiple tasks as the low rankness of
the parameter matrix of these tasks. The task clustering approach is
to identify task clusters, each of which contains similar tasks. The
task relation learning approach aims to learn quantitative relations
between tasks from data automatically. The decomposition ap-
proach decomposes the model parameters of all the tasks into two
or more components, which are penalized by different regularizers.
In summary, there are mainly ﬁve approaches in the feature-
based and parameter-based MTL. In the following sections, we
review these approaches in a chronological order to reveal the
relations and evolutions among different models.
2.1 Feature Learning Approach
Since tasks are related, it is intuitive to assume that different tasks
share a common feature representation based on the original fea-
tures. One reason to learn common feature representations instead
of directly using the original ones is that the original representation
may not have enough expressive power for multiple tasks. With the
training data in all the tasks, a more powerful representation can
be learned for all the tasks and this representation can bring the
improvement on the performance.
Based on the relationship between the original feature repre-
sentation and the learned one, we can further classify this category
into two sub-categories. The ﬁrst sub-category is the feature
transformation approach where the learned representation is a
linear or nonlinear transformation of the original representation
and in this approach, each feature in the learned representation is
different from the original features. Different from this approach,the feature selection approach, the second sub-category, selects a
subset of the original features as the learned representation and
hence the learned representation is similar to the original one
by eliminating useless features based on different criteria. In the
following, we introduce these two approaches.
2.1.1 Feature Transformation Approach
The multi-layer feedforward neural network [1], which belongs to
the feature transformation approach, is one of the earliest model
for multi-task learning. To see how the multi-layer feedforward
neural network is constructed for MTL, in Figure 2 we show
an example with an input layer, a hidden layer and an output
layer. The input layer receives training instances from all the
tasks and the output layer has moutput units with one for each
task. Here the outputs of the hidden layer can be viewed as the
common feature representation learned for the mtasks and the
transformation from the original representation to the learned one
depends on the weights connecting the input and hidden layers as
well as the activation function adopted in the hidden units. Hence,
if the activation function in the hidden layer is linear, then the
transformation is a linear function and otherwise it is nonlinear.
Compared with multi-layer feedforward neural networks used for
single-task learning, the difference in the network architecture lies
in the output layers where in single-task learning, there is only
one output unit while in MTL, there are mones. In [8], the
radial basis function network, which has only one hidden layer,
is extended to MTL by greedily determining the structure of the
hidden layer. Different from these neural network models, Silver
et al. [9] propose a context-sensitive multi-task neural network
which has only one output unit shared by different tasks but has a
task-speciﬁc context as an additional input.
Fig. 2. An example for the multi-task feedforward neural network with an
input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer.
Different from multi-layer feedforward neural networks which
are connectionist models, the multi-task feature learning (MTFL)
method [10] is formulated under the regularization framework
with the objective function as
min
A;U;bmX
i=11
niniX
j=1l(yi
j;(ai)TUTxi
j+bi) +kAk2
2;1
s:t:UUT=I; (1)
wherel(;)denotes a loss function such as the hinge loss or
square loss, b= (b1;:::;bm)Tis a vector of offsets in all the
tasks, U2Rddis a square transformation matrix, A2Rdm
contains model parameters of all the tasks with its ith column ai
as model parameters for the ith task after the transformation, the
`2;1norm of a matrix Adenoted bykAk2;1equals the sum of
the`2norm of rows in A,Idenotes an identity matrix with an
appropriate size, and is a positive regularization parameter. The