IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 2
(a) MTL vs. transfer learning
 (b) MTL vs. multi-label learning/multi-
output regression
(c) MTL vs. multi-view learning
Fig. 1. Illustrations for differences between MTL and other learning paradigms.
of features. Even though different views have different sets of
features, all the views are used together to learn for the same task
and hence multi-view learning belongs to single-task learning with
multiple sets of features, which is different from MTL as shown
in Fig. 1(c).
Over past decades, MTL has attracted many attentions in the
artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning communities. Many
MTL models have been devised and many MTL applications
in other areas have been exploited. Moreover, many analyses
have been conducted to study theoretical problems in MTL.
This paper serves as a survey on MTL from the perspective
of algorithmic modeling, applications and theoretical analyses.
For algorithmic modeling, we ﬁrst give a deﬁnition for MTL
and then classify different MTL algorithms into ﬁve categories:
feature learning approach which can be further categorized into
feature transformation and feature selection approaches, low-
rank approach, task clustering approach, task relation learning
approach and decomposition approach. After that, we discuss the
combination of MTL with other learning paradigms, including
semi-supervised learning, active learning, unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, multi-view learning and graphical models.
To handle a large number of tasks, we review online, parallel and
distributed MTL models. For data in a high-dimensional space,
feature selection, dimensionality reduction and feature hashing
are introduced as vital tools to process them. As a promising
learning paradigm, MTL has many applications in various areas
and here we brieﬂy review its applications in computer vision,
bioinformatics, health informatics, speech, NLP, web, etc. From
the perspective of theoretical analyses on MTL, we review relevant
works. At last, we discuss several future directions for MTL.1
2 MTL M ODELS
In order to fully characterize MTL, we ﬁrst give the deﬁnition of
MTL.
Deﬁnition (Multi-Task Learning) .Givenmlearning tasks
fTigm
i=1where all the tasks or a subset of them are related,
multi-task learning aims to learn the mtasks together to improve
the learning of a model for each task Tiby using the knowledge
contained in all or some of other tasks.
1. For an introduction to MTL without technical details, please refer to [5].Based on the deﬁnition of MTL, we focus on supervised
learning tasks in this section since most MTL studies fall in this
setting and for other types of tasks, we review them in the next
section. In the setting of supervised learning tasks, a task Tiis
usually accompanied by a training dataset Diconsisting of ni
training samples, i.e., Di=fxi
j;yi
jgni
j=1, where xi
j2Rdiis
thejth training instance in Tiandyi
jis its label. We denote by
Xithe training data matrix for Ti, i.e., Xi= (xi
1;:::;xi
ni).
When different tasks lie in the same feature space implying that
diequalsdjfor anyi6=j, this setting is the homogeneous-
feature MTL, and otherwise it corresponds to heterogeneous-
feature MTL. Without special explanation, the default MTL setting
is the homogeneous-feature MTL. Here we need to distinguish
the heterogeneous-feature MTL from the heterogeneous MTL. In
[6], the heterogeneous MTL is considered to consist of different
types of supervised tasks including classiﬁcation and regression
problems, and here we generalize it to a more general setting
that the heterogeneous MTL consists of tasks with different
types including supervised learning, unsupervised learning, semi-
supervised learning, reinforcement learning, multi-view learning
and graphical models. The opposite to the heterogeneous MTL
is the homogeneous MTL which consists of tasks with only
one type. In a word, the homogeneous and heterogeneous MTL
differ in the type of learning tasks while the homogeneous-feature
MTL is different from the heterogeneous-feature MTL in terms
of the original feature representations. Similarly, without special
explanation, the default MTL setting is the homogeneous MTL.
In order to characterize the relatedness in the deﬁnition of
MTL, there are three issues to be addressed: when to share, what
to share and how to share.
The ‘when to share’ issue is to make choices between single-
task and multi-task models for a multi-task problem. Currently
such decision is made by human experts and there are few works
to study it. A simple solution is to formulate such decision as a
model selection problem and then use model selection techniques,
e.g., cross validation, to make decisions, but this solution is usually
computational heavy and may require much more training data. An
advanced solution we think is to use multi-task models which can
degenerate to their single-task counterparts given some form of
model parameters, for example, problem (33) presented in Section
2.8 which can reduce to multiple single-task models with the
learning of different tasks decoupled when a parameter becomes
diagonal. In this case, we can let the training data determine the