BARTpho: Pre-trained Sequence-to-Sequence Models for Vietnamese
Nguyen Luong Tran, Duong Minh Le, Dat Quoc Nguyen
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{v.nguyentl12, v.duonglm1, v.datnq9}@vinai.io
Abstract
We present BARTpho with two versions, BARTpho syllable and
BARTpho word, which are the first public large-scale monolin-
gual sequence-to-sequence models pre-trained for Vietnamese.
BARTpho uses the “large” architecture and the pre-training
scheme of the sequence-to-sequence denoising autoencoder
BART, thus it is especially suitable for generative NLP tasks.
We conduct experiments to compare our BARTpho with its
competitor mBART on a downstream task of Vietnamese text
summarization and show that: in both automatic and human
evaluations, BARTpho outperforms the strong baseline mBART
and improves the state-of-the-art. We further evaluate and com-
pare BARTpho and mBART on the Vietnamese capitalization
and punctuation restoration tasks and also find that BARTpho
is more effective than mBART on these two tasks. We publicly
release BARTpho to facilitate future research and applications
of generative Vietnamese NLP tasks.
Index Terms : BARTpho; Sequence-to-Sequence; Vietnamese;
Pre-trained models; Text summarization; Capitalization; Punc-
tuation restoration.
1. Introduction
The masked language model BERT [1] and its variants, pre-
trained on large-scale corpora, help improve the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performances of various natural language understand-
ing (NLU) tasks. However, due to a bidirectionality nature, it
might be difficult to directly apply those pre-trained language
models to natural language generation tasks [2]. Therefore, pre-
trained sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models are proposed to
handle this issue [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The success of these pre-
trained seq2seq models has largely been limited to the English
language. From a societal, cultural, linguistic, cognitive and
machine learning perspective [9], it is worth investigating pre-
trained seq2seq models for languages other than English. For
other languages, one could employ existing pre-trained multi-
lingual seq2seq models [10, 11, 12] or retrain language-specific
models using the proposed seq2seq architectures [13, 14]. Note
that retraining a language-specific model might be preferable
as dedicated language-specific models still outperform multi-
lingual ones [15].
Regarding Vietnamese, to the best of our knowledge, there
is not an existing monolingual seq2seq model pre-trained for
Vietnamese. In addition, another concern is that all publicly
available pre-trained multilingual seq2seq models are not aware
of the linguistic characteristic difference between Vietnamese
syllables and word tokens. This comes from the fact that when
written in Vietnamese, in addition to marking word boundaries,
the white space is also used to separate syllables that consti-
tute words.1For example, a 7-syllable written text “Chúng
1Note that 85% of Vietnamese word types are composed of at least
two syllables [16].tôi là nh/uni1EEFng nghiên c/uni1EE9u viên” We are researchers forms a 4-word text
“Chúng_tôi Welàarenh/uni1EEFng nghiên_c/uni1EE9u_viên reseacher ”. Without
applying a Vietnamese word segmenter, those pre-trained multi-
lingual seq2seq models directly apply Byte-Pair encoding mod-
els [17, 18] to the syllable-level Vietnamese pre-training data.
Therefore, it is worth investigating the influence of word seg-
mentation on seq2seq pre-training for Vietnamese.
In this paper, we introduce BARTpho with two versions—
BARTpho syllable and BARTpho word—the first large-scale mono-
lingual seq2seq models pre-trained for Vietnamese, which are
based on the seq2seq denoising autoencoder BART [4]. The
difference between our two BARTpho versions is that they take
different types of input texts: a syllable level for BARTpho syllable
vs. a word level for BARTpho word. We compare BARTpho with
mBART [10]—a multilingual variant of BART—on a down-
stream task of Vietnamese text summarization, and we find that
our BARTpho models outperform mBART in both automatic
and human evaluations, and help produce a new SOTA perfor-
mance, thus showing the effectiveness of large-scale monolin-
gual seq2seq pre-training for Vietnamese. We also evaluate and
compare BARTpho and mBART on the Vietnamese capitaliza-
tion and punctuation restoration tasks and find that BARTpho
helps produce better performance results than mBART. In all
three evaluation tasks, we find that BARTpho worddoes better
than BARTpho syllable , showing the positive influence of Viet-
namese word segmentation towards seq2seq pre-training.
We publicly release our BARTpho models at https://
github.com/VinAIResearch/BARTpho , which can be
used with popular libraries fairseq [19] and transform-
ers [20]. We hope that our BARTpho can serve as a strong
baseline for future research and applications of generative natu-
ral language processing (NLP) tasks for Vietnamese.
2. Related work
PhoBERT [15] is the first public large-scale monolingual lan-
guage model pre-trained for Vietnamese, which helps ob-
tain state-of-the-art performances on various downstream Viet-
namese NLP/NLU tasks [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. PhoBERT is pre-
trained on a 20GB word-level corpus of Vietnamese texts, using
the RoBERTa pre-training approach [26] that optimizes BERT
for more robust performance. Following PhoBERT, there are
also public monolingual language models for Vietnamese such
as viBERT and vELECTRA [27], which are based on BERT
and ELECTRA pre-training approaches [1, 28] and pre-trained
on syllable-level Vietnamese text corpora. Following Rothe et
al. [29] who leverage pre-trained language model checkpoints
for sequence generation tasks, Nguyen et al. [30] conduct an
empirical study and show that PhoBERT helps produce better
performance results than viBERT for a downstream task of Viet-
namese abstractive summarization.
Our BARTpho is based on BART. We employ BART be-
cause it helps produce the strongest performances on down-
stream tasks in comparison to other pre-trained seq2seq modelsarXiv:2109.09701v3  [cs.CL]  27 Jun 2022