Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
extrapolate
interpolate
extrapolate
interpolate
70.6
6.543.8
6.10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0sum pooling max/min pooling
max degree shortest path
(a) Importance of architecture
extrapolate dist
extrapolate mass
interpolate
11.0
6.3
1.2 1.5 1.1 0.7original features improved features
n-body problem (b) Importance of representation
Figure 6: Extrapolation for algorithmic tasks. Each column indicates the task and mean average
percentage error (MAPE). Encoding appropriate non-linearity in the architecture or representation
is less helpful for interpolation , but signiﬁcantly improves extrapolation . Left: In max degree and
shortest path, GNNs that appropriately encode max/min extrapolate well, but GNNs with sum-pooling
do not. Right: With improved input representation, GNNs extrapolate better for the n-body problem.
path   4regular   ladder   cycle   expander   complete   tree   general   
94.512.511.06.40.10.10.00.0
(a) Max degree with GNNs that encode max
complete   expander   general   4regular   ladder   cycle   tree   path   
8.92.40.00.411.613.819.333.6 (b) Shortest path with GNNs that encode min
Figure 7: Importance of the training graph structure. Rows indicate the graph structure covered
by the training set and the extrapolation error (MAPE). In max degree, GNNs with max readout
extrapolate well if the max/min degrees of the training graphs are not restricted (Theorem 3). In
shortest path, the extrapolation errors of min GNNs follow a U-shape in the sparsity of the training
graphs. More results may be found in Appendix D.2.
Corollary 1. GNNs with sum-aggregation and sum-readout do not extrapolate well in Max Degree.
To achieve linear algorithmic alignment, we can encode the only non-linearity, the max function, in
the readout. Theorem 3 conﬁrms that a GNN with max-readout can extrapolate well in this task.
Theorem 3. (Extrapolation with GNNs). Assume all nodes have the same feature. Let gand
g0be the max/min degree function, respectively. Let f(Gi;g(Gi)gn
i=1be the training set. If
f(g(Gi);g0(Gi);g(Gi)Nmax
i;g0(Gi)Nmin
i)gn
i=1spans R4, whereNmax
i andNmin
i are the
number of nodes that have max/min degree on Gi, then one-layer max-readout GNNs trained
onf(Gi;g(Gi))gn
i=1with squared loss in the NTK regime learn g.
Theorem 3 does not follow immediately from Theorem 2, because MLP modules in GNNs only
receive indirect supervision. We analyze the Graph NTK (Du et al., 2019b) to prove Theorem 3 in
Appendix B.5. While Theorem 3 assumes identical node features, we empirically observe similar
results for both identical and non-identical features (Figure 16 in Appendix).
Interpretation of conditions. The condition in Theorem 3 is analogous to that in Theorem 2. Both
theorems require diverse training data, measured by graph structure in Theorem 3 or directions in
Theorem 2. In Theorem 3, the condition is violated if all training graphs have the same max or min
node degrees, e.g., when training data are from one of the following families: path, C-regular graphs
(regular graphs with degree C), cycle, and ladder.
Experiments: architectures that help extrapolation. We validate our theoretical analysis with
two DP tasks: max degree and shortest path (details in Appendix C.5 and C.6). While previous works
only test on graphs with different sizes (Battaglia et al., 2018; Velickovic et al., 2020), we also test on
graphs with unseen structure, edge weights and node features. The results support our theory. For
max degree, GNNs with max-readout are better than GNNs with sum-readout (Figure 6a), conﬁrming
Corollary 1 and Theorem 3. For shortest path, GNNs with min-readout and min-aggregation are
better than GNNs with sum-readout (Figure 6a).
Experiments conﬁrm the importance of training graphs structure (Figure 7). Interestingly, the two
tasks favor different graph structure. For max degree, as Theorem 3 predicts, GNNs extrapolate well
when trained on trees, complete graphs, expanders, and general graphs, and extrapolation errors are
8