Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
5)Learning maximum degree of graphs with Graph Neural Networks. Extrapolation on
graph structure, number of nodes, and node features. To show the role of architecture for
extrapolation, we study the following GNN architecture regimes.
a)GNN with graph-level max-pooling and neighbor-level sum-pooling. By Theorem 3,
this GNN architecture extrapolates in max degree with appropriate training data.
b)GNN with graph-level and neighbor-level sum-pooling. By Corollary 1, this default
GNN architecture cannot extrapolate in max degree.
To show the importance of training distribution, i.e., graph structure in training set, we study
the following training data regimes.
a)Node features are identical , e.g., 1. In such regimes, our learning tasks only consider
graph structure. We consider training sets sampled from various graph structure,
and ﬁnd only those satisfy conditions in Theorem 3 enables GNNs with graph-level
max-pooling to extrapolate.
b) Node features are spurious and continuous. This also requires extrapolation on OOD
node features. GNNs with graph-level max-pooling with appropriate training sets also
extrapolate to OOD spurious node features.
6)Learning the length of the shortest path between given source and target nodes, with Graph
Neural Networks. Extrapolation on graph structure, number of nodes, and edge weights. We
study the following regimes.
a)Continuous features. Edge and node features are real values. This regime requires
extrapolating to graphs with edge weights out of training range.
Test graphs are all sampled from the “general graphs” family with a diverse range of structure.
Regarding the type of training graph structure, we consider two schemes. Both schemes
show a U-shape curve of extrapolation error with respect to the sparsity of training graphs.
a)Speciﬁc graph structure: path, cycle, tree, expander, ladder, complete graphs, general
graphs, 4-regular graphs.
b)Random graphs with a range of probability pof an edge between any two nodes.
Smallerpsamples sparse graphs and large psamples dense graphs.
7)Physical reasoning of then-Body problem in the orbit setting with Graph Neural Networks.
We show that GNNs on the original features from previous works fail to extrapolate to unseen
masses and distances. On the other hand, we show extrapolation can be achieved via an
improved representation of the input edge features. We consider the following extrapolation
regimes.
a) Extrapolation on the masses of the objects.
b) Extrapolation on the distances between objects.
We consider the following two input representation schemes to compare the effects of how
representation helps extrapolation.
a)Original features. Following previous works on solving n-body problem with GNNs,
the edge features are simply set to 0.
b)Improved features. We show although our edge features do not bring in new information,
it helps extrapolation.
C.1 L EARNING SIMPLE NON-LINEAR FUNCTIONS
Dataset details. We consider four tasks where the underlying functions are simple non-linear
functionsg:Rd!R. Given an input x2Rd, the label is computed by y=g(x)for allx. We
consider the following four families of simple functions g.
a)Quadratic functions g(x) =x>Ax. In each dataset, we randomly sample A. In the simplest
case whereA=I,g(x) =Pd
i=1x2
i.
a) Cosine functions g(x) =Pd
i=1cos (2xi).
c)Square root functions g(x) =Pd
i=1pxi. Here, the domain Xofxis restricted to the space
inRdwith non-negative value in each dimension.
32