Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 1: How ReLU MLPs extrapolate. We train MLPs to learn nonlinear functions (grey) and
plot their predictions both within (blue) and outside (black) the training distribution. MLPs converge
quickly to linear functions outside the training data range along directions from the origin (Theorem 1).
Hence, MLPs do not extrapolate well in most nonlinear tasks. But, with appropriate training data,
MLPs can provably extrapolate linear target functions (Theorem 2).
ΣvGNN ArchitecturesDP Algorithm (Target Function) MLP has to learn non-linear stepsMLP learns linear steps
d[k][u]=d[k−1][v]+w(v,u)h(k)u=MLP(k)(h(k−1)v,h(k−1)u,w(v,u))h(k)u=MLP(k)(h(k−1)v,h(k−1)u,w(v,u))minvminv
(a) Network architecture
: hard for extrapolation: input graph    : input transform    : easier for extrapolationff(G)f(G)hgghh(G)G (b) Input representation
Figure 2: How GNNs extrapolate. Since MLPs can extrapolate well when learning linear functions,
we hypothesize that GNNs can extrapolate well in dynamic programming (DP) tasks if we encode
appropriate non-linearities in the architecture (left) and input representation (right; through domain
knowledge or representation learning). The encoded non-linearities may not be necessary for
interpolation, as they can be approximated by MLP modules, but they help extrapolation. We support
the hypothesis theoretically (Theorem 3) and empirically (Figure 6).
Starting with feedforward networks, the simplest neural networks and building blocks of more
complex architectures such as GNNs, we establish that the predictions of over-parameterized MLPs
with ReLU activation trained by GD converge to linear functions along any direction from the origin.
We prove a convergence rate for two-layer networks and empirically observe that convergence often
occurs close to the training data (Figure 1), which suggests ReLU MLPs cannot extrapolate well for
most nonlinear tasks. We emphasize that our results do not follow from the fact that ReLU networks
have ﬁnitely many linear regions (Arora et al., 2018; Hanin & Rolnick, 2019; Hein et al., 2019).
While having ﬁnitely many linear regions implies ReLU MLPs eventually become linear, it does not
say whether MLPs will learn the correct target function close to the training distribution. In contrast,
our results are non-asymptotic and quantify what kind of functions MLPs will learn close to the
training distribution. Second, we identify a condition when MLPs extrapolate well: the task is linear
and the geometry of the training distribution is sufﬁciently “diverse”. To our knowledge, our results
are the ﬁrst extrapolation results of this kind for feedforward neural networks.
We then relate our insights into feedforward neural networks to GNNs, to explain why GNNs
extrapolate well in some algorithmic tasks. Prior works report successful extrapolation for tasks that
can be solved by dynamic programming (DP) (Bellman, 1966), which has a computation structure
aligned with GNNs (Xu et al., 2020). DP updates can often be decomposed into nonlinear and linear
steps. Hence, we hypothesize that GNNs trained by GD can extrapolate well in a DP task, if we
encode appropriate non-linearities in the architecture andinput representation (Figure 2). Importantly,
encoding non-linearities may be unnecessary for GNNs to interpolate , because the MLP modules
can easily learn many nonlinear functions inside the training distribution (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik
et al., 1989; Xu et al., 2020), but it is crucial for GNNs to extrapolate correctly. We prove this
hypothesis for a simpliﬁed case using Graph NTK (Du et al., 2019b). Empirically, we validate the
hypothesis on three DP tasks: max degree, shortest paths, and n-body problem. We show GNNs with
appropriate architecture, input representation, and training distribution can predict well on graphs
with unseen sizes, structures, edge weights, and node features. Our theory explains the empirical
success in previous works and suggests their limitations: successful extrapolation relies on encoding
task-speciﬁc non-linearities, which requires domain knowledge or extensive model search. From a
broader standpoint, our insights go beyond GNNs and apply broadly to other neural networks.
2