Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 3: Conditions for ReLU MLPs to extrapolate well. We train MLPs to learn linear functions
(grey) with different training distributions (blue) and plot out-of-distribution predictions (black).
Following Theorem 2, MLPs extrapolate well when the training distribution (blue) has support in all
directions (ﬁrst panel), but not otherwise: in the two middle panels, some dimensions of the training
data are constrained to be positive (red arrows); in the last panel, one dimension is a ﬁxed constant.
quadratic cos sqrt linear l1103
101
101103MAPE
(a) Different target functions
all fix1 neg1 neg16 neg32103
101
101103MAPE (b) Different training distributions for linear target
Figure 4: Extrapolation performance of ReLU MLPs. We plot the distributions of MAPE (mean
absolute percentage error) of MLPs trained with various hyperparameters (depth, width, learning rate,
batch size). (a) Learning different target functions; (b) Different training distributions for learning
linear target functions: “all” covers all directions, “ﬁx1” has one dimension ﬁxed to a constant, and
“negd” hasddimensions constrained to negative values. ReLU MLPs generally do not extrapolate
well unless the target function is linear along each direction (Figure 4a), and extrapolate linear target
functions if the training distribution covers sufﬁciently many directions (Figure 4b).
3 H OWFEEDFORWARD NEURAL NETWORKS EXTRAPOLATE
Feedforward networks are the simplest neural networks and building blocks of more complex
architectures such as GNNs, so we ﬁrst study how they extrapolate when trained by GD. Throughout
the paper, we assume ReLU activation. Section 3.3 contains preliminary results for other activations.
3.1 L INEAR EXTRAPOLATION BEHAVIOR OF RELU MLP S
By architecture, ReLU networks learn piecewise linear functions, but what do these regions precisely
look like outside the support of the training data? Figure 1 illustrates examples of how ReLU
MLPs extrapolate when trained by GD on various nonlinear functions. These examples suggest that
outside the training support, the predictions quickly become linear along directions from the origin.
We systematically verify this pattern by linear regression on MLPs’ predictions: the coefﬁcient of
determination ( R2) is always greater than 0.99 (Appendix C.2). That is, ReLU MLPs “linearize”
almost immediately outside the training data range.
We formalize this observation using the implicit biases of neural networks trained by GD via the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) : optimization trajectories of over-parameterized networks trained by
GD are equivalent to those of kernel regression with a speciﬁc neural tangent kernel, under a set of
assumptions called the “NTK regime” (Jacot et al., 2018). We provide an informal deﬁnition here;
for further details, we refer the readers to Jacot et al. (2018) and Appendix A.
Deﬁnition 2. (Informal) A neural network trained in the NTK regime is inﬁnitely wide, randomly
initialized with certain scaling, and trained by GD with inﬁnitesimal steps.
Prior works analyze optimization and in-distribution generalization of over-parameterized neural
networks via NTK (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019a;b; Arora et al., 2019a;b; Cao & Gu, 2019; Du et al.,
2019c;a; Li & Liang, 2018; Nitanda & Suzuki, 2021). We instead analyze extrapolation.
Theorem 1 formalizes our observation from Figure 1: outside the training data range, along any
directiontvfrom the origin, the prediction of a two-layer ReLU MLP quickly converges to a linear
4