Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
HOWNEURAL NETWORKS EXTRAPOLATE :
FROM FEEDFORWARD TO GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS
Keyulu Xuy, Mozhi Zhangz, Jingling Liz, Simon S. Dux, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi{,
Stefanie Jegelkay
yMassachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
zUniversity of Maryland
xUniversity of Washington
{National Institute of Informatics (NII)
keyulu@mit.edu, keyulux@csail.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
We study how neural networks trained by gradient descent extrapolate , i.e., what
they learn outside the support of the training distribution. Previous works report
mixed empirical results when extrapolating with neural networks: while feedfor-
ward neural networks, a.k.a. multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), do not extrapolate
well in certain simple tasks, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) – structured networks
with MLP modules – have shown some success in more complex tasks. Working
towards a theoretical explanation, we identify conditions under which MLPs and
GNNs extrapolate well. First, we quantify the observation that ReLU MLPs quickly
converge to linear functions along any direction from the origin, which implies that
ReLU MLPs do not extrapolate most nonlinear functions. But, they can provably
learn a linear target function when the training distribution is sufﬁciently “diverse”.
Second, in connection to analyzing the successes and limitations of GNNs, these
results suggest a hypothesis for which we provide theoretical and empirical evi-
dence: the success of GNNs in extrapolating algorithmic tasks to new data (e.g.,
larger graphs or edge weights) relies on encoding task-speciﬁc non-linearities in
the architecture or features. Our theoretical analysis builds on a connection of
over-parameterized networks to the neural tangent kernel. Empirically, our theory
holds across different training settings.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Humans extrapolate well in many tasks. For example, we can apply arithmetics to arbitrarily large
numbers. One may wonder whether a neural network can do the same and generalize to examples
arbitrarily far from the training data (Lake et al., 2017). Curiously, previous works report mixed
extrapolation results with neural networks. Early works demonstrate feedforward neural networks,
a.k.a. multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), fail to extrapolate well when learning simple polynomial
functions (Barnard & Wessels, 1992; Haley & Soloway, 1992). However, recent works show Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009), a class of structured networks with MLP building
blocks, can generalize to graphs much larger than training graphs in challenging algorithmic tasks,
such as predicting the time evolution of physical systems (Battaglia et al., 2016), learning graph
algorithms (Velickovic et al., 2020), and solving mathematical equations (Lample & Charton, 2020).
To explain this puzzle, we formally study how neural networks trained by gradient descent (GD)
extrapolate, i.e., what they learn outside the support of training distribution. We say a neural network
extrapolates well if it learns a task outside the training distribution. At ﬁrst glance, it may seem
that neural networks can behave arbitrarily outside the training distribution since they have high
capacity (Zhang et al., 2017) and are universal approximators (Cybenko, 1989; Funahashi, 1989;
Hornik et al., 1989; Kurkova, 1992). However, neural networks are constrained by gradient descent
training (Hardt et al., 2016; Soudry et al., 2018). In our analysis, we explicitly consider such implicit
bias through the analogy of the training dynamics of over-parameterized neural networks and kernel
regression via the neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018).
1arXiv:2009.11848v5  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2021