Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
WHAT MATTERS FOR ON-POLICY DEEP ACTOR -
CRITIC METHODS ? A L ARGE -SCALE STUDY
Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Sta ´nczyk, Manu Orsini,
Sertan Girgin, Raphaël Marinier, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist,
Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly, Olivier Bachem
Google Research, Brain Team
ABSTRACT
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied to many
different continuous control tasks. While RL algorithms are often conceptually
simple, their state-of-the-art implementations take numerous low- and high-level
design decisions that strongly affect the performance of the resulting agents. Those
choices are usually not extensively discussed in the literature, leading to discrepancy
between published descriptions of algorithms and their implementations. This
makes it hard to attribute progress in RL and slows down overall progress [27].
As a step towards ﬁlling that gap, we implement >50 such “choices” in a uniﬁed
on-policy deep actor-critic framework, allowing us to investigate their impact in
a large-scale empirical study. We train over 250’000 agents in ﬁve continuous
control environments of different complexity and provide insights and practical
recommendations for the training of on-policy deep actor-critic RL agents.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has seen increased interest in recent years due to its ability to
have neural-network-based agents learn to act in environments through interactions. For continuous
control tasks, on-policy algorithms such as REINFORCE [2], TRPO [10], A3C [14], PPO [17] and
off-policy algorithms such as DDPG [13] and SAC [21] have enabled successful applications such as
quadrupedal locomotion [20], self-driving [30] or dexterous in-hand manipulation [20, 25, 32].
Many of these papers investigate in depth different algorithmic ideas, for example different loss
functions and learning paradigms. Yet, it is less visible that behind successful experiments in deep RL
there are complicated code bases that contain a large number of low- and high-level design decisions
that are usually not discussed in research papers. While one may assume that such “choices” do not
matter, there is evidence that they are in fact crucial for or even driving good performance [27].
While there are open-source implementations available that can be used by practitioners, this is still
unsatisfactory: Research publications often contain one-to-one comparisons of different algorithmic
ideas based on implementations in different code bases. This makes it impossible to assess whether
improvements are due to the underlying algorithmic idea or due to the implementation. In fact, it is
hard to assess the performance of high-level algorithmic ideas without an understanding of lower-level
choices as performance may strongly depend on the tuning of hyperparameters and implementation-
level details. Overall, this makes it hard to attribute progress in reinforcement learning and slows
down further research [15, 22, 27].
Our contributions. Our key goal in this paper is to investigate such lower level choices in depth
and to understand their impact on ﬁnal agent performance. Hence, as our key contributions, we
(1) implement >50 choices in a uniﬁed on-policy deep actor-critic implementation1, (2) conducted
a large-scale (more than 250’000 agents trained) experimental study that covers different aspects
of the training process, and (3) analyze the experimental results to provide practical insights and
recommendations for the training of on-policy deep actor-critic RL agents.
1The implementation is available at https://github.com/google-research/seed_rl .
1