Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Most surprising ﬁnding. While many of our experimental ﬁndings conﬁrm common RL practices,
some of them are quite surprising, e.g. the policy initialization scheme signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the
performance while it is rarely even mentioned in RL publications. In particular, we have found that
initializing the network so that the initial action distribution has zero mean, a rather low standard
deviation and is independent of the observation signiﬁcantly improves the training speed (Sec. 3.2).
Paper outline. The rest of of this paper is structured as follows: We describe our experimental setup
and performance metrics used in Sec. 2. Then, in Sec. 3 we present and analyse the experimental
results and ﬁnish with related work in Sec. 4 and conclusions in Sec. 5. The appendices contain the
detailed description of all design choices we experiment with (App. B), default hyperparameters
(App. C) and the raw experimental results (App. D - K).
2 S TUDY DESIGN
Considered setting. In this paper, we consider the setting of on-policy deep actor-critic reinforce-
ment learning for continuous control . We deﬁne on-policy learning in the following loose sense:
We consider policy iteration algorithms that iterate between generating experience using the current
policy and using that experience to improve the policy. This is the standard modus operandi of
algorithms usually considered on-policy such as PPO [17]. However, we note that algorithms often
perform several model updates and thus may operate technically on off-policy data within a single
policy improvement iteration. As benchmark environments, we consider ﬁve widely used continuous
control environments from OpenAI Gym [12] of varying complexity: Hopper-v1, Walker2d-v1,
HalfCheetah-v1, Ant-v1, and Humanoid-v12.
Uniﬁed on-policy deep actor-critic gradient algorithm. We took the following approach to create
a highly conﬁgurable uniﬁed on-policy deep actor-critic gradient algorithm with as many choices as
possible:
1.We researched prior work and popular code bases to make a list of commonly used choices,
i.e., different loss functions (both for value functions and policies), architectural choices such
as initialization methods, heuristic tricks such as gradient clipping and all their corresponding
hyperparameters.
2.Based on this, we implemented a single, uniﬁed on-policy deep actor-critic agent and correspond-
ing training protocol starting from the SEED RL code base [28]. Whenever we were faced with
implementation decisions that required us to take decisions that could not be clearly motivated or
had alternative solutions, we further added such decisions as additional choices.
3.We veriﬁed that when all choices are selected as in the PPO implementation from OpenAI
baselines, we obtain similar performance as reported in the PPO paper [17]. We chose PPO
because it is probably the most commonly used on-policy deep actor-critic RL algorithm at the
moment.
The resulting agent implementation is detailed in Appendix B. The key property is that the implemen-
tation exposes all choices as conﬁguration options in an uniﬁed manner. For convenience, we mark
each of the choice in this paper with a number (e.g., C1) and a ﬁxed name (e.g. num_envs (C1) )
that can be easily used to ﬁnd a description of the choice in Appendix B.
Difﬁculty of investigating choices. The primary goal of this paper is to understand how the
different choices affect the ﬁnal performance of an agent and to derive recommendations for these
choices. There are two key reasons why this is challenging:
First, we are mainly interested in insights on choices for good hyperparameter conﬁgurations. Yet, if
all choices are sampled randomly, the performance is very bad and little (if any) training progress is
made. This may be explained by the presence of sub-optimal settings (e.g., hyperparameters of the
wrong scale) that prohibit learning at all. If there are many choices, the probability of such failure
increases exponentially.
2It has been noticed that the version of the Mujoco physics simulator [5] can slightly inﬂuence the behaviour
of some of the environments — https://github.com/openai/gym/issues/1541 . We used Mujoco
2.0 in our experiments.
2