Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Fig. 17 and Fig. 2 suggests that the difference might be mostly caused by the decreased magnitude of
initial actions11.
Other choices appear to be less important: The scale of the last layer initialization matters much less
for the value MLP ( C58) than for the policy MLP (Fig. 19). Apart from the last layer scaling, the
network initialization scheme ( C56) does not matter too much (Fig. 27). Only he_normal and
he_uniform [7] appear to be suboptimal choices with the other options performing very similarly.
There also appears to be no clear beneﬁts if the standard deviation of the policy is learned for each
state (i.e. outputted by the policy network) or once globally for all states ( C59, Fig. 23). For the
transformation of policy output into action standard deviation ( C60),softplus and exponentiation
perform very similarly12(Fig. 25). Finally, the minimum action standard deviation ( C62) seems to
matter little, if it is not set too large (Fig. 30).
Recommendation. Initialize the last policy layer with 100smaller weights. Use softplus to
transform network output into action standard deviation and add a (negative) offset to its input to
decrease the initial standard deviation of actions. Tune this offset if possible. Use tanh both as the
activation function (if the networks are not too deep) and to transform the samples from the normal
distribution to the bounded action space. Use a wide value MLP (no layers shared with the policy)
but tune the policy width (it might need to be narrower than the value MLP).
3.3 N ORMALIZATION AND CLIPPING (BASED ON THE RESULTS IN APPENDIX F)
Study description. We investigate the impact of different normalization techniques: observation
normalization ( C64), value function normalization ( C66), per-minibatch advantage normalization
(C67), as well as gradient ( C68) and observation ( C65) clipping.
Interpretation. Input normalization ( C64) is crucial for good performance on all environments apart
from Hopper (Fig. 33). Quite surprisingly, value function normalization ( C66) also inﬂuences the
performance very strongly — it is crucial for good performance on HalfCheetah and Humanoid,
helps slightly on Hopper and Ant and signiﬁcantly hurts the performance on Walker2d (Fig. 37). We
are not sure why the value function scale matters that much but suspect that it affects the performance
by changing the speed of the value function ﬁtting.13In contrast to observation and value function
normalization, per-minibatch advantage normalization ( C67) seems not to affect the performance
too much (Fig. 35). Similarly, we have found little evidence that clipping normalized14observations
(C65) helps (Fig. 38) but it might be worth using if there is a risk of extremely high observations due
to simulator divergence. Finally, gradient clipping ( C68) provides a small performance boost with
the exact clipping threshold making little difference (Fig. 34).
Recommendation. Always use observation normalization and check if value function normalization
improves performance. Gradient clipping might slightly help but is of secondary importance.
3.4 A DVANTAGE ESTIMATION (BASED ON THE RESULTS IN APPENDIX G)
Study description. We compare the most commonly used advantage estimators ( C6): N-step [3],
GAE [9] and V-trace [19] and their hyperparameters ( C7,C8,C9,C10). We also experiment
with applying PPO-style pessimistic clipping ( C13) to the value loss (present in the original PPO
implementation but not mentioned in the PPO paper [17]) and using Huber loss [1] instead of MSE
for value learning ( C11,C12). Moreover, we varied the number of parallel environments used ( C1)
as it changes the length of the experience fragments collected in each step.
Interpretation. GAE and V-trace appear to perform better than N-step returns (Fig. 44 and 40) which
indicates that it is beneﬁcial to combine the value estimators from multiple timesteps. We have not
11tanh can also potentially perform better with entropy regularization (not used in this experiment) as it
bounds the maximum possible policy entropy.
12We noticed that some of the training runs with exponentiation resulted in NaNs but clipping the exponent
solves this issue (See Sec. B.8 for the details).
13Another explanation could be the interaction between the value function normalization and PPO-style value
clipping ( C13). We have, however, disabled the value clipping in this experiment to avoid this interaction. The
disabling of the value clipping could also explain why our conclusions are different from [27] where a form of
value normalization improved the performance on Walker.
14We only applied clipping if input normalization was enabled.
6