Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
found a signiﬁcant performance difference between GAE and V-trace in our experiments. = 0:9
(C8,C9) performed well regardless of whether GAE (Fig. 45) or V-trace (Fig. 49) was used on all
tasks but tuning this value per environment may lead to modest performance gains. We have found
that PPO-style value loss clipping ( C13) hurts the performance regardless of the clipping threshold15
(Fig. 43). Similarly, the Huber loss ( C11) performed worse than MSE in all environments (Fig. 42)
regardless of the value of the threshold ( C12) used (Fig. 48).
Recommendation. Use GAE with = 0:9but neither Huber loss nor PPO-style value loss clipping.
3.5 T RAINING SETUP (BASED ON THE RESULTS IN APPENDIX H)
Study description. We investigate choices related to the data collection and minibatch handling:
the number of parallel environments used ( C1), the number of transitions gathered in each iteration
(C2), the number of passes over the data ( C3), minibatch size ( C4) and how the data is split into
minibatches ( C5).
For the last choice, in addition to standard choices, we also consider a new small modiﬁcation of
the original PPO approach: The original PPO implementation splits the data in each policy iteration
step into individual transitions and then randomly assigns them to minibatches ( C5). This makes it
impossible to compute advantages as the temporal structure is broken. Therefore, the advantages are
computed once at the beginning of each policy iteration step and then used in minibatch policy and
value function optimization. This results in higher diversity of data in each minibatch at the cost of
using slightly stale advantage estimations. As a remedy to this problem, we propose to recompute the
advantages at the beginning of each pass over the data instead of just once per iteration.
Results. Unsurprisingly, going over the experience multiple times appears to be crucial for good sam-
ple complexity (Fig. 54). Often, this is computationally cheap due to the simple models considered,
in particular on machines with accelerators such as GPUs and TPUs. As we increase the number of
parallel environments ( C1), performance decreases sharply on some of the environments (Fig. 55).
This is likely caused by shortened experience chunks (See Sec. B.1 for the detailed description
of the data collection process) and earlier value bootstrapping. Despite that, training with more
environments usually leads to faster training in wall-clock time if enough CPU cores are available.
Increasing the batch size ( C4) does not appear to hurt the sample complexity in the range we tested
(Fig. 57) which suggests that it should be increased for faster iteration speed. On the other hand, the
number of transitions gathered in each iteration ( C2) inﬂuences the performance quite signiﬁcantly
(Fig. 52). Finally, we compare different ways to handle minibatches (See App. B.1 for the detailed
description of different variants) in Fig. 53 and 58. The plots suggest that stale advantages can in fact
hurt performance and that recomputing them at the beginning of each pass at least partially mitigates
the problem and performs best among all variants.
Recommendation. Go over experience multiple times. Shufﬂe individual transitions before assigning
them to minibatches and recompute advantages once per data pass (See App. B.1 for the details).
For faster wall-clock time training use many parallel environments and increase the batch size (both
might hurt the sample complexity). Tune the number of transitions in each iteration ( C2) if possible.
3.6 T IMESTEPS HANDLING (BASED ON THE RESULTS IN APPENDIX I)
Study description. We investigate choices related to the handling of timesteps: discount fac-
tor16(C20), frame skip ( C21), and how episode termination due to timestep limits are handled ( C22).
The latter relates to a technical difﬁculty explained in App. B.4 where one assumes for the algorithm
an inﬁnite time horizon but then trains using a ﬁnite time horizon [16].
Interpretation. Fig. 60 shows that the performance depends heavily on the discount factor 
(C20)
with
= 0:99performing reasonably well in all environments. Skipping every other frame ( C21)
improves the performance on 2out of 5environments (Fig. 61). Proper handling of episodes
abandoned due to the timestep limit seems not to affect the performance ( C22, Fig. 62) which
15This is consistent with prior work [27].
16While the discount factor is sometimes treated as a part of the environment, we assume that the real goal is
to maximize undiscounted returns and the discount factor is a part of the algorithm which makes learning easier.
7