7
`circles' data only take a few epochs until reaching full
accuracy. Although the perfect t to the training data is
of course not useful for machine learning (as can be seen
by the non-increasing accuracy on the test set) these
results are a clue to the fact that the squeezing feature
map makes data linearly separable in feature space, a
fact that we prove in Appendix B.
While the results of the simulations are promising,
a goal is to nd more sophisticated kernels. Although
quantum computers could oer constant speed advan-
tages, they become indispensable if the feature map cir-
cuit is classically intractable. However, squeezed states
are an example of so-called Gaussian states, and it is
well known that Gaussian states (although living in an
innite-dimensional Hilbert space) can be eciently sim-
ulated by a classical computer [29], which we used in the
simulations. In order to do something more interesting,
one needs non-Gaussian elements to the circuit. For ex-
ample, one can extend a standard linear optical network
of beamsplitters by a cubic phase gate [30, 31] or use pho-
ton number measurements [32]. To this end, let V(x)
be a non-Gaussian feature map circuit, i.e. a quantum
algorithm that takes a vacuum state and prepares an x-
dependent non-Gaussian state. The kernel
(x;x0) =h0:::0jVy
(x)V(x0)j0:::0i
can in general not be simulated by a classical computer
any more. It is therefore an interesting open question
what type of feature map circuits Vare classically in-
tractable, but at the same time lead to powerful kernels
for classical models such as support vector machines.
E. An explicit quantum classier
In the explicit approach dened above, we use a
parametrised continuous-variable circuit W() to build
a \Fock-space" classier. For our squeezing example this
can be done as follows. We start with two vacuum modes
j0i
j0i. To classify a data input x, rst map the input
to a quantum state jc;xi=jc;x1i
jc;x2iby performing
a squeezing operation on each of the modes. Second, ap-
ply the model circuit W() tojc;xi. Third, interpret the
probability p(n1;n2) of measuring a certain Fock state
jn1;n2ias the output of the machine learning model.
Since this probability depends on the displacement and
squeezing intensity, it is better to dene two probabili-
ties, sayp(n1= 2;n2= 0) andp(n1= 0;n2= 2), as
a one-hot encoded output vector ( o0;o1). This output
vector can be normalised [33] to a new vector
1
o0+o1
o0
o1
=
p(y= 0)
p(y= 1)
;
wherep(y= 0),p(y= 1) can now be interpreted as the
probability for the model to predict class y= 0 and
y= 1, respectively. The nal label is the class with thea.)
feature map
circuitmodel
circuitW()
x1
x2
...o0
o1p(y= 0)
p(y= 1)
X
FY
b.)
j(c;x1)i
W()p(n1)
j(c;x2)i p(n2)
c.)
BS(1;2)D(3)P(5)V(7)
D(4)P(6)V(8)
FIG. 7. a.) Representation of the Fock-space-classier in
the graphical language of quantum neural networks. A vector
(x1;x2)Tfrom the input space Xgets mapped into the feature
spaceFwhich is the innite-dimensional 2-mode Fock space
of the quantum system. The model circuit, including photon
detection measurement, implements a linear model in feature
space and reduces the \innite hidden layer" to two outputs.
b.) The model circuit of the explicit classier described in the
text uses only 2 modes to instantiate this innite-dimensional
hidden layer. The variational circuit W() consists of repe-
titions of a gate block. We use the gate block shown in c.)
with the beamsplitter (BS), displacement (D), quadratic (P)
and cubic phase gates (C) described in the text.
higher probability. We can interpret this circuit in the
graphical representation of neural networks as shown at
the top in Figure 7.
Let us assume we could represent any possible quan-
tum circuit in the feature Hilbert space with the circuit
W(). Since the data in Fis linearly separable, there is
aWfor which we obtain 100% accuracy on the training
set, as we saw in Figure 6. However, the goal of machine
learning is not to perfectly t data, but to generalise from
it. It is therefore not desirable to nd the optimal deci-
sion boundary for the training data in F, but to nd a
good candidate from a class of decision boundaries that
captures the structure in the data well. Such a restricted
class of decision boundaries can be dened by using an
ansatz for the model circuit W() which cannot represent
anycircuit, yet still 
exible enough to reach interesting
candidates. Figure 7 c.) shows such a model circuit for
the 2 input modes in our continuous-variable example.
The architecture consists of repetitions of a general gate