2
original space feature space
FIG. 1. While in the original space of training inputs, data
from the two classes `blue squares' and `red circles' are not
separable by a simple linear model (left), we can map them
to a higher dimensional feature space where a linear model is
indeed sucient to dene a separating hyperplane that acts
as a decision boundary (right).
classical model that depends on a kernel function, but
uses the quantum device to evaluate the kernel, which
is computed as the inner products of quantum states
in `feature Hilbert space'. The explicit approach uses
the quantum device to directly learn a linear decision
boundary in feature space by optimising a variational
quantum circuit.
A central result of this paper is that the idea of em-
bedding data into a quantum Hilbert space opens up
a promising avenue to quantum machine learning, in
which we can generically use quantum devices for pat-
tern recognition. The implicit and explicit approaches
are not only hardware-independent, but also suitable for
intermediate-term quantum technologies, which allows us
to test them with the generation of quantum comput-
ers that is currently being developed. Nonlinear feature
maps also circumvent the need to implement nonlinear
transformations on amplitude-encoded data, and thereby
solve an outstanding problem in quantum machine learn-
ing which we will come back to in the conclusion.
II. FEATURE MAPS, KERNELS AND
QUANTUM COMPUTING
In machine learning we are typically given a dataset
of inputsD=fx1;:::;xMgfrom a certain input set X,
and have to recognise patterns to evaluate or produce
previously unseen data. Kernel methods use a distance
measure(x;x0) between any two inputs x;x02X in or-
der to construct models that capture the properties of a
data distribution. This distance measure is connected to
inner products in a certain space, the feature space . Be-
sides many practical applications, the most famous being
the support vector machine, these methods have a rich
theoretical foundation [15] from which we want to high-
light some relevant points.A. Feature maps and kernels
Let us start with the denition of a feature map.
Denition 1. LetFbe a Hilbert space, called the feature
space ,Xan input set and xa sample from the input
set. A feature map is a map:X!F from inputs to
vectors in the Hilbert space. The vectors (x)2F are
called feature vectors .
Feature maps play an important role in machine learning,
since they map any type of input data into a space with a
well-dened metric. This space is usually of much higher
dimension. If the feature map is a nonlinear function it
changes the relative position between data points (as in
the example of Figure 1), and a dataset can become a
lot easier to classify in feature space. Feature maps are
intimitely connected to kernels [16].
Denition 2. LetXbe a nonempty set, called the input
set. A function :XX ! Cis called a kernel if
the Gram matrix Kwith entries Km;m0=(xm;xm0)
is positive semidenite, in other words, if for any nite
subsetfx1;:::;xMgX withM2andc1;:::;cM2C,
MX
m;m0=1cmc
m0(xm;xm0)0:
By denition of the inner product, every feature map
gives rise to a kernel.
Theorem 1. Let:X!F be a feature map. The inner
product of two inputs mapped to feature space denes a
kernel via
(x;x0) :=h(x);(x0)iF; (1)
whereh;iFis the inner product dened on F.
Proof. We must show that the Gram matrix of this kernel
is positive denite. For arbitrary cm;cm02Cand any
fx1;:::;xMgX withM2, we nd that
MX
m;m0=1cmc
m0(xm;xm0) =hX
mcm(xm);X
m0cm0(xm0)i
=jjX
mcm(xm)jj20
The connection between feature maps and kernels
means that every feature map corresponds to a distance
measure in input space by means of the inner product
of feature vectors. It also means that we can compute
inner products of vectors mapped to much higher dimen-
sional spaces by computing a kernel function, which may
be computationally a lot easier.