3
feature map kernel RKHSThm 1 Def 3
Thm 2
FIG. 2. Relationships between the concepts of a feature map,
kernel and reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
B. Reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
Kernel theory goes further and denes a unique Hilbert
space associated with each kernel, the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space or RKHS [17, 18]. Although rather ab-
stract, this concept is useful in order to understand the
signicance of kernels for machine learning, as well as
their connection to linear models in feature space.
Denition 3. LetXbe a non-empty input set and Ra
Hilbert space of functions f:X!Cthat map inputs to
the real numbers. Let h;ibe an inner product dened
onR(which gives rise to a norm via jjfjj=p
hf;fi).
Ris a reproducing kernel Hilbert space if every point
evaluation is a continuous functional F:f!f(x)for
allx2X. This is equivalent to the condition that there
exists a function :XX! Cfor which
hf;(x;)i=f(x) (2)
with(x;)2R and for all f2H,x2X.
The function is the unique reproducing kernel ofR,
and Eq. (2) is the reproducing property . Note that a
dierent, but isometrically isomorphic Hilbert space can
be derived for a so-called Mercer kernel [19].
Since a feature map gives rise to a kernel and a kernel
gives rise to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, we can
construct a unique reproducing kernel Hilbert space for
any given feature map (see Figure 2).
Theorem 2. Let:X !F be a feature map over an
input setX, giving rise to a complex kernel (x;x0) =
h(x);(x0)iF. The corresponding reproducing kernel
Hilbert space has the form
R=ff:X!Cj
f(x) =hw;(x)iF;8x2X;w2Fg (3)
The functionshw;iin the RKHS associated with
feature map can be interpreted as linear models, for
whichw2F denes a hyperplane in feature space.
In machine learning these rather formal concepts gain
relevance because of the (no less formal) representer the-
orem [20]:
Theorem 3. LetXbe an input set, :XX ! Ra
kernel,Da data set consisting of data pairs (xm;ym)2XRandf:X ! Ra class of model functions that
live in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space Rof. Fur-
thermore, assume we have a cost function Cthat quan-
ties the quality of a model by comparing predicted out-
putsf(xm)with targets ym, and which has a regularisa-
tion term of the form g(jjfjj)whereg: [0;1)!Ris
a strictly monotonically increasing function. Then any
functionf2Rthat minimises the cost function Ccan
be written as
f(x) =MX
m=1m(x;xm); (4)
for some parameters m2R.
The representer theorem implies that for a common
family of machine learning optimisation problems over
functions in an RKHS R, the solution can be represented
as an expansion of kernel functions as in Eq. (4). Conse-
quently, instead of explicitly optimising over an innite-
dimensional RKHS we can directly start with the implicit
ansatz of Eq. (4) and solve the convex optimisation prob-
lem of nding the parameters m. The combination of
Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 shows another facet of the
link of kernels and feature maps. A model that denes
a hyperplane in feature space can often be written as a
model that depends on kernel evaluations. In Section III
we will translate these two viewpoints into two ways of
designing quantum machine learning algorithms.
C. Input encoding as a feature map
The immediate approach to combine quantum me-
chanics and the theory of kernels is to associate the
Hilbert space of a quantum system with a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space and nd the reproducing kernel of
the system. We show in Appendix A that for Hilbert
spaces with discrete bases, as well as for the special
`continuous-basis' case of the Hilbert space of coherent
states, the reproducing kernel is given by inner products
of basis vectors. This insight can lead to interesting
results. For example, Chatterjee et al. [14] show that
the inner product of an optical coherent state can
be turned into a Gaussian kernel (also called radial
basis function kernel ) which is widely used in machine
learning. However, to widen the framework we choose
another route here. Instead of asking what kernel is
associated with a quantum Hilbert space, we associate
a quantum Hilbert space with a feature space and
derive a kernel that is given by the inner product of
quantum states. As seen in the previous section, this
will automatically give rise to an RKHS, and the entire
apparatus of kernel theory can be applied.
Assume we want to encode some input xfrom an input
setXinto a quantum state that is described by a vector
j(x)iand which lives in Hilbert space F. This procedure
of `input encoding' fullls the denition of a feature map