Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces
Maria Schuldand Nathan Killoran
Xanadu, 372 Richmond St W, Toronto, M5V 2L7, Canada
(Dated: March 21, 2018)
The basic idea of quantum computing is surprisingly similar to that of kernel methods in machine
learning, namely to eciently perform computations in an intractably large Hilbert space. In this
paper we explore some theoretical foundations of this link and show how it opens up a new avenue
for the design of quantum machine learning algorithms. We interpret the process of encoding inputs
in a quantum state as a nonlinear feature map that maps data to quantum Hilbert space. A
quantum computer can now analyse the input data in this feature space. Based on this link, we
discuss two approaches for building a quantum model for classication. In the rst approach, the
quantum device estimates inner products of quantum states to compute a classically intractable
kernel. This kernel can be fed into any classical kernel method such as a support vector machine. In
the second approach, we can use a variational quantum circuit as a linear model that classies data
explicitly in Hilbert space. We illustrate these ideas with a feature map based on squeezing in a
continuous-variable system, and visualise the working principle with 2-dimensional mini-benchmark
datasets.
I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of many quantum algorithms is to perform
ecient computations in a Hilbert space that grows
rapidly with the size of a quantum system. `Ecient'
means that the number of operations applied to the
system grows at most polynomially with the system size.
An illustration is the famous quantum Fourier transform
applied to an n-qubit system, which uses O(poly(n))
operations to perform a discrete Fourier transform on
2namplitudes. In continuous-variable systems this is
pushed to the extreme, as a single operation { for exam-
ple, squeezing { applied to a mode formally manipulates
a quantum state in an innite-dimensional Hilbert space.
In this sense, quantum computing can be understood
as a technique to perform \implicit" computations in
an intractably large Hilbert space through the ecient
manipulation of a quantum system.
In machine learning, so-called kernel methods are a
well-established eld with a surprisingly similar logic.
In a nutshell, the idea of kernel methods is to formally
embed data into a higher- (and sometimes innite-)
dimensional feature space in which it becomes easier to
analyse (see Figure 1). A popular example is a support
vector machine that draws a decision boundary between
two classes of datapoints by mapping the data into a
feature space where it becomes linearly separable. The
trick is that the algorithm never explicitly performs
computations with vectors in feature space, but uses a
so-called kernel function that is dened on the domain
of the original input data. Just like quantum computing,
kernel methods therefore perform implicit computations
in a possibly intractably large Hilbert space through the
ecient manipulation of data inputs.
maria@xanadu.aiBesides this apparent link, kernel methods have
been hardly studied in the quantum machine learning
literature, a eld that (in the denition we employ here)
investigates the use of quantum computing as a resource
for machine learning. Across the approaches in this
young eld, which vary from sampling [1{5] to quantum
optimisation [6, 7], linear algebra solvers [8{10] and
using quantum circuits as trainable models for inference
[11, 12], a lot of attention has been paid to recent trends
in machine learning such as deep learning and neural
networks. Kernel methods, which were most successful
in the 1990s, are only mentioned in a few references
[9, 13]. Besides a single study on the connection between
coherent states and Gaussian kernels [14], their potential
for quantum computing remains widely unexplored.
The aim of this paper is to investigate the relationship
between feature maps, kernel methods and quantum
computing. We interpret the process of encoding inputs
into a quantum state as a feature map which maps
data into a potentially vastly higher-dimensional feature
space, the Hilbert space of the quantum system. Data
can now be analysed in this `feature Hilbert space',
where simple classiers such as linear models may
gain enormous power. Furthermore, it is well known
that the inner product of two data inputs that have
been mapped into feature space gives rise to a kernel
function that measures the distance between the data
points. Kernel methods use these kernel functions to
create models that have been very successful in pattern
recognition. By switching between kernels one eec-
tively switches between dierent models, which is known
as the kernel trick . In the quantum case, the kernel
trick corresponds to changing the data encoding strategy.
These two perspectives, namely of kernels on the one
hand and feature spaces one the other hand, naturally
lead to two ways of building quantum classiers for
supervised learning. The implicit approach takes aarXiv:1803.07128v1  [quant-ph]  19 Mar 2018