Sensors 2020 ,20, 3738 3 of 13
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Time Series
A time series is a series of data points indexed in time order. Most commonly, it is a sequence
taken at successive equally spaced points in time.
We use two time series datasets in our experiment. They are Yahoo and KPI commonly used for
evaluating the performance of time-series anomaly detection. In these datasets, anomaly points are
labeled as positive, and normal points are labeled as negative.
Yahoo is released by Yahoo Labs. It contains both real and synthetic time series with varying
trend, noise and seasonality, representing the metrics of various Yahoo services [ 35]. The Yahoo dataset
has four di erent parts, the ﬁrst part A1Benchmark is real data, and the other three parts are synthetic
data. The timestamps of the A1Benchmark are replaced by integers with the increment of 1, where
each data-point represents 1 hour worth of data. The A1Benchmark has 94866 points in total, 1669 of
which are anomalies, and the anomaly rate is 1.76%. We only use the real time series A1Benchmark to
evaluate the anomaly detection methods, as shown in Figure 1a.
KPI is released by AIOPS Challenge [ 36]. It is collected from some Internet Companies, such as
Sogo, Tencent, eBay, etc, which reﬂect the health status of machines (servers, routers, and switches)
and quality of Web services. We take the ﬁrst 10000 points and down sample it every 2 timestamps.
After that, we obtain the dataset with 5000 timestamps length, 38 anomaly points, 0.76% anomaly rate,
as shown in Figure 1b.
 
(a) (b) 
Figure 1. Time series used in our experiment, and the red parts are anomalies. ( a) An example from
Yahoo dataset. ( b) Time series in KPI dataset.
In the data preprocessing, we use the min–max normalization to bring all values in each time
series into the range [0,1] and divide each time series into two halves according to the time. Since our
model is aimed at learning the distribution of normal data at the model training stage, we remove
the anomalies in the data of the ﬁrst part to get the normal training data. The data in the second
part is used for testing. In addition, we divide the time series into training data and testing data into
sub-sequences by a sliding window with a size of 10 and a step-size of 3.
2.2. LSTM-Based V AE-GAN
This paper presents a LSTM-based VAE-GAN method for time series anomaly detection.
The method has two stages, one is the model training stage and the other is the anomaly detection
stage. Our model is trained on the normal time series data to learn the distribution of them at the
model training stage and calculates the average anomaly score of each point in testing time series data
by identifying whether the testing time series data conform to the normal time series data distribution
at the anomaly stage. The architecture of LSTM-based VAE-GAN is shown in Figure 2.