Sensors 2020 ,20, 3738 2 of 13
prediction model to detect anomalies by the deviation of the predicted value from the actual value
at each time point. For example, an anomaly detection method based on LSTM prediction model
was modeled on normal time series data, and anomalies were identiﬁed by comparing the residual of
the predicted value and the true value [ 19–21]. Malhotra et.al use stacked LSTM networks trained
on non-anomalous data as a predictor over a number of time steps for anomaly detection in time
series [ 22]. Other prediction models include multilayer perceptron (MLP) predictor and support vector
regression. With the development of industrial systems, time series data become more and more
complicated. In the industrial production process, the behavior of machines always changes based on
usage and external factors that are di cult to capture [ 23]. Under such circumstances, it is di cult to
predict the time series even in a few time steps, resulting in the time series anomaly detection method
based on the prediction model being no longer applicable.
In order to solve such problems, some reconstruction-based models were proposed. Anomaly
detection methods based on autoencoder (AE) appeared. An encoder learns a vector representation
of the input time-series and the decoder uses this representation to reconstruct the time-series.
The method based on AE performs anomaly detection through reconstruction di erence [ 24–27].
AE is a representative reconstruction approach that is a connected network with an encoder and a
decoder. It has also been applied for reconstructing time-series data using a sliding time-window [ 28].
Subsequently, some time series anomaly detection methods based on variational autoencoder (VAE)
were proposed [ 23]. Unlike an AE, a VAE models the underlying probability distribution of observations
using variational inference. At present, a novel time series anomaly detection method based on GAN
has been proposed [ 29]. The LSTM networks are used as the generator and the discriminator to capture
the distribution of the time series. However, the method based on GAN needs to ﬁnd the best mapping
from real-time space to the latent space at the anomaly stage. This optimization process of ﬁnding
the best mapping brings new errors and takes a long time, so that the system cannot provide early
warning in time.
In this paper, we propose a LSTM-based VAE-GAN for time series anomaly detection, which
eectively solves the above problems. The encoder, the generator and the discriminator are jointly
trained to take advantage of the mapping ability of the encoder and the discrimination ability of
the discriminator simultaneously. In order to capture time dependence, LSTM networks are used
as the encoder, the generator and the discriminator. The model is trained on the normal time series.
The encoder maps the input time series to the latent space. The generator reconstructs the input time
series. The characteristics of the discriminator make it possible to judge anomalies directly from the
input time series [ 30]. Since the encoder, the generator and the discriminator are jointly trained at
the training stage, it is not necessary to calculate the best mapping from real-time space to the latent
space at the anomaly detection stage. The time required at the anomaly detection stage is greatly
reduced, which can make our model detect anomalies more quickly. At the same time, due to the joint
optimization of the various modules of our model, our model can detect anomalies more accurately.
In addition, our model design is inspired by a method applied in images of faces, which combines
variational autoencoder with a generative adversarial network and shows that this method outperforms
VAEs with element-wise similarity measures in terms of visual ﬁdelity [31–34].
To summarize, the main contributions of our work are:
 A novel anomaly detection method based on VAE-GAN is proposed to detect anomalies in times
series data from sensors.
 Our method jointly trains the encoder, the generator and the discriminator, which takes
advantage of the mapping ability of the encoder and the discrimination ability of the
discriminator simultaneously.
 The anomaly score consists of the reconstruction di erence of the VAE part and the discrimination
results of the discriminator, which makes it more able to distinguish anomalies from normal data.