Sensors 2020 ,20, 3738 10 of 13
Figure 5 shows the anomaly score of the time series, which were outputted by our model. The red
dotted line is the optimal threshold. It can be seen that the scores of normal points are mostly below the
optimal threshold, and the scores of anomaly points are mostly above the optimal threshold. Since our
reconstructed samples are relatively smooth as shown in Figure 4, the reconstruction di erences that
are part of the anomaly score make the anomaly score curves and the time series shape approximately
the same.
 
(a) (b) 
Figure 5. (a) The original time series containing anomalies, and the red parts are anomalies. ( b) The
anomaly score corresponding the time series in part a, and the dotted line is the optimal threshold.
4. Discussion
In this paper, a LSTM-based VAE-GAN anomaly detection method for time series is proposed.
The method is designed to monitor the equipment sates through the data collected in the form of
time series.
The time series anomaly detection method based on sample reconstruction can be divided into
two stages. One is the model training stage, where the model learns the distribution of normal data.
The other is the anomaly detection stage, where the anomaly score of the time series is calculated
to identify anomaly. The LSTM-based VAE-GAN jointly trains the encoder, the generator and the
discriminator to take advantage of the mapping ability of the encoder and the discriminatory ability of
the discriminator simultaneously. The optimization process at the anomaly detection stage is avoided
so that anomalies can be detected more quickly and more accurately. In experiments based on Yahoo
and KPI time series data, our method has a higher F1 value than several classic sample-reconstruction
based time series anomaly detection methods. In the time loss comparison with GAN, our method is
shown to spend less time due to avoiding the optimization process at the anomaly detection stage.
Due to the moving window mechanisms, some points’ anomaly scores are calculated many times,
the others are calculated only once. The accuracy is not inﬂuenced by the number of calculations of
the anomaly scores at the anomaly detection stage. In fact, the moving window mechanism is not
essential in the data preprocessing. It depends on the length of the time series. For increasing the
number of subsequences used to train the model at the training stage, we set the step size smaller than