of generative models of images and video is an open problem. Here, I give a
summary and discussion of the latest progress, since Borji (2019), in this ﬁeld
covering newly proposed measures, benchmarks, and GAN visualization and
error diagnosis techniques.
1.1. Background
Evaluation of generative models is an active area of research. Several quan-
titative and qualitative measures have been proposed so far. In this section, I
review some of the inﬂuential measures that have inspired the researchers.
A classic approach is to compare the log-likelihoods of models. This approach,
however, has several shortcomings. A model can achieve high likelihood, but
low image quality, and conversely, low likelihood and high image quality. Also,
kernel density estimation in high-dimensional spaces is very challenging (Theis
et al., 2015).
The two most common GAN evaluation measures are Inception Score (IS)
and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID). They rely on a pre-existing classiﬁer
(InceptionNet) trained on ImageNet. IS (Salimans et al., 2016) computes the
KL divergence between the conditional class distribution and the marginal class
distribution over the generated data. FID (Heusel et al., 2017) calculates the
Wasserstein-2 ( a.k.aFréchet) distance between multivariate Gaussians ﬁtted to
the embedding space of the Inception-v3 network of generated and real images3.
IS does not capture intra-class diversity, is insensitive to the prior distribution
over labels (hence is biased towards ImageNet dataset and Inception model4),
and is very sensitive to model parameters and implementations (Barratt and
Sharma, 2018; Odena, 2019). It requires a large sample size to be reliable.
A simple class-conditional model that memorizes one example per ImageNet
class achieves a high IS. Using a 1D example, Barratt and Sharma (2018) show
that the true underlying data distribution may achieve a lower IS than other
distributions.
FIDhasbeenwidelyadoptedbecauseofitsconsistencywithhumaninspection
and sensitivity to small changes in the real distribution ( e.g.slight blurring or
small artifacts in synthesized images). FID, unlike IS, can detect intra-class
mode collapse5. The Gaussian assumption in FID calculation, however, might
not hold in practice. A major drawback with FID is its high bias. The sample
size to calculate FID has to be large enough (usually above 50K). Smaller sample
sizes can lead to over-estimation of the actual FID (Chong and Forsyth, 2020).
While single-value metrics like IS and FID successfully capture many aspects
of the generator, they lump quality and diversity evaluation and are therefore
not ideal for diagnostic purposes (Precision-Recall addresses this shortcoming).
as linear separability, mode collapse, etc. For a complete list of desired properties of GANs,
please see Borji (2019).
3To learn how to implement FID, please refer to here.
4See also here.
5Mode collapse happens when a generator produces data from only a few modes of the
target distribution, thus failing to generate diverse enough outputs. Please see here.
2