Figure 16: Seeing what a GAN cannot generate (Bau et al., 2019). (a) Distribution of object
segmentations in the training set of LSUN churches vs. the corresponding distribution over
the generated images. Objects such as people, cars, and fences are dropped by the generator.
(b) Pairs of real images and their reconstructions in which individual instances of a person and
a fence cannot be generated. Figure compiled from Bau et al. (2019).
and post-processing and data augmentation, they show that an image classiﬁer
trained on only one speciﬁc CNN generator is able to generalize well to unseen
architectures, datasets, and training methods. They highlight that today’s
CNN-generated images share common systematic ﬂaws, preventing them from
achieving realistic image generation. Similar works have been reported in Chai
et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2019). In alignment with these results, Gragnaniello
et al. (2021) also conclude that we are still far from having reliable tools for
GAN image detection.
4. Discussion
4.1. GAN Benchmarks and Analysis Studies
Following previous works ( e.g.Lucic et al. (2017); Shmelkov et al. (2018)),
new studies have investigated formulating good criteria for GAN evaluation, or
have conducted systematic GAN benchmarks. Gulrajani et al. (2020) argue that
a good evaluation measure should not have a trivial solution ( e.g.memorizing
the dataset) and show that many scores such as IS and FID can be won by
simply memorizing the training data (Fig. 20). They suggest that a necessary
condition for a metric not to behave this way is to have a large number of samples.
They also propose a measure based on neural network divergences (NND). NND
works by training a discriminative model to discriminate between samples of
the generative model and samples from a held-out test set. The poorer the
discriminative model performs, the better the generative model is. Through
experimental validation, they show that NND can eﬀectively measure diversity,
sample quality, and generalization. Lee and Town (2020) introduce Mimicry21, a
lightweight PyTorch library that provides implementations of popular GANs and
21https://github.com/kwotsin/mimicry
20