- Brightness +
- Rotate2D +
- Rotate3D +
- Zoom +
- Shift Y +
- Shift X +
Latent Space Image Space
zαwz+αw
OR
zf(z)f(f(f(f(z))))
G(z)edit (G(z),α) G(z+αw)Ledit
Linear Nonlinear
Figure 17: Top) A walk in the latent space of a GAN corresponds to visual transformations
such as zoom and camera shift, Bottom) The goal is to ﬁnd a path in zspace (linear or
non-linear) to transform the generated image G(z)to its edited version edit (G(z; )),e.g.an
zoom. To measure steerability, the distributions of a given attribute in real images and
generated images (after walking in the latent space) are compared. Figure from Jahanian et al.
(2019).
evaluation metrics to closely reproduce reported scores in the literature. They
also compare several GANs on seven widely-used datasets by training them under
the same conditions, and evaluating them using three popular GAN metrics.
Some tutorials and interaction tools have also been developed to understand,
visualize, and evaluate GANs22.
Also mention that deepfakes might be detected because they have diﬀerent
spectral properties than real images. See for example Durall et al. (2020)
4.2. Assessing Fairness and Bias of Generative Models
Fairness and bias in ML algorithms, datasets, and commercial products have
become growing concerns recently ( e.g.Buolamwini and Gebru (2018)) and
have attracted widespread attention from public and media23. Even without a
single precise deﬁnition for fairness (Verma and Rubin, 2018), it is still possible
to observe the lack of fairness across many domains and models, with GANs
being no exception. Some recent works ( e.g.Xu et al. (2018); Yu et al. (2020)
have tried to mitigate the bias in GANs or use GANs to reduce bias in other
ML algorithms ( e.g.Sattigeri et al. (2019); McDuﬀ et al. (2019)). Bias can
enter a model during training (through data, labeling, architecture), evaluation
(such as who created the evaluation measure), as well as deployment (how is
the model being distributed and for what purposes). Therefore it is critical to
address these aspects when evaluating and comparing generative models.
22See this link and https://poloclub.github.io/ganlab/ .
23https://thegradient.pub/pulse-lessons/
21