Figure 19: Wang et al. (2020a) show that a classiﬁer trained to distinguish images generated by
only one GAN (ProGAN, the left-most column) from real ones can detect the images generated
by other generative models (remaining columns) as well. Please see https://peterwang512.
github.io/CNNDetection/ .
Figure 20: Left) Gulrajani et al. (2020) show that common evaluation measures such as IS
and FID prefer a model that memorizes the dataset ( ptrain, red) to a model ( q, green) which
imperfectly ﬁts the true distribution ( p, blue) but covers more of p’s support. Right) Neural
network divergence, DCNN, discounts memorization and prefers GANs that generalize beyond
the training set. Figure compiled from Gulrajani et al. (2020)
4.3. Connection to Deepfakes
A alarming application of generative models is fabricating fake content24.
It is thus crucial to develop tools and techniques to detect and limit their use
(See Tolosana et al. (2020) for a survey on deepfakes). There is a natural
connection between deepfake detection and GAN evaluation. Obviously, as
generative models improve, it becomes increasingly harder for a human to
distinguish between what is real and what is fake (manipulated images, videos,
text, and audio). Telling the degree of fakeness of an image or video directly
tells us about the performance of a generator. Even over faces, where generative
models excel, it is still possible to detect fake images (Fig. 21), although in
some cases it can be very daunting (Fig. 22). Diﬃculty of deepfake detection for
humans is also category dependent, with some categories such as faces, cats, and
dogs being easier than bedrooms or cluttered scenes (Fig. 23). Fortunately, or
unfortunately, it is still possible to build deep networks that can detect the subtle
artifacts in the doctored images ( e.g.using the universal detectors mentioned
above (Wang et al., 2020a; Chai et al., 2020)). Moving forward, it is important
to study whether and how GAN evaluation measures can help us mitigate the
threat from deepfakes.
24Some concerns can be found at these links 1, 2, 3, and 4
23