2.11. Perplexity
Acommonlyusedmetrictoevaluategenerativemodelsoftextistheperplexity.
It measures the probability for a sentence to be produced by a language model
that has been trained on a dataset:
perplexity =QT
t=1
1
PLM(x(t+1)jx(t);:::;x(1))1=T
where xrepresent a single word and Tis the sentence length. The lower the
perplexity value, the better the model (averaged over a set of test sentences).
See here, here, Iqbal and Qureshi (2020), and Tevet et al. (2018) for some other
measures for evaluating text generation models.
3. New Qualitative GAN Evaluation Measures
A number of new qualitative measures have also been proposed. These
measures typically focus on how convincing a generated image is from human
perception perspective.
3.1. Human Eye Perceptual Evaluation (HYPE)
Zhou et al. (2019) propose a human-in-the-loop evaluation approach that
is grounded in psychophysics research on visual perception (Fig. 14). They
introduce two variants. The ﬁrst one measures visual perception under adaptive
time constraints to determine the threshold at which a model’s outputs appear
real (e.g.250 ms). The second variant is less expensive and measures human
error rate on fake and real images without time constraints18. Kolchinski et al.
(2019) propose an approach to approximate HYPE and report 66% accuracy
in predicting human scores of image realism, matching the human inter-rater
agreement rate. A major drawback with human evaluation approaches such as
HYPE is scaling them. One way to remedy this is to train a model from human
judgments and interact with a person only when the model is not certain. HYPE
is more reliable compared to automated ones but cannot be used for monitoring
the training process.
3.2. Neuroscore
Wang et al. (2020b) outline a method called Neuroscore using neural signals
andrapidserialvisualpresentation(RSVP)todirectlymeasurehumanperceptual
response to generated stimuli. Participants are instructed to attend to target
images (real and generated) amongst a larger set of non-target images (left panel
in Fig. 15). This paradigm, known as the oddball paradigm, is commonly used
to elicit the P300 event-related potential (ERP), which is a positive voltage
deﬂection typically occurring between 300 ms and 600 ms after the appearance
18An important point when conducting experiments of this sort ( e.g.Denton et al. (2015))
is to make sure that real and generated images are shuﬄed during the presentation. Otherwise,
subjects maybe able to guess what type of images are shown in a session from the ﬁrst few
images, if all the images in the session in either real or fake.
17