Pros and Cons of GAN Evaluation Measures:
New Developments
Ali Borji
aliborji@gmail.com
Abstract
Thisworkisanupdateofapreviouspaperonthesametopicpublishedafewyears
ago (Borji, 2019). With the dramatic progress in generative modeling, a suite
of new quantitative and qualitative techniques to evaluate models has emerged.
Although some measures such as Inception Score, Fréchet Inception Distance,
Precision-Recall, and Perceptual Path Length are relatively more popular, GAN
evaluation is not a settled issue and there is still room for improvement. Here,
I describe new dimensions that are becoming important in assessing models
(e.g.bias and fairness) and discuss the connection between GAN evaluation
and deepfakes. These are important areas of concern in the machine learning
community today and progress in GAN evaluation can help mitigate them.
Keywords: Generative Models, Generative Adversarial Networks, Neural
Networks, Deep Learning, Deepfakes
1. Introduction
Generative models have revolutionized AI and are now being widely adopted1.
They are remarkably eﬀective at synthesizing strikingly realistic and diverse
images, and learn to do so in an unsupervised manner (Wang et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2021; Bond-Taylor et al., 2021). Models such as generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), autoregressive models such as
PixelCNNs (Oord et al., 2016), variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013), and recently transformer GANs (Hudson and Zitnick, 2021;
Jiang et al., 2021) have been constantly improving the state of the art in image
generation. See for example Brock et al. (2018); Karras et al. (2019); Ramesh
et al. (2021) and Razavi et al. (2019).
A key diﬃculty in generative modeling is evaluating performance, i.e.how
good is a model in approximating a data distribution? Quantitative evaluation2
1For a list of GAN applications, please refer to here.
2Generative models are commonly evaluated in terms of ﬁdelity (how realistic a generated
image is) and diversity (how well generated samples capture the variations in real data) of the
learned distribution. Generative models, however, can also tested against other criteria such
Preprint submitted to Elsevier October 5, 2021arXiv:2103.09396v3  [cs.LG]  3 Oct 2021