Figure 12: Illustration of -Precision, -Recall and Authenticity metrics (Alaa et al., 2021).
Blue and red spheres correspond to the and-supports of real and generative distributions,
respectively. Blue and red points correspond to real and synthetic data. (a) Generated
samples falling outside the blue sphere look unrealistic or noisy. (b) Overﬁtted models can
generate high-quality samples that are “unauthentic” because they are copied from training
data. (c) High-quality samples should reside in the blue sphere. (d) Outliers do not count in
the-Recall metric. (Here, ==0.9,-Precision=8/9, -Recall=4/9, Authenticity=9/10).
Figure from Alaa et al. (2021).
throughout training. Intuitively, duality gap measures the sub-optimality ( w.r.t.
an equilibrium) of a given solution (G,D) where G and D and the generator
and the discriminator, respectively. They also show that their measure highly
correlates with FID on natural image datasets, and can also be used in other
modalities such as text and sound. Further, their measure requires no labels or
a pretrained classiﬁer, making it domain agnostic. In a follow-up work, Sidheekh
et al. (2021) extend the notion of duality gap to proximal duality gap that is
applicable to the general context of training GANs.
2.9. Spectral Methods
A number of studies ( e.g.Durall et al. (2020); Frank et al. (2020); Dzanic
et al. (2019); Zeng et al. (2017)) have shown that current generators are unable to
correctly approximate the spectral distributions of real data. Durall et al. (2020)
showed that up-scaling operations commonly used in GANs ( e.g.up-convolutions)
alter the spectral properties of the images causing high frequency distortions in
the output. This can be seen in the average azimuthal integration of the power
spectrum shown in the top panel of Fig. 13. Based on this observation, they
proposed a novel spectral regularization term to compensate spectral distortions.
They also proposed a very simple but highly accurate detector for generated
images and videos, i.e.a DeepFake detector.
15