Figure 4: Correlation between PPL and image quality (generated by StyleGAN). Panels (a)
and (b) show random examples with low and high (per-image) PPL. PPL score is capable of
capturing the consistency of the images. The lower the PPL, the better. Figure from Karras
et al. (2020).
the training set, a separate held-out sample from the target distribution, and a
generated sample from the model. The key insight is that an overﬁtted GAN
generates samples that are on average closer to the training samples, therefore
the average distance of generated samples to training samples is smaller than the
corresponding distances between held-out test samples and the training samples.
They also divide the instance space into cells and conduct their test separately
in each cell. This is because, as they argue, generative models tend to behave
diﬀerently in diﬀerent regions of space.
2.6. Measures that Probe Generalization in GANs
Zhao et al. (2018)16utilize carefully designed training datasets to characterize
how existing models generate novel attributes and their combinations. Some
of their ﬁndings are as follows. When presented with a training set with all
images having exactly 3 objects, both GANs and VAEs typically generate 2-5
objects (Fig. 8.B). Over a multi-modal training distribution ( e.g.images with
either 2 or 10 objects), the model acts as if it is trained separately on each
mode, and it averages the two modes. When the modes are close to each other
(e.g.2 and 4 objects), the learned distribution assigns higher probability to the
mean number of objects (3 in this example), even though there was no image
with 3 objects in the training set (Fig. 8.C). When the training set contains
certain combinations ( e.g.red cubes but not yellow cubes; Fig. 8.D), the model
memorizes the combinations in the training set when it contains a small number
of them ( e.g.20), and generates novel combinations when there is more variety
(e.g.80). Xuan et al. (2019) made a similar observation shown in Fig. 9. On a
geometric-object training dataset where the number of objects for each training
image is ﬁxed, they found a variable number of objects in generated images.
16Please see also the subsection on “Evaluating Mode Drop and Mode Collapse” in Borji
(2019).
10