for evaluation of music enhancement and molecule generation algorithms.
2.2. Methods based on Self-supervised Learned Representations
FID scores computed with classiﬁcation-pretrained embeddings have been
shown to correlate well with human evaluations (Heusel et al., 2017). Meanwhile,
they can be misleading as they are biased towards ImageNet. On non-ImageNet
datasets, FID can result in inadequate evaluation. Morozov et al. (2020) advocate
for using self-supervised representations to evaluate GANs on the established
non-ImageNet benchmarks11. They show that representations, typically obtained
via contrastive or clustering-based approaches, provide better transfer to new
tasks and domains, and thus can serve as more universal embeddings of natural
images. Further, they demonstrate that self-supervised representations produce
a more reasonable ranking of models and often improve the sample eﬃciency of
FID.
2.3. Methods based on Analysing Data Manifold
These methods measure disentanglement in the representations learned by
generative models, and are useful for improving the generalization, robustness,
and interpretability of models.
2.3.1. Local Intrinsic Dimensionality (LID)
Barua et al. (2019) introduce a new evaluation measure called “CrossLID” to
assess the local intrinsic dimensionality (LID) of real-world data with respect to
neighborhoods found in GAN-generated samples. Intuitively, CrossLID measures
the degree to which the manifolds of two data distributions coincide with each
other. The idea behind CrossLID is depicted in Fig. 1. Barua et al.compare
CrossLID with other measures and show that it a) is strongly correlated with
the progress of GAN training, b) is sensitive to mode collapse, c) is robust to
small-scale noise and image transformations, and 4) is robust to sample size. It is
not clear whether this measure can be applied to complex and high dimensional
data where it is hard to deﬁne local dimensionality.
2.3.2. Intrinsic Multi-scale Distance (IMD)
Tsitsulin et al. (2019) argue that current evaluation measures only reﬂect the
ﬁrst two (mean and covariance) or three moments of distributions. As illustrated
in Fig. 2, FID and KID (Kernel Inception Distance (Bińkowski et al., 2018))12
are insensitive to the global structure of the data distribution. They propose
a measure, called IMD, to take all data moments into account, and claim that
IMD is intrinsic13and multi-scale14. Tsitsulin et al.experimentally show that
their method is eﬀective in discerning the structure of data manifolds even on
11https://github.com/stanis-morozov/self-supervised-gan-eval
12KID is refereed to as MMD in Borji (2019).
13It is invariant to isometric transformations of the manifold such as translation or rotation.
14It captures both local and global information.
6