2.1.5. Unbiased FID and IS
Chong and Forsyth (2020) show that FID and IS are biased in the sense
that their expected value, computed using a ﬁnite sample set, is not their true
value. They ﬁnd that bias depends on the number of images used for calculating
the score and the generators themselves, making objective comparisons between
models diﬃcult. To mitigate the issue, they propose an extrapolation approach
to obtain a bias-free estimate of the scores, called FID1andIS1, computed
with an inﬁnite number of samples. These extrapolated scores are simple, drop-in
replacements for the ﬁnite sample scores9.
2.1.6. Clean FID
Parmaretal.(2021)examinethesensitivityofFIDscore(andalsootherscores
such as KID) to inconsistent and often incorrect implementations across diﬀerent
image processing libraries when training and evaluating generative models. FID
score is widely used to evaluate generative models, but each FID implementation
uses a diﬀerent low-level image processing method. Image resizing functions in
commonly-used deep learning libraries often introduce aliasing artifacts. They
observe that numerous subtle choices need to be made for FID calculation and a
lack of consistencies in these choices can lead to vastly diﬀerent FID scores. To
address these challenges, they introduce a standardized protocol, and provide an
easy-to-use FID evaluation library called cleanﬁd10.
2.1.7. Fréchet Video Distance (FVD)
Unterthiner et al. (2019) propose an extension of the FID, called FVD, to
evaluate generative models of video. In addition to the quality of each frame,
FVD captures the temporal coherence in a video. To obtain a suitable feature
video representation, they used a pre-trained network (the Inﬂated 3D Con-
vnet (Carreira and Zisserman, 2017) pre-trained on Kinetics-400 and Kinetics-600
datasets) that considers the temporal coherence of the visual content across
a sequence of frames. The I3D network generalizes the Inception architecture
to sequential data, and is trained to perform action-recognition on the Kinet-
ics dataset consisting of human-centered YouTube videos. FVD considers a
distribution over videos, thereby avoiding the drawbacks of frame-level measures.
Some other measures for video synthesis evaluation include Average Content
Distance (Tulyakov et al., 2018) (the average L2 distance among all consecutive
frames in a video), Cumulative Probability Blur Detection (CPBD) (Narvekar
and Karam, 2009), Frequency Domain Blurriness Measure (FDBM) (De and
Masilamani, 2013), Pose Error (Yang et al., 2018), and Landmark Distance
(LMD) (Chen et al., 2018). For more details on video generation and evaluation,
please consult Oprea et al. (2020).
In addition to above, Fréchet Audio Distance (FAD) (Roblek et al., 2019)
and Fréchet ChemNet Distance (FCD) (Preuer et al., 2018) have been suggested
9https://github.com/mchong6/FID_IS_infinity
10github.com/GaParmar/clean-fid
5