it might be easier to evaluate a model on downstream tasks when those
tasks have a clear target for a given input. In some tasks ( e.g.graphics
applications such as image synthesis, image translation, image inpainting,
and attribute manipulation) image quality is more important, whereas in
some other tasks ( e.g.generating synthetic data for data augmentation)
diversity may weigh more. Thus, evaluation metrics should be tailored to
the target task. It should be note that the representation power of the
discriminator or encoder of a GAN does not necessarily reﬂect its sample
quality and diversity.
4.Having good evaluation measures is important not only for ranking gener-
ative models but also for diagnosing their errors. Reliable GAN evaluation
is specially important in domains where humans are less attuned to discern
the quality of samples ( e.g.medical images). An important question thus
is whether current evaluation measures generalize across diﬀerent domains
(i.e.are domain-agnostic).
5.The degree to which generative models memorize the training data is still
unclear. A common technique to assess memorization is to look for nearest
neighbors. It is known that this approach has several shortcomings (Theis
et al., 2015; Borji, 2019). Motivated by works that study memorization in
supervised learning works, van den Burg and Williams (2021) proposed new
methods to understand and quantify memorization in generative models.
6.Ultimately, future works should also study how research in evaluating per-
formance of generative models can help mitigate the threat from fabricated
content. In this regard, extending works such as Durall et al. (2020); Wang
et al. (2020a), conducting benchmarks on standard datasets containing fab-
ricated content, as well as cross-talks between research in GAN evaluation
and deep fake detection will lead to advances in these areas.
References
Alaa, A.M., van Breugel, B., Saveliev, E., van der Schaar, M., 2021. How faithful
is your synthetic data? sample-level metrics for evaluating and auditing
generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08921 .
Bai, C.Y., Lin, H.T., Raﬀel, C., Kan, W.C.w., 2021. On training sample
memorization: Lessons from benchmarking generative modeling with a large-
scale competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03062 .
Barannikov, S., Troﬁmov, I., Sotnikov, G., Trimbach, E., Korotin, A., Filip-
pov, A., Burnaev, E., 2021. Manifold topology divergence: a framework for
comparing data manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04024 .
Barratt, S., Sharma, R., 2018. A note on the inception score. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.01973 .
Barua, S., Ma, X., Erfani, S.M., Houle, M.E., Bailey, J., 2019. Quality eval-
uation of gans using cross local intrinsic dimensionality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.00643 .
28