Further, they continue to have a blind spot for image quality (Karras et al.,
2019).
Another popular approach to evaluate GANs is manual inspection ( e.g.Den-
ton et al. (2015); Zhou et al. (2019)). While this approach can directly tell us
about the image quality, it is limited in assessing sample diversity. It is also
subjective as the reviewers may incorporate their own biases and opinions. It
also requires knowledge of what is realistic and what is not for the target domain
which might be hard to learn in some domains ( e.g.medical domain6). Further,
it is constrained by the number of images that can be reviewed in a reasonable
time prohibiting its usage during model development. Finally, due to the subtle
diﬀerences in experimental protocols ( e.g.user interface design, fees, duration),
it is often diﬃcult to replicate the results across diﬀerent publications.
1.2. Organization of the Paper
This paper is organized as follows. Recently proposed evaluation measures
are categorized under quantitative and qualitative measures and are covered in
sections 2 and 3, respectively7. In section 4, I then discuss some benchmark and
model comparison studies as well as analysis works. Finally, section 5 highlights
some major points and oﬀers suggestions for future research in GAN evaluation.
Note that some of the works reviewed here have not been accepted in prior
published work and may have not been peer reviewed. Therefore, they should
be treated with additional caution in the absence of widespread usage.
2. New Quantitative GAN Evaluation Measures
2.1. Specialized Variants of Fréchet Inception Distance and Inception Score
2.1.1. Spatial FID (sFID)
Nash et al. (2021) propose a variant of FID called sFID that uses spatial
features rather than the standard pooled features. They compute FID using
both the standard pool3 inception features and the ﬁrst 7 channels from the
intermediate mixed 6/conv feature maps. The reason to include pool3 is because
it compresses spatial information to a large extent, making it less sensitive to
spatial variability. The reason to include the intermediate mixed 6/conv is
because it provides a sense of spatial distributional similarity between models.
2.1.2. Class-aware FID (CAFD) and Conditional FID
Liu et al. (2018) argue against the single-manifold Gaussian assumption in
FID, and employ a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to better ﬁt the feature
6For example, to tell whether a GAN can generate X-rays with pneumonia in them, it is
better to ask doctors rather than Amazon Mechanical Turk workers!
7Some methods may fall in both categories.
3