Figure 15: Left) An example of RSVP experimental protocol in which a rapid image stream
(4 images per second) containing target and non-target images is presented to participants.
Participants are instructed to search for real face images. The idea is that GAN generated faces
will elicit a diﬀerent response than real faces. Right) Schematic diagram of neuro-AI interface
for computing the Neuroscore. Generated images by a GAN are shown to the participants
and the corresponding recorded neural responses are used to evaluate the performance. Figure
compiled from Wang et al. (2020b).
whereis the step size, and Lis the distance between the generated image
G(z+w)after taking an -step in the latent direction and the target image
edit(G(z),). The latter is the new image derived from the source image G(z).
To quantify how well a desired image manipulation under each transformation
is achieved, the distributions of a given attribute ( e.g.“luminance”) in the real
data and generated images (after walking in latent space) are compared.
3.5. GAN Dissection
Bau et al. (2018) propose a technique to dissect and visualize the inner
workings of an image generator19. The main idea is to identify GAN units
(i.e.generator neurons) that are responsible for semantic concepts and objects
(such as tree, sky, and clouds) in the generated images. Having this level of
granularity into the neurons allows editing existing images ( e.g.to add or remove
trees as shown in Fig. 18) by forcefully activating and deactivating (ablating) the
corresponding units for the desired objects. Their technique also allows ﬁnding
artifacts in the generated images and hence can be used to evaluate and improve
GANs. A similar approach has been proposed in Park et al. (2019) for semantic
manipulation and editing of GAN generated images20.
3.6. A Universal Fake vs.Real Detector
Wang et al. (2020a) ask whether it is possible to create a “universal” detector
to distinguish real images from synthetic ones using a dataset of synthetic images
generated by 11 CNN-based generative models. See Fig. 19. With careful pre-
19A demo of this work is available at here.
20See here for an illustration.
19