4 Non-redundant; 4) Strongly relevant . The feature which did not require for predicting 
accuracy  is known  as an irrelevant  feature. Some of the popular appro aches that fit 
into filter and wrapper methods are models, search strategies , feature quality 
measures , and feature evaluation.  
Set of features are key factors for determining the hypothesis of the predicting 
models . The No of features and the hypothesis space are directly proportional to each 
other, i.e., as the number of features incre ases, then the hypothesis space is also 
incre ased. For example, if there are M features with  the binary  class label  in a dataset , 
then it has
M22 in the search space. The hypothesis space can furth er be reduce d by 
discarding redundant and irrelevant features .  
The relevancy of the feature is measured based on the characteristics  of the data 
not by its value. Statistics is such one technique which shows the relationship between 
the features and its importance.  
The distortion of irrelevant and redundant features is not due to  the presence  of 
un-useful  information ; it is because the feature s did not have  a statistical  relationship 
with other features . Individually any feature may  be irrelevant but it is relevant whe n 
joined with other features [2].  
FS methods are classified  into three types, b ased on the interaction with  the 
learning model such as  Filter, Wrapper and Embedded Methods. In the Filter method 
features are selected based on statistical measures. It is independent of the learning 
algorithm and requires less computational time.  Information  gain [3], chi-square test  
[3], Fisher  score,  correlation coefficient , and variance threshold  are some of the 
statistical measures used to understand the importance of the featur es. The 
performance of the Wrapper  method depends on the classifier . The best subset of 
features is selected  based on the results of the classifier.  Wrapper methods are 
computationally more expensive th an filter methods , due to the repeated learning 
steps and cross -validation.  However, the se methods are more accurate than the filter  
method. Some of the examples are R ecursive feature elimination  [4], Sequential 
feature selection algorithms  [5], and Genetic algorithms . The third appro ach is the 
Embedded  method w hich uses ensemb le learning and hybrid learning methods for 
feature selection. Since it has a collective decision, its performance is better than the 
other two models. Random forest is one such example . It is computationally  less 
intensive than wrapper met hods. However, this method has a drawback of specific to 
a learning model.  
1.1. FS procedure  
It is proved  from the literature that feature selection can improve the performance of 
prediction, scalability and generalization capability of the classifier. In knowledge 
discovery , FS plays a fundamental  role in reducing the computational complexity, 
storage, and cost [6]. 
Fig. 1 shows  the various stages of FS process [7] which is explained  below.  Its 
performance de pends on the decision  taken at every level.  
1. Search direction . A n g  et al. [7] state that t he first st age of the FS process 
is finding the search direction  and the starting point. The search directions are broadly 
classified into three types of forward search, backward search, and random search.