9 Gaussian data. Traditional MI has a drawback that, the method  discards only a few 
redundant variables. For identifying the relevant f eature, it calculates the JMI 
between the target feature  and the individual features. To discard all redundant 
features JMI uses Conditional MI instead of normal MI.  
Similarly  P e n g, L o n g  and D i n g  [38] in 2005 , proposed  a heuristic 
algorithm called minimal -Redundancy -Maximal -Relevance (mRMR) for the 
removal of redundant data. It also finds most relevant features during  the optimal 
feature subset selection, and without compr omising  the classification accuracy . 
Based on the information  theoretic (like mutual information ) selection criterion 
M e y e r  and B o n t e m p i  [45] in 2006 proposed a new filter selection called 
Double  Input Symmetrical Relevance (DISR) for supervised classifications. These 
methods use the variable complementary measures for finding intrinsic features and 
more information about the target class than that of an individual  feature . 
S o n g, Ni, and W a n g  [46] in 2013 proposed a n algorithm for feature subset 
selection called a Fast clustering -based feature selection algorithm (FAST) based on 
graph theory. The algorithm uses the graph technique Minimum Spanning Tree 
(MST) for clustering the features. This FAST algo rithm had effect ively removed  
irrelevant features and redundant features  by using symmetric uncertainty measure 
[47]. For choosing the optimal features  FAST  algorithm uses the cluster -based 
methods.  
2.2. Wrapper method  
According to K o h a v i  and J o h n  [48] in 1997 the feature subset selection  in 
wrapper method  is made as a black box, i.e., there is no knowle dge about the 
underlying  algorithm. Feature subsets are selected based on inductive algorithms.  
This chosen  feature subset  estimates the accuracy of the training model. Depending 
on the accuracy  measured from the previous step , the method will decide wheth er to 
add or remove a feature from the selected subset. Due to this, the wrapper methods 
are computationally more complex.  
K o r f i a t i s  et al. [49] in 2013   proposed a novel wrapper FS algorithm  called 
LM-FM method ; it comprises of two stages namely Local Maximization (LM) 
followed by a Floating Maximization (FM) . In the LM stage best subset of features 
are selected from the original set of features based on credit score values between the 
features and the target class. Then this best subset of features is taken as input for the 
FM stage. In the FM stage , optimal features are selected by using floating size feature 
selection algorithm  like Sequential Floating Forward Selection (SFFS) . Korfiatis et 
al. combine the SVM  classifier with LM -FM to show better classification.  
Wrapper methods are good at classification accuracy and bad at computational 
efficiency. So, to overcome this problem , G. C h e n  and J. C h e n  [50] in 2015  
proposed a new wrapper method namely “Cosine Similarity Measure Support Vector 
Machines ” (CSMSVM). This technique  uses the SVM classifier itself for selection 
of relevant features at the time of classifier construction, by including the cosine 
distance into SVM. This technique  not only decreases the intraclass  distances for the 
reduction of classification error rate but al so it optimizes the margin in SVM. The 
proposed method  had increased the computational efficiency to a maximum extent.