10 P a n t h o n g  and S r i v i h o k  [51] in 2015  proposed an algorithm for wrapper 
FS method based on ensemble learning algorithms. In this approach, Panthong and 
Srivihok use three types of search strategies in the wrapper method namely SFS, SBS 
and Optimize selection. These methods are combined  with ensemble learner. The 
empirical analysis of different combinations of the search strategies  – Sequential and 
heuristic, bagging,  boosting, decision tree and Naïve Bayes classifiers are used . They 
are: 1) FBDT (SFS + Bagging + Decision Tree), 2) BBDT (SBS + Bagging + 
Decision Tree), 3) OBNB (Optimize selection (evolutionary) + Bagging + Naïve 
Bayes), 4) OADT (Optimize selection (evo lutionary) + Ada Boost  + Decision Tree) , 
and 5) OANB (Optimize selection (evolutionary) + Ada Boost+ Naïve Bayes). The 
study on FBDT, BBDT, OBNB, OADT , and OANB reveals that the prediction results 
are more accurate when combin ing with evolutionary algorith m ‒ heuristic search for 
feature selection.  
D a s  et al. [52] in 2017 use wrapper FS method based on harmony search . 
Harmony search is a met a-heuristic algorithm, which uses the concept of musical 
procedure for searching an idealistic harmony. In this work, instead of heuristic 
search, harmony search is used for subset section and is applied to identify the 
suitable words in native  language (B angla: Indian origin) words.  
In general, the wrapper method takes more time complexity. To overcome this, 
W a n g  et al. [53] in 2017 , proposed a novel  approach by combing the wrapper  
method and filter method. This method uses the Markov blanket technique along with 
the wrapper -based  FS for reducing the computational time. Markov blanket technique 
can explicitly remove the redundant feature by considering the relevance  is between 
the features . It uses a cross -entropy  based measure  for this purpose. The features that 
are considered  as redundant  are conditionally independent of the target class. To 
reduce the no of wrapper computations the unnecessary  features  are identified using  
the filter method rather than the wrapper  method.  
Over past years to extract meaningful  information from sensor data filter based 
FS method has been used . However,  this approach requires more time complexity, 
and less occupancy estimation. M a s o o d, S o h  and J i a n g  [54] in 2017  have 
proposed a new ranking based incremental search strategy  method -WRANK -ELM . 
This uses wrapper -ranking based feature selection, which is named  after Extreme 
Learning Machine (ELM) classifier. The time complexity of this meth od is improved  
by adopting an incremental  search strategy rather  than sequential  and exhaustive 
search. This considerably saves computational costs. The best-selected  features are 
evaluated  by using EML classifier. Experimental results of this approach outperform  
the results of an other wrapper method . 
B e r m e j o  [55] in 2017  propose another different view on wrapper method 
that is applyi ng combined wrapper methods for feature selection. This ensemble 
wrapper approach was tested  on fish age prediction. Here Bermejo  uses the ensemble 
techniques during the wrapper method, i.e., CV is calculated for each selected feature 
subsets, and the Mean  CV error is calculated based on this value.  Subset which has 
minimum CV error, that subset is considered as the best set? The collective 
performance of the wrapper method has shown good improvement in the accuracy.