13 1994 extended the Relief to Relief  – A, B, F for address the incomplete, unknown 
and multiclass problems respectively . But this method  also fails to remove r edundant 
data, so B a t t i t i  [43] in 1994 use MI-based  FS to rule out the redundant features. 
All these methods are computationally faster but lack in the accuracy  of the model. 
To overcome these drawbacks wrapper -based , FS are introduced.  
In the wrapper meth od, the features are selected based on the underlying 
learning algorithm but it is computationally slow due to iteratively selecting for the 
best subset of features. Initially day sequential  search strategies are used for selecting 
the subset of features. But it has a nesting  effect to overcome this P u d i l, 
N o v o v i č o v á, and K i t t l e r  [10] in 1994  came with the idea of SFFS (Sequential 
Forward  Floating  Selection) and SBFS (Sequential Backward Floating Selection). 
These methods also have the drawback of the searching overhead. To overcome this 
Heuristic Search  and optimal search strategies based on a bio-inspired  algorithm for 
selection of optimal features with less overhead are applied. So, there i s a lot of future 
scope in the optimization of the search strategies for better selection of the feature 
subsets.  
There is another scope of combining the filter and wrapper to form a hybrid  
algorithm for better  accuracy and time complexity.  
3. FS methods based on Learning method  
Based on the presence and absence of class labels  feature selection methods 
Supervised FS, Unsupervised FS follow, respectively. When the dataset  has both 
labeled  and unlabelled  data Semi -supervised  Feature selection can be used.  
3.1 Supervised FS 
This approach uses the class  label for selecting relevant features. Most of the time 
this approach causes overfitting problem due to the presence of the noisy data in the 
dataset.  Some of the widely used supervised Feature selection meth ods are the Fisher  
score [60], Hilbert -Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [61], Fisher Criterion 
[62], Pearson Correlation Coefficient [63], trace ratio criterion [64] and mutual 
information [38]. 
S o n g  et al.  [61] in 2007  proposed a supervised feature selection method called 
BAHSIC. The dependence is estimated  by using the Hilbert -Schmidt  Independence 
Criterion (HSIC) [65], and the feature s are selected using backward elimination. 
HSIC kernel is used for measuring the dependencies. Most of the feature selection 
methods are applicable either for binary classification or regression but not both. The 
BAHSIC  method has the advantage of being applied  to problems of regression, 
binary class and multi -class  classification with less computational time compared to 
other FS methods.  
T u t k a n, G a n i z  and A k y o k u ş  [66] in 2016  proposed a novel feature 
selection method called Meaning Based Feature Selection (MBFS) for text mining 
that uses Supervised and Unsupervised learning. MBFS was based  on the Helmholtz  
principle [67] and Gestalt theorem of human perception [68], for selecting the 
features it uses meaning measure. Helmholtz principle from the Gestalt theory  is used