14 for assigning a meaning  score for each word in the document. For measuring the 
meaning score  is used  the next e quation : 
(5)   meaning (𝑤,𝑐𝑗)=−1
𝑚log[𝑘
𝑚]−[(𝑚−1) log𝑁], 
where 𝑤 is a feature that appears 𝑘 times in 𝑠 dataset, 𝑚 times in a document of 𝑐𝑗 
class and 𝑁 is the rate of length of dataset.  
M a r t í n-S m i t h  et al. [69] in 2017  used supervised filter method for the 
classification of a Brain -Computer  Interface (BCI) by using Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) classifier. It extracts the fe atures from Electro Encephalo Gram 
(EEG) signals, for analy zing the extracted signals Multi -Resolution Analysis (MRA) 
method had used. The proposed Filter approach had improved the formulation of 
multi -objective FS. For obtaining an optimal  feature subset [69] had multi -objectives , 
they are first the method should increase the accuracy of the classifier and second the 
method  should have overcome the overfitting  problems. These had been achieved  by 
evaluating the classifier and adjusting the parameters suitable during the training 
phase.  
In the past Spectral Feature Selection (SFS) had been used in feature selection. 
But it fails to preserve  either local or global structure of the data -set in the  form of 
graph matrix. Another drawback is that it uses the original data for matrix learning 
every time. To overcome the problems with SFS [70] propose a novel supervised 
feature selections method by preserving  both gl obal and the local  structure  of the  data 
set. For maximizing the objective function at a fast rate, it uses an optimization  
method. The graph matrix learning and the low -dimensional feature space learning 
are coupled  as a unified framework . For pre serving the global and local structure, it 
uses subspace -learning methods like LDA and Locality Preserving Projection (LPP) 
respectively, LDA uses low -rank constraint whereas  LPP uses graph structure 
learning and for eliminating the irrelevant  features , it uses l2,1 – norm regularizer for 
sparse feature selection.  
3.2. Graph -based unsupervised FS 
In Unsupervised feature selection, the data set is unassisted  by the class  label, so it 
was the most  challenging task than Supervised and Semi -supervised FS. Based  on 
the similarity measures the redundant features are removed.  
If the features  are similar with one or more features then one of these features 
are remov ed, similarly , if a feature did not make any contribution to clustering , then 
such features  are elimin ated during feature selection process. It is essential for 
exploratory data analysis of biological data and, also useful for effectively finding 
unknown disease types . There are some demerits with this Unsupervised feature 
selection ; The selected subsets d id not consider the correlation between different 
features. Some of the well known unsupervised feature selection algorithms are 
Variance Score [71], Unsupervised Feature Selection using Feature Similarity 
measure (FSFS) [72], Laplacian Score for Feature Selection (LSFS) [73], Spectral 
analysis based feature selection [74], Multi -Cluster  Feature Selection (MCFS) [75], 
and Unsupervised Discriminative Feature Selection (UDFS) [76].  
In earlier unsupervised feature selection [73], He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006  uses 
feature ranking based techniques as fundamental  criteria for feature selections. As the