8 2.1.2. Mutual information  
MI is another statistical method used in FS. It is the measure of how two variables  
(a, b) are mutually dependent. It evaluates the “measure of data ” gather ed about one 
arbitrary variable, through the other random variable . Equation 2 is used  to calculate 
MI between  two discrete random variables a and b,   
(2)   𝐼(𝐴,𝐵)=∑ ∑ 𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)log(𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)
𝑝(𝑎)𝑝(𝑏)) 𝑎𝐴 𝑏𝐵 , 
where p(a, b) is the joint probability function of A and B, and p(a) and p(b) are the 
marginal probability distribution functions of A and B respectively . 
For continuous random variables , the summation is replaced by a double 
integral  as  
(3)  𝐼(𝐴,𝐵)=∫∫𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)log(𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)
𝑝(𝑎)𝑝(𝑏))𝑑𝑎𝐴𝐵𝑑𝑏. 
In the filter  method , each feature is assigned a  scoring value  using  statistical 
measures. Features are organized  in descending order based on the scores and assign 
ranking for the features.  A subset of features is selected using threshold value. Filter 
method takes less computational time for selecting the best features. As the 
correlation between the independent variables is not considered  while selecting the 
features, this leads to selection of redundant features . 
Filter method uses characteristics such as informa tion gain, consistency, 
dependency, correlation , and distance  measures . K i r a  and R e n d e l l  [40] in 1992 
proposed a method  called Relief  work  based on instance based  learning [41]. It uses 
Euclid  distance for selecting Near -hit and Near -miss. Let X denote an instance and 
an instance Xi is call ed as Near -hit of X when it a close  neighbor  of X and also same 
class label as X. Similarly  an instance Xi is call ed as Near -miss of X when it properly 
close  neighbor  of X and different class label as X, T denotes a relevance of threshold 
ranges from 0≤𝑇≤1. The algorithm calculates feature weight based on the average 
Near -hit and Near -miss. It selects the features whose feature weight is greater than T. 
The drawback in this algorithm is that it is applicable to two classes of classification 
problems and fails to discard redundant, incomplete features.   
To overcome the problems with Relief   K o n o n e n k o  [42] in 1994 proposed 
an extension to Relief  called  Relief -A for addressing the incomplete data  problem ,  
Relief -B if at least one of two instances has unknown value for a given attribute. To 
address the multiclass problem , Relief -F is introduced . In Relief   uses only one Near -
hit/Miss for selecting the feature, whereas  in Relief -A uses k-Nearest hits/misses and 
consider the average of these k -Nearest hits/misses instead  of one near hit/miss.  In 
Relief -F instead of finding one near miss M from a different class, the algorithm finds 
one near miss for each different class and averages their contribution for updating 
feature weights. This algorithm also fails to remove the redundant data.  
Mutual Information based Feature selection was used by the Bat t i t i  [43] in 
1994 to address the above -said issue. It not only finds the relevancy between the 
target class and individual features but also finds the relevancy between the individual 
features.  In the selection process , the information gained by the variables helps to 
rule out the redundant features.  
Y a n g  and M o o d y  [44] in 1999 proposed a method called Joint Mutual 
Information  based approach (JMI) for the classification and visualization of non -