15 feature measures are calculated independently, the relationship between them is not 
considered. To overcome this issue,  Z. Li et al. [77] in 2012  and Y. Y a n g  et al. 
[76] in 2011  have proposed a spectral -based  clustering approach. In this method , the 
cluster structure of the data had been explored  by using matrix factorization. The 
features are selected by using the sparsity  regularization model  based  on learned 
graph Laplacian.  
B a n d y o p a d h y a y  et al. [78] in 2014  use dense sub -graph based on feature 
clustering for unsupervised feature selection. In this method first, the original feature 
set is represented in the form of a graph , it consist s of all features  being portray ed as 
vertices of the graph , and the edge weights are found  by using the inter-feature  
similarity.  What is computed  by using mutual information ? In this method the feature 
selection is performed in two stages, the first stage,  densest sub -graph had been 
obtained with nonredundant  features and the second  stage minimi zes the feature  sets 
by using feature clustering from the graph.  
X. W a n g  et al. [79] in 2016   propose Unsupervised Spectral Featu re Selection 
(USFS) with l1-norm graph. It is based  on the method, Spectral Embedded Clustering 
[80]. For selecting the discriminative features, USFS uses l1-norm graph and spectral 
clustering. By using spectr al clustering, the cluster indicators are obtained  from the 
unlabelled data sets. For cross -checking , the selected features l1-norm graph had been 
imposed . It is not clear whether the manifold structure with the existing spectral 
feature selection method c ould overcome this USFS manifold structure is used for 
clarity.  
W e n  et al. [81] in 2016  proposed Unsupervised Optimal Feature Selection 
(UOFS) for FS. UOFS  is based  on l2,1-norm regularization matrix instead of l1-norm 
graph . This is because in l1-norm graph has two phases namely 1) graph construction 
and 2) subspace learning before classification. But these phases are not optimal for 
classificatio n. So, W e n  et al.  [81] use l2,1-norm based sparse representation model, 
and for subspace learning , it uses l2,1-norm regularization. The sparse representation 
in this method had been used  for feature selection and extraction for classification.  
S. W a n g  and H. W a n g  [82] in 2017  proposed a novel method for 
unsupervised feature selection based on low -rank approximation and structure 
learning. Using  low-rank approximation one can provide an exact evaluation for the 
number  of Connected components of embedded graphs in struct ure learning.  The 
primary  step in this method is to  represent the feature selection problem as a matrix 
factorization with low -rank constraints by using a self-representation  of a data matrix. 
For capturing the sparsity of the feature selection matrix , l2,1-norm method had been 
used. Based on these structure d learning and low -rank approximation techniques, an 
efficient algorithm had been implemented . There are some demerits with this method  
namely, how to learn the feature subsets adaptively.  
Y. L i u  et al. [83] in 2017  proposed a novel method for Unsupervised feature 
selection called Diversity -Induced  Self-Representation  (DISR), based on Self 
representation property [84] and also used an algorithm called Augmented Lagrange 
Method (ALM) for efficient optimization. By using diversity property , more 
information about the data can be captured, which helps in discarding the similar 
features. Due to this redundant feature s are significantly removed . The similarity