17 the user has to use a graph -based  SSL algorithm for diffusing the class labels on the 
known node of the graph to the unknown data nodes.  
Some of the graph based  SSL algorithms are graph min -cut method [90], 
Gaussian fields and harmonic methods [91], the global and local consistency method 
[92], the manifold regularization [89] and the alternating graph transduction method 
[93]. 
Most of the methods in GSSL follow neighborhood  methods like k-NN. From 
the literature , it is clear that the neighborhood  approach constructed using GSSL 
generates irregular  and imbalanced graphs for real and synthetic data. The greedy  
approach in adding n odes to the graph, which is based on k nearest points, is the cause 
for the above -said issue. To overcome the drawback of k-NN based GSSL in [93] 
proposed  a method named maximum weight  b-matching. In this method, each node 
had precise ly b nodes in the graph.  
Z h a o  and L i u  [94] in 2007  had proposed an algorithm called sSelect  for semi -
supervised  learning based on spectral graph analysis. The algorithm ranks the features 
in the way similar to Fisher score by using a regularization framework. This algorithm 
selects the features one by one without considering the relationship between the 
features.  
Generally, this graph  based semi -supervised  feature selection has broad  
applications in the area of image annotation. Ma et al. [95] in 2012  Proposed an 
algorithm called Structural Feature Selection with Sparsity (SFSS), by using 
automatic image annotation. Y. Y a n g  et al. [96] in 2012   used a joint framework by 
joining shared structure learning and graph -based  learning for annotating the web 
images. For annotating  the noisily tagged web images, T a n g  et al. [97] in 2011   
have proposed an algorithm called  a novel k-NN sparse graph -based  SSL approach.  
3.3.1 . Findings  
From the literature, we came to know that there are mainly two drawbacks to the 
graph -based  semi -supervised  feature selection. First, these methods are not suitable 
for the large -scale data set, due to the presence of a large number of training datasets 
and also due to  that they consume more time for the construction of graph like 
Laplacian matrix. Second, it selects the features independently without considering 
the correlation between the features . 
4. Appl ications  
These days there is a demand for computa tional  power, proce ssing capacity and 
storage to handle the volume  of data in various fields such as massiv e Image 
processing, Microarray  data, Graph Theory, Gene Selection, Network security and so 
on. The massive  data is the major  concern for the learning models. To improve the 
performance of the learner , it is very much essential  to apply dimensionality 
reduction techniques to generate compact  and error -free data for better results. In the 
following paragr aphs we explain in details about each application area in details.