7 5. Validate the results . To validate the results the feature sets validation 
techniques are used. Cross -validation , Confusion matrix, Jaccard similarity -based 
measure, Rand Index are some of the validation techniques . Cross -Validation  (CV)  
is most commonly used validation methods.  The m ain advantage of the CV method 
is that it gives  an unbiased  error estimate. Confusion Matrix is generated  for the 
evaluation  of the classifier . Some of the classification and clu stering measures 
commonly used are: 
Classificati on Measures  Clustering Measures  
Error Rate  Davies -Bouldin Index  
TP Rate/ Recall / Sensitivity  Dunn Index  
Specificity  F-Measure  
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) Curve  Jaccard index  
Precision  Dice index  
F-Score / F -Measure  Fowlkes -Mallows index  
Further, the paper is outlined as follows: Section 2 explains how feature 
selection is divided based on the evaluation criteria. Section 3, elaborates how feature 
selection methods are applied based on the class label. Section 4 explains the 
applications areas of feature selection. Section 5 describes the summary and future 
scope of feature selection methods.  
2. Feature selection based on Evaluation criteria  
In this section , we are discussing the  FS algorithms that depend  on evaluation criteria. 
Based on evaluation criteria and interaction with learning algorithm feature selections  
are classified into three types as: 1 ) Filter method 2 ) Wrapper method, and  
3) Embedded method . 
2.1. Filter method  
In this method, the model starts with all features and select s the best features  subset  
based on statistical measures  such as  Pearson’s correlation [33], Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA ), ANOV A, Chi -square [34], Wilcoxon Mann Whitney test [35], and 
Mutual Information  (MI)  [36-39]. All these st atistical methods depend on the 
response and feature variable present in the dataset.  Pearson’s Correlation (PC) and 
Mutual Information methods are commonly using statistical methods.  
2.1.1. Pearson’s correlation  
Correlation is a method of finding the rela tionship between  two Quantities , for 
example , age and height. PC is used  for detect ing the linear relationship between two  
variables.  The next e quation  is used  to calculate t he PC (ρ) between the independent  
variable  x and dependent variable y:  
(1)    𝜌(𝑥,𝑦)=∑(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)(𝑦𝑖−𝑦)𝑖
√∑(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)2(𝑦𝑖−𝑦)2𝑖. 
Generally , the PC value lies in between [ –1, 1] if the value is –1 then the 
variables are negatively correlated otherwise if the value is 1 then the variables are 
positively correlated. In case that the value is 0, then there is no correlation between 
the variables.