20 application.  This drags the atten tion of the researchers to come  up with the best 
feature selection model that suits for any application irrespective of the constrain ts. 
So, we need to reduce the dimensions of the data by using some of the dimensionality  
reduction methods mentioned above.  
 
Fig. 3. Ratio of FS approaches used in different domains  
It is observed from the literature , that filter -based feature selections are  
computationally faster  when compared with the wrapper  method and less accurate. 
Whereas  in wrapper method the accuracy is more but computationally costlier. 
Dimension reduction provide s several advantages: it results in a low dimensional 
model, requires l ess memory space, reduces the risk of overfitting , better accuracy 
and reduces the time complexity.  
From Fig. 3 it specifies  most of the researchers use Gene selection as an 
application  area. Moreover,  from Fig. 4 correlation criteria algorithm had been used 
by most of the researchers.  
After doing a critical  literature  survey , it is clear that most of the experimental 
analysis is carried out on the static  dataset. In reality , many applications generate 
dynamic and live data, which tends to drift the concept frequently. So, there is scope 
for understanding the concept and propose suitable dimensionality reduction model.  
In wrapper feature selection methods, sequential search is using for the selection 
of feature subsets. Due to this, it incre ases the time complexity. To overcome this 
problem  some of the researchers introduce  a genetic  algorithm -based  searching 
methods lik e Ant Colony Optimization;  Practical  Swarm Optimization are some of 
the commonly used methods. By using the optimization methods , there is a 
significant  improvement  in the feature subset selection. So most of the future research 
works are carried out by us ing this methods only. There is more future scope in this 
area.  
Another area of feature scope is using hybrid methods by combining filter and 
wrapper method for better performance of the reduction techniques. Here in this 
hybrid methods the researcher is c oming with filter and wrapper method to improve 
the performance of the classification algorithms. Using this appro ach also has a more  
future scope.  
Finally , another area of future scope for dimensionality reduction is using of 
graph based feature selection  for unsupervised feature selction.