18 4.1. Hyperspectral  images  
In the standard  image , only RGB spectral bands will be present  whereas  in 
Hyperspectral images there are  several hundreds of spectral bands  available . So, each 
pixel is used for the characterization of the objects.  These hyperspectral images have 
been widely us ed in applications  like remote sensing, medical imaging and so on.  In 
hyperspectral images , the data contains rich information for different applications, 
but not all the measures are crucial  for a particular application . Due to the presence 
of a large  number of spectral bands , this leads to presence of  redundancy between 
these bands. So, there is a need for feature selection method for the elimination of th e 
redundant bands.  
So, feature selection techniques are essential for selecting the relevant subset of 
features. Gabor wavelet transformation -based feature extraction has increase d the 
performance of the classifiers, but in this method , too many G abor features are 
extracted  which makes  the burden  on the computation and efficiency of the 
technique. To overcome this in [98] a multi -task joint sparse representation 
framework based Gabor cube feature selection  is proposed.  In [99] is explained about 
various issues and the challenges in FS for hyperspectral image analysis.  
4.2. Intrusion detection  
Nowadays network -based  technologies are increasing rapidly and the attacks on these 
techniques also increases. To overcome this probl em, we should have to build a high 
secured Intrusion Detection  System (IDS). These IDS need to deal with high 
dimensions of data which contain noisy, redundant and irrelevant data. This leads to 
a decrease in the intrusion detection rate and require s more computation time.  So to 
achieve high detection rate FS methods are needed.  
A m i r i  et al. [100]  in 2011  propose an FS method for IDS using Mutual  
Information  a filter method  approach. Moreover, Y. C h e n  et al. [101]  in 2006  
explain  about different feature selections availab le for IDS. From the literature , it is 
clear that hybrid based methods are more reliable and suitable  for this application 
when compared to the wrapper  method. However, wrapper based methods are useful 
when the data size  is small. Whereas the filter method is used  for the fast 
computational process, but it is less accurate.  
4.3. Microarray data  
Generally , microarray gene selection data consists of hundreds  and thousands of 
features and have few rows. This become s challe nging for the learning  models, so 
there is a need for reducing the dimensions of the data. A n g  et al. [7] in 2016  clearly 
explain  various gene selection methods for supervised, unsupervised and semi -
supervised  based learning models. M a n d a l  and M u k h o p a d h y a y  [102]  in 
2013  proposed  an improved mRMR feature selection for gene expression data. In the 
existing literature , most  of the methods use either redundancy or relevance feature 
selection methods. Whereas  Mandal and Mukhopa dhyay, 2013 proposed a method 
where redundancy and relevances are considered parallely . 
Inter estingly , semi -supervised  and unsupervised feature selection in selecting 
the gene features outperforms  the supervised feature selection models. O ther methods