5 The search process can start with an empty set where new features are added 
recursively in every iteration such phenomenon is known as forward searching. In 
converse to it, the backward elimination search start with a complete set of feature s 
and features are removed iteratively until the desired subset of features is reached. 
The other variant approach is a random searching method, which builds the feature 
subset by both adding and removing of the features iteratively. After determining the 
search direction search strategy can be applied.  
 
Fig. 1. Stages in F S-process 
2. Determine search strategy . From the literature, we c ome to know that 
search strategies can be  randomized, exponential and sequential  search . Table 1 
enumerates the different search strategies and their algorithms. The d rawback  of 
exponential search is that it requires 2N combinations of feature selection for N 
features. It is an exhaustive search strategy, and it is an NP -hard problem [8]. To 
overcome this drawback researchers  has introduce d randomized search strategies.  
In sequential search , sequentially features are added to an empty set or remove 
features from the complete set. Which is referred to as Sequential Forward Selection 
(SFS) and Sequential Backward Selection (SBS) respectively . The drawback with 
these methods is  the features that  are eliminated will not be considered for further 
iterations. This phenomenon is known as nesting effect. To overcome this 
disadvantage, F e r r i  and P u d i l  [9] in 1994 proposed Plus -l-minus -r (l – r) search 
method. These methods have Ө (2M) complexity for selecting l feature from the set 
of M features.  
A good search strategy should obtain an optimal solution, local search  ability 
and computational effective ness [2]. Based on these requirements searching 
algorithms are further classified as optimal and suboptimal feature selection 
algorithm s. The nesting effect of SFS and SBS algorithm ar e overcome by P u d i l, 
N o v o v i č o v á  and K i t t l e r  [10] in 1994 S FFS and SBFS algorithms. Different 
search techniques, categories, their merits, and demerits are stated in Table 2.  
3. Evaluation criteria . The best features are selected based on the evaluation 
criteria. Based on the evaluation methods FS methods [23]  are classified into Filter 
1. Determine search 
direction  
3. Determine 
Evolution Criteria  
2. Determine search 
Strategy  
4. Stopping 
criteria  
5. Validate the Final 
Results  
Original  
 Data  
Feature 
Subset
Selected 
Feature Subset  
No
 Yes
Original data