3 BULGARIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES  
 
CYBERNETICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES  Volume 19, No 1 
Sofia  2019 Print ISSN : 1311 -9702 ; Online ISSN : 1314-4081  
DOI: 10.2478/cait -2019-0001 
 
 
A Review of Feature Selection and Its Methods   
B. Venkatesh, J . Anuradha  
SCOPE , Vellore Institute of Technology,  Vellore , TN, 632014 , India  
E-mail: venkatesh.cse88@gmail.com      
Abstract : Nowadays , being in digital  era the  data generated by various applications 
are incre asing drastically both row-wise and column  wise; this crea tes a bottleneck 
for analytics  and  also increases the burden  of machine learning algorithms that work  
for pattern recogni tion. This cause of dimensionality can be handled  through 
reduction  techniques. The Dimensionality Reduction (DR) can be handled  in two 
ways namely Feature Selection (FS) and Feature Extraction (FE). This paper focuses 
on a survey  of feature selection methods, from this extensive  survey we can conclude 
that most of the FS methods use static data. However , after the emergence of IoT  and 
web-based  applications , the data are generated dynamically and grow in a fast rate, 
so it is likely to have noisy data, it also hinder s the performance  of the algorithm.  
With the incre ase in the size of  the data set, the scalab ility of the FS methods becom es 
jeopardized.  So the existing DR algorithms do not address the issues with the dynamic 
data. Using FS methods not only reduce s the burden of the data  but also avoids 
overfitting of the model.  
Keywords : Dimensionality Reduction (DR), Feature Selecti on (FS), Feature 
Extraction  (FE). 
1. Introduction  
As the data increases exponentially  the quality of data required  for processing by 
Data mining, Pattern Recognition,  Image processing,  and other Machine Learning  
algor ithms decrease gradually . Bellman  calls this scenario “Curse of 
Dimensionality ”. Higher dimension data leads to the prevalence  of noisy , irrelevant  
and redundant data. Which intern causes overfitting of the model  and increases the 
error rate of the learning algorithm. To handle these prob lems “ Dimensionality 
Reduction ” techniques are applied, and it is the part of the preprocessing  stage. So, 
Feature Selection (FS) and Feature Extraction (FE) are most commonly using 
dimensionality reduction approaches. FS is used to clean up  the noisy, red undant and 
irrelevant data. As a result , the performance is boosted .  
In FS  a subset of features are  selected  from  the original  set of feature s based on 
features redundancy and relevance. Based on the relevance  and redundant features , 
Yu and L i u  [1] in 2004  have classifie d the feature subset as four types. They are:  
1) Noisy & irrelevant; 2) Redundant & Weakly relevant ; 3) Weakl y relevant  and