16 between the m-th and n-th feature s can be calculated using dot product weight 
as 𝑠𝑚𝑛=𝑓𝑚𝑡𝑓𝑛,𝑚,𝑛=1,2,⋯,𝑖. A larger 𝑠𝑚𝑛 means  m-th and n-th feature s are 
more similar.   For selecting the most  valuable features , it uses both diversity 
properties and representativeness.  
Hu et al. [85] in 2017  proposed a novel method called Graph Self 
Representation Sparse Feature Selection (GSR -SFS) for Unsupervised Feature 
selection. For improving the stability of feature , the selection  is achieved by 
integrating a subspace -learning model , (i.e., LPP) into a sparse feature level self -
representation method.  To achieve interpretation ability the techni que uses the feature 
level self -representation loss function , similarly to produc e stability for subspace 
learning it uses l2, 1-norm regularization.  
D u  et al. [86] in 2017  proposed Robust Unsupervised Feature Selection via 
Matrix Factorization ( RUFSM ) method for unsupervised feature selection. T he data 
matrix is decomposed  into two matrices  which contai n latent cluster centers and 
sparse representation using l2,1-norm . High accurate discriminative feature selection 
is achieved  by estimating the orthogonal cluster centers. 
Qi et al. [87] in 2017  proposed a novel method called Reg ularized Matrix 
Factorization Feature Selection (RMFFS). Matrix factorization determines the 
correlation among features. For making the feature weight matrix as sparsity, it 
considers  the absolute values of the inner product of the feature weight matrix. T he 
combination of l1-norm and l2 norm  is used for matrix factorization.  
3.2.1 . Findings  
He, C a i  and N i y o g i  [73] in 2006 use rank based for feature selections , but they 
do not consider the relationship between them. Li  et al. [77] in 2012 and Y a n g  et 
al. [76] in 2011 address these issues by using spectral based clustering approach. 
Later most of the researchers use graph -based learning for feature clustering . Initially , 
l1-norm based graph learning was used. But using this the classifications are not 
optim al to overcome this l2,1-norm graph -based methods are introduced. l2,1 based 
method is gaining more popular due to its optimal feature selection.  
3.3. Semi -supervised feature selection  
In Semi -supervised feature selection , the learning data set contains both labeled  and 
unlabeled  data.  
The graph Laplacian methods have gained the attention of many researchers 
working on semi -supervised  based feature selection. The weighted graph is 
constructed  for the given data for which th e feature selection is applied [88].  
There are mainly three stages of Graph  based  on Semi -Supervised Learning 
(GSSL). Firstly, assessing the proclivity (affinity) between a pair of samples (or) sets 
the users may choose kernel or similarity function. B e l k i n  and N i y o g i  [89] in 
2008   used a Gaussian  kernel model as a similarity function, and his empirical study 
proves its performance. Secondly, the users have to choose an appropriate algorithm 
for the construction of sparse weighted subgraph  from the completely  weighted graph 
between all set of nodes. Some of the regularly used algorithms for the  development  
of sparse subgraphs  are k-Nearest Neighbour ( k-NN) and Ꜫ-Neighbourhood. F inally ,