10           20     30   40  50           100           200    300Conformer-CTC-M71.757.057.058.458.442.772.0Baseline+ Temporal U-Net+ TX-Style Block+ Unified Activations+ Simplified LayerNorm+ DW Sep. Subsampling+ Model Scale-up7.907.287.127.096.896.896.50
8.58.07.57.06.56.0GFLOPs
Squeezeformer-MFigure 1: (Left) We perform a series of systematic studies on macro and micro architecture to
redesign the Conformer architecture towards our Squeezeformer architecture. The bars and the line
indicate the WER on LibriSpeech test-other dataset and the FLOPs, respectively. For each design
modification, we strictly improve WER until our final Squeezeformer model outperforms Conformer
by 1.40% WER improvement with the same number of FLOPs. See Tab. 1 for the details. (Right)
LibriSpeech test-other WER vs. FLOPs for Squeezeformer and other state-of-the-art ASR models.
Conformer-CTC∗is our own reproduction to the best performance as possible and the others are
the reported numbers in their papers [ 4,27,36]. Our architecture scales well to smaller and larger
models to constantly outperform other models by a large margin throughout the entire FLOPs range.
See Tab. 3 for the details. For both plots, the lower the WER, the better; however, we plotted in
reverse for better visualization.
less critique to non-autoregressive schemes such as Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) [ 15]
as well [38].
Despite being a key architecture in speech processing tasks, the Conformer architecture has some
limitations that can be improved upon. First, Conformer still suffers from the quadratic complexity of
the attention mechanism limiting its efficiency on long sequence lengths. This problem is further
highlighted by the long sequence lengths of typical audio inputs as also pointed out in [ 46]. Further-
more, the Conformer architecture is relatively more complicated than Transformer architectures used
in other domains such as in natural language processing [ 7,44,51] or computer vision [ 9,10,49].
For instance, the Conformer architecture incorporates multiple different normalization schemes
and activation functions, the Macaron structure [ 34], as well as back-to-back multi-head attention
(MHA) and convolution modules. This level of complexity makes it difficult to efficiently deploy the
model on dedicated hardware platforms for inference [ 26,39,55]. More importantly, this raises the
question of whether such design choices are necessary and optimal for achieving good performance
in ASR tasks.
In this paper, we perform a careful and systematic analysis of each of the design choices with the
goal of achieving lower word-error-rate (WER) for a given computational budget. We developed
a much simpler and more efficient hybrid attention-convolution architecture in both its macro and
micro-design that consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art ASR models. In particular, we make
the following contributions in our proposed Squeezeformer model:
•We find a high temporal redundancy in the learned feature representations of neighboring speech
frames especially deeper in the network, which results in unnecessary computational overhead. To
address this, we incorporate the temporal U-Net structure in which a downsampling layer halves
the sampling rate at the middle of the network, and a light upsampling layer recovers the temporal
resolution at the end for training stability (§ 3.1.1).
•We redesign the hybrid attention-convolution architecture based on our observation that the back-
to-back MHA and convolution modules with the Macaron structure are suboptimal. In particular,
we propose a simpler block structure similar to the standard Transformer block [ 7,51], where
the MHA and convolution modules are each directly followed by a single feed forward module
(§ 3.1.2).
•We finely examine the micro-architecture of the network and found several modifications that
simplify the model overall and greatly improve the accuracy and efficiency. This includes (i)
activation unification that replaces GLU activations with Swish (§ 3.2.1), (ii) Layer Normalization
2