2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Conformer Block Index0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Cosine Similarity dist 1
dist 2
dist 3
dist 4Conformer
Conformer w/ T emporal U-NetConformer
Conformer w/ T emporal U-NetFigure 3: Cosine similarity between two embed-
ding vectors of neighboring speech frames with
varying adjacency distances across the Conformer
blocks. The temporal dimension is downsampled
after the 7th block and upsampled before the 16th
block in the Temporal U-Net structure.
Module 1+PostLNModule 2PreLN+
Module 1+PostLNModule 2Scaling+Block 2
Block 1Block 2
Block 1Figure 4: (Left) Back-to-back preLN and
postLN at the boundary of the blocks. (Right)
The preLN can be replaced with the learned
scaling that readjusts the magnitude of the ac-
tivation that goes into the subsequent module.
the Conformer model depth. We randomly sample 100 audio signals from LibriSpeech’s dev-other
dataset, and process them through the Conformer blocks, recording their per-block activations. We
then measure the average cosine similarity between two neighboring embedding vectors. The results
are plotted as the solid lines in Fig. 3. We observe that the embeddings for the speech frames directly
next to each other have an average similarity of 95% at the topmost layer, and even those 4 speech
frames away from each other have a similarity of more than 80%. This reveals that there is an
increasing temporal redundancy as inputs are processed through the Conformer blocks deeper in
the network. We hypothesize that this redundancy in feature embedding vectors causes unnecessary
computational overhead and that the sequence length can be reduced deeper in the network without
loss in accuracy.
As our first macro-architecture improvement step, we change the Conformer model to incorporate
subsampling of the embedding vectors after it has been processed by the early blocks of the model.
In particular, we keep the sample rate to be 40ms up to the 7th block, and afterwards we subsample
to a rate of 80ms per input sequence by using a pooling layer. For the pooling layer we use a
depthwise separable convolution with stride 2 and kernel size 3 to merge the redundancies across
neighboring embeddings. This decreases the attention complexity by 4×and also reduces the
redundancies of the features. This temporal downsampling shares similarities with computer vision
models, which often downsample the input image spatially to save compute and develop hierarchical
level features [10, 20, 30, 48], and with the approach of Efficient Conformer [4].
However, the temporal downsampling alone leads to an unstable and diverging training behaviour
(§ 4.3). One possible reason for this is the lack of enough resolution for the decoder after subsampling
the rate to 80ms. The decoder maps an embedding for each speech frame into a single label, e.g.,
character, and therefore requires sufficient resolution for successful decoding of the full sequence.
Inspired from successful architectures for dense prediction in computer vision such as U-Net [ 45],
we incorporate the Temporal U-Net structure to recover the resolution at the end of the network
through an upsampling layer as shown in Fig. 2. This upsampling block takes the embedding vectors
processed by the 40ms and 80ms sampling rates, and produces an embedding with a rate of 40ms by
adding them together via a skip connection. To the best of our knowledge, the closest work to our
Temporal U-Net is the approach proposed in [ 43], in which the U-Net structure is incorporated into a
fully-convolutional model to downsample sleep signals.
This change not only reduces the total FLOPs by 20% compared to Conformer1, but also improves
the test-other WER by 0.62% from 7.90% to 7.28% (Tab. 1, 2nd row). Furthermore, analyzing the
cosine similarity shows that the Temporal U-Net architecture prevents the neighboring embeddings
1The total FLOPs is for the entire model. If we just study the attention block, the Temporal U-Net structure
reduces the FLOPs by 2.31 ×and 2.53 ×FLOPs reduction for processing 30s and 60s audio signals as compared
to Conformer-CTC-M baseline, respectively.
5