from becoming too similar to each others at the later blocks, in particular at the final block directly
connected to the decoder, as shown in Fig. 3 as the dashed lines.
3.1.2 Transformer-Style Block
The Conformer block consists of a sequence of feed-forward (‘F’), multi-head attention (MHA, ‘M’),
convolution (‘C’), and another feed-forward module (‘F’). We denote this as the FMCF structure.
Note that the convolutional kernel sizes in ASR models are rather large, e.g., 31 in Conformer,
which makes its behaviour similar to attention in mixing global information. This is stark contrast to
convolutional kernels in computer vision, which often have small 3×3kernels and hence benefit
greatly from attention’s global processing. As such, placing the convolution and MHA module with
a similar functionality back-to-back (i.e., the MC substructure) does not seem prudent. Hence, we
consider an MF/CF structure, which is motivated by considering the convolution module as a local
MHA module. Furthermore, we drop the Macaron structure [ 34], as MHA modules followed by
feed-forward modules have been more widely adopted in the literature [ 7,9,44,51]. In a nutshell,
we simplify the architecture to be similar to the standard Transformer network and denote the blocks
MF and CF substructures, as shown in Fig. 2. This modification further improves the test-other WER
by 0.16% from 7.28% to 7.12% and marginally improves the test-clean WER without affecting the
FLOPs (Tab. 1, 3rd row).
3.2 Micro-Architecture Design
So far we have designed the macro structure of Squeezeformer by incorporating seminal architecture
principles from computer vision and natural language processing into Conformer. In this subsection,
we now focus on optimizing the micro structure of the individual modules. We show that we can
further simplify the module architectures while improving both efficiency and performance.
3.2.1 Unified Activations
Conformer uses Swish activation for most of the blocks. However, it switches to a Gated Linear
Unit (GLU) for its convolution module. Such a heterogeneous design seems over-complicated and
unnecessary. From a practical standpoint, the use of multiple activations complicates hardware
deployment, as an efficient implementation requires dedicated logic design, look up tables, or
custom approximations [ 26,39,55]. For instance, on low-end edge devices with no dedicated vector
processing unit, supporting additional non-linear operations would require additional look up tables
or advanced algorithms [ 12,13]. To address this, we propose to replace the GLU activation with
Swish, unifying the choice of activation function throughout the entire model. We keep the expansion
rate for the convolution modules. As shown in the 4th row of Tab. 1, this change does not entail
noticeable changes in WER and FLOPs but only simplifies the architecture.
3.2.2 Simplified Layer Normalizations
Continuing our micro-architecture improvements, we note that the Conformer model incorporates
redundant Layer Normalizations (LayerNorm), as shown in Fig. 4 (Left). This is because the Con-
former model contains both a post-LayerNorm (postLN) that applies LayerNorm in between the
residual blocks, as well as pre-LayerNorm (preLN) which applies LayerNorm inside the residual
connection. While it is hypothesized that preLN stabilizes training and postLN benefits perfor-
mance [ 53], these two modules used together lead to redundant back-to-back operations. Aside from
the architectural redundancy, LayerNorm can be computationally expensive [ 26,55] due to its global
reduction operations.
However, we found that naïvely removing the preLN or postLN leads to training instability and
convergence failure (§ 4.3). Investigating the cause of failure, we observe that a typical trained
Conformer model has orders of magnitude differences in the norms of the learnable scale variables of
the back-to-back preLN and postLN. In particular, we found that the preLN would scale down the
input signal by a large value, giving more weight to the skip connection. Therefore, it is important
to use a scaling layer when replacing the preLN component to allow the network to control this
weight. This idea is also on par with several training stabilization strategies in other domains. For
instance, NF-Net [ 3] proposed adaptive (i.e., learnable) scaling before and after the residual blocks to
stabilize training without normalization. Furthermore, DeepNet [ 53] also recently proposed to add
non-trainable rule-based scaling to the skip connections to stabilize preLN in Transformers.
6