Squeezeformer: An Efficient Transformer for
Automatic Speech Recognition
Sehoon Kim∗1, Amir Gholami∗1, Albert Shaw†‡1, Nicholas Lee†1, Karttikeya Mangalam1,
Jitendra Malik1, Michael W. Mahoney123, Kurt Keutzer1
1University of California, Berkeley2ICSI3LBNL
{sehoonkim, amirgh, nicholas_lee, mangalam, malik, mahoneymw, keutzer}@berkeley.edu
Albertshaw@google.com
Abstract
The recently proposed Conformer model has become the de facto backbone model
for various downstream speech tasks based on its hybrid attention-convolution
architecture that captures both local and global features. However, through a series
of systematic studies, we find that the Conformer architecture’s design choices
are not optimal. After re-examining the design choices for both the macro and
micro-architecture of Conformer, we propose Squeezeformer which consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art ASR models under the same training schemes. In
particular, for the macro-architecture, Squeezeformer incorporates (i) the Temporal
U-Net structure which reduces the cost of the multi-head attention modules on long
sequences, and (ii) a simpler block structure of multi-head attention or convolution
modules followed up by feed-forward module instead of the Macaron structure
proposed in Conformer. Furthermore, for the micro-architecture, Squeezeformer
(i) simplifies the activations in the convolutional block, (ii) removes redundant
Layer Normalization operations, and (iii) incorporates an efficient depthwise down-
sampling layer to efficiently sub-sample the input signal. Squeezeformer achieves
state-of-the-art results of 7.5%, 6.5%, and 6.0% word-error-rate (WER) on Lib-
riSpeech test-other without external language models, which are 3.1%, 1.4%, and
0.6% better than Conformer-CTC with the same number of FLOPs. Our code is
open-sourced and available online [25].
1 Introduction
The increasing success of end-to-end neural network models has been a huge driving force for the
drastic advancements in various automatic speech recognition (ASR) tasks. While both convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [ 19,27,29,36,61] and Transformers [ 24,31,32,56,57] have drawn attention
as popular backbone architectures for ASR models, each of them has several limitations. Generally,
CNN models lack the ability to capture global contexts and Transformers involve prohibitive comput-
ing and memory overhead. To overcome these shortcomings, Conformer [ 16] has recently proposed
a novel convolution-augmented Transformer architecture. Due to its ability to synchronously capture
global and local features from audio signals, Conformer has become the de facto model not only for
ASR tasks, but also for various end-to-end speech processing tasks [ 17]. Furthermore, it has also
achieved state-of-the-art performance in combination with recent developments in self-supervised
learning methodologies as well [ 37,62]. While the Conformer architecture was introduced as an
autoregressive RNN-Transducer (RNN-T) [ 14] model in its original setting, it has been adopted with
∗First author equal contribution.
†Second author equal contribution.
‡Now at Google.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).