1
Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems for Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Why, When, What for, and
Where to?
Alberto Fernandez, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN
Maria Jose del Jesus, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, Department of
Computer Science, University of Jaen, Jaen, SPAIN
Oscar Cordon, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN Francesco Marcelloni,Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa,
ITALY
and Francisco Herrera, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN
Abstract
Evolutionary fuzzy systems are one of the greatest advances within the area of computational intelligence. They consist of
evolutionary algorithms applied to the design of fuzzy systems. Thanks to this hybridization, superb abilities are provided to
fuzzy modeling in many different data science scenarios. This contribution is intended to comprise a position paper developing
a comprehensive analysis of the evolutionary fuzzy systems research ﬁeld. To this end, the “4 W” questions are posed and
addressed with the aim of understanding the current context of this topic and its signiﬁcance. Speciﬁcally, it will be pointed out
why evolutionary fuzzy systems are important from an explainable point of view, when they began, what they are used for, and
where the attention of researchers should be directed to in the near future in this area. They must play an important role for the
emerging area of eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) learning from data.
I. W HYEVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS ?
“KNOWLEDGE itself is power” [1]. This simple sentence has led to a wave of continuous interest in developing
models that are able to extract the maximum amount of information from data. In this context, the use of machine
learning (ML) techniques allows stakeholders to obtain useful insights, predictions, and decisions from datasets of many
different sources in an automatic fashion [2]. Current applications come with novel data characteristics as big dimension and
non-standard classiﬁcation problems, and both researchers and practitioners actually aim to understand how the models work.
Therefore, a movement is being witnessed from traditional data mining towards a more proﬁtable and challenging scenario
known as data science [3]. It brings novel technologies, frameworks, methodologies, and skills that are designed to ease the
management of the challenges related to big data applications [4].
Nevertheless, to be able to reach the deepest level when considering all the information available, the knowledge domain
and the data analysis must have a strong synergy. From a data viewpoint, one must be aware of the quality associated with it.
Additionally, representation of the expert knowledge available on the tackled application domain must also be considered.
In this scenario, fuzzy set theory might be regarded as a valuable tool. Proposed by Lofti A. Zadeh in the mid 60s [5], a
linguistic representation of numerical variables is possible by means of a membership degree being assigned to each of them,
which could vary from 0 (full non-membership) to 1 (full membership). Therefore, models that use fuzzy sets as a tool for data
handling provide some important advantages. In terms of semantics, the use of linguistic labels in the fuzzy model structure
is a natural knowledge representation allowing for a direct human interaction [6]. In addition, from a learning perspective,
translating the input features into fuzzy variables with fuzzy membership functions permits obtaining smoothed descriptive
models that adapt well to data with a certain degree of uncertainty.
Based on the former observations, and without lacking generality, the focus of this contribution will be set on fuzzy rule-
based systems (FRBSs) [7]. As their name suggests, FRBSs are composed of fuzzy IF-THEN rules where both antecedents and
consequents usually contain fuzzy sets. The main components of any FRBS are the knowledge base (KB) and the inference
engine module. The KB comprises all the fuzzy rules within a rule base (RB), and the deﬁnition of the fuzzy sets in the data
base (DB). The inference engine includes a fuzziﬁcation interface, an inference system, and a defuzziﬁcation interface.
The learning procedure for FRBSs involves a search for the model that, based on the observations, best approximates a
given performance metric [2]. In particular, ﬁnding the best approach is related to the so-called “empirical risk-loss” function,
which depends on the data the user works with. In other words, any learning algorithm has the ultimate goal of optimizing
Corresponding author: Alberto Fernandez (alberto@decsai.ugr.es)