2
a mapping function between inputs and outputs. In this sense, the clear advantages of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [8] for
developing this task must be highlighted.
EAs are a type of metaheuristic based optimization techniques that are based on a population of solutions. As the name
suggests, EAs are concerned with biological evolution, so that each solution is encoded as an individual of the population. The
search for the optimal values of the function that is being optimized (the ﬁtness value) is carried out by means of the repeated
application of operators such as reproduction, mutation, recombination and selection. Among the different implementations of
EAs, the most popular is certainly Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [9], where solutions (also known as chromosomes) are encoded
into strings of “genes”, and evolve by means of recombination and/or mutation. EAs are not speciﬁcally designed as ML
techniques. However, it is well-known that a learning task can be modeled as an optimization problem and thus effectively
solved through evolution. EAs’ powerful search in complex, ill-deﬁned problem spaces has allowed for them to be successfully
applied to a huge variety of ML and knowledge discovery tasks [10]. When the accuracy performance is set as the ﬁtness
function of this optimization process, the predictive quality of the system is expected to be boosted.
Considering the issues on predictive performance, the main goal traditionally pursued is to make the model matching reality,
i.e. effectively summarizing the underlying data. Hence, this “quest for accuracy” is the most important requirement when
selecting a solution, and has probably supported the current explosion of black-box ML approaches. This type of system is
known for having an excellent ability to learn accurately from the input data. On the contrary, most of these accurate models
are highly non-transparent, i.e. it is no clear what information in the input data makes them arrive at their decisions [11],
[12]. Nowadays, there is an important need for safety, ethics, and scientiﬁc understanding systems that provide the right to
an explanation where necessary [13]. They must be optimized not only for accuracy but also for other criteria as fairness
or unbiasedness, privacy, reliability, robustness, causality and/or trust, among others. Most of these criteria often cannot be
completely quantiﬁed, but if the system is interpretable , i.e. if it can explain its reasoning, it can be veriﬁed whether that
reasoning is sound with respect to these auxiliary criteria.
There is little consensus on the deﬁnition of interpretability, explainability and some of the auxiliary criteria. In the ML
context, the interpretability is deﬁned as the ability to explain or to present in understandable terms to a human [14]. In recent
years a broader concept known as explainability has emerged in what has been denoted as eXplanaible Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(XAI) . It encompasses ML/AI systems for opening black box models, for improving the understanding of what the models
have learned and/or for explaining individual predictions [11].
The design of this kind of systems includes different aspects to be taken into account:
Designers and developers must have the chance of analyzing the generated model and discerning its meaning. i.e. to
understand the structure of the system.
End-users must use the system as a decision support, so that the model must explain the phenomena under study.
Interpretability is probably the traditional buzz-word, in the context of ML, and explainability in the broader context of AI
(XAI). Both with equivalent meaning and behind the desideratum for accomplishing all the former issues. However, different
sub-concepts can be distinguished associated with terms “interpretability” and “explainability”. Among others, we should refer
to “understandability”, ‘intelligibility” or “comprehensibility” [12], [15].
Understandability andintelligibility can be viewed as synonyms that are associated to a functional understanding of the
model in ML. In other words, it refers to grasp how the model works [16], without trying to elucidate its inner procedure
or to shed light on its internal representation [17]. For FRBSs, intelligibility is primarily associated with inference.
Comprehensibility was deﬁned as the learning algorithm ability for encoding its model in such a way that it may be
inspected and understood by humans [15], [18]. This deﬁnition narrows the focus to the model itself. It is based on the
comprehensibility postulate argued by Michalski [19]: “The results of computer induction should be symbolic descriptions
of given entities, semantically and structurally similar to those a human expert might produce observing the same entities.
Components of these descriptions should be comprehensible as single ‘chunks’ of information, directly interpretable in
natural language, and should relate quantitative and qualitative concepts in an integrated fashion” . In the FRBS context,
the comprehensibility is related with the fuzzy rules, and in general with the KB.
The ﬁnal objective related to explainability is boosting the transparency in the solutions proposed for data science applications,
and therefore the ability to trust the system output [20].
One straightforward way for combining two of the most important concepts in ML (accuracy and interpretability/explainability)
in a natural way, to obtaining XAI models, is by means of the synergy between FRBSs and EAs. Speciﬁcally, the intrinsic
understandability, comprehensibility, and explainability associated with FRBSs, and the potential of EAs as the optimization
technique for improving FRBSs, leads to what is known as evolutionary fuzzy systems (EFSs) [21].
In short, an EFS is a methodology that utilizes EAs for a “ﬁne-setting” of the components of the FRBS, with the aim of
achieving a more reliable solution in terms of any desired objective function, based on accuracy, interpretability, or a combination
of both. The EA may be applied a priori during the building stage of the FRBS, leading to a “learning” stage, or rather to
be considered a posteriori for a ﬁner adjustment of the FRBS, which is known as a “tuning” stage. Different perspectives for
the application of both approaches may be found in the specialized literature. To set up the fuzzy sets, the parameterization
of the fuzzy membership functions, and the selection of the fuzzy rules, among others, should be noted. In addition, a very