10
Neural
Nets
Bayesian
Belief
ModelsRandom
Forest
(Fuzzy) Rule Based
SystemsAOGsDeep
Learning
SVMsGraphical
Models
Decision
TreesStatistical
ModelsEnsemble
Methods
Markov
Models
Accuracy
ExplainabilityChallengeDesired
V alueCurrent
V alue
Fig. 3. Accuracy vs. Explainability: Venn diagram for several ML models (partially inspired from [74]).
Interpreting and explaining deep networks is a young and emerging ﬁeld of research. In [17] can be found a study of
techniques for interpreting complex machine learning models, with focus on DL. Most of the proposals have focused on
post-hoc interpretability but greater efforts are required in the near future to understand the ML models.
In this scenario, rule-based systems [77] allow to audit the extracted knowledge with a double objective. On the one hand,
obtaining a clear explanation of the cognition process carried out by the system. On the other hand, being able to trust in the
description of the rules and their relationship with the problem that is aimed to be solved. In particular, EFSs combine the
ability to represent knowledge in natural way for human understanding (with fuzzy rules), the strength of fuzzy reasoning and
the ability of EAs for search in complex and ill-deﬁned problems. However, it must be emphasized that FRBSs must remain
simple and understandable, since they are not interpretable per se [78]. It is important to take account of different issues in
order to obtain FRBSs that represent knowledge easily understood by humans. Among others, the rule base compactness or the
semantic comprehensibility of the fuzzy partitions must be stressed. Moreover, the EFSs must be properly designed to obtain
the desired trade-off between accuracy and explainability for the problem at hand. When in the EFS design more attention is
paid to the accuracy than to explainability, the skills of the fuzzy system obtained are hardly comparable with other preferable
and more complex solutions such as DL.
DL is a powerful paradigm that can effectively capture relevant features, in particular for those problems from which a
higher level of abstraction is needed to describe the hidden knowledge [76]. In any way, DL solutions must not be considered
to be rivals for FRBSs and EFSs, but rather as complementary approaches, each one with their strengths and drawbacks. A
promising step forward the achievement of this objective could be to make use of the good interpretability properties of EFSs
in conjunction with DL.
There are some interesting examples of the positive synergy between both paradigms. First, a fuzzy classiﬁer based on
stacking is proposed in [79]. It embeds a zero-order TSK FRBS with a limited number of linguistic labels within a neuron-
layered representation. Thus, each layer becomes a single model within the “ensemble”. After the learning stage using a DL
procedure, rules can be simply extracted from each “neuron” to keep the original interpretability. A different approach is
proposed in [80]. It comprises a hierarchical system composed of a fuzzy rule layer, to manage the ambiguity of the data, and
a DL layer, to reduce the noise and to create higher order variables for a more accurate representation. Then, both parts are
fused leading to a more robust classiﬁcation. Finally, an interpretable structure for DL networks is also proposed in [81]. To
achieve the required explainability, zero-order TSK fuzzy linguistic rules are encoded and learned in the ﬁnal layer of the net
to perform the ﬁnal classiﬁcation, just after the feature extraction.
In summary, EFSs are a very signiﬁcant tool in many ﬁelds of application where the explainability of the decision must be
taken into account. The reader should refer to areas such as medical diagnosis, ﬁnancial problems, or security systems,
among others. It is straightforward to acknowledge that, in these scenarios, the same importance must be given to the
accuracy/conﬁdence of the output and the explainability of the decision made. In other words, ML models based on EFSs are
a desirable choice when the output is intended to be trusted by the human user.
VI. C ONCLUDING REMARKS
The world of data science has changed the way applications are approached. At present, the core of the model not only aims
to achieve the highest possible accuracy but also to make it explainable for researchers and practitioners. In this sense, ML
methods based on EFSs preserve the original essence of comprehensibility exposed by Zadeh, also boosting their modeling