6
Performance vs. Interpretability . Fuzzy systems in general, and fuzzy linguistic models in particular, are well suited
to understanding the nature of the problem that they represent. For this reason, it is quite important to consider different
interpretability measures as an estimation of the FRBS potential.
An FRBS is not interpretable per se . Instead, there are many different issues which must be taken into account in order
to obtain a human-interpretable structure. Among others, the rule base compactness or the semantic comprehensibility of
the fuzzy partitions should be considered. Hence, the ML method used to learn the fuzzy model, classiﬁer, or decision
support systems must be properly designed to obtain the desired trade-off for the problem at hand.
Speciﬁcally, two different options can be taken into account. On the one hand, those which are based on the simplicity
could be considered, i.e. the dimensionality, of the system (the simpler, the better). On the other hand, semantic-based
metrics could be considered, i.e. the comprehensibility of the derived system.
Performance vs. Performance . When addressing a control system problem, there are more constraints that must be taken
into account than there are for standard data mining tasks. Speciﬁcally, there is a need to obtain an efﬁcient controller,
with proper stability and, if possible, to have a compact and interpretable structure. Therefore, the use of MOEAs for
designing fuzzy controllers has become a very successful approach.
In this case, both the structure of the controller and its parameters must be obtained. This implies a direct adaptation
for all methods previously introduced for general EFSs. Speciﬁcally, a post-processing tuning step is the most common
approach due to its simplicity and reduced search space.
3) New representations: fuzzy sets extensions: In several applications, where the degree of uncertainty is very high, traditional
fuzzy sets are not able to provide an appropriate representation of the hidden knowledge. To cope with this aspect, some
extensions such as type-2 fuzzy sets and interval-valued fuzzy sets are used instead.
Being special cases of fuzzy set representations, there is no established way of obtaining their parameter values and/or their
structure. For this reason, EAs are a proper tool for the design strategy and/or for optimizing these fuzzy models. For example,
the parameters of type-2 fuzzy sets may be optimized from a given standard fuzzy set, or by considering the direct generation
from data. Recent approaches are aimed at tuning rules and conditions using this kind of fuzzy representation [32], [33].
III. W HAT EVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS SHOULD BEUSED FOR?
In the introduction of this manuscript, several interesting properties of fuzzy systems were highlighted. In short, they provide
two interesting features making them very useful for knowledge representation tasks:
1) On the one hand, the inherent interpretability of the system. This refers to two different aspects. First, the intrinsic
comprehensibility associated with the use of a simple description mechanism in the form of fuzzy linguistic rules, very
close to natural language. And second, the comprehensibility and understandability of the rule-based system and the
inference procedure.
2) On the other hand, the robustness of adapting to and learning from complex problems, i.e. to model scenarios which are
difﬁcult to represent with other types of paradigms. In particular, it is a very interesting tool to apply when users must
deal with the lack of data or uncertainty in the deﬁnition of the input data.
In regards to the aspects associated with the interpretability of FRBSs, ﬁrst the “cointension” term must be highlighted,
deﬁned between fuzzy sets and regular concepts [34]. In particular, Lofti A. Zadeh emphasized that this semantic cointension
was the key for understanding the success of the application of fuzzy models, namely the importance of the human component
in the data science process [15]. This is what can be referred to as human-centric modeling and decision making, which
implies the need to provide descriptive models and decision support systems able to comprehend the underlying human mental
processes in order to manage the information in a more human-oriented style [35]. Human-centric models and descriptive
support systems allow the designer to use the comprehensibility of the designed solutions to both understand the underlying
human reasoning processes and uncover knowledge about the system at hand, as well as to enhance the problem solving [15].
Although the use of linguistic labels provides a solid basis for achieving both facets, many model induction techniques that
use fuzzy systems can impose certain interpretability constraints (linguistic structure, rule length, and rule set size, among
others) in the search for greater accuracy. It is at this point where EFS algorithms can be used to ﬁnd a good trade-off between
interpretability and accuracy [30], [31].
As previously discussed in detail in Section II-B, this can be done in one out of two phases. On the one hand, in the
construction of the model itself, i.e. during the learning process. On the other hand, a posteriori , i.e. once the model has been
obtained, a component tuning can be carried out. In both cases, the properties associated with EAs in regards to the coding of
different types of information provide a clear beneﬁt: ﬂexibility [29]. In fact, they permit optimizing from simple parameters
of fuzzy systems to complete sets of rules. The practitioner will therefore be able to directly pair the necessary interpretability
constraints while generating a model with a high predictive power [30], [31].
Analyzing these properties in detail, the key ability of EFS is to obtain an ML system incorporating the fundamental property
of what was deﬁned as XAI [12]. It is not only about understanding the composition of the model, but also about the fact that
the system is able to explain to the user the process it followed to make the output decision. Therefore, the synergy between
fuzzy systems and the ability of EAs to learn them makes EFSs a very appealing tool for a large number of problems. As an