9
For this reason, the development of learning and tuning methods must be redirected within a distributed environment. To
this end, MapReduce has established as a de-facto solution to simplify the implementation of these techniques [66].
It is basically an execution environment which lays over a distributed and fault-tolerant ﬁle system, HDFS being the most
common option. By means of two simple functions, Map and Reduce, any implementation can be automatically parallelized
in a transparent way for the programmer. The ﬁrst function allows operating on independent “chunks” of data, by applying
the same procedure. The second merges the outputs of the Map functions to produce a single ﬁnal output.
According to the new MapReduce paradigm of distributed programming, any ML solution can be categorized into two main
types [67]:
1) Local approaches (also known as approximate models) that work directly on the distributed chunks of data by creating
partial models that are then aggregated.
2) Global approaches (also known as exact models) that iterate over all examples to generate the model or build the system
iteratively by optimal merging.
By analyzing the properties of each of these types of methodologies some very interesting insights could be achieved.
Local approaches are a priori easier to develop than the original algorithm would be embedded in the different Map tasks.
However, it would imply a greater effort in the merging phase of the independent sub-models (Reduce function). Another
advantage is an expected efﬁciency increase when augmenting the number of partitions. The main hitch, in this case, would
be to work with a smaller number of data in each of the sub-processes. Fortunately, the good behavior of FRBSs and EFSs
with respect to such an eventuality has been previously highlighted [62] (see Section III).
Global approaches, on the other hand, have as their main virtue the learning of more robust models. This is a theoretical
issue as they comprise the analysis of the complete set of data. However, this is precisely their major disadvantage. Speciﬁcally,
more effort must be devoted to design the methodology to meet the conditions of correctness. In addition to the former, the
efﬁciency can also be reduced as the process must be iterated several times.
A very interesting option in this case is to take advantage of the features of novel environments such as Spark [68]. It
is a distributed computing platform that provides a memory-intensive scheme, being very suitable for ML algorithms [67].
Speciﬁcally, it supports very versatile data structures, together with a wide range of operations for transforming them, such as
ﬁltering, grouping, or set operations, among others.
When referring to big data constraints for the development of novel ML approaches, the efforts are mainly focused on
ﬁnding scalable solutions considering only one-side of the Volume , namely the “Big Instance Size”. However, there is another
signiﬁcant issue in this regard, which is known as the “Big Dimensionality” explosion [69]. There are diverse ways to face
this problem, including smart feature selection [70], fuzzy ensemble models based on bagging for vertically partitioning the
training set [71], [72], and the use of fuzzy decision trees that internally consider a feature ranking mechanism [73].
As it has been discussed throughout this section, the task of addressing big data problems with EFSs is still far from
being fully covered. Many state-of-the-art learning and tuning approaches need to be redesigned and translated into the new
MapReduce paradigm. The objective is to take advantage of the power and quality that these algorithms have already shown,
but using the new applications and current-day data sets. Furthermore, researchers must be aware of this circumstance to be
more ambitious and develop new robust methodologies by taking into account the new functionalities available in the current
programming environments. As a ﬁnal remark, the difﬁculties associated with this framework imply the development of much
more ingenious and effective ideas to achieve greater milestones in this area of research.
V. R EMARKS ON THE NEED FOR INTERPRETABLE AND EXPLAINABLE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Throughout this paper, it has been stressed that there are two main criteria any practitioner must consider when determining
what kind of ML techniques should be used to address a speciﬁc regression, classiﬁcation, or decision-making problem: accuracy
and interpretability/explainability. Of course, the ideal situation would be to obtain jointly high degrees of both but, since they
are in conﬂict, this is a complex task. Figure 3 shows this fact with a trade-off for some well-known ML techniques and the
current challenge to increase the explainability without reducing accuracy. For the most interpretable models the challenge is
to increase both axes.
In practice, one of the two properties usually prevails over the other (use of black-box vs. white- or gray-box mod-
els/classiﬁers). Driven by the need for accuracy, we are witnessing an emerging trend to embrace “black-box” solutions,
in particular those based on neural networks and mainly Deep Learning (DL) [75], [76]. In short, these systems are based
on a number of layers of fully-connected neurons. The ﬁrst layers are devoted to extracting simpler attributes from the data,
which are then combined in the subsequent layers to form more complex and thus more representative attributes. In spite of
the impressive capacity of these black-box solutions to obtain accurate models, this virtue is often associated with a higher
system complexity. Designers are often unable to understand how the systems work, and also to decipher why they produce a
certain output. In fact, the effectiveness of the existing ML methods could be limited by the machines’ inability to explain its
thoughts and actions to human users in some application ﬁelds, and thus may lead to unsafe and incorrect decisions1.
1https://www.statnews.com/2018/07/25/ibm-watson-recommended-unsafe-incorrect-treatments/