7
example of these developments, one may refer to the EFS design that allows the fusion mechanism for a classiﬁer ensemble
to be interpreted by the human designer thanks to a hierarchical fuzzy rule-based structure [36].
Focusing on the robustness properties associated with EFSs, the ﬁrst aspect to be taken into account is their effectiveness in
extracting information that resides in small datasets with low density in the domain, the so-called “lack of data” problem [37].
The reason is simple: by deﬁning the universe of discourse of the fuzzy variables along the overall domain of the attributes that
represent the problem, an integral coverage of the input space is allowed. Furthermore, when there is some overlap between
the fuzzy sets, a smoother transition among the modeled information granules is expected to be obtained.
In addition to the lack of data, the beneﬁts of EFSs in handling imprecise and uncertain data is also of high priority. In these
cases, the ﬂexibility of the deﬁnition of fuzzy partitions as well as the membership functions must be taken into account. In
this sense, it is natural to use different extensions to the traditional type-1 fuzzy sets to add an extra level of freedom in the
representation. However, deﬁning the exact values according to the problem may not be a trivial task performed by a human
operator. Thus, it is of great interest to be able to rely on the use of EAs to learn or adjust the components of the fuzzy DB.
It should be stressed that social network analysis or social mining are application areas that may beneﬁt the most from EFSs
[38]. It has become a hot topic in the last few years due to the increase of social media interactions. Corporations and academia
are very interested in conceptualizing, modeling, analyzing, explaining, and predicting these relationships. There is a natural
connection between graph theory, on which social network analysis is based, and fuzzy set theory. This allows providing an
easier and more robust way to express relationships among nodes in these networks. Furthermore, some research has already
discussed the theoretical and conceptual models for social data based on fuzzy sets [39], [40].
Another area in which the inherent uncertainty of the data imposes a difﬁcult restriction, and also requires interpretable
models in order to be truly useful to the end-users, is ﬁnance. In this environment, the comprehension of how inputs and
outputs are related to each other is crucial in order to be able to make operative and strategic decisions. Therefore, EFSs have
been successfully applied to many ﬁnancial domains [41].
Decisions in medical applications are also considered to be critical. Therefore, any action taken by experts must be taken
conﬁdently. This implies that any decision support system used in this context must be trustworthy and transparent. In other
words, it must explain to both the doctor and the patient, the reasons behind a particular diagnosis. In this sense, an EFS based
on fuzzy linguistic rules might be the proper choice [42].
Finally, current solutions focused on intrusion detection systems are high priority. The reason for this is clear, namely the
vast use of information systems and the need of establishing security policies and rules that allow an undesired system access
to be discriminated. In particular, EFS-based approaches are very interesting for several reasons. First of all, this type of
problem has a common structure. Indeed, they are described by numeric data and therefore crisp thresholds can lead to low
detection accuracy. Additionally, the boundary between legit and abnormal behavior is inherently fuzzy. In other words, small
changes in an intrusion behavior may not be recognized, whereas a small deviation in a normal proﬁle can generate a false
alarm. In accordance with the former, several relevant EFS approaches based on fuzzy linguistic variables may be found in
the specialized literature [43].
IV. W HERE ARE EVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS GOING ? FUTURE PROSPECTS
From Section II, the reader might acknowledge that EFS-based methods have come a long way since the pioneering proposal
of the ﬁrst EFS-based methods more than 25 years ago. Extensive research has been carried out in this ﬁeld, mainly due to
the versatility associated with the learning and tuning of the different components of the FRBS.
Now, researchers and practitioners must look ahead to discern what the future objectives and challenges in the EFS ﬁeld
could be. The open directions for novel research are particularly associated with two basic pillars: (1) efforts focused on the
novel optimization of the internal components of the FRBS (Section IV-A); and (2) analysis of the application of EFSs to
emerging work scenarios in data science (Section IV-B). Finally, the particular characteristics of this big data scenario imply
paying special attention to the design and development of EFSs (Section IV-C).
A. Optimization of novel FRBS’ components
There is a wide variety of FRBS elements whose values can be optimized using an EFS. Enumerating some possibilities,
we should stress the choice of relevant inputs, scaling factors, membership functions, shape functions, granularity, fuzzy rules,
inference parameters, number of rules, and so on. In addition, as previously described the power of EAs permits the joint
learning of several of these components so as to obtain a much more robust FRBS.
However, it must be highlighted once again that for current applications it is not useful to generate models with excessively
complex components. In other words, special attention must be paid to maintain the comprehensibility of the models. For this
reason, the evolution of the multiple components of an FRBS must always be carried out considering the semantic properties
and simplicity of the obtained system.