8
B. Emerging data science scenarios for EFS
Data science is a quite recent ﬁeld of study, and it is still rapidly expanding. New problems and practical applications
arise and require the development of robust techniques to address new complex paradigms. Speciﬁcally, novel problems are
usually characterized by: i) uncertainty, the available information is often imprecise, uncertain, noisy, or there might be an
acute lack of information; the objective of the modeling or decision problem is ambiguous and the problem structure might be
loosely speciﬁed; and the problem environment may be not stationary but changing; ii) the impressively increasing problem
dimensions, requiring prohibitive computational times to achieve problem tractability; and iii) the need to provide descriptive
models and decision support systems able to comprehend the underlying human mental processes to manage the information
in a more human-oriented style (human-centric modeling and decision making) [44]. EFSs have excelled in many different
scenarios and, in accordance with this general good behavior, a bright future for their use in most of the incoming data science
areas can be predicted.
A ﬁrst case-study is related to non-standard classiﬁcation problems, such as those based on multi-label and multi-instance
learning. In the former case, the model must classify a query instance in a set of non-exclusive categories [45]. In the latter,
incomplete information about the classes or instances implies a handicap during the categorization [46]. Thus, instances are
coupled into a single “bag”, being unaware of which is the one that provides the true label. Finally, both problems can be
combined adding a higher degree of complexity to the design of future solutions. Taking into account this type of relationship
between labels and/or instances, the nature of both problems is well suited for the use of fuzzy sets and systems, and thus for
EFSs. However, at present just a few attempts have been made to solve this task using these tools [47].
The novel topic related to ordinal and monotonic classiﬁcation [48] should be noted. This case study comprises those
problems where both the input attributes and/or the class have a monotonicity constraint. The ﬁrst study that extracts fuzzy
rules satisfying these constraints without the need of a preprocessing stage can be found in [49], where authors incorporate
several mechanisms based on monotonicity with EFS algorithms.
Supervised descriptive rule discovery [50], and in particular subgroup discovery [51], [52], is also another interesting area of
study. The goal is to locate subgroups which are statistically “most interesting” for the user. The obtained model must fulﬁll some
properties such as simplicity (understandable structure with few variables), and both a high signiﬁcance and support. Another
particular case of this scenario is the so-called Emerging Pattern Extraction [53], in which frequency changes signiﬁcantly
from one dataset to another. In this context, the use of MOEFSs has shown that obtained rules allow the descriptions of the
emerging phenomena to be simpler than those in the state of the art [54].
A topic that has gained much attention in the research community of data science is multi-view learning [55], where examples
are described by multiple distinct feature sets. This is related to the way several current-day problems are deﬁned, such as
multimedia-content, web page classiﬁcation, and bioinformatics. The approaches which address multi-view learning via data
integration are quite diverse.
Another interesting area of study is semi-supervised learning. It is based on problems in which only a subset of the instances
are labeled and the algorithm can modify the output of the training data [56]. Considered as an extension to unsupervised
learning, clustering techniques have received much attention. In this context, the use of an FRBS can represent a sort of
linguistic description of the dissimilarity relation among patterns [57], thus helping the recognition of the clusters with fewer
data.
Finally, there are novel domains of application arising everyday that share problems similar to the ones already solved in
other domains. Therefore, it can be of interest to exploit previously acquired knowledge to manage new tasks in a quick and
effective way. This is the premise of the area of research known as transfer learning [58]. Taking advantage of fuzzy learning
methods for this task is evident, regarding the uncertainty that is found in these dynamic environments [59]. They also allow
leveraging knowledge from some referring scenes when there is little data available [60].
These are some of the new data science scenarios without the aim of being very exhaustive. The previous analysis illustrates
that there are not enough scientiﬁc studies using EFSs for such novel and signiﬁcant topics. Therefore, this must be regarded
as a “call-to-action” for current researchers in the area of EFSs to open the way in such promising lines of study, from both
the theoretical and practical points of view.
C. EFSs in big data: a signiﬁcant topic for the near future
One of the hottest topics for current research is related to data science and big data problems [4]. An in-depth analysis of
the current state of this framework was carried out in both [61] and [62], where authors reported the good properties of fuzzy
systems when dealing with such types of applications. However, focusing on the case of EFSs for big data, so far few studies
have been developed in this area of research [63]–[65].
The main reason for the lack of proposals in the specialized literature is the difﬁculty in reaching solutions that are scalable
within the EFS paradigm. Indeed, this constraint is associated with the computation of an accuracy-based ﬁtness function from
data at the core of the evolutionary procedure. In other words, it is not straightforward to develop methodologies that allow
the whole dataset to be handled in a reasonable time.