4
Herrera published an overview focused on the MOEFSs topic, which was intended to summarize the main contributions in
this particular ﬁeld [23]. Finally, in 2015 Fern ´andez, L ´opez, del Jesus, and Herrera revisited the topic of EFSs by presenting
a complete taxonomy of the existing proposals, and also posing some new trends and challenges to suggest some potential
research directions [29].
B. EFSs: Current taxonomy
As previously explained at the beginning of this paper, any EFS is developed on top of an FRBS. In this way, the components
of the FRBS are learned or optimized using an evolutionary process commonly taken from available data, as illustrated in
Figure 1. The ﬁnal goal is being able to contextualize the behavior of these systems in a given scenario.
Fuzzyfication(input interface)
InferenceSystem
Defuzzification(output	interface)NumericalDataNumericalDataFuzzySetFuzzySet
KNOWLEDGE BASE
R1: IF Xp1isA11and Xp2isA12thenY isB1
Data Base
Rule Base
EA BasedLearningProcess
Fig. 1. How EFS are built on top of an FRBS. Inspired from [29].
The main reason for using EAs as a tool for the design of FRBSs is related to the possibility of addressing the optimization
of their components as a search problem. Rule sets, membership functions, and many other features of an FRBS can be easily
encoded inside a chromosome. The optimization procedure can be viewed from a double perspective: learning and/or tuning.
In addition, the classical trade-off between accuracy and interpretability must be taken into account [30], [31]. For this task, the
use of an MOEA is probably the option that is best suited. Finally, different ways of representing fuzzy sets may be considered
as another aspect to be embedded in the optimization approach.
Taking all these aspects into account, in [29] authors proposed a complete taxonomy of EFSs, which is illustrated in Figure 2.
Speciﬁcally, three large groups were highlighted depending on several aspects, such as how the FRBSs’ elements are optimized,
the trade-off among the different learning criteria, and the use of new fuzzy set representations.
In what follows, a brief description of the EFS approaches enumerated in the taxonomy is provided. First, the learning and
tuning of FRBSs are introduced. Next, the use of multi-objective optimization in this framework is presented. Finally, several
comments are given on the parameterized construction for new fuzzy representations.
1) Evolutionary learning and tuning of FRBSs’ components: When using an FRBS for modeling a given problem, researchers
and practitioners must decide whether a simple system is enough for the existing requirements, or if a more complex
computational solution is required. In such a case, the use of an EFS is mandatory in order to achieve a robust and accurate
model.
There are two main alternatives for developing EFSs: (a) using EAs in the learning procedure of FRBSs and (b) using EAs
for tuning the elements of FRBSs. Speciﬁcally, learning can be carried out either on the KB components or in conjunction
with the inference engine parameters. The post-processing tuning is devoted to reﬁning a preliminary deﬁnition of the FRBSs.
In the following, a short description of the different approaches for both alternatives is provided.
a.Evolutionary learning . The specialized literature distinguishes between two main cases, depending on whether the learning
is applied just to the KB or to the inference engine parameters as well.
Evolutionary KB learning . Four different learning options have been proposed to obtain the KB: