3
interesting extension uses multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) [22], which can consider several design criteria
to be optimized concurrently, thus composing the so-called multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy systems (MOEFSs) [23].
In this contribution, a better insight on the topic of EFS is provided by posing the 4 W questions . The ﬁrst one has been
addressed throughout this section, namely Why are EFSs so signiﬁcant in data science tasks? The main reason has been
discussed above: they have a great potential for obtaining a good trade-off between accurate and explainable models, which is
extremely important in most of the current social and engineering applications.
The remaining 3 W questions are analyzed in depth to set the past, present and future scenarios. Whereas the historical
review (past and present) is intended to set the current context of EFSs, the main novelty in this position paper is related to
future insights. Speciﬁcally, special attention is paid to analyze the capabilities of EFSs, in particular those areas that could
beneﬁt the most from their application. Additionally, some novel scenarios, namely data science, big data and the development
of explainable models, that EFS researchers should focus on for the near future are described. Finally, the paper is concluded
by a thorough discussion on the need for XAI models in ML, which is intended to go beyond the old-fashioned dialectical
exercise on the interpretability-accuracy trade-off, very extended in FRBSs.
To carry out these tasks, the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, Section II considers When did EFSs
begin? , introducing the pioneer works on the topic and the current taxonomy for EFSs. Section III analyzes What should EFSs
be used for? , presenting the good capabilities of EFSs, namely robustness and explainability, for solving current problems
and applications. Section IV is devoted to establishing Where are EFSs going to? , considering some challenges for future
work, and focusing in particular on the big data scenario due to its signiﬁcance for current research. To summarize all thoughts
considered in this position paper, Section V presents an overview of the need for XAI. Finally, Section VI points out some
concluding remarks.
II. W HEN DIDEVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS BEGIN ? PAST AND PRESENT
In order to understand the present and to be able to forecast the future of a speciﬁc topic, the history and state of the art must
be acknowledged. In this regard, this section highlights the main progresses made in EFSs from their proposal to present. To
this aim, the initial milestones on the topic and some well-known reviews are ﬁrst introduced (Section II-A). Then, a complete
taxonomy is presented to frame the EFS techniques in their different categories (Section II-B).
A. EFSs: Pioneering approaches
The pioneering work by Lofti A. Zadeh on fuzzy sets supposed a signiﬁcant contribution in many research areas of control
and modeling [5]. Speciﬁcally, the application of fuzzy set theory as a knowledge representation structure based on fuzzy rules
began in the mid-1970s with the work of Mamdani [7]. Practically at the same time, the basis and theoretical studies on EAs
were established, in particular regarding one of its branches, that of GAs [9]. Despite the early appearance of both approaches,
only in the early 1990s the hybridization between these two computational intelligence techniques was introduced.
Throughout this section, four of the pioneering works in the ﬁeld are discussed in no particular order. They adopted both
tuning and learning methodologies of the components of the FRBS KB by means of GAs.
Karr was the ﬁrst to investigate the genetic tuning of the DB for fuzzy controllers [24]. In his study, the complete deﬁnition
of the DB was intended to be optimized, i.e. the best values of the parameters that deﬁne the fuzzy partitions were automatically
determined. This was obtained thanks to the ease of encoding information on the GA chromosome. In particular, the evolution
of the input and output fuzzy sets was jointly considered.
One of the ﬁrst models of evolutionary learning of a linguistic RB was proposed by Valenzuela-Rendon in [25]. This proposal
used a learning scheme where each solution (chromosome) represented a single rule over the entire RB. The ﬁrst version of
the methodology used a reward distribution scheme. Later, the original proposal was extended to allow reinforcement learning.
A different scheme for learning the RB was deﬁned by Thrift in [26]. The author used a decision matrix to represent the
RB, in that particular case study only with two dimensions. This matrix collected the linguistic labels of the output variable
according to the corresponding input fuzzy labels. It considered an integer coding scheme, using “0” to represent a null value,
thus allowing for the automatic learning of the optimal number of rules. The GA encoded different fuzzy rules, i.e. the whole
RB deﬁnition, on a single chromosome.
Pham and Karaboga proposed a similar approach but using a fuzzy relation Rinstead of the classical crisp relation (decision
table) [27]. The GA was used to modify the fuzzy relational matrix of a single-input / single-output fuzzy model. The
chromosome was obtained by concatenating the M Nelements of R, where MandNwere the number of linguistic terms
associated with the input and output variables, respectively. The main difference with the work in [26] is that the elements of
Rwere real numbers in [0,1] instead of integer values.
All these contributions were considered as milestones for the work on EFSs. From that point on, the interest of researchers
on the topic has signiﬁcantly increased. As a short description of developments throughout the history of EFSs, four surveys
are considered. Ten years after the publication of the ﬁrst approaches, the main achievements in the ﬁeld were compiled in the
2001 monograph by Cord ´on, Herrera, Hoffmann, and Magdalena [21]. After a period of another ten years, Cord ´on proposed
a historical review focusing on the interpretability viewpoint in 2011 [28]. In 2013, Fazzolari, Alcal ´a, Nojima, Ishibuchi, and