Entity Abstraction in Visual Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning
Rishi Veerapaneni;1,John D. Co-Reyes;1,Michael Chang;1,Michael Janner1
Chelsea Finn2,Jiajun Wu3,Joshua Tenenbaum3,Sergey Levine1
Abstract: We present OP3, a framework for model-based reinforcement learning
that acquires object representations from raw visual observations without supervi-
sion and uses them to predict and plan. To ground these abstract representations
of entities to actual objects in the world, we formulate an interactive inference
algorithm which incorporates dynamic information in the scene. Our model can
handle a variable number of entities by symmetrically processing each object rep-
resentation with the same locally-scoped function. On block-stacking tasks, OP3
can generalize to novel block conﬁgurations and more objects than seen during
training, outperforming both a model that assumes access to object supervision and
a state-of-the-art video prediction model.
Keywords: model-based reinforcement learning, objects, compositionality
1 Introduction
Figure 1: OP3 infers a set of entity vari-
ablesH(t)
1:Kfrom an observation xtand
predicts their future states given a se-
quence of actions a(t:T). We evaluate
rollouts during planning by scoring these
predicted states against inferred goal hid-
den statesh(G)
k.A powerful tool for modeling the complexity of the physical
world is to frame this complexity as the composition of sim-
pler entities and processes. For example, the study of classical
mechanics in terms of macroscopic objects and a small set of
laws governing their motion has enabled not only an explana-
tion of natural phenomena like apples falling from trees but
the invention of structures that never before existed in human
history, such as skyscrapers. Paradoxically, the creative varia-
tionof such physical constructions in human society is due in
part to the uniformity with which human models of physical
laws apply to the literal building blocks that comprise such
structures – the reuse of the same simpler models that apply to
primitive entities and their relations in different ways obviates
the need, and cost, of designing custom solutions from scratch
for each construction instance.
The challenge of scaling the generalization abilities of learning
robots follow a similar characteristic to the challenges of mod-
eling physical phenomena: the complexity of the task space
may scale combinatorially with the conﬁgurations and number
of objects, but if all scene instances share the same set of objects that follow the same physical laws,
then transforming the problem of modeling scenes into a problem of modeling objects and the local
physical processes that govern their interactions may provide a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in generalizing to
solving novel physical tasks the learner has not encountered before.
That is the central hypothesis of this paper, which we test by deﬁning models for perceiving and
predicting raw observations that are themselves compositions of simpler functions that operate locally
onentities rather than globally on scenes. Importantly, the symmetry that all objects follow the same
physical laws enables us to deﬁne these learnable entity-centric functions to take as input argument
* Equal contribution.
1University of California Berkeley.2Stanford University.3Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
3rd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.