Figure 6: Respective results of our method in compari-
son to prior work. OP3 outperforms O2P2 even though
it does not have access to any object segmentations.SA VP O2P2 OP3 (ours)
24% 76% 82%
Table 1: Accuracy (%) of block tower builds by the
SA VP baseline, the O2P2 oracle, and our approach.
O2P2 uses image segmentations whereas OP3 uses
only raw images as input.
# Blocks SA VP OP3 (xy) OP3 (entity)
1 54% 73% 91%
2 28% 55% 80%
3 28% 41% 55%
Table 2: Accuracy (%) of multi-step planning for build-
ing block towers. (xy) means (pick xy, place xy)
action space while (entity) means (entity id,
place xy)action space.
Setup: We train OP3 on the same dataset and evaluate on the same goal images as Janner et al.
[33]. While the training set contains up to ﬁve objects, the test set contains up to nine objects, which
are placed in speciﬁc structures (bridge, pyramid, etc.) not seen during training. The actions are
optimized using the cross-entropy method (CEM) [ 57], with each sampled action evaluated by the
greedy cost function described in Sec. 4.5. Accuracy is evaluated using the metric deﬁned by Janner
et al. [33], which checks that all blocks are within some threshold error of the goal.
Results: The two baselines, SA VP [ 6] and O2P2, represent the state-of-the-art in video prediction
and symmetric object-centric planning methods, respectively. SA VP models objects with a ﬁxed
number of convolutional ﬁlters and does not process entities symmetrically. O2P2 does process
entities symmetrically but has access to ground truth object segmentations. As shown in Table 1, OP3
achieves better accuracy than O2P2, even without any ground truth supervision on object identity.
OP3 achieves three times the accuracy of SA VP, which suggests that symmetric modeling of entities
is enables the ﬂexibility to transfer knowledge of dynamics of a single object to novel scenes with
different conﬁgurations heights, color combinations, and numbers of objects than those from the
training distribution. Fig. 11 and Fig. 10 in the Appendix show that, by grounding its entities in
objects of the scene through inference, OP3’s predictions isolates only one object at a time without
affecting the predictions of other objects.
5.2 Multi-Step Planning
The goal of our second experiment is to understand how well OP3 can perform multi-step planning.
The task in the previous section can be performed with a greedy planning algorithm: each block
placement can be selected to maximally reduce the difference between the current and goal scene. In
this next experiment, we modify the block stacking to require our model to reason over temporally
extended action sequences on objects already present in the scene, by changing the action space to
represent a picking and dropping location.
Goals are speciﬁed with a goal image, and the initial scene contains all of the blocks needed to build
the desired structure. This task is more difﬁcult because the agent may have to move blocks out of
the way before placing other ones which would require multi-step planning. Furthermore, an action
only successfully picks up a block if it intersects with the block’s outline, which makes searching
through the combinatorial space of plans a challenge. As stated in Sec. 4.4, having a pointer to
each object enables OP3 to plan in the space of entities. We compare two different action spaces
(pick xy, place xy)and(entity id, place xy)to understand how automatically ﬁltering
for pick locations at actual locations of objects enables better efﬁciency and performance in planning.
Details for determining the pick xyfrom entity idare in the appendix.
Results: We compare with SA VP, which uses the (pick xy, place xy)action space. With this
standard action space (Table 2) OP3 achieves between 1.5-2 times the accuracy of SA VP. This
performance gap increases to 2-3 times the accuracy when OP3 uses the (entity id, place xy)
action space. The low performance of SA VP with only two blocks highlights the difﬁculty of such
combinatorial tasks for model-based RL methods, and highlights the both the generalization and
localization beneﬁts of a model with entity abstraction. Fig. 7 shows that with the same number
of planning steps, SA VP is unable to ﬁnd good enough plans to construct the goal conﬁguration,
whereas OP3 is able to plan more efﬁciently, suggesting that OP3 may be a more effective model
7