Figure 2: Our approach to model-based RL imposes the entity abstraction :(a)The hidden state is factorized
intolocal entity states, each of which are symmetrically processed with the same function that takes in a generic
entity as an argument. In contrast, prior work do not incorporate symmetric processing of the hidden state. (b)
The hidden state represents the scene globally and is processed with a single function. (c)Different chunks
of the hidden state represent different entities and the entire state is processed with a single function. (d)The
hidden state is factorized into local entity states, each of which are processed with a different function.
a variable that represents a generic entity, the speciﬁc instantiations of which are all processed
symmetrically be the same function. We use the term entity abstraction to refer to the abstraction
barrier that isolates the abstract variable , which the entity-centric function is deﬁned with respect to,
from its concrete instantiation , which contains information about the appearance and dynamics of an
object that modulates the function’s behavior.
Deﬁning the observation and dynamic models of a model-based reinforcement learner as neural
network functions of abstract entity variables allows for symbolic computation in the space of entities,
but the key challenge for realizing this is to ground the values of these variables in the world from
raw visual observations. Fortunately, the language of partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDP) enables us to represent these entity variables as latent random state variables in a state-
factorized POMDP, thereby transforming the variable binding problem into an inference problem with
which we can build upon state-of-the-art techniques in amortized iterative variational inference [ 1–3]
to use temporal continuity and interactive feedback to infer the posterior distribution of the entity
variables given a sequence of observations and actions.
We present a framework for object-centric perception, prediction, and planning (OP3), a model-based
reinforcement learner that predicts and plans over entity variables inferred via an interactive inference
algorithm from raw visual observations. Empirically OP3 learns to discover and bind information
about actual objects in the environment to these entity variables without any supervision on what
these variables should correspond to. As all computation within the entity-centric function is local in
scope with respect to its input entity, the process of modeling the dynamics or appearance of each
object is protected from the computations involved in modeling other objects, which allows OP3 to
generalize to modeling a variable number of objects in a variety of contexts with no re-training.
Contributions: Our conceptual contribution is the use of entity abstraction to integrate graphical
models, symbolic computation, and neural networks in a model-based RL agent. This is enabled
by our technical contribution: deﬁning models as the composition of locally-scoped entity-centric
functions and the interactive inference algorithm for grounding the abstract entity variables in raw
visual observations without any supervision on object identity. Empirically, we ﬁnd that OP3 achieves
about three times greater accuracy than state of the art video prediction models solving novel single
and multi-step block stacking tasks.
2 Related Work
Representation learning for visual model-based reinforcement learning: Prior works have pro-
posed learning video prediction models [ 4–7] to improve exploration [ 8] and planning [ 9] in rein-
forcement learning. However, such works and others [ 10–13] that represent the scene with a single
representation vector may be susceptible to the binding problem [ 14,15] and must rely on data
to learn that the same object in two different contexts can be modeled similarly. But processing a
disentangled latent state with a single function [ 16–20] or processing each disentangled factor with a
different function [ 6,21] (1) assumes a ﬁxed number of entities that cannot be dynamically adjusted
for generalizing to more objects than in training and (2) has no constraints to enforce that multiple
instances of the same entity in the scene be modeled in the same way. For generalization, often the
particular arrangement of objects in a scene does not matter so much as what is constant across scenes
– properties of individual objects and inter-object relationships – which the inductive biases of these
prior works do not capture. The entity abstraction in OP3 enforces symmetric processing of entity
representations, thereby overcoming the limitations of these prior works.
Unsupervised grounding of abstract entity variables in concrete objects: Prior works that model
entities and their interactions often pre-specify the identity of the entities [ 22–28], provide additional
2