Figure 5: Amortized interactive inference alternates between reﬁnement (pink) and dynamics (orange) steps,
iteratively updating the belief of 1:Kover time. ^corresponds to the output of the dynamics network, which
serves as the initial estimate of that is subsequently reﬁned by fGandfQ.Odenotes the feedback used in the
reﬁnement process, which includes gradient information and auxiliary inputs (Appdx. 6.3.1).
entity idandpick xy, allowing OP3 to automatically use a (entity id, place xy)action
space without needing a scripted policy.
4.5 Generalization to Various Tasks
We consider tasks deﬁned in the same environment with the same physical laws that govern appearance
and dynamics. Tasks are differentiated by goals, in particular goal conﬁgurations of objects. Building
good cost functions for real world tasks is generally difﬁcult [ 54] because the underlying state of
the environment is always unobserved and can only be modeled through modeling observations.
However, by representing the environment state as the state of its entities, we may obtain ﬁner-grained
goal-speciﬁcation without the need for manual annotations [ 55]. Having rolled out OP3 to a particular
timestep, we construct a cost function to compare the predicted entity states H(P)
1:Kwith the entity
statesH(G)
1:Kinferred from a goal image by considering pairwise distances between the entities,
another example of enforcing the entity abstraction. Letting S0andSdenote the set of goal and
predicted entities, we deﬁne the form of the cost function via a composition of the task speciﬁc
distance function coperating on entity-pairs:
C
H(G)
1:K;H(P)
1:K
=X
a2S0min
b2Sc
H(G)
a;H(P)
b
; (5)
in which we pair each goal entity with the closest predicted entity and sum over the costs of these
pairs. Assuming a single action sufﬁces to move an object to its desired goal position, we can greedily
plan each timestep by deﬁning the cost to be mina2S0;b2Sc(H(G)
a;H(P)
b), the pair with minimum
distance, and removing the corresponding goal entity from further consideration for future planning.
5 Experiments
Our experiments aim to study the various ways in which entity abstraction improves generalization,
planning, and modeling. Sec. 5.1 shows that from only training to predict how objects fall, OP3
generalizes to solve various novel block stacking tasks with three times better accuracy than a state-
of-the-art video prediction model. Sec. 5.2 shows that OP3 can plan for multiple steps in a difﬁcult
multi-object environment. Sec. 5.3 shows that OP3 learns to ground its abstract entities in objects
from real world videos.
5.1 Combinatorial Generalization without Object Supervision
We ﬁrst investigate how well OP3 can learn object-based representations without additional ob-
ject supervision, as well as how well OP3’s factorized representation can enable combinatorial
generalization for scenes with many objects.
Domain: In the MuJoCo [ 56] block stacking task introduced by Janner et al. [33] for the O2P2
model, a block is raised in the air and the model must predict the steady-state effects of dropping the
block on a surface with multiple objects, which implicitly requires modeling the effects of gravity and
collisions. The agent is never trained to stack blocks, but is tested on a suite of tasks where it must
construct block tower speciﬁed by a goal image. Janner et al. [33] showed that an object-centric model
with access to ground truth object segmentations can solve these tasks with about 76% accuracy. We
now consider whether OP3 can do better, but without any supervision on object identity .
6