than SA VP in modeling combinatorial scenes. Fig. 8 shows the execution of interactive inference
during training, where OP3 alternates between four reﬁnement steps and one prediction step. Notice
that OP3 infers entity representations that decompose the scene into coherent objects and that entities
that do not model objects model the background. Notice also in the last column ( t= 2) that OP3
predicts the appearance of the green block even though the green block was partially occluded in the
previous timestep, which is expected because the latent entity variables in OP3 persist through time.
Figure 7: End result of multi-step planning.
Figure 8: Visualization of multi-step planning. Blue
boxes correspond to reﬁnement steps within the same
timestep while orange boxes correspond to predicting
the future timestep.5.3 Real World Evaluation
Figure 9: Qualitative results on learning object representations on
real world data, showing learned object masks for IODINE and our
method. OP3 initially segments the arm and object in the same
mask (a), then separates them out after incorporating actions (b).
IODINE initially segments multiple objects with the same mask (c)
and also does not have temporal consistency (d).The previous tasks used simulated en-
vironments with monochromatic ob-
jects. Now we study how well OP3
scales to real world data with cluttered
scenes, object ambiguity, and occlu-
sions. We evaluate OP3 on the dataset
from Ebert et al. [58] which contains
videos of a robotic arm moving cloths
and other deformable and multipart
objects with varying textures.
We evaluate qualitative performance
by visualizing the object segmenta-
tions and compare against vanilla IO-
DINE, which does not incorporate
a interaction-based dynamics model
into the inference process. Fig. 9 high-
lights the strength of OP3 in preserv-
ing temporal continuity and disambiguating objects in real world scenes. While IODINE can
disambiguate monochromatic objects in static images, we observe that it struggles to do more than
just color segmentation on more complicated images where movement is required to disambiguate
objects. In contrast, whereas OP3 also initially performed color segmentation by grouping the towel,
arm, and dark container edges together, by observing the effects of moving the arm it separates these
entities into different groups.
6 Discussion
In the physical world, objects can be viewed as variables that are symmetrically processed by the
same physical laws. Modeling such entities as an abstraction on the state is a modeling choice, in the
same way that rewards are an abstraction on the state that indicates performance, that actions are an
abstraction on the state that indicates avenues for intervention. As we have shown with the various
generalization, planning, and modeling beneﬁts of OP3 in various novel compositional multi-object
tasks, abstraction may provide beneﬁt in grouping shared structure in ways that can be modeled
generically rather speciﬁcally for each instance. What often makes abstraction difﬁcult, especially
that which enables symbolic computation like the relational computation OP3 performs, is not so
much the lossiness of abstraction but the inability to continuously update the abstract representation
with more raw data. Framing abstract variables as random variables in a graphical model whose
posterior can be inferred and reﬁned over time from raw data using neural networks, as OP3 does,
can provide a potential bridge between the symbolic world and the noisy high dimensional physical
world, opening a path to scaling robotic learning to more combinatorially complex tasks.
8