Table 11. Ablation study on a large-scale dataset pre-trained with
DAMO-YOLO-S. We validated our model on COCO without ﬁne-
tuning (denoted by ’-’). For the VisDrone dataset, we loaded the
pre-trained model and ﬁne-tuned it for 300 epochs.
Pretrained Dataset Downstream Task AP
COCO - 46.0
COCO+Obj365+OpenImage - 47.1
COCO VisDrone 24.6
COCO+Obj365+OpenImage VisDrone 26.6
and student features, to weaken the effect the difference of
real values brings. After subtracting the mean, standard
deviation of each channel would function as temperature
coefﬁcient in KL loss.
Besides, we present two key observations for a better
usage of distillation. One is the balance between distillation
and task loss. As shown in Fig.4, when we focus more
on distillation (weight=10), the classiﬁcation loss in student
has a slow convergence, which results in a negative effect.
The small loss weight3(weight=0.5) hence is necessary
to strike a balance between distillation and classiﬁcation.
The other is the shallow head of detector. We found that
the proper reduction of the head depth is beneﬁcial to the
feature distillation on neck. The reason is that when the gap
between the ﬁnal outputs and the distilled feature map is
closer, distillation can have a better impact on decision.
In practice, we use DAMO-YOLO-S as teacher to dis-
till DAMO-YOLO-T, and DAMO-YOLO-M as teacher to
distill DAMO-YOLO-S, and DAMO-YOLO-L as teacher
to distill DAMO-YOLO-M, while DAMO-YOLO-L is dis-
tilled by it self.
2.5. General Class DAMO-YOLO Model
In this section, we introduce the General Class DAMO-
YOLO model, which has been trained on multiple large-
scale datasets, including COCO, Objects365, and Open-
Image. Our model incorporates several improvements
that enable high precision and generalization. Firstly,
we address ambiguity resulting from overlapping cate-
gories across different datasets, such as ”mouse,” which
can refer to a computer mouse in COCO/Objects365 and
a rodent in OpenImage, by creating a uniﬁed label space
for ﬁltering. This reduces the original 945 categories
(80 from COCO, 365 from Objects365, and 500 from
OpenImage) to 701 [42]. Secondly, we present a method
of polynomial smoothing followed by weighted sampling to
address the imbalance in dataset sizes, which often results
in batch sampling biases towards larger datasets. Finally,
3In our method, the cosine weight is utilized.we implement a class-aware sampling approach to tackle
the issue of long-tail effects in Objects365 and OpenImage
datasets. This assigns greater sampling weights to images
containing categories with fewer data points.
By improving our model, we trained DAMO-YOLO-
S on Large-Scale Datasets and achieved a 1.1% mAP
improvement compared to the DAMO-YOLO-S baseline
on COCO. Furthermore, this pre-trained model can be
ﬁne-tuned for downstream tasks. We applied it to the
VisDrone dataset for 300 epochs and achieved a 26.6%
mAP, surpassing the performance of the model pre-trained
on COCO. These results highlight the advantages of large-
scale dataset training and the robustness it provides to the
model. The results are presented in Table.11.
3. Implementation Details
Our models are trained 300 epochs with SGD optimizer.
The weight decay and SGD momentum are 5e-4 and 0.9
respectively. The initial learning rate is 0.4 with a batch size
of 256, and the learning rate decays according to a cosine
schedule. Following YOLO-Series [9, 18, 32, 34] model
exponential moving average (EMA) and grouped weight
decay are used. To enhance data diversity, Mosaic [1,
32] and Mixup [41] augmentation is a common practice.
However, recent advancement [3, 44] shows that properly
designed box-level augmentation is crucial in object de-
tection. Inspired by this, we apply Mosaic and Mixup
for image-level augmentation and employ the box-level
augmentation of SADA [3] after image-level augmentation
for more robust augmentation.
4. Comparison with the SOTA
DAMO-YOLO release a series of general models and
lightweight models, catering to both general scenarios and
resource-limited edge scenarios.
In order to evaluate the performance of DAMO-YOLO’s
general models against other state-of-the-art models, we
conducted a comparative analysis on T4-GPU using the
TensorRT-FP16 inference engine. The results, presented in
Table.9, demonstrate that DAMO-YOLO’s general models
outperform its rivals in terms of both accuracy and speed.
Moreover, our proposed distillation technique offers signif-
icant improvements in accuracy.
To assess the performance of light weight models, we
conducted a comparative analysis on Intel-8163 CPU using
Openvino as the inference engine. As shown in Table
2, DAMO-YOLO’s lightweight model achieved substantial
leading advantages, surpassing its competitors by a consid-
erable margin in both speed and accuracy.
8