techs, including MAE-NAS backbones, RepGFPN
neck, ZeroHead, AlignedOTA and distillation
enhancement.
2. DAMO-YOLO outperforms the state-of-the-art detec-
tors ( e.g. YOLO series) on public COCO datasets in
both general and lightweight categories.
3. A suite of models with various scales is presented
in DAMO-YOLO (tiny/small/medium) to support dif-
ferent deployments. The code and pre-trained mod-
els are released at https://github.com/tinyvision/damo-
yolo, with ONNX and TensorRT supported.
2. DAMO-YOLO
In this section, we introduce each module of DAMO-
YOLO in detail, including Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) backbones, efﬁcient Reparameterized Generalized-
FPN (RepGFPN) neck, ZeroHead, AlignedOTA label as-
signment and distillation enhancement. The whole frame-
work of DAMO-YOLO is displayed in Fig.3.
2.1. MAE-NAS Backbone
Previously, in real-time scenarios, designers relied on the
Flops-mAP curve as a simple means of assessing model
performance. However, the relationship between a model’s
ﬂops and latency is not necessarily consistent. In order
to enhance a model’s real-world performance in industrial
deployment, DAMO-YOLO prioritized the latency-MAP
curve in the design process.
Based on this design principle, we use MAE-NAS [30]
to obtain optimal networks under different latency budgets.
MAE-NAS constructs an alternative proxy based on infor-
mation theory to rank initialized networks without training.
Therefore, the search process only takes a few hours, which
is much lower than the training costs. Several basic search
blocks are provided by MAE-NAS, such as Mob-block,
Res-block and CSP-block, as shown in Fig.2. The Mob-
block is a variant of MobileNetV3 [14] block, the Res-block
is derived from ResNet [12], and the CSP-block is derived
from CSPNet [35]. The full supported block list can be
found in MAE-NAS repository2.
We found that applying different kinds of blocks in
models of different scales achieves better trade-offs for real-
time inference. The performance comparisons among CSP-
Darknet and our MAE-NAS backbones under our DAMO-
YOLO with different scales are listed in Table.1. In this
table, “MAE-Res” means we apply Res-block in the MAE-
NAS backbones, and “MAE-CSP” means we apply CSP-
block in it. Besides, “S” (Small) and “M” (Medium) repre-
sent different scales of backbones. As shown in Table.1, the
2https://github.com/alibaba/lightweight-neural-architecture-
search/blob/main/tinynas/models/README.md#supported-blocksTable 3. Ablation Study on the depth and width of our neck.
“Depth” denotes the repeat times on the bottleneck of fusion block.
“Width” indicates the channel dimensions of feature maps.
Depth Width Latency FLOPs AP
2 (192, 192, 192) 3.53 34.9 44.2
2 (128, 256, 512) 3.72 36.1 45.1
3 (160, 160, 160) 3.91 38.2 44.9
3 (96, 192, 384) 3.83 37.8 45.6
4 (64, 128, 256) 3.85 37.2 45.3
MAE-CSP obtained by MAE-NAS technology outperforms
manually designed CSP-Darknet in terms of both speed
and accuracy, demonstrating the superiority of MAE-NAS
technolog. Moreover, we can observe from Table.1 that
using Res-block on smaller models can achieve a better
trade-off between performance and speed than CSP-block,
while using CSP-block can signiﬁcantly outperform Res-
block on larger and deeper networks. As a consequences,
we use “MAE-Res” in “T” (Tiny) and “S” models and
“MAE-CSP” in “M” and ”L” models in the ﬁnal setting.
When dealing with scenarios that only have limited
computing power or GPU is not available, it is crucial to
have models that meet strict requirements for computation
and speed. To address this issue, we have designed a series
of light weight model using Mob-Block. Mob-block is
derived from MobleNetV3 [14], which can signiﬁcantly
decrease model computation and is friendly with CPU
devices.
2.2. Efﬁcient RepGFPN
Feature pyramid network aims to aggregate different
resolution features extracted from the backbone, which
has been proven to be a critical and effective part of
object detection [10, 31, 36]. The conventional FPN [10]
introduces a top-down pathway to fuse multi-scale features.
Considering the limitation of one-way information ﬂow,
PAFPN [36] adds an additional bottom-up path aggregation
network, but with higher computational costs. BiFPN [31]
removes nodes that only have one input edge, and adds skip-
link from the original input on the same level. In [17],
Generalized-FPN (GFPN) is proposed to serve as neck
and achieves SOTA performance, as it can sufﬁciently
exchange high-level semantic information and low-level
spatial information. In GFPN, multi-scale features are
fused in both level features in previous and current layers.
What’s more, the log2(n)skip-layer connections provide
more effective information transmission that can scale into
deeper networks. When we directly replace modiﬁed-
PANet with GFPN on modern YOLO-series models, we
achieved higher precision. However, the latency of GFPN-
3