Image Encoder 
...0.29
0.16
0.39...black eye 
blue crown 
solid belly 
Learnable feature 
Intermediate feature ProtoMod 
BaseMod 
 Similarity maps 
 
Attribute 
vector 
...black eye 
red beak 
striped wing 
blue crown 
yellow leg 
solid belly 
...=...
...Figure 1: Our attribute prototype network ( APN) consists of an Image Encoder extracting image
featuresf(x), aBaseMod performing classiﬁcation for zero-shot learning, and a ProtoMod learning
attribute prototypes pkand localizing them with similarity maps Mk. The end-to-end training of
APNencourages the image feature to contain both global information which is discriminative for
classiﬁcation and local information which is crucial to localize and predict attributes.
3 Attribute Prototype Network
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize images of previously unseen classes ( Yu) by transferring
learned knowledge from seen classes ( Ys) using their class embeddings, e.g. attributes. The training
set consists of labeled images and attributes from seen classes, i.e., S=fx;y; (y)jx2X;y2Ysg.
Here,xdenotes an image in the RGB image space X,yis its class label and (y)2RKis the class
embedding i.e., a class-level attribute vector annotated with Kdifferent visual attributes. In addition,
class embeddings of unseen classes i.e., f(y)jy2Yug, are also known. The goal for ZSL is to
predict the label of images from unseen classes, i.e., X!Yu, while for generalized ZSL (GZSL)
[42] the goal is to predict images from both seen and unseen classes, i.e., X!Yu[Ys.
In the following, we describe our end-to-end trained attribute prototype network ( APN) that improves
the attribute localization ability of the image representation, i.e. locality, for ZSL. As shown in
Figure 1 our framework consists of three modules, the Image Encoder , the base module ( BaseMod )
and the prototype module ( ProtoMod ). In the end of the section, we describe how we perform zero-
shot learning on top of our image representations and how the locality enables attribute localization.
3.1 Base Module ( BaseMod ) for global feature learning
The base module ( BaseMod ) learns discriminative visual features for classiﬁcation. Given an input
imagex, the Image Encoder (a CNN backbone) converts it into a feature representation f(x)2
RHWCwhereH,WandCdenote the height, width, and channel respectively. BaseMod then
applies global average pooling over the HandWto learn a global discriminative feature g(x)2RC:
g(x) =1
HWHX
i=1WX
j=1fi;j(x); (1)
wherefi;j(x)2RCis extracted from the feature f(x)at spatial location (i;j)(blue box in Figure 1).
Visual-semantic embedding layer. In contrast to standard CNNs with fully connected layers to
compute class logits, we further improve the expressiveness of the image representation using
attributes. In detail, a linear layer with parameter V2RCKmaps the visual feature g(x)into
the class embedding (e.g., attribute) space. The dot product between the projected visual feature
3