Attribute Prediction Part Localization Accuracy
Attribute type Seen Unseen Breast Belly Back Head Wing Leg Mean
APN + Binary 86.8 86.7 61.8 54.5 30.0 64.2 54.1 47.7 52.1
APN + Continuous 86.4 85.7 63.1 54.6 30.5 64.1 55.9 50.5 52.8
Table 4: Attribute prediction accuracy and part localization accuracy of APN model trained with
binary attributes (“APN+Binary”) or with continuous attributes (“APN+Continuous”) on CUB dataset.
Binary v.s. continuous attributes The class-level continuous attributes are usually obtained by
averaging the image-level binary attributes for each class, which are expensive to collect. In this
section, we test if our model can work with class-level binary attributes, which are easier to annotate.
Speciﬁcally, we retrain our attribute prototype network with class-level binary attributes which
are obtained by thresholding the continuous ones. We then evaluate its performance on the part
localization and the image-level attribute prediction tasks on the test set of CUB dataset. Our APN
model can make an attribute prediction by thresholding the predicted attribute ^aat0:5. As shown
in Table 4, our method works equally well for both binary and continuous attributes in terms of
attribute prediction accuracy ( 86:4%with continuous attributes vs 86:8%with binary attributes on
seen classes) and part localization accuracy ( 52:8%with continuous attributes vs 52:1%with binary
attributes). It indicates that our model does not rely on the expensive continuous attribute annotation
and generalizes well to the binary attributes that are easier to collect.
5 Conclusion
In this work, we develop a zero-shot representation learning framework, i.e. attribute prototype
network ( APN), to jointly learn global and local features. By regressing attributes with local features
and decorrelating prototypes with regularization, our model improves the locality of image represen-
tations. We demonstrate consistent improvement over the state-of-the-art on three ZSL benchmarks,
and further show that, when used in conjunction with feature generating models, our representations
improve over ﬁnetuned ResNet representations. We qualitatively verify that our network is able to
accurately localize attributes in images, and the part localization accuracy signiﬁcantly outperforms a
weakly supervised localization model designed for zero-shot learning.
Broader Impact
Computers have become much smarter over the past decades, but they cannot distinguish between two
objects without a properly annotated training dataset. Since humans can learn general representations
that generalize well across many classes, they require very little or even no training data to recognize
novel classes. Zero-shot learning aims to mimic this ability to recognize objects using only some
class level descriptions (e.g., identify a bird according to the color and pattern of bird body parts),
and takes a ﬁrst step to build a machine that has a similar decision process as humans. Therefore,
ZSL techniques would beneﬁt those who do not have access to large-scale annotated datasets, e.g. a
wildlife biologist who wants to build an automatic classiﬁcation system for rare animals.
Our work introduces an attribute prototype network, which is good at predicting attributes with local
features. Speciﬁcally, we deal with the attribute correlation problem, where the network cannot tell
attributes apart because they co-occur very often, eg, the yellow forehead andyellow crown of birds.
By decorrelating attribute prototypes, we use the local information for predicting attributes, rather
than using the correlated contexts, which is an important direction that we hope there will be a greater
focus by the community. Additionally, we strengthen the interpretability of the inference process, by
highlighting the attributes our model has learnt in the image. Interpretability is important for helping
users to understand the learning process and check model errors.
Broadly speaking, there are two shortcuts of zero-shot learning. Firstly, the prediction accuracy
is still lower than models trained with both seen and unseen classes. Thus ZSL is not applicable
to those settings that require high accuracy and conﬁdence, e.g., self-driving cars. Secondly, the
model’s generalization ability depends to a great extent on the quality of side information that
describes the similarity between seen and unseen classes. Thus biased side information might harm
the generalization ability of ZSL models.
9