Attribute Prototype Network for Zero-Shot Learning
Wenjia Xu1;3;4Yongqin Xian1Jiuniu Wang3;4Bernt Schiele1Zeynep Akata1;2
1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2Cluster of Excellence Machine Learning, University of Tübingen, Germany
3School of Electronic, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
4Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China
Abstract
From the beginning of zero-shot learning research, visual attributes have been
shown to play an important role. In order to better transfer attribute-based knowl-
edge from known to unknown classes, we argue that an image representation with
integrated attribute localization ability would be beneﬁcial for zero-shot learning.
To this end, we propose a novel zero-shot representation learning framework that
jointly learns discriminative global and local features using only class-level at-
tributes. While a visual-semantic embedding layer learns global features, local
features are learned through an attribute prototype network that simultaneously
regresses and decorrelates attributes from intermediate features. We show that our
locality augmented image representations achieve a new state-of-the-art on three
zero-shot learning benchmarks. As an additional beneﬁt, our model points to the
visual evidence of the attributes in an image, e.g. for the CUB dataset, conﬁrming
the improved attribute localization ability of our image representation.
1 Introduction
Visual attributes describe discriminative visual properties of objects shared among different classes.
Attributes have shown to be important for zero-shot learning as they allow semantic knowledge
transfer from known to unknown classes. Most zero-shot learning (ZSL) methods [ 30,6,1,50]
rely on pretrained image representations and essentially focus on learning a compatibility function
between the image representations and attributes. Focusing on image representations that directly
allow attribute localization is relatively unexplored. In this work, we refer to the ability of an image
representation to localize and associate an image region with a visual attribute as locality. Our goal is
to improve the locality of image representations for zero-shot learning.
While modern deep neural networks [ 13] encode local information and some CNN neurons are
linked to object parts [ 53], the encoded local information is not necessarily best suited for zero-shot
learning. There have been attempts to improve locality in ZSL by learning visual attention [ 24,58] or
attribute classiﬁers [ 35]. Although visual attention accurately focuses on some object parts, often the
discovered parts and attributes are biased towards training classes due to the learned correlations. For
instance, the attributes yellow crown andyellow belly co-occur frequently (e.g. for Yellow Warbler).
Such correlations may be learned as a shortcut to maximize the likelihood of training data and
therefore fail to deal with unknown conﬁgurations of attributes in novel classes such as black crown
andyellow belly (e.g. for Scott Oriole) as this attribute combination has not been observed before.
To improve locality and mitigate the above weaknesses of image representations, we develop a weakly
supervised representation learning framework that localizes and decorrelates visual attributes. More
speciﬁcally, we learn local features by injecting losses on intermediate layers of CNNs and enforce
xuwenjia16@mails.ucas.ac.cn
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.