these features to encode visual attributes deﬁning visual characteristics of objects. It is worth noting
that we use only class-level attributes and semantic relatedness of them as the supervisory signal, in
other words, no human annotated association between the local features and visual attributes is given
during training. In addition, we propose to alleviate the impact of incidentally correlated attributes by
leveraging their semantic relatedness while learning these local features.
To summarize, our work makes the following contributions. (1) We propose an attribute prototype
network ( APN) to improve the locality of image representations for zero-shot learning. By regressing
and decorrelating attributes from intermediate-layer features simultaneously, our APNmodel learns
local features that encode semantic visual attributes. (2) We demonstrate consistent improvement
over the state-of-the-art on three challenging benchmark datasets, i.e., CUB, AWA2 and SUN, in both
zero-shot and generalized zero-shot learning settings. (3) We show qualitatively that our model is
able to accurately localize bird parts by only inspecting the attention maps of attribute prototypes
and without using any part annotations during training. Moreover, we show signiﬁcantly better part
detection results than a recent weakly supervised method.
2 Related work
Zero-shot learning. The aim is to classify the object classes that are not observed during training [ 20].
The key insight is to transfer knowledge learned from seen classes to unseen classes with class
embeddings that capture similarities between them. Many classical approaches [ 30,6,1,50,41] learn
a compatibility function between image and class embedding spaces. Recent advances in zero-shot
learning mainly focus on learning better visual-semantic embeddings [ 25,50,16,5] or training
generative models to synthesize features [ 43,44,57,56,18,31]. Those approaches are limited by
their image representations, which are often extracted from ImageNet-pretrained CNNs or ﬁnetuned
CNNs on the target dataset with a cross-entropy loss.
Despite its importance, image representation learning is relatively underexplored in zero-shot learning.
Recently, [ 48] proposes to weigh different local image regions by learning attentions from class
embeddings. [ 58] extends the attention idea to learn multiple channel-wise part attentions. [ 35] shows
the importance of locality and compositionality of image representations for zero-shot learning. In
our work, instead of learning visual attention like [ 58,48], we propose to improve the locality of
image features by learning a prototype network that is able to localize different attributes in an image.
Prototype learning. Unlike softmax-based CNN, prototype networks [ 46,39] learn a metric space
where the labeling is done by calculating the distance between the test image and prototypes of each
class. Prototype learning is considered to be more robust when handling open-set recognition [ 46,32],
out-of-distribution samples [ 3] and few-shot learning [ 33,11,28]. Some methods [ 3,47,23] base the
network decision on learned prototypes. Instead of building sample-based prototypes, [ 8] dissects the
image and ﬁnds several prototypical parts for each object class, then classiﬁes images by combining
evidences from prototypes to improve the model interpretability. Similarly, [ 55] uses the channel
grouping model [52] to learn part-based representations and part prototypes.
In contrast, we treat each channel equally, and use spatial features associated with input image patches
to learn prototypes for attributes. [ 8,58,55] learn latent attention or prototypes during training and the
semantic meaning of the prototypes is inducted by observation in a post-hoc manner, leading to limited
attribute or part localization ability e.g., [ 58] can only localize 2 parts. To address those limitations,
our method learns prototypes that represent the attributes/parts where each prototype corresponds
to a speciﬁc attribute. The attribute prototypes are shared among different classes and encourage
knowledge transfer from seen classes to unseen classes, yielding better image representation for
zero-shot learning.
Locality and representation learning. Local features have been extensively investigated for repre-
sentation learning [ 14,40,27], and are commonly used in person re-identiﬁcation [ 34,38], image
captioning [ 2,22] and ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation [ 52,10,51]. Thanks to its locality-aware archi-
tecture, CNNs [ 13] exploit local information intrinsically. Here we deﬁne the local feature as the
image feature encoded from a local image region. Our work is related to methods that draw attention
over local features [ 17,34]. Zheng et.al. [ 52] generates the attention for discriminative bird parts by
clustering spatially-correlated channels. Instead of operating on feature channels, we focus on the
spatial conﬁguration of image features and improve the locality of our representation.
2