fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 11
Bertl et al. 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
users or integration into clinical processes is often much more
challenging to solve than intelligence of cognition. Still, most
papers focus on cognition, not user interaction; our framework’s
validation dimension is evidence of this. We found 23 papers
evaluating accuracy, which is an evaluation of AI technology,
and ﬁve papers evaluating user acceptance or eﬃcacy, meaning
that they attempted to improve the current clinical process.
Since most papers in our review are of maturity levels 1, 2
or 3 (meaning algorithm research), they do not include the
clinical component necessary for user acceptance and eﬃcacy
evaluation. This shows a research gap when it comes to the
enrichment of clinical processes with IT. The same goes for
evaluating legal and IT-security constraints, which were not
mentioned by any paper in our review. Since eHealth systems
are getting increasingly focused by cyber attacks (66), IT and
data security need to be a vital part of the evaluation to allow
a safe DDSS adoption.
Further research has to be conducted on how the clinical
process needs to be adapted for DDSSs to work, also in
the context of the supported decisions. Most DDSS designers
do not really understand the medical decision process but
provide decisions in an “IT way.” One limitation of this general
hypothesis is that our research focuses solely on DDSS for PTSD.
However, the narrow approach to include only PTSD shows that
even in a very well-scoped area, a DDSS is hard to implement.
Since we used an inductive research approach to design
our framework based on currently available literature, some
important framework dimensions might be missing. One
example is that the framework includes many technical
aspects of the implementations and fewer organizational
and ﬁnancial perspectives. We encourage further research to
include dimensions that describe the adoption of DDSSs in
clinical processes.
Introducing our novel framework for DDSS, we provide a
guide for decision support system evaluation. The framework
is complementary to other healthcare technology evaluation
methods (clinical, organizational, ﬁnancial) and thus supports
the design of comprehensive evaluation systems for DDSSs.
Applying the maturity dimension helped us to examine what
features of a DDSS are present, thereby indicating the steps
to take in order to move up in maturity when developing
decision support systems. Since the framework was developed
out of general considerations, it can be applied to decision
support systems outside of PTSD or mental health. However, it
should be further evaluated to examine whether the terminology
suits other domains. Higher maturity scales in particular need
additional veriﬁcation, since only two papers in our review had
a maturity level above 4.
Conclusion
Our research aimed to analyze existing decision support
systems for PTSD. Based on this goal, we developed a genericframework covering all dimensions of digital decision support
systems. Our framework not only accelerates the development
and benchmarking of DDSSs, but also acts as the foundation
for our systematic literature review. Extracting data for all
framework dimensions ensures consistency in our analysis
and gives a holistic overview of DDSSs. During our review,
we found working DDSS prototypes for PTSD and described
their components. However, most of the systems are not
evaluated in production use; they are only algorithmic models
based on secondary datasets. This shows that there is still a
gap between technical possibilities and actual clinical work.
We proposed some possible explanations: small sample size,
missing domain expertise, lack of focus to bring research to
production. However, this gap should be analyzed further
by testing our hypothesis and examining it with data from
research on DDSSs for other mental diseases. For now, we
conclude that only a few rare DDSSs for PTSD are ready
for large-scale adoption in healthcare. The long-promised
revolution of AI and ML for diagnosis in psychiatry, at least for
PTSD, is yet to come.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in this study are
included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries
can be directed to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
MB: conceptualization, methodology, investigation,
resources, data curation, and writing – original draft. JM:
investigation, data curation, and writing – original draft.
PR: writing, review, editing, and supervision. All authors
contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of
interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
Frontiers in Psychiatry 11 frontiersin.org