fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 2
Bertl et al. 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
Introduction
According to Sauter, Digital Decision Support Systems
(DDSSs) are computer-based systems that bring together
information from various sources, assist in the organization
and analysis of information and facilitate the evaluation
of assumptions underlying the use of speciﬁc models (1).
The concept of decision support systems originated in the
1960s (2) when researchers began to study computerized
methods to assist in decision-making (3–5). Since then,
the idea has extended throughout a broad spectrum of
domains, one of which is healthcare. This work focuses on
decision support systems in mental health, more precisely
on decision support systems for PTSD. The American
Psychiatric Association deﬁnes PTSD as “a psychiatric
disorder that can occur in people who have experienced
or witnessed a traumatic event such as a natural disaster, a
serious accident, a terrorist act, war/combat, rape or other
violent personal assault” (6). People with PTSD experience
recurrent thoughts about their traumatic experience that
inﬂuence their daily life. The lifetime prevalence of PTSD is
around 12.5% (7). However, people suﬀering from PTSD are
often undiagnosed or misdiagnosed, resulting in incorrect,
incomplete or missing treatment (8). To investigate whether
DDSSs could be a solution to this problem, we aim to
review available decision support systems for PTSD and
map their technological approaches in order to understand
possible research gaps and obstacles in introducing decision
support systems to clinical processes. Since no available
reference architecture for decision support systems is
applicable to our research, we contribute by introducing
a novel framework for decision support systems that can
be used to analyze existing systems. Ultimately, this also
accelerates the development of new systems by highlighting
essential dimensions.
Designers of earlier DDSSs have applied multiple alternative
approaches for converting real-world data into something
that stimulates better decisions. Information-management-
based DDSSs try to organize data into usable presentations;
modeling-(or data-analytics)-based DDSSs attempt to apply
statistical (learning) methods for ﬁnding patterns or calculating
indicators; and knowledge-management-based systems
apply externally prepared algorithms (expert rules) to ﬁnd
matching data or derive new facts (9). While AI has been
an essential element of DDSSs throughout its history,
only recently has a new generation of decision support
been facilitated by the availability of powerful computing
tools to properly manage big data and to analyze and
generate new knowledge. The evaluation of AI’s earlier
implementations was limited to the design and development
phase; machine learning-based algorithms often do not
generalize beyond the training data set (10). However,
studies have still shown the beneﬁts of machine learningalgorithms in DDSSs (11–13). Current studies that test
the application of healthcare AI algorithms often omit
details of DDSS tools that apply AI models. A well-designed
DDSS is likely to enable the real-world application of AI
technology (14).
This review aims to contribute by introducing a framework
for the features of DDSS implementation in mental health.
We aim to identify the prevalent features of the current state
of research on DDSS. Often, the development of information
systems involves the continuous introduction of new features
and quality improvements. We hypothesized that each available
article presents only a selection of features, a selection which
is dependent on the maturity of the DDSS. Maturity models
are increasingly used as a means of benchmarking or self-
assessment of development (15). In healthcare informatics,
many maturity models are available [e.g., Hospital Information
System Maturity Model (16)], but none of these models strictly
provides an informed approach for the assessment of research
on decision support systems (17). The available maturity models
instead tend to look at the level of organizational adoption
of speciﬁc technologies (e.g., how much an organization
values data analytics technology) and provide little support
for deciding on the readiness of DDSS tools in their early
phases of development. As AI is often an essential element of
a DDSS, we also explored AI maturity models. AI maturity
models mostly look into the level of AI adoption in an
organization rather than the maturity of the AI technology itself
(18–20).
A DDSS is not a single technology but rather a set of
integrated technologies (21–25). Sauser et al. (26) suggested
a measure of System Readiness Level (SRL), which expresses
the level of maturity of a system consisting of a set of
integrated technologies (26). Exploring AI technology
readiness or maturity, we encountered suggestions to look
separately into the AI system’s capacities of integrating
existing data sources (machine-machine intelligence),
interacting with human users (human-computer intelligence)
and applying intelligent reasoning (core cognitive
intelligence) (27).
Methods
To have a transparent and objective approach for this
literature review, we decided to apply the ﬁve stages suggested by
Kitchenham’s “Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature
Reviews in Software Engineering” (28):
(1) Search Strategy
(2) Study Selection
(3) Study Quality Assessment
(4) Data Extraction
(5) Data Synthesis
Frontiers in Psychiatry 02 frontiersin.org