fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 1
TYPE Systematic Review
PUBLISHED 09 August 2022
DOI10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Oswald David Kothgassner,
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
REVIEWED BY
Weihui Li,
Central South University, China
Karin Waldherr,
Ferdinand Porsche FernFH – Distance
Learning University of Applied
Sciences, Austria
*CORRESPONDENCE
Markus Bertl
mbertl@taltech.ee
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Digital Mental Health,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
RECEIVED 19 April 2022
ACCEPTED 15 July 2022
PUBLISHED 09 August 2022
CITATION
Bertl M, Metsallik J and Ross P (2022) A
systematic literature review
of AI-based digital decision support
systems for post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Front. Psychiatry 13:923613.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
COPYRIGHT
© 2022 Bertl, Metsallik and Ross. This
is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.A systematic literature review of
AI-based digital decision
support systems for
post-traumatic stress disorder
Markus Bertl *, Janek Metsallik and Peeter Ross
Department of Health Technologies, School of Information Technologies, Tallinn University
of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia
Objective: Over the last decade, an increase in research on medical decision
support systems has been observed. However, compared to other disciplines,
decision support systems in mental health are still in the minority, especially
for rare diseases like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). We aim to provide
a comprehensive analysis of state-of-the-art digital decision support systems
(DDSSs) for PTSD.
Methods: Based on our systematic literature review of DDSSs for PTSD, we
created an analytical framework using thematic analysis for feature extraction
and quantitative analysis for the literature. Based on this framework, we
extracted information around the medical domain of DDSSs, the data used,
the technology used for data collection, user interaction, decision-making,
user groups, validation, decision type and maturity level. Extracting data for all
of these framework dimensions ensures consistency in our analysis and gives
a holistic overview of DDSSs.
Results: Research on DDSSs for PTSD is rare and primarily deals with the
algorithmic part of DDSSs (n = 17). Only one DDSS was found to be a
usable product. From a data perspective, mostly checklists or questionnaires
were used (n = 9). While the median sample size of 151 was rather low,
the average accuracy was 82%. Validation, excluding algorithmic accuracy
(like user acceptance), was mostly neglected, as was an analysis concerning
possible user groups.
Conclusion: Based on a systematic literature review, we developed a
framework covering all parts (medical domain, data used, technology used
for data collection, user interaction, decision-making, user groups, validation,
decision type and maturity level) of DDSSs. Our framework was then used
to analyze DDSSs for post-traumatic stress disorder. We found that DDSSs
are not ready-to-use products but are mostly algorithms based on secondary
datasets. This shows that there is still a gap between technical possibilities and
real-world clinical work.
KEYWORDS
decision support systems (DSS), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), systematic literature review (SLR), clinical
decision support (CDS), psychiatry, mental health
Frontiers in Psychiatry 01 frontiersin.org