fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 5
Bertl et al. 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
Technology: The technology dimension describes how the
decision support system is implemented. This involves three
sub-dimensions:
Decision technology: The decision technology explains
the intelligence of the cognition of the system. This is
the algorithm that powers the decision-making. Examples
are diﬀerent machine learning algorithms such as support
vector machines or other statistical methods as well as
rule-based approaches.
Interaction technology: This sub-dimension describes
the technology needed to interact with other systems or
user groups in the clinical process. Interaction technology
can be API-based interfaces to systems, graphical user
interfaces (websites, mobile apps) or sensory input like
conversational interfaces (chatbots).
Data collection technology: The data collection
technology sub-dimension deﬁnes how the data described
in the input data dimension are collected. Examples are
instance sensors, questionnaires or chatbots.
Validation: Validation describes how the success of decision
support systems is measured.
Accuracy: The decision support system is evaluated by
how many right or wrong decisions it makes. Examples
are accuracy, recall (sensitivity), precision, speciﬁcity, area
under the curve (AUC) values and F1 scores (harmonic
mean of recall and precision).
User acceptance: End-users are involved in the
evaluation of the DDSS.
Eﬃcacy: The impact of the decision support system is
evaluated based on potential beneﬁts.
Security: The DDSS is evaluated against
security regulations.
Legal: The legal compliance of the DDSS is evaluated.
User group: This dimension captures the diﬀerent user
groups interacting with the decision support system in the
clinical process.TABLE 3 Extraction questions (EQ).
# Extraction parameters
EQ1 On the basis of which input data do existing decision
support systems in mental health operate?
EQ1.2 What was the data sample size?
EQ2 What is the implementation technology of the DDSS?
EQ2.1 Decision technology
EQ2.2 User Interaction/Interface/Application
EQ2.3 Data collection technology
EQ3 What feature was validated?
EQ4 Which user groups are involved in the use of DDSS in
mental health?
EQ5 What diseases are currently targeted by DDSS in mental
health?
EQ6 What decisions are supported by the system?
EQ7 What maturity level does the DDSS have?
Medical domain: The medical domain dimension describes the
disease for which the decision support system can be applied.
Decision: The following scale deﬁnes the decisions a digital
decision support system can support:
Prediction: The system outputs a risk score based on the
likelihood that someone gets a disease.
Assessment: The patient is already sick (knowingly
or unknowingly).
Diagnosis: Testing individuals with symptoms
and/or suspicion of illness
Screening: Testing for individuals without speciﬁc
symptoms
Monitoring: Decision support that evaluates
symptom severity or treatment progress
Treatment: Recommendation or intervention
concerning care or therapy
Maturity: As none of the existing maturity models ﬁts our
research, we designed a DDSS maturity model based on the SLR
scale (26), but with adaptions speciﬁc to healthcare. It introduces
additional gradation for noticing the moment where human
interaction is added to the core AI algorithm. Our maturity
30 papersClustering of 
available 
information on 
decision support 
systems
Extraction 
parameterExtracting the 
terminology to 
each dimensionIterative grouping 
of the extracted 
terminology
Scales to the 
extraction 
parameterCombining 
extraction 
parameter and 
scalesDigital Decision 
Support 
Framework
FIGURE 2
Extraction process.
Frontiers in Psychiatry 05 frontiersin.org