fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 8
Bertl et al. 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
FIGURE 4
Sample size distribution.
papers investigated the diagnosis of PTSD (37, 41, 52, 60) and
ﬁve focused on monitoring PTSD (33, 35, 56, 58, 59).
Data synthesis maturity level (EQ7)
The decision support systems were ranked according to the
maturity scale described in see section “a framework for digital
decision support systems.” As stated by answering research
question two, the majority of papers work with secondary data.
This is supported by the high volume of research with a maturity
level of two. Figure 8 shows the number of articles grouped
by maturity level.
Discussion
This research highlights the state of the art in digital decision
support systems for PTSD based on our proposed framework.
We developed the framework to ensure a holistic overview of all
features of a DDSS. The dimensions of the framework represent
the topics of interest and the choice of features is based on
the conceptualization of the terminology extracted from the
included articles dimension by dimension.Concerning the data dimension, we noticed that
questionnaires and checklists are still the most common
and most mature (see Figure 6) input for decision support
systems. When examining clinical guidelines like NICE (64)
for diagnosing PTSD, questionnaires and checklists are still the
only approach mentioned for diagnostics. Even though some
new technologies, such as virtual or augmented reality, were
investigated in the research found in this review, we noticed
an absence of input parameters based on smartphones or
wearables like GPS sensors or accelerometers. We hypothesize
that this is due to the short life cycle of modern technologies,
making it diﬃcult to oﬀer clinical evidence of their beneﬁts.
Questionnaires and checklists, however, have been around
for many years and the methodology for administering
them has not changed, therefore there is more scientiﬁc
evidence of their use. Researchers and medical professionals
are more likely to research, invest and adopt technology
with strong evidence. This could be another reason why
DDSSs using new technology are not widely included in
clinical processes.
The data dimension also showed that the sample size is
on average small and the statistical signiﬁcance of the results
was not proven by the majority of the research articles. Several
reasons contribute to this. In general, medical data are hard to
obtain for research because secondary use is still not easy with
Frontiers in Psychiatry 08 frontiersin.org