fpsyt-13-923613 August 5, 2022 Time: 11:27 # 3
Bertl et al. 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.923613
Research questions
Since our aim is to understand current research on decision
support systems for PTSD, this paper is based on two research
questions. First, we look for state-of-the-art decision support
systems for post-traumatic stress disorder (RQ1). Second, we
investigate the component elements of current decision support
systems for PTSD (RQ2).
Search strategy
We built a search string based on the research questions
identiﬁed and applied it to the Scopus abstract and citation
database. Scopus was chosen as the primary source because
it is the largest abstract and citation database of research
literature with 100% MEDLINE coverage (29). The initial search
string consisted of the disease to investigate – post-traumatic
stress disorder – its abbreviation PTSD as well as the term
“decision support.” To ﬁnd papers that covered the prediction
and classiﬁcation of PTSD, we also added Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
In Scopus, we applied the search string to the title, abstract and
tags of the research papers. We restricted our search to only
include journal articles or conference proceedings in English.
We also conducted a manual search using Google Scholar and
the web to ﬁnd additional research; however, this did not bring
up any new articles not already covered by our database search
and our reference screening process. We formed our search
criteria as (“decision support” OR “Artiﬁcial Intelligence”) AND
[PTSD OR (post AND traumatic AND stress AND disorder)].
We conducted the search in Scopus on 3 March 2021.
It resulted in 75 papers; reference screening of the included
literature brought up an additional 13 papers. Our search
process is visualized in Figure 1.
Study selection
The titles and abstracts of the queried articles were analyzed
to identify relevant articles from the results of the search string
queries. Articles ﬁtting the research questions and meeting the
inclusion criteria (see section “inclusion criteria”) as well as the
quality criteria (see section “study quality assessment”) were
included. Since the goal of this research is to give an overview
of the state of the art, we did not put any constraints on
study types and designs. To reduce bias in the study selection
process, the task was done by two researchers independently.
The two result sets were then merged and deviations were
discussed among the authors. This resulted in a total set of 17
research papers.
We then repeated this process step to extract relevant studies
from the reference lists of the selected articles. This resulted in
13 new research papers.Inclusion criteria
Table 1 presents the inclusion criteria applied to the articles
in our review (Inclusion criteria).
Study quality assessment
Table 2 presents the inclusion criteria applied to the articles
in our review (Quality criteria).
Data extraction and synthesis
Data extraction and synthesis were based on an inductive
approach. We applied thematic analysis (30) to answer our
research questions. First, clear, scoped questions for data
extraction were formed. Two researchers read through all
the articles and iteratively clustered all of the information
available on decision support systems into the extraction
parameters. These extraction parameters describe how
decision support systems work. This process is shown in
Figure 2.
The answers extracted from the EQs (see Table 3) were then
combined upon the agreement of the authors to create a feature
matrix. The extracted features were then further clustered to
create a common terminology that allows further analysis and
the possibility to compare results. In the end, we combined the
developed extraction questions and the clustered scales of each
question into a novel framework for decision support systems
in mental health.
Results
The selected 30 research articles (31–60) were published
between 2001 and 2019. Three articles were published in
journals about medical informatics, 10 in computer science
journals or proceedings and 17 in medical journals. The
following table shows how often each extraction parameter
was present and indicates the terminology used in the selected
studies. The terminology shown in Table 4 was developed by
manual, iterative clustering of the extracted features until the
authors were satisﬁed with the granularity.
A framework for digital decision
support systems
Based on our aim to ﬁnd all relevant features of decision
support systems in the PTSD area and our systematic literature
review results, we propose a multidimensional framework
that covers the diﬀerent areas of DDSS. Each dimension
represents one of our extraction parameters. Figure 3 illustrates
our framework with the diﬀerent dimensions of DDSSs.
Based on the extracted data, we clustered the terminology
Frontiers in Psychiatry 03 frontiersin.org