Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 10662 3 of 18
learners. Therefore, we trained the CNN model from scratch instead of the transfer
learning paradigm used in other work [ 10,13–15]. Although the cell image features may
differ signiﬁcantly from natural images, a network trained from scratch on cell images may
converge to a better solution. To improve the quality and quantity of available datasets,
a number of preprocessing methods are used including data augmentation to improve the
generalizability and class balancing to avoid overﬁtting or bias incorporation due to dataset.
In this work, we proposed an attention-based CNN to address the task of categorization of
ALL and healthy cell images. The designed deep learning model is trained from scratch on
the preprocessed dataset to obtain parameter values that are most relevant and provide
better convergence for the network.
2. Related Work
2.1. Conventional Machine Learning Algorithms
Joshi et al. [ 16] developed a method for the segmentation and classiﬁcation of white
blood cells. For the preprocessing of microscopic blood images, they used histogram
equalization and contrast enhancement. In addition, to extract white blood cells, they
used the Otsu thresholding segmentation. The extracted features were given to K nearest
neighbor (KNN) clustering to categorize the blood images into normal and blast cells.
The proposed method was tested on 108 images of peripheral blood smears from a publicly
available dataset.
Another unsupervised segmentation method was developed by Mohapatra et al. [ 17]
based on color scheme clustering for the classiﬁcation of leukemia. A two-stage color
segmentation approach based on fuzzy logic was used to differentiate leukocytes from
other constituents of the blood. The authors extracted the features like the fractal di-
mension, shape, texture, and the signature of the contour. Their proposed method used
270 images for the classiﬁcation of ALL. MoradiAmin et al. [ 7] proposed an enhanced
method for ALL recognition. In this method, they utilized fuzzy c-means clustering for
the segmentation of lymphocytes. After feature extraction, they used principal component
analysis (PCA) to reduce the features and fed them to the support vector machine (SVM)
classiﬁer to distinguish between normal and blast cells. They conducted their experiment
on 958 images.
Putzu et al. [ 18] proposed a method that isolates the leukocytes from a microscopic
image and further distinguishes the nuclei and cytoplasm from the leukocytes. They
trained different classiﬁcation models and extracted shape, color, and texture features to
determine which model is best suitable for leukemia classiﬁcation. They used 368 images
and tested several classiﬁers for classiﬁcation purposes. Based on the classiﬁcation accuracy
they found that SVM with a Gaussian radial basis kernel outperforms other classiﬁers.
Singhal et al. [ 19] developed an automatic detection algorithm for ALL based on local
binary pattern (LBP) and geometric texture features. Their proposed model used a small
dataset composed of 368 images for features extraction and these features are then fed to
SVM for binary classiﬁcation. Patel et al. [ 20] proposed a method for automatic detection of
leukemia from 108 microscopic images. They applied some ﬁltering techniques to extract
the important parts from images and then K-means clustering was used to produce the
binary clusters. For classiﬁcation purposes, they used an SVM classiﬁer to distinguish
between healthy and malignant cells. Karthikeyan et al. [ 21] came up with a novel idea for
leukemia detection using stained blood microscopic images. They used the median ﬁlter
and histogram equalization for image preprocessing. For segmentation purposes, they used
fuzzy c-means and SVM to classify the leukemia cells into normal and malignant classes.
They used 19 microscopic images for leukemia cancer classiﬁcation. Another segmentation
and classiﬁcation method proposed by Mohammad et al. [ 22] involves the transformation
of grayscale images to color space YCbCr. Then they computed the Gaussian distribution
on each color and calculated a number of features like texture, scale, and morphology.
These features are then given as input to the random forest classiﬁer. They used a dataset
of 105 images to train their model for WBCs classiﬁcation.