Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 10662 4 of 18
A signiﬁcant drawback of these methods is they used small datasets to classify ALL
cell images. A classiﬁer trained on a small dataset is more vulnerable to overﬁtting and
may not give an optimal result. The used datasets in the literature vary from 19 to 958
images. Another drawback is that these researchers used conventional machine learning
algorithms (SVM, KNN, K-means clustering), which use handcrafted features that may
not be an optimal set of features for classiﬁcation. All these drawbacks can limit the ﬁnal
performance. Thus, there is still a need to devise high-performance algorithms based on a
larger dataset and extract features using an automated technique to diagnose ALL with
better accuracy.
2.2. Deep Learning-Based Methods
With the emergence of deep neural networks, we can achieve better performance in
computer vision. A deep neural network can automatically extract task-speciﬁc features us-
ing two-dimensional convolutional ﬁlters to overcome the problem of predeﬁned features.
Deep neural networks are widely utilized in the ﬁeld of computer vision, especially for
medical image analysis, such as disease classiﬁcation [ 23], localization [ 24], detection [ 25],
registration [ 26], and segmentation [ 27,28]. However, the performance of a deep neural
network depends on the size of the dataset, but unfortunately, it is hard to get a larger
dataset for medical image analysis. In order to deal with small dataset transfer, learning
strategy and data augmentation can be used to overcome the problem of the limited dataset.
Rehman et al. [ 29] used a pre-trained AlexNet and ﬁne-tuning to identify ALL subtypes on
a private dataset composed of 330 images. Shaﬁque et al. [ 30] proposed a deep CNN to clas-
sify all four subtypes of leukemia. To avoid training from scratch they used a pre-trained
AlexNet to perform binary classiﬁcation on 368 images. A classiﬁcation model focused on
both transfer learning and deep learning was proposed by Habibzadeh et al. [ 31] for WBC
classiﬁcation. The proposed approach began with preprocessing of the dataset and then
employed transfer learning for feature extraction. Finally, the Inception and ResNet were
used to perform WBCs classiﬁcation. Their proposed model used 352 images for WBC
classiﬁcation. Ahmad et al. [ 32] proposed a CNN model that recognizes all subtypes of
leukemia. Initially, they used 903 images for classiﬁcation of ALL subtypes. They also
used seven distinct data augmentation techniques to enhance the dataset size. In compari-
son to CNN, they also investigated other machine learning algorithms like decision tree
(DT), SVM, Naïve Bayes, and KNN and found that CNN outperforms all other methods.
Wang et al. [ 33] used SVM to identify spatial features and then suggested a neural network
with marker-based learning vector quantization to detect and classify ALL cells. They
used 24 samples (16 out of 27 ALL patients and 8 normal samples with no clinical history
of leukemia) to train their proposed method for ALL diagnosis. Pansombut et al. [ 34]
proposed a new method to identify ALL and its subtypes using a CNN network called
ConVNet. They evaluated their model with other machine learning algorithms such as
SVM, multilayer perceptron (MLP) and random forest. They used two types of datasets,
one for ConVNet and the other for feature extraction. The overall dataset consists of
363 images.
Again, here is the problem of a limited number of images as many researchers used
a tiny dataset consisting of 24 to 903 images. The performance results of such a small
dataset cannot be considered an optimal performance indicator for medical image analysis.
On the other hand, classiﬁcation becomes extremely difﬁcult when dealing with small
datasets, which results in an incorrect and biased classiﬁcation model [ 22]. In addition,
using pre-trained models for classiﬁcation needs to adjust the input image’s size according
to the predeﬁned input shape of the networks, which can alter the morphology of ALL
cell images [ 35]. It is difﬁcult to classify ALL cell images because these leukocytes are
challenging to detect due to their high intraclass homogeneity and low interclass separa-
bility. Furthermore, they used transfer learning or ﬁne-tuning of deep neural networks
for ALL classiﬁcation. A model trained on non-medical images and used for medical
image classiﬁcation may not achieve optimal results because the cell image features may