Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 10662 10 of 18
Human biological processes are the best approaches to demonstrate the intuition
behind attention. For example, in order to assist perception, our visual processing system
selectively focuses on speciﬁc portions of the image regardless of extraneous informa-
tion [ 53]. The ECA module extracts the information from each channel of VGG16 results
in a weighted sum of all the aggregated features. This allows the deep learning model to
assign greater weight to certain elements of the input images. In Section 4.2 we show the
feature maps generated by our proposed method clearly presented that our model focused
on the cell itself rather than the image background. Attention modules are used to help
CNN learn and to focus on more important features, instead of learning non-useful context
knowledge. In order to learn more deep features, ECA has been employed after every
VGG16 block. The ECA module helps to avoid feature dimensionality reduction caused by
the convolutional block which inevitably brings side effects and is conducive to capturing
the dependency between the channels. The ECA module only involves few parameters
to explores the local cross-channel interaction by implementing a 1 1 convolution via
adaptive selection of the kernel size k. In our proposed model we used k= 9 extra parame-
ters with our backbone VGG16 following the original ECA paper. Gradient descent is also
utilized to optimize these parameters. ECA module can increase the information interac-
tion between channels of the feature maps, reduce the model complexity, and maintains
the performance.
Figure 5. The ECA module takes the feature map, which is the output of a convolutional block
and is 3-dimensional in shape (W HC). W, H, and C represent the width, height, and number
of the feature map channels. The GAP reduces the dimensionality of the input feature map into 1
1C. Then the ECA module explores the local cross-channel interaction by implementing a 1
1 convolution via an adaptive selection of the kernel size k. After passing through the sigmoid
function, the output channel weights of dimension 1 1C are used to reﬁne the input feature
map via element-wise product. Finally, the reﬁned feature map is used as the input of the next
convolutional block.
After the global average pooling (GAP), the ECA module considers each channel of
the input feature maps and its knearest neighbors, and quickly completes the channel
weight calculation through one-dimensional convolution. Where krepresents the number
of neighboring channels involved in the calculation of a channel weight, and the value of k
affects the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the ECA. The ECA module helps to adaptively
compute kvia a function of channel dimension C, and then performs 1D convolution
followed by a sigmoid function to learn channel attention.
3.5. Experimental Setting
In our experiments, we resized the cell images to 224 224 resolution. The learning
rate was set to 0.0001 with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimization and the network
is trained for 50 epochs. The batch size is set as 16 in the training process. The cross entropy
loss function is used as a loss function to train our model. The software environment used