Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 10662 5 of 18
differ signiﬁcantly from natural images. A model trained from scratch on cell images may
converge to a better solution.
Currently some researchers used a larger dataset for the classification of ALL. Kasani et al. [ 36]
proposed an aggregated-based deep learning-based model for the classification of ALL. They
used fine-tuning and transfer learning to propose an ensemble model based on VGG19 and
NasNetLarge architecture. Kassani et al. [ 37] proposed a hybrid model based on VGG16 and
MobileNet for the classification of ALL cell images. Global average pooling (GAP) was used
between VGG16 and MobileNet to extract high-level features from ALL cell images. LeukoNet
was proposed by Mourya et al. [ 38] for the classification of ALL cell images. The proposed model
combines the discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain features extracted using CNN with the
optical density (OD) space features to build an effective classifier. Although these researchers used
the C-NMC 2019 dataset composed of more than 10,000 images, but they did not segregate the
training data based on subject-level variability . Instead, the classifier was trained by combining
all of the subject’s data into healthy and cancer classes. Because subject-specific features help in
class discrimination, this pooling can restrict the classifier’s performance. As a result, a practical
classifier would require training on data from certain subjects and testing using data from entirely
unknown subjects. In this paper we used the C-NMC 2019 dataset for the diagnosis of ALL.
The cell images in the C-NMC dataset are selected carefully based on subject-level variability .
In order to get more robust results, we split the dataset into seven-fold cross-validation so that
no two splits overlap in terms of subject data. This strategy also ensures that none of the cell
images of a subject used in training were used to test the classifier. In comparison to other ALL
datasets such as the ispat general hospital (IGH) [17], ALL image database for image processing
(ALL-IDB) [ 39], medical image and signal processing research center (MISP) [ 22], and American
society of hematology (ASH) [ 32], the C-NMC 2019 dataset has a substantially more significant
number of images, which can aid in the development of a robust and scalable ALL diagnostic
classifier. Our proposed simple model uses an attention module to refine features more and
overcome the problem of morphological similarity bringing more reliability to the results and
thus classifying the images as healthy or not. T o the best of our knowledge, we are the first to use
the attention module with a CNN model for ALL classification.
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Dataset Description
We have used the publicly available dataset C-NMC 2019. The dataset is released by
the cancer imaging archive (TCIA) for the ALL challenge competition. The objective of this
competition is to create a computer-aided design (CAD) system to differentiate the normal
cells from the leukemic blast (malignant cells) in microscopic images of blood clotting.
Both training and test images have been processed to 24-bit RGB format with a consistent
resolution of 450 450 pixels. Errors in lighting, uneven staining, and image noise have
been resolved using the methods given by [ 11,12]. The images in this dataset were labeled
as normal or malignant by an experienced oncologist. The dataset consists of 10,661 single
cell images collected from 76 individual subjects, whereas 7272 images were taken from
47 patients having ALL, and the rest 3389 were taken from 26 healthy subjects. The C-NMC
dataset includes a considerably large number of images that can help in designing a robust
diagnostic ALL classiﬁer. In our experiment, the dataset is divided into 7 folds based on
subject-level variability as shown in Table 1. To avoid overﬁtting and to make the dataset
balanced, we applied different data augmentation techniques.