Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 10662 2 of 18
stage. According to the key statistics about ALL, in 2021 more than 5690 cases of ALL
are identiﬁed in the United States only [ 4] and out of which more than 1550 people are
anticipated to die including both youngsters and adults. If leukemia, and especially ALL
is diagnosed in its early stages, it is easily curable. The symptoms of leukemia are similar
to other diseases like anemia, joint pain, fever, weakness, and bone pain, which is why the
diagnosis of leukemia sometimes becomes difﬁcult.
There are a number of invasive methods which are usually used by hematologists
to diagnose the disease. Generally, a biopsy is done which is an invasive method that is
done by conducting tests on blood, bone marrow or spinal ﬂuid [ 5]. These methods are
painful, costly, and time-consuming. In these checkups, the medical specialist examines if
the quantity of WBCs is sufﬁciently high and there are other relevant physical observations
then it is highly likely the presence of ALL. These manual and expert-speciﬁc methods are
also prone to error as the results of such methods are highly dependent on the knowledge
and skills of the expert conducting the analysis [ 6]. To avoid the complexities involved with
such invasive methods, and to provide faster, safe, and cost-effective solutions, medical
image analysis-based techniques are employed. Image processing and computer vision-
based methods are easy to generalize and eliminate the error of human factor.
The image-based analysis can easily be done by radiologists. Such methods can
provide beneﬁt in a way that these are non-invasive however they do suffer from the same
issues as invasive methods. The manual analysis by radiologists becomes burdensome,
error-prone, and tremendously tedious when human experts are required to analyze
the large datasets consisting of hundreds and thousands of medical images. Inherent
overlapping features like morphology and texture in medical, especially histopathology
images make the task harder. This fact is shown clearly in Figure 1, where images of ALL
cancer and healthy cells are given. One can observe that these leukocytes are difﬁcult to
detect and classify due to their high intraclass homogeneity and low interclass separability.
Consequently, developing accurate and reliable methodologies for leukemia recognition
is important for timely diagnosis and early treatment. However, in general, ALL cancer
cells differ from healthy cells on the basis of various factors including morphology, cell
size, shape, and texture [ 7]. A computational classiﬁer can use any of these distinguishing
features to distinguish ALL cancer and healthy cell images.
Figure 1. ALL cell image samples from C-NMC 2019 dataset [ 8–12]. Images ( A–C) show ALL cancer
cell images while ( D–F) show healthy cell images.
To remove the aforementioned issues associated with invasiveness and human experts,
a fully automated solution based on convolutional neural networks is proposed in this
work. The features associated with the dataset play a vital role for statistical, computational