Published in the Elsevier journal “Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena”, Volume 404, March 2020:
Special Issue on Machine Learning and Dynamical Systems
Fundamentals of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Network
Alex Sherstinsky
shers@alum.mit.edu
https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexsherstinsky
Abstract
Because of their effectiveness in broad practical applications, LSTM networks have received a wealth of coverage in scientific
journals, technical blogs, and implementation guides. However, in most articles, the inference formulas for the LSTM network
and its parent, RNN, are stated axiomatically, while the training formulas are omitted altogether. In addition, the technique of
“unrolling” an RNN is routinely presented without justification throughout the literature. The goal of this tutorial is to explain the
essential RNN and LSTM fundamentals in a single document. Drawing from concepts in Signal Processing, we formally derive
the canonical RNN formulation from differential equations. We then propose and prove a precise statement, which yields the RNN
unrolling technique. We also review the difficulties with training the standard RNN and address them by transforming the RNN
into the “Vanilla LSTM”1network through a series of logical arguments. We provide all equations pertaining to the LSTM system
together with detailed descriptions of its constituent entities. Albeit unconventional, our choice of notation and the method for
presenting the LSTM system emphasizes ease of understanding. As part of the analysis, we identify new opportunities to enrich
the LSTM system and incorporate these extensions into the Vanilla LSTM network, producing the most general LSTM variant to
date. The target reader has already been exposed to RNNs and LSTM networks through numerous available resources and is open
to an alternative pedagogical approach. A Machine Learning practitioner seeking guidance for implementing our new augmented
LSTM model in software for experimentation and research will find the insights and derivations in this treatise valuable as well.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Since the original 1997 LSTM paper [21], numerous theoretical and experimental works have been published on the subject
of this type of an RNN, many of them reporting on the astounding results achieved across a wide variety of application
domains where data is sequential. The impact of the LSTM network has been notable in language modeling, speech-to-text
transcription, machine translation, and other applications [31]. Inspired by the impressive benchmarks reported in the literature,
some readers in academic and industrial settings decide to learn about the Long Short-Term Memory network (henceforth, “the
LSTM network”) in order to gauge its applicability to their own research or practical use-case. All major open source machine
learning frameworks offer efficient, production-ready implementations of a number of RNN and LSTM network architectures.
Naturally, some practitioners, even if new to the RNN/LSTM systems, take advantage of this access and cost-effectiveness and
proceed straight to development and experimentation. Others seek to understand every aspect of the operation of this elegant
and effective system in greater depth. The advantage of this lengthier path is that it affords an opportunity to build a certain
degree of intuition that can prove beneficial during all phases of the process of incorporating an open source module to suit
the needs of their research effort or a business application, preparing the dataset, troubleshooting, and tuning.
In a common scenario, this undertaking balloons into reading numerous papers, blog posts, and implementation guides in search
of an “A through Z” understanding of the key principles and functions of the system, only to find out that, unfortunately, most
of the resources leave one or more of the key questions about the basics unanswered. For example, the Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), which is the general class of a neural network that is the predecessor to and includes the LSTM network
as a special case, is routinely simply stated without precedent, and unrolling is presented without justification. Moreover, the
training equations are often omitted altogether, leaving the reader puzzled and searching for more resources, while having to
reconcile disparate notation used therein. Even the most oft-cited and celebrated primers to date have fallen short of providing
a comprehensive introduction. The combination of descriptions and colorful diagrams alone is not actionable, if the architecture
description is incomplete, or if important components and formulas are absent, or if certain core concepts are left unexplained.
As of the timeframe of this writing, a single self-contained primer that provides a clear and concise explanation of the Vanilla
LSTM computational cell with well-labeled and logically composed schematics that go hand-in-hand with the formulas is still
1The nickname “Vanilla LSTM” symbolizes this model’s flexibility and generality [17].
1arXiv:1808.03314v10  [cs.LG]  31 Jul 2023