Finally,dE
dΘ, the total derivative of the objective function, E, with respect to the model parameters, Θ, for the entire unrolled
sequence is computed by Equation 172. Aggregated over a batch of segments,dE
dΘis plugged in to the Gradient Descent
training algorithm for learning the model parameters, Θ.
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the fundamentals of the RNN and the LSTM network using a principled approach. Starting with the
differential equations encountered in many branches of science and engineering, we showed that the canonical formulation of
the RNN can be obtained by sampling delay differential equations used to model processes in physics, life sciences, and neural
networks. We proceeded to obtain the standard RNN formulation by appropriately choosing the parameters of the canonical
RNN equations and applying stability considerations. We then formally explained RNN unrolling within the framework of
approximating an IIR system by an FIR model and proved the sufficient conditions for its applicability to learning sequences.
Next, we presented the training of the standard RNN using Back Propagation Through Time, segueing to the review of
the vanishing and exploding gradients, the well-known numerical difficulties, associated with training the standard RNN by
Gradient Descent. We subsequently addressed the shortcomings of the standard RNN by morphing the canonical RNN system
into the more robust LSTM network through a series of extensions and embellishments. In addition to the logical construction
of the Vanilla LSTM network from the canonical RNN, we included a self-contained overview of the Vanilla LSTM network,
complete with the specifications of all principal entities as well as clear, descriptive, yet concise, presentations of the forward
pass and, importantly, the backward pass, without skipping any steps. The main contribution up to this point has been our unique
pedagogical approach for analyzing the RNN and Vanilla LSTM systems from the Signal Processing perspective, a formal
derivation of the RNN unrolling procedure, and a thorough treatment using a descriptive and meaningful notation, aimed at
demystifying the underlying concepts. Moreover, as an unexpected benefit of our analysis, we identified two novel extensions to
the Vanilla LSTM network: the convolutional non-causal input context windows and the external input gate. We then augmented
the equations for the LSTM cell with these extensions (along with the recurrent projection layer, previously introduced by
another researcher team). Candidate recommendations for future work include implementing the Augmented LSTM system
within a high-performance computing environment and benchmarking its efficacy in multiple practical scenarios. The use of
the Augmented LSTM could potentially benefit the language representation subsystems used in question answering and in
automating customer support. For these applications, it will be important to evaluate the performance impact, attributed to the
non-causal input context windows, as compared to the different baselines, such the Vanilla LSTM network, the bi-directional
LSTM network, the Transformer, and other state-of-the-art models. Also of particular relevance to this use case will be to
measure the effectiveness of the external input gate in helping to eliminate the non-essential content from the input sequences.
Finally, adopting the Augmented LSTM network to other practical domains and publishing the results is respectfully encouraged.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Eugene Mandel for long-time collaboration and engaging discussions, which were instrumental in clarifying
the key concepts, as well as for his encouragement and support. Tremendous gratitude is expressed to Tom Minka for providing
helpful critique and valuable comments and to Mike Singer for reviewing the proposition and correcting errors in the proof.
Big thanks go to Varuna Jayasiri, Eduardo G. Ponferrada, Flavia Sparacino, and Janet Cahn for proofreading the manuscript.
40