training. This enables an adversary to infer whether a given
text appeared in the training dataset [Melis et al. , 2019 ].
Attackers in an FL system can conduct both active and
passive membership inference attacks [Nasr et al. , 2019;
Melis et al. , 2019 ]. In the passive case, the attacker simply
observes the updated model parameters and performs infer-
ence without changing anything in the local or global col-
laborative training procedure. In the active case, however,
the attacker can tamper with the FL model training proto-
col and perform a more powerful attack against other partici-
pants. Speciﬁcally, the attacker shares malicious updates and
forces the FL model to share more information about the par-
ticipants’ local data the attacker is interested in. This attack,
called gradient ascent attack [Nasr et al. , 2019 ], exploits the
fact that SGD optimization updates model parameters in the
opposite direction of the gradient of the loss.
4.3 Inferring Properties
An adversary can launch both passive and active property in-
ference attacks to infer properties of other participants’ train-
ing data that are independent of the features that characterize
the classes of the FL model [Melis et al. , 2019 ]. Property in-
ference attacks assume that the adversary has auxiliary train-
ing data correctly labelled with the property he wants to infer.
An passive adversary can only observe/eavesdrop the updates
and perform inference by training a binary property classi-
ﬁer. An active adversary can use multi-task learning to trick
the FL model into learning a better separation for data with
and without the property, and thus extract more information.
An adversarial participant can even infer when a property ap-
pears and disappears in the data during training (e.g., identi-
fying when a person ﬁrst appears in the photos used to train
a gender classiﬁer). The assumption in property inference at-
tacks may prevent its applicability in H2C.
4.4 Inferring Training Inputs and Labels
The most recent work called Deep Leakage from Gradient
(DLG) proposed an optimization algorithm that can obtain
both the training inputs and the labels in just a few itera-
tions [Zhu et al. , 2019 ]. This attack is much stronger than
previous approaches. It can recover pixel-wise accurate orig-
inal images and token-wise matching original texts. [Zhao et
al., 2020 ]presented an analytical approach called Improved
Deep Leakage from Gradient (iDLG), which can certainly ex-
tract labels from the shared gradients by exploiting the rela-
tionship between the labels and the signs of corresponding
gradients. iDLG is valid for any differentiable model trained
with cross-entropy loss over one-hot labels, which is the gen-
eral case for classiﬁcation.
Inference attacks generally assume that the adversaries
possess sophisticated technical capabilities and large compu-
tational resources. In addition, adversaries must be selected
for many rounds of FL training. Thus, it is not suitable for
H2C scenarios, but more likely under H2B scenarios. Such
attacks also highlight the need for protecting the gradients be-
ing shared during FL training, possibly through mechanisms
such as homomorphic encryption [Yang et al. , 2019b ].5 Discussions and Promising Directions
There are still potential vulnerabilities which need to be ad-
dressed in order to improve the robustness of FL systems. In
this section, we outline research directions which we believe
are promising.
Curse of Dimensionality: Large models, with high di-
mensional parameter vectors, are particularly susceptible to
privacy and security attacks [Chang et al. , 2019 ]. Most FL al-
gorithms require overwriting the local model parameters with
the global model. This makes them susceptible to poisoning
and backdoor attacks, as the adversary can make small but
damaging changes in the high-dimensional models without
being detected. Thus, sharing model parameters may not be a
strong design choice in FL, it opens all the internal state of the
model to inference attacks, and maximize the model’s mal-
leability by poisoning attacks. To address these fundamental
shortcomings of FL, it is worthwhile to explore whether shar-
ing model updates is essential. Instead, sharing less sensitive
information (e.g., SIGNSGD [Bernstein et al. , 2018 ]) or only
sharing model predictions [Chang et al. , 2019 ]in a black-box
manner may result in more robust privacy protection in FL.
Threats to VFL: In VFL, there may only be one party who
owns labels for the given learning task. It is unclear if all the
participants have equal capability of attacking the FL model,
and if threats to HFL can work on VFL. Most of the current
threats still focus on HFL. Thus, threats on VFL, which is
important to businesses, are worth exploring.
FL with Heterogeneous Architectures: Sharing model
updates is typically limited only to homogeneous FL archi-
tectures, i.e., the same model is shared with all participants.
It would be interesting to study how to extend FL to collab-
oratively train models with heterogeneous architectures [Gao
et al. , 2019; Chang et al. , 2019 ], and whether existing attacks
and privacy techniques can be adapted to this paradigm.
Decentralized Federated Learning: Decentralized FL
where no single server is required in the system is currently
being studied [Yang et al. , 2019b; Lyu et al. , 2019 ]. This is
a potential learning framework for collaboration among busi-
nesses which do not trust any third party. In this paradigm,
each party could be elected as a server in a round robin man-
ner. It would be interesting to investigate if existing threats
on server-based FL still apply in this scenario. Moreover, it
may open new attack surfaces. One possible example is that
the last party who was elected as the server is more likely
to effectively contaminate the whole model if it chooses to
insert backdoors. This resembles the fact in server-based
FL models which are more vulnerable to backdoors in later
rounds of training nearing convergence. Similarly, if decen-
tralized training is conducted in a “ring all reduce” manner,
then any malicious participant can steal the training data from
its neighbors.
Weakness of Current Defense: FL with secure aggrega-
tion are especially susceptible to poisoning attacks as the in-
dividual updates cannot be inspected. It is still unclear if ad-
versarial training can be adapted to FL, as adversarial training
was developed primarily for IID data, and it is still a challeng-
ing problem how it performs in non-IID settings. Moreover,
adversarial training typically requires many epochs, which