Table 2: A summary of attacks against server-based FL.
Attack TypeAttack Targets Attacker Role FL Scenario Attack Complexity
Model Training Data Participant Server H2B H2C Attack Iteration Auxiliary Knowledge Required
One round Multiple rounds
Data Poisoning YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES
Model Poisoning YES NO YES NO YES NO YES YES YES
Infer Class Representatives NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Membership NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Properties NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Training Inputs and Labels NO YES NO YES YES NO NO YES NO
2.3 Training Phase v.s. Inference Phase
Attacks at training phase attempt to learn, inﬂuence, or cor-
rupt the FL model itself [Biggio et al. , 2011 ]. During training
phase, the attacker can run data poisoning attacks to com-
promise the integrity of training dataset collection, or model
poisoning attacks to compromise the integrity of the learning
process. The attacker can also launch a range of inference at-
tacks on an individual participant’s update or on the aggregate
of updates from all participants.
Attacks at inference phase are called evasion/exploratory
attacks [Barreno et al. , 2006 ]. They generally do not tamper
with the targeted model, but instead, either cause it to produce
wrong outputs (targeted/untargeted) or collect evidence about
the model characteristics. The effectiveness of such attacks is
largely determined by the information that is available to the
adversary about the model. Inference phase attacks can be
classiﬁed into white-box attacks (i.e. with full access to the
FL model) and black-box attacks (i.e. only able to query the
FL model). In FL, the model maintained by the server not
only suffers from the same evasion attacks as in the general
ML setting when the target model is deployed as a service,
the model broadcast step in FL renders the model accessible
to any malicious client. Thus, FL requires extra efforts to
defend against white-box evasion attacks. In this survey, we
omit the discussion of inference phase attacks, and mainly
focus on the training phase attacks.
3 Poisoning Attacks
Depending on the attacker’s objective, poisoning attacks can
be either a) random attacks and b) targeted attacks [Huang
et al. , 2011 ]. Random attacks aim to reduce the accuracy of
the FL model, whereas targeted attacks aim to induce the FL
model to output the target label speciﬁed by the adversary.
Generally, targeted attacks is more difﬁcult than random at-
tacks as the attacker has a speciﬁc goal to achieve. Poisoning
attacks during the training phase can be performed on the data
or on the model. Figure 2 shows that the poisoned updates can
be sourced from two poisoning attacks: (1) data poisoning at-
tack during local data collection; and (2) model poisoning at-
tack during local model training process. At a high level, both
poisoning attacks attempt to modify the behavior of the target
model in some undesirable way. If adversaries can compro-
mise the FL server, then they can easily perform both targeted
and untargeted poisoning attacks on the trained model.
3.1 Data Poisoning
Data poisoning attacks largely fall in two categories: 1) clean-
label [Shafahi et al. , 2018 ]and 2) dirty-label [Guet al. , 2017 ].
LocaldatacollectionLocalmodeltrainingprocessDataPoisoningModel Poisoning
Poisonedmodelparameter∆w1Centralserver
LocaldatacollectionLocalmodeltrainingprocess∆wn
w’=w+aggregate(∆w1+⋯+∆wn)
Figure 2: Data v.s. model poisoning attacks in FL.
Clean-label attacks assume that the adversary cannot change
the label of any training data as there is a process by which
data are certiﬁed as belonging to the correct class and the poi-
soning of data samples has to be imperceptible. In contrast,
in dirty-label poisoning, the adversary can introduce a num-
ber of data sample it wishes to miss-classify with the desired
target label into the training set.
One common example of dirty-label poisoning attack is the
label-ﬂipping attack [Biggio et al. , 2012; Fung et al. , 2018 ].
The labels of honest training examples of one class are ﬂipped
to another class while the features of the data are kept un-
changed. For example, the malicious clients in the system
can poison their dataset by ﬂipping all 1s into 7s. A success-
ful attack produces a model that is unable to correctly clas-
sify 1s and incorrectly predicts them to be 7s. Another weak
but realistic attack scenario is backdoor poisoning [Guet al. ,
2017 ]. Here, an adversary can modify individual features or
small regions of the original training dataset to embed back-
doors into the model, so that the model behaves according to
the adversary’s objective if the input contains the backdoor
features ( e.g., a stamp on an image). However, the perfor-
mance of the poisoned model on clean inputs is not affected.
In this way, the attacks are harder to be detected.
Data poisoning attacks can be carried out by any FL par-
ticipant. The impact on the FL model depends on the extent
to which participants in the system engage in the attacks, and
the amount of training data being poisoned. Data poisoning
is less effective in settings with fewer participants like H2C.
3.2 Model Poisoning
Model poisoning attacks aim to poison local model updates
before sending them to the server or insert hidden backdoors
into the global model [Bagdasaryan et al. , 2018 ].
In targeted model poisoning, the adversary’s objective is
to cause the FL model to miss-classify a set of chosen inputs
with high conﬁdence. Note that these inputs are not modiﬁed
to induce miss-classiﬁcation at test time as under adversar-