Threats to Federated Learning: A Survey
Lingjuan Lyu1,Han Yu2andQiang Yang3;4
1Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3Department of AI, WeBank, Shenzhen, China
4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
*Corresponding authors: lyulj@comp.nus.edu.sg, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
With the emergence of data silos and popular
privacy awareness, the traditional centralized ap-
proach of training artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) mod-
els is facing strong challenges. Federated learning
(FL) has recently emerged as a promising solution
under this new reality. Existing FL protocol design
has been shown to exhibit vulnerabilities which can
be exploited by adversaries both within and without
the system to compromise data privacy. It is thus of
paramount importance to make FL system design-
ers to be aware of the implications of future FL al-
gorithm design on privacy-preservation. Currently,
there is no survey on this topic. In this paper, we
bridge this important gap in FL literature. By pro-
viding a concise introduction to the concept of FL,
and a unique taxonomy covering threat models and
two major attacks on FL: 1) poisoning attacks and
2) inference attacks, this paper provides an accessi-
ble review of this important topic. We highlight the
intuitions, key techniques as well as fundamental
assumptions adopted by various attacks, and dis-
cuss promising future research directions towards
more robust privacy preservation in FL.
1 Introduction
As computing devices become increasingly ubiquitous, peo-
ple generate huge amounts of data through their day to day
usage. Collecting such data into centralized storage facilities
is costly and time consuming. Another important concern is
data privacy and user conﬁdentiality as the usage data usually
contain sensitive information [Abadi et al. , 2016 ]. Sensitive
data such as facial images, location-based services, or health
informatioon can be used for targeted social advertising and
recommendation, posing the immediate or potential privacy
risks. Hence, private data should not be directly shared
without any privacy consideration. As societies become in-
creasingly aware of privacy preservation, legal restrictions
such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) are
emerging which makes data aggregation practices less feasi-
ble[Yang et al. , 2019b ].
Traditional centralized machine learning (ML) cannot sup-
port such ubiquitous deployments and applications due toTable 1: Taxonomy for horizontal federated learning (HFL).
HFL Number of
ParticipantsFL Training
ParticipationTechnical Ca-
pability
H2B small frequent high
H2C large not frequent low
infrastructure shortcomings such as limited communication
bandwidth, intermittent network connectivity, and strict de-
lay constraints [Liet al. , 2018 ]. In this scenario, federated
learning (FL) which pushes model training to the devices
from which data originate emerged as a promising alternative
ML paradigm [McMahan et al. , 2016b ]. FL enables a mul-
titude of participants to construct a joint ML model without
exposing their private training data [McMahan et al. , 2016b;
Bonawitz et al. , 2017 ]. It can handle unbalanced and non-
independent and identically distributed (non-IID) data which
naturally arise in the real world [McMahan et al. , 2016a ].
In recent years, FL has beneﬁted a wide range of applica-
tions such as next word prediction [McMahan et al. , 2016a;
McMahan et al. , 2018 ], visual object detection for safety [Liu
et al. , 2020 ], etc.
1.1 Types of Federated Learning
Based on the distribution of data features and data sam-
ples among participants, federated learning can be gener-
ally classiﬁed as horizontally federated learning (HFL), verti-
cally federated learning (VFL) and federated transfer learning
(FTL) [Yang et al. , 2019a ].
Under HFL, datasets owned by each participant share sim-
ilar features but concern different users [Kantarcioglu and
Clifton, 2004 ]. In this paper, we further classify HFL into
HFL to businesses (H2B), and HFL to consumers (H2C). A
comparison between H2B and H2C is listed in Table 1. The
main difference lies in the number of participants, FL train-
ing participation level, and technical capability, which can in-
ﬂuence how adversaries attempt to compromise the FL sys-
tem. Under H2B, there are typically a handful of participants.
They can be frequently selected during FL training. The par-
ticipants tend to possess signiﬁcant computational power and
sophisticated technical capabilities [Yang et al. , 2019b ]. Un-
der H2C, there can be thousands or even millions of potential
participants. In each round of training, only a subset of them
are selected. As their datasets tend to be small, the chancearXiv:2003.02133v1  [cs.CR]  4 Mar 2020