of a participant being selected repeatedly for FL training is
low. They generally possess limited computational power and
low technical capabilities. An example of H2C is Google’s
GBoard application [McMahan et al. , 2018 ].
VFL is applicable to the cases in which participants have
large overlaps in the sample space but differ in the feature
space, i.e., different parties hold different attributes of the
same records [Vaidya and Clifton, 2002 ]. VFL mainly tar-
gets business participants. Thus, the characteristics of VFL
participants are similar to those of H2B participants.
FTL deals with scenarios in which FL participants have
little overlap in both the sample space and the feature
space [Yang et al. , 2019b ]. Currently, there is no published
research studying threats to FTL models.
1.2 Privacy Leakage in FL
FL offers a privacy-aware paradigm of model training which
does not require data sharing and allows participants to join
and leave a federation freely. Nevetheless, recent works have
demonstrated that FL may not always provide sufﬁcient pri-
vacy guarantees, as communicating model updates through-
out the training process can nonetheless reveal sensitive in-
formation [Bhowmick et al. , 2018; Fredrikson et al. , 2015;
Melis et al. , 2019 ]even incur deep leakage [Zhuet al. , 2019 ],
either to a third-party, or to the central server [McMahan
et al. , 2018; Agarwal et al. , 2018 ]. For instance, as shown
by[Aono et al. , 2018 ], even a small portion of original gradi-
ents may reveal information about local data. A more recent
work in NeurIPS 2019 showed that the malicious attacker can
completely steal the training data from gradients in a few it-
erations [Zhuet al. , 2019 ].
FL protocol designs may contain vulnerabilities for both
(1) the (potentially malicious) server, who can observe indi-
vidual updates over time, tamper with the training process
and control the view of the participants on the global param-
eters; and (2) any participant who can observe the global pa-
rameter, and control its parameter uploads. For example, ma-
licious participants can deliberately alter their inputs or in-
troduce stealthy backdoors into the global model. Such at-
tacks pose signiﬁcant threats to FL. Therefore, it is important
to understand the principles behind these attacks. Existing
survey papers on FL mostly focused on the broad aspect of
Party 1Party 2Party nCentralserver11123334441: send localmodelgradients2: aggregatelocal model gradients3: download the latest global model  4: update local models 
Figure 1: A typical FL training process, in which both the (po-
tentially malicious) FL server/aggregator and malicious participants
may compromise the FL system.how to make FL work [Yang et al. , 2019a; Li et al. , 2019;
Kairouz et al. , 2019 ]. In this paper, we survey recent ad-
vances in threats to compromise FL to bridge this important
gap in the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) research community’s
understanding in this topic. In particular, we focus on two
speciﬁc threats initiated by the insiders on FL systems: 1)
poisoning attacks that attempt to prevent a model from being
learned at all, or to bias the model to produce inferences that
are preferable to the adversary; and 2) inference attacks that
target participant privacy. The properties of these attacks are
summarized in Table 2.
2 Threat Models
Before reviewing attacks on FL, we ﬁrst present a summary
of the threat models.
2.1 Insider v.s. Outsider
Attacks can be carried out by insiders and outsiders. Insider
attacks include those launched by the FL server and the par-
ticipants in the FL system. Outsider attacks include those
launched by the eavesdroppers on the communication chan-
nel between participants and the FL server, and by users of
the ﬁnal FL model when it is deployed as a service.
Insider attacks are generally stronger than the outsider at-
tacks, as it strictly enhances the capability of the adver-
sary. Due to this stronger behavior, our discussion of attacks
against FL will focus primarily on the insider attacks, which
can take one of the following three general forms:
1. Single attack: a single, non-colluding malicious par-
ticipant aims to cause the model to miss-classify a set
of chosen inputs with high conﬁdence [Bhagoji et al. ,
2018; Bagdasaryan et al. , 2018 ];
2. Byzantine attack: the byzantine malicious participants
may behave completely arbitrarily and tailor their out-
puts to have similar distribution as the correct model
updates, making them difﬁcult to detect [Blanchard
et al. , 2017; Chen et al. , 2017; Chen et al. , 2018;
Yinet al. , 2018 ];
3. Sybil attack: the adversaries can simulate multiple
dummy participant accounts or select previously com-
promised participants to mount more powerful attacks
on FL [Fung et al. , 2018; Bagdasaryan et al. , 2018 ].
2.2 Semi-honest v.s. Malicious
Under the semi-honest setting, adversaries are considered
passive or honest-but-curious. They try to learn the private
states of other parties without deviating from the FL proto-
col. The passive adversaries are assumed to only observe the
aggregated or averaged gradient, but not the training data or
gradient of other honest participants. Under the malicious
setting, an active, or malicious adversary tries to learn the
private states of honest participants, and deviates arbitrarily
from the FL protocol by modifying, re-playing, or removing
messages. This strong adversary model allows the adversary
to conduct particularly devastating attacks.