Example: users' identities
model updates leak info about training dataPredict gender
Not correlated to learning task
Figure 3: Attacker infers information unrelated to the learning task.
ial example attacks [Szegedy et al. , 2013 ]. Rather, the miss-
classiﬁcation is a result of adversarial manipulations of the
training process. Recent works have investigated poisoning
attacks on model updates in which a subset of updates sent
to the server at any given iteration are poisoned [Blanchard
et al. , 2017; Bhagoji et al. , 2018 ]. These poisoned updates
can be generated by inserting hidden backdoors, and even a
single-shot attack may be enough to introduce a backdoor into
a model [Bagdasaryan et al. , 2018 ].
Bhagoji et al. [2018 ]demonstrated that model poisoning
attacks are much more effective than data poisoning in FL set-
tings by analyzing a targeted model poisoning attack, where a
single, non-colluding malicious participant aims to cause the
model to miss-classify a set of chosen inputs with high con-
ﬁdence. To increase attack stealth and evade detection, they
use the alternating minimization strategy to alternately op-
timize for the training loss and the adversarial objective, and
use parameter estimation for the benign participants’ updates.
This adversarial model poisoning attack can cause targeted
poisoning of the FL model undetected.
In fact, model poisoning subsumes data poisoning in FL
settings, as data poisoning attacks eventually change a sub-
set of updates sent to the model at any given iteration [Fung
et al. , 2018 ]. This is functionally identical to a centralized
poisoning attack in which a subset of the whole training data
is poisoned. Model poisoning attacks require sophisticated
technical capabilities and high computational resources. Such
attacks are generally less suitable for H2C scenarios, but more
likely to happen in H2B scenarios.
4 Inference Attacks
Exchanging gradients during FL training can result in seri-
ous privacy leakage [Phong et al. , 2018; Su and Xu, 2018;
Melis et al. , 2019; Zhu et al. , 2019 ]. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 3, model updates can leak extra information about the
unintended features about participants’ training data to the
adversarial participants, as deep learning models appear to
internally recognize many features of the data that are not ap-
parently related with the main tasks. The adversary can also
save the snapshot of the FL model parameters, and conduct
property inference by exploiting the difference between the
consecutive snapshots, which is equal to the aggregated up-
dates from all participants less the adversary (Figure 4).
The main reason is that the gradients are derived from the
participants’ private data. In deep learning models, gradi-
ents of a given layer are computed using this layer’s features
and the error from the layer above. In the case of sequential
Server𝜽𝑻+𝟏𝜽𝑻−=	𝚺
Gradients based on a batch of data
What information do updates leak?Figure 4: Attacker infers gradients from a batch of training data.
fully connected layers, the gradients of the weights are the
inner products of the error from the layer above and the fea-
tures. Similarly, for a convolutional layer, the gradients of the
weights are convolutions of the error from the layer above and
the features [Melis et al. , 2019 ]. Consequently, observations
of model updates can be used to infer a signiﬁcant amount
of private information, such as class representatives, mem-
bership as well as properties associated with a subset of the
training data. Even worse, an attacker can infer labels from
the shared gradients and recover the original training sam-
ples without requiring any prior knowledge about the training
set[Zhuet al. , 2019 ].
4.1 Inferring Class Representatives
Hitaj et al. [2017 ]devised an active inference attack called
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) attack on deep FL
models. Here, a malicious participant can intentionally com-
promise any other participant. The GAN attack exploits the
real-time nature of the FL learning process that allows the
adversarial party to train a GAN that generates prototypical
samples of the targeted training data which were meant to
be private. The generated samples appear to come from the
same distribution as the training data. Hence, GAN attack is
not targeted at reconstructing actual training inputs, but only
class representatives. It should be noted that GAN attack as-
sumes that the entire training corpus for a given class comes
from a single participant, and only in the special case where
all class members are similar, GAN-constructed representa-
tives are similar to the training data. This resembles model
inversion attacks in the general ML settings [Fredrikson et
al., 2015 ]. However, these assumptions may be less practical
in FL. Moreover, GAN attack is less suitable for H2C scenar-
ios, as it requires large computation resources.
4.2 Inferring Membership
Given an exact data point, membership inference attacks aim
to determine if it was used to train the model [Shokri et al. ,
2017 ]. For example, an attacker can infer whether a speciﬁc
patient proﬁle was used to train a classiﬁer associated with a
disease. FL presents interesting new avenues for such attacks.
In FL, the adversary’s objective is to infer if a particular sam-
ple belongs to the private training data of a single party (if
target update is of a single party) or of any party (if target
update is the aggregate). For example, the non-zero gradients
of the embedding layer of a deep learning model trained on
natural-language text reveal which words appear in the train-
ing batches used by the honest participants during FL model