8 I. Elezi et al.
and1is the all-one m-dimensional vector. (t) =WX(t) as dened in (2),
anddenotes the Hadamard (element-wise) matrix product. In other words,
the diagonal elements of Q(t) represent the normalization factors in (4), which
can also be interpreted as the average support that object iobtains from the
current mini-batch at iteration t. Intuitively, the motivation behind our update
rule is that at each step of the renement process, for each image i, a label
will increase its probability xiif and only if its support iis higher than the
average support among all the competing label hypothesis Qii.
Thanks to the Baum-Eagon inequality [34], it is easy to show that the dynam-
ical system dened by (4) has very nice convergence properties. In particular, it
strictly increases at each step the following functional:
F(X) =nX
i=1nX
j=1mX
=1wijxixj (7)
which represents a measure of \consistency" of the assignment matrix X, in
accordance to the smoothness assumption ( Frewards assignments where highly
similar objects are likely to be assigned the same label). In other words:
F(X(t+ 1))F(X(t)) (8)
with equality if and only if X(t) is a stationary point. Hence, our update rule (4)
is, in fact, an algorithm for maximizing the functional Fover the space of row-
stochastic matrices. Note, that this contrasts with classical gradient methods, for
which an increase in the objective function is guaranteed only when innitesimal
steps are taken, and determining the optimal step size entails computing higher-
order derivatives. Here, instead, the step size is implicit and yet, at each step,
the value of the functional increases.
3.4 Loss computation
Once the labeling assignments converge (or in practice, a maximum number of
iterations is reached), we apply the cross-entropy loss to quantify the classica-
tion error and backpropagate the gradients. Recall, the renement procedure is
optimized via replicator dynamics , as shown in the previous section. By studying
Equation (5), it is straightforward to see that it is composed of fully dierentiable
operations (matrix-vector and scalar products), and so it can be easily integrated
within backpropagation. Although the rening procedure has no parameters to
be learned, its gradients can be backpropagated to the previous layers of the
neural network, producing, in turn, better embeddings for similarity computa-
tion.
3.5 Summary of the Group Loss
In this section, we proposed the Group Loss function for deep metric learning.
During training, the Group Loss works by grouping together similar samples