The Group Loss for Deep Metric Learning
Ismail Elezi1, Sebastiano Vascon1, Alessandro Torcinovich1, Marcello Pelillo1,
and Laura Leal-Taix e2
1Ca' Foscari University of Venice
2Technical University of Munich
Abstract. Deep metric learning has yielded impressive results in tasks
such as clustering and image retrieval by leveraging neural networks to
obtain highly discriminative feature embeddings, which can be used to
group samples into dierent classes. Much research has been devoted to
the design of smart loss functions or data mining strategies for training
such networks. Most methods consider only pairs or triplets of samples
within a mini-batch to compute the loss function, which is commonly
based on the distance between embeddings. We propose Group Loss ,
a loss function based on a dierentiable label-propagation method that
enforces embedding similarity across allsamples of a group while promot-
ing, at the same time, low-density regions amongst data points belonging
to dierent groups. Guided by the smoothness assumption that \similar
objects should belong to the same group", the proposed loss trains the
neural network for a classication task, enforcing a consistent labelling
amongst samples within a class. We show state-of-the-art results on clus-
tering and image retrieval on several datasets, and show the potential of
our method when combined with other techniques such as ensembles. To
facilitate further research, we make available the code and the models at
https://github.com/dvl-tum/group_loss .
Keywords: Deep Metric Learning, Image Retrieval, Image Clustering
1 Introduction
Measuring object similarity is at the core of many important machine learning
problems like clustering and object retrieval. For visual tasks, this means learning
a distance function over images. With the rise of deep neural networks, the focus
has rather shifted towards learning a feature embedding that is easily separable
using a simple distance function, such as the Euclidean distance. In essence,
objects of the same class (similar) should be close by in the learned manifold,
while objects of a dierent class (dissimilar) should be far away.
Historically, the best performing approaches get deep feature embeddings
from the so-called siamese networks [4], which are typically trained using the
contrastive loss [4] or the triplet loss [41,53]. A clear drawback of these losses
is that they only consider pairs or triplets of data points, missing key infor-
mation about the relationships between all members of the mini-batch. On aarXiv:1912.00385v4  [cs.CV]  20 Jul 2020