The Group Loss for Deep Metric Learning 5
can achieve competitive results. A similar line of research is that of [61], where
the authors use a combination of normalized-scale layers and Gram-Schmidt
optimization to achieve ecient usage of the softmax cross-entropy loss for metric
learning. The work of [35] goes a step further by taking into consideration the
similarity between classes. Furthermore, the authors use multiple centers for
class, allowing them to reach state-of-the-art results, at a cost of signicantly
increasing the number of parameters of the model. In contrast, we propose a
novel loss that achieves state-of-the-art results without increasing the number of
parameters of the model.
3 Group Loss
Most loss functions used for deep metric learning [40,44,42,43,48,51,50,22,10,25]
do not use a classication loss function, e.g., cross-entropy, but rather a loss
function based on embedding distances. The rationale behind it, is that what
matters for a classication network is that the output is correct, which does not
necessarily mean that the embeddings of samples belonging to the same class
are similar. Since each sample is classied independently, it is entirely possible
that two images of the same class have two distant embeddings that both allow
for a correct classication. We argue that a classication loss can still be used
for deep metric learning if the decisions do not happen independently for each
sample, but rather jointly for a whole group , i.e., the set of images of the same
class in a mini-batch. In this way, the method pushes for images belonging to
the same class to have similar embeddings.
Towards this end, we propose Group Loss , an iterative procedure that uses
the global information of the mini-batch to rene the local information provided
by the softmax layer of a neural network. This iterative procedure categorizes
samples into dierent groups , and enforces consistent labelling among the sam-
ples of a group. While softmax cross-entropy loss judges each sample in isolation,
the Group Loss allows us to judge the overall class separation for allsamples. In
section 3.3, we show the dierences between the softmax cross-entropy loss and
Group Loss, and highlight the mathematical properties of our new loss.
3.1 Overview of Group Loss
Given a mini-batch Bconsisting of nimages, consider the problem of assigning
a class label 2=f1;:::;mgto each image in B. In the remainder of the
manuscript, X= (xi) represents a nm(non-negative) matrix of image-
label soft assignments. In other words, each row of Xrepresents a probability
distribution over the label set (P
xi= 1 for alli= 1:::n).
Our model consists of the following steps (see also Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1):
1
Initialization : InitializeX, the image-label assignment using the softmax
outputs of the neural network. Compute the nnpairwise similarity matrix
Wusing the neural network embedding.