6 I. Elezi et al.
2
Renement : Iteratively, rene Xconsidering the similarities between all the
mini-batch images, as encoded in W, as well as their labeling preferences.
3
Loss computation : Compute the cross-entropy loss of the rened proba-
bilities and update the weights of the neural network using backpropagation.
We now provide a more detailed description of the three steps of our method.
3.2 Initialization
Image-label assignment matrix. The initial assignment matrix denoted X(0),
comes from the softmax output of the neural network. We can replace some of
the initial assignments in matrix Xwith one-hot labelings of those samples. We
call these randomly chosen samples anchors , as their assignments do not change
during the iterative rene process and consequently do not directly aect the
loss function. However, by using their correct label instead of the predicted label
(coming from the softmax output of the NN), they guide the remaining samples
towards their correct label.
Similarity matrix. A measure of similarity is computed among all pairs of
embeddings (computed via a CNN) in Bto generate a similarity matrix W2
Rnn. In this work, we compute the similarity measure using the Pearson's
correlation coecient [33]:
!(i;j) =Cov[(Ii);(Ij)]p
Var[(Ii)]Var[(Ij)](1)
fori6=j, and set!(i;i) to 0. The choice of this measure over other options such
as cosine layer, Gaussian kernels, or learned similarities, is motivated by the
observation that the correlation coecient uses data standardization, thus pro-
viding invariance to scaling and translation { unlike the cosine similarity, which
is invariant to scaling only { and it does not require additional hyperparameters,
unlike Gaussian kernels [8]. The fact that a measure of the linear relationship
among features provides a good similarity measure can be explained by the fact
that the computed features are actually a highly non-linear function of the in-
puts. Thus, the linear correlation among the embeddings actually captures a
non-linear relationship among the original images.
3.3 Renement
In this core step of the proposed algorithm, the initial assignment matrix X(0)
is rened in an iterative manner, taking into account the similarity informa-
tion provided by matrix W.Xis updated in accordance with the smoothness
assumption , which prescribes that similar objects should share the same label.
To this end, let us dene the support matrix= (i)2Rnmas
=WX (2)