14 I. Elezi et al.
Fig. 7: Training vs testing Recall@1
curves on Cars 196 dataset.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Number of epochs5060708090Recall@1Stanford Online Products
Train Group Loss
Test Group Loss
Train DSC
Test DSCFig. 8: Training vs testing Recall@1
curves on Stanford Online Products
dataset.
We further implement the P-NCA [28] loss function and perform a similar
experiment, in order to be able to compare training and test accuracies directly
with our method. In Figure 7, we show the training and testing curves of P-NCA
on the Cars 196 [21] dataset. We see that while in the training set, P-NCA
reaches results of 3 pphigher than our method, in the testing set, our method
outperforms P-NCA by around 10 pp. Unfortunately, we were unable to reproduce
the results of the paper [28] on Stanford Online Products dataset. Furthermore,
even when we turn o L2-regularization, the generalization performance of our
method does not drop at all. Our intuition is that by taking into account the
structure of the entire manifold of the dataset, our method introduces a form of
regularization. We can clearly see a smaller gap between training and test results
when compared to competing methods, indicating less overtting.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this work, we propose the Group Loss, a novel loss function for metric learning.
By considering the content of a mini-batch, it promotes embedding similarity
across all samples of the same class, while enforcing dissimilarity for elements
of dierent classes. This is achieved with a dierentiable layer that is used to
train a convolutional network in an end-to-end fashion. Our model outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on several datasets, and shows fast convergence. In our
work, we did not consider any advanced sampling strategy. Instead, we randomly
sample objects from a few classes at each iteration. Sampling has shown to have
a very important role in feature embedding [25]. As future work, we will explore
sampling techniques which can be suitable for our module.
Acknowledgements. This research was partially funded by the Humboldt Foun-
dation through the Sofja Kovalevskaja Award. We thank Michele Fenzi, Maxim Max-
imov and Guillem Braso Andilla for useful discussions.