The Group Loss for Deep Metric Learning 19
dierent authors propose dierent methods to deal with the negative outputs. The most
common approach is to shift the matrix of similarity towards the positive regime by
subtracting the biggest negative value from every entry in the matrix [9]. Nonetheless,
this shift has a side eect: If a sample of class k1has very low similarities to the
elements of a large group of samples of class k2, these similarity values (which after
being shifted are all positive) will be summed up. If the cardinality of class k2is very
large, then summing up all these small values lead to a large value, and consequently
aect the solution of the algorithm. What we want instead, is to ignore these negative
similarities, hence we propose clamping . More concretely, we use a ReLU activation
function over the output of Equation (1).
We compare the results of shifting vs clamping. On the CARS 196 dataset, we do
not see a signicant dierence between the two approaches. However, on the CUBS-200-
2011 dataset, the Recall@1 metric is 51 with shifting, much below the 64 :3 obtained
when using clamping. We investigate the matrix of similarities for the two datasets, and
we see that the number of entries with negative values for the CUBS-200-2011 dataset
is higher than for the CARS 196 dataset. This explains the dierence in behavior, and
also veries our hypothesis that clamping is a better strategy to use within Group Loss .
H Dealing with Relative Labels
The proposed method assumes that the dataset consists of classes with (absolute) labels
and set of samples in each class. This is the case for the datasets used in metric learning
[47,21,44]) technique evaluations. However, deep metric learning can be applied to more
general problems where the absolute class label is not available but only relative label
is available. For example, the data might be given as pairs that are similar or dissimilar.
Similarly, the data may be given as triplets consisting of anchor (A), positive (P) and
negative (N) images, such that A is semantically closer to P than N. For example, in
[49] a triplet network has been used to learn good visual representation where only
relative labels are used as self-supervision (two tracked patches from the same video
form a "similar" pair and the patch in the rst frame and a patch sampled from another
random video forms a "dissimilar" pair). Similarly, in [27], relative labels are used as
self-supervision for learning good spatio-temporal representation.
Our method, similar to other classication-based losses [58,28,35] for deep metric
learning, or triple loss improvements like Hierarchical Triplet Loss [10] assumes the
presence of absolute labels. Unlike traditional losses [4,40], in cases where only relative
labels are present, all the mentioned methods do not work. However, in the presence
of both relative and absolute labels, then in our method, we could use relative labels
to initialize the matrix of similarities, potentially further improving the performance
of networks trained with The Group Loss.
I Dealing with a Large Number of Classes
In all classication based methods, the number of outputs in the last layer linearly
increases with the number of classes in the dataset. This can become a problem for
learning on a dataset with large number of classes (say N > 1000000) where metric
learning methods like pairwise/triplet losses/methods can still work. In our method,
the similarity matrix is square on the number of samples per mini-batch, so its dimen-
sions are the same regardless if there are 5 or 5 million classes. However, the matrix of