The Group Loss for Deep Metric Learning 11
Query Rank 1 Rank 2 Rank 3 Rank 4 Retrieval 
Query Rank 1 Rank 2 Rank 3 Rank 4 
 Retrieval 
Query Retrieval 
Fig. 3: Retrieval results on a set of images from the CUB-200-2011 (left), Cars
196(middle), and Stanford Online Products (right) datasets using our Group
Loss model. The left column contains query images. The results are ranked by
distance. The green square indicates that the retrieved image is from the same
class as the query image, while the red box indicates that the retrieved image is
from a dierent class.
as this is the most popular backbone for the metric learning task, which enables
fair comparison among methods. In supplementary material, we present results
for other backbones, and include a discussion about the methods that work by
increasing the number of parameters (capacity of the network) [35], or use more
expressive network architectures.
Quantitative results
Loss comparison. In Table 1 we present the results of our method and compare
them with the results of other approaches. On the CUB-200-2011 dataset, we
outperform the other approaches by a large margin, with the second-best model
(Classication [58]) having circa 6 percentage points( pp) lower absolute accuracy
in Recall@1 metric. On the NMI metric, our method achieves a score of 69 :0
which is 2:8pphigher than the second-best method. Similarly, on Cars 196 , our
method achieves best results on Recall@1, with Classication [58] coming second
with a 4pplower score. On Stanford Online Products , our method reaches the
best results on the Recall@1 metric, around 2 pphigher than Classication [58]
and Proxy-NCA [28]. On the same dataset, when evaluated on the NMI score,
our loss outperforms any other method, be those methods that exploit advanced
sampling, or ensemble methods.
Loss with ensembles. In Table 2 we present the results of our ensemble, and
compare them with the results of other ensemble and sampling approaches. Our
ensemble method (using 5 neural networks) is the highest performing model
inCUB-200-2011 , outperforming the second-best method (Divide and Conquer
[39]) by 1ppin Recall@1 and by 0 :4ppin NMI. In Cars 196 our method outper-
forms the second best method (ABE 8 [19]) by 2 :8ppin Recall@1. The second
best method in NMI metric is the ensemble version of RLL [50] which gets
outperformed by 2 :4ppfrom the Group Loss. In Stanford Online Products , our
ensemble reaches the third-highest result on the Recall@1 metric (after RLL [50]
and GPW [51]) while increasing the gap with the other methods in NMI metric.
Qualitative results