2 I. Elezi et al.
mini-batch of size n, despite that the number of pairwise relations between sam-
ples isO(n2), contrastive loss uses only O(n=2) pairwise relations, while triplet
loss usesO(2n=3) relations. Additionally, these methods consider only the rela-
tions between objects of the same class (positives) and objects of other classes
(negatives), without making any distinction that negatives belong to dierent
classes. This leads to not taking into consideration the global structure of the
embedding space, and consequently results in lower clustering and retrieval per-
formance. To compensate for that, researchers rely on other tricks to train neural
networks for deep metric learning: intelligent sampling [25], multi-task learning
[59] or hard-negative mining [40]. Recently, researchers have been increasingly
working towards exploiting in a principled way the global structure of the em-
bedding space [36,5,12,50], typically by designing ranking loss functions instead
of following the classic triplet formulations.
In a similar spirit, we propose Group Loss , a novel loss function for deep
metric learning that considers the similarity between all samples in a mini-batch.
To create the mini-batch, we sample from a xed number of classes, with samples
coming from a class forming a group . Thus, each mini-batch consists of several
randomly chosen groups, and each group has a xed number of samples. An
iterative, fully-dierentiable label propagation algorithm is then used to build
feature embeddings which are similar for samples belonging to the same group,
and dissimilar otherwise.
At the core of our method lies an iterative process called replicator dynamics
[52,9], that renes the local information, given by the softmax layer of a neural
network, with the global information of the mini-batch given by the similarity
between embeddings. The driving rationale is that the more similar two samples
are, the more they aect each other in choosing their nal label and tend to be
grouped together in the same group, while dissimilar samples do not aect each
other on their choices. Neural networks optimized with the Group Loss learn
to provide similar features for samples belonging to the same class, making
clustering and image retrieval easier.
Ourcontribution in this work is four-fold:
{We propose a novel loss function to train neural networks for deep metric
embedding that takes into account the local information of the samples, as
well as their similarity.
{We propose a dierentiable label-propagation iterative model to embed the
similarity computation within backpropagation, allowing end-to-end training
with our new loss function.
{We perform a comprehensive robustness analysis showing the stability of our
module with respect to the choice of hyperparameters.
{We show state-of-the-art qualitative and quantitative results in several stan-
dard clustering and retrieval datasets.