4 I. Elezi et al.
diction objective on the lifted problem. The work was later extended in [43],
proposing a new metric learning scheme based on structured prediction that is
designed to optimize a clustering quality metric, i.e., the normalized mutual in-
formation [26]. Better results were achieved on [48], where the authors proposed
a novel angular loss, which takes angle relationship into account. A very dier-
ent problem formulation was given by [22], where the authors used a spectral
clustering-inspired approach to achieve deep embedding. A recent work presents
several extensions of the triplet loss that reduce the bias in triplet selection by
adaptively correcting the distribution shift on the selected triplets [56].
Sampling and ensemble methods. Knowing that the number of possible
triplets is extremely large even for moderately-sized datasets, and having found
that the majority of triplets are not informative [40], researchers also investi-
gated sampling. In the original triplet loss paper [40], it was found that using
semi-hard negative mining, the network can be trained to a good performance,
but the training is computationally inecient. The work of [25] found out that
while the majority of research is focused on designing new loss functions, select-
ing training examples plays an equally important role. The authors proposed
a distance-weighted sampling procedure, which selects more informative and
stable examples than traditional approaches, achieving excellent results in the
process. A similar work was that of [10] where the authors proposed a hierarchi-
cal version of triplet loss that learns the sampling all-together with the feature
embedding. The majority of recent works has been focused on complementary
research directions such as intelligent sampling [25,10,7,51,54] or ensemble meth-
ods [55,39,19,29,57]. As we will show in the experimental section, these can be
combined with our novel loss.
Other related problems. In order to have a focused and concise paper, we
mostly discuss methods which tackle image ranking/clustering in standard datasets.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge related research on specic applications such as
person re-identication or landmark recognition, where researchers are also grav-
itating towards considering the global structure of the mini-batch. In [12] the
authors propose a new hashing method for learning binary embeddings of data
by optimizing Average Precision metric. In [36,13] authors study novel metric
learning functions for local descriptor matching on landmark datasets. [5] de-
signs a novel ranking loss function for the purpose of few-shot learning. Similar
works that focus on the global structure have shown impressive results in the
eld of person re-identication [60,1].
Classication-based losses. The authors of [28] proposed to optimize the
triplet loss on a dierent space of triplets than the original samples, consisting
of an anchor data point and similar and dissimilar learned proxy data points.
These proxies approximate the original data points so that a triplet loss over the
proxies is a tight upper bound of the original loss. The nal formulation of the
loss is shown to be similar to that of softmax cross-entropy loss, challenging the
long-hold belief that classication losses are not suitable for the task of metric
learning. Recently, the work of [58] showed that a carefully tuned normalized
softmax cross-entropy loss function combined with a balanced sampling strategy