On the Integration of Self-Attention and Convolution
Xuran Pan1Chunjiang Ge1Rui Lu1Shiji Song1Guanfu Chen2Zeyi Huang2Gao Huang1,3*
1Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2Huawei Technologies Ltd., China
3Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{pxr18, gecj20, r-lu21 }@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{chenguanfu1, huangzeyi2 }@huawei.com ,{shijis, gaohuang }@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Convolution and self-attention are two powerful tech-
niques for representation learning, and they are usually
considered as two peer approaches that are distinct from
each other. In this paper, we show that there exists a strong
underlying relation between them, in the sense that the
bulk of computations of these two paradigms are in fact
done with the same operation. Specifically, we first show
that a traditional convolution with kernel size k×kcan
be decomposed into k2individual 1×1convolutions, fol-
lowed by shift and summation operations. Then, we in-
terpret the projections of queries, keys, and values in self-
attention module as multiple 1×1convolutions, followed
by the computation of attention weights and aggregation
of the values. Therefore, the first stage of both two mod-
ules comprises the similar operation. More importantly,
the first stage contributes a dominant computation complex-
ity (square of the channel size) comparing to the second
stage. This observation naturally leads to an elegant in-
tegration of these two seemingly distinct paradigms, i.e., a
mixed model that enjoys the benefit of both self- Attention
andConvolution (ACmix), while having minimum compu-
tational overhead compared to the pure convolution or self-
attention counterpart. Extensive experiments show that
our model achieves consistently improved results over com-
petitive baselines on image recognition and downstream
tasks. Code and pre-trained models will be released at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/ACmix and
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models .
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the vast development of
convolution and self-attention in computer vision. Convolu-
tion neural networks (CNNs) are widely adopted on image
*Corresponding author.
(a) Convolution (c) Ours - ACmix (b) Self-AttentionFigure 1. A sketch of ACmix. We explore a closer relationship
between convolution and self-attention in the sense of sharing the
same computation overhead ( 1×1convolutions), and combining
with the remaining lightweight aggregation operations. We show
the computation complexity of each block w.r.tthe feature channel.
recognition [19, 23], semantic segmentation [9] and object
detection [38], and achieve state-of-the-art performances on
various benchmarks. On the other hand, self-attention is
first introduced in natural language processing [1, 42], and
also shows great potential in the fields of image generation
and super-resolution [10, 34]. More recently, with the ad-
vent of vision transformers [7,15,37], attention-based mod-
ules have achieved comparable or even better performances
than their CNN counterparts on many vision tasks.
Despite the great success that both approaches have
achieved, convolution and self-attention modules usually
follow different design paradigms. Traditional convolution
leverages an aggregation function over a localized receptive
field according to the convolution filter weights, which are
shared in the whole feature map. The intrinsic characteris-
tics impose crucial inductive biases for image processing.
Comparably, the self-attention module applies a weighted
average operation based on the context of input features,
where the attention weights are computed dynamically via
a similarity function between related pixel pairs. The flexi-
bility enables the attention module to focus on different re-
gions adaptively and capture more informative features.
Considering the different and complementary properties
of convolution and self-attention, there exists a potential
815