+ 
 
 S(-1,-1)  
S(1,1)  ...+*00
00
00001
+
+
+
Raw feature  
(from 1x1 conv)Shifted  
featureS(i,j)  Convolution  
kernels  *10
00
00000
*00
00
10000+*00
00
00001
10
00
00000
00
00
10000x N Groups
I. Frozen kernels  
(shift kernels)  II. Learnable kernels  
(Initialized as shift kernels ) III. Full Group Convolution  
(Initialized as shift kernels)
Shift 
direction *Group  
Convolution  (a) Tensor Shifts(b) Shift with fixed  
group convolution kernels(c) Shift with learnable group convolution kernels
... 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
    Figure 3. Practical improvements on shift operations. (a) Simple implementation with tensor shifts. (b) Fast implementation with carefully
designed group convolution kernels. (c) Further adaptations with learnable kernels and multiple convolution groups.
perspectives. First, the two stages play quite similar roles.
Stage I is a feature learning module, where both approaches
share the same operations by performing 1×1convolutions
to project features into deeper spaces. On the other hand,
stage II corresponds to the procedure of feature aggrega-
tion, despite the differences in their learning paradigms.
From the computation perspective, the 1×1convolu-
tions conducted at Stage I of both convolution and self-
attention modules require a quadratic complexity of theoret-
ical FLOPs and parameters with regard to the channel size
C. Comparably, at stage II both modules are lightweight or
nearly free of computation.
As a conclusion, the above analysis shows that (1) Con-
volution and self-attention practically share the same oper-
ation on projecting the input feature maps through 1×1con-
volutions, which is also the computation overhead for both
modules. (2) Although crucial for capturing semantic fea-
tures, the aggregation operations at stage II are lightweight
and do not acquire additional learning parameters.
4.2. Integration of Self-Attention and Convolution
The aforementioned observations naturally lead to an el-
egant integration of convolution and self-attention. As both
modules share the same 1×1convolution operations, we
can only perform the projection once, and reuse these inter-
mediate feature maps for different aggregation operations
respectively. The illustration of our proposed mixed mod-
ule, ACmix, is shown in Fig.2(c).
Specifically, ACmix also comprises two stages. At Stage
I, input feature is projected by three 1×1convolutions and
reshaped into Npieces, respectively. Thus, we obtain a rich
set of intermediate features containing 3×Nfeature maps.
At Stage II, they are used following different paradigms.For the self-attention path, we gather the intermediate fea-
tures into Ngroups, where each group contains three pieces
of features, one from each 1×1convolution. The corre-
sponding three feature maps serve as queries, keys, and val-
ues, following the traditional multi-head self-attention mod-
ules (Eq.(12)). For the convolution path with kernel size k,
we adopt a light fully connected layer and generate k2fea-
ture maps. Consequently, by shifting and aggregating the
generated features (Eq.(7),(8)), we process the input feature
in a convolution manner, and gather information from a lo-
cal receptive field like the traditional ones.
Finally, outputs from both paths are added together and
the strengths are controlled by two learnable scalars:
Fout=αFatt+βFconv. (13)
4.3. Improved Shift and Summation
As shown in Sec.4.2 and Fig.2, intermediate features in
the convolution path follow the shift and summation op-
erations as conducted in traditional convolution modules.
Despite that they are theoretically lightweight, shifting ten-
sors towards various directions practically breaks the data
locality and is difficult to achieve vectorized implementa-
tion. This may greatly impair the actual efficiency of our
module at the inference time.
As a remedy, we resort to applying depthwise convolu-
tion with fixed kernels as a replacement of the inefficient
tensor shifts, as shown in Fig.3 (b). Take Shift( f,−1,−1)
as an example, shifted feature is computed as:
˜fc,i,j=fc,i−1,j−1,∀c, i, j, (14)
where crepresents each channel of the input feature.
On the other hand, if we denote convolution kernel (ker-
819