7 to process the input image dataset [89]. High processing 
consumes more time to validate the massive amount of 
data if found any error, it ta kes a cycle to check either 
code running perfectly or not. In short, the overall 
scenario is the time deplete with lots of processing power needed to compute several records.  
6.4. Bogus Data:  
Algorithmic data emerge, fortune model, this is the beginning of synthetic or fake data become the part of the real-world [90, 91]. Types of bogus are online websites or 
small companies, particularly start- up to create a mimic 
dataset for model training, creating the perfect dataset for research publication, offline survey collection, or non -
existent data. Identification of actual data from different sources and utilizes these collected datasets to find the unique outcome is one of the challenging tasks nowadays [92].  
6.5. ML Model/Algorithm does not 
Collaborate:   
Algo rithms are categorized into two parts; one is learning 
style while other is a similarity. Learning style algorithms 
separated in the form of supervised, unsupervised, and semi -supervised learning aspects [93, 94]. The similarity 
is used to grouping the same data together, instance-based, regression, regularization, clustering, decision -tree, 
Bayesian algorithms are the main examples. Limitation 
rises when the hybrid system means to collaborate with 
two algorithms to utilize both functionalities and make the  
machine more powerful than other run- time systems.  
7. Open Research Areas
A lot of work has been done on computer vision by using machine learning but still issues in the computer vision field.  
Object/ Vehicle Detection:  Vehicle and object 
detection is still required efficient algorithms to detect required object or vehicle in  the war situations to react 
quickly, so it required further development to fast processing to detect to react and prevent from damage [95, 105]. Compressed and large -scale images are the 
problems in the dataset to accurately detect objects, this will help  to easily detect vehicle and monitor their actives 
[96]. Poor visual and Low resolution of the satellite image is also an issue in object/vehicle detection, but development advance ML algorithms and model will help 
to use of Maximally Stable Extremal Regi ons for vehicle 
detection in complex situations low lightening conditions 
or under shadow regions [ 97, 98].  
Activity Recognition:  Activity recognition in 
images/videos still required ML -based efficient 
algorithms and models, which measure indexing, recog nition rate, accuracy, robustness, efficiency, single 
activity and multiple type and level of activity recognition 
[99].   
Human pose estimation:  This is also a major 
research area of computer vision, which based on the 
analysis of the pose of humans in a n image [10 0]. This is 
the process of calculating the actual position of human joints in video or image. The research of computer vision 
is still facing the problem of the location of human joints 
in images  [104] .  It is  also important to note that pose 
estimation has various sub- tasks such as single pose 
estimation, estimating poses in an image with many people, estimating poses in crowded places, and estimating poses in videos  [101] . 
8. Conclusion
In this paper,  the im portance of ML in the i mage 
processing (IP) domain is highlighted and address the 
processes  of digital image and how difficult is to feed the 
computer  system . For this processes, the acquisition is the 
first step of IP where image can load and prepare for further process (briefly elaborate in image processing section). In the end, we get label image objects in the 
detection and recognition phases. Neural Networks (NN) 
is one of the ML algorithms, which aims to optimize solutions of the given problem to provide better solution and predicate output by providing input values. Well -
known companies adopted NN for maintaining entire applications and one of them is Amazon the world -
famous organization utilizes NN for its power recommendation engine, Microsoft for t ranslation 
purpose, Facebook for facial detection and recognition, and Google use NN for Gmail spam filter, etc. Also,  we 
have discussed the concept of deep learning , the emerging 
technology of AI , which is the subfield of ML, the advent 
of the technology it grabs the attention of researchers  
nowadays . We conclude as machine learning spread all 
the corners of computer vision and well perform in all those areas, but unfortunately, there are still some open research areas, where researchers need to  focus on it and 
fill these areas, which are mention in open research areas 
section.  
Declarations. 
Availability of data and materials  
• No associated data available related to this paper
Competing interests
• Authors did not have any conflict of interest.
Funding• There is no funding available for this research
Authors' contributions• First author proposes and write draft and 2ndauthor is supervise and revised the paper. 3rdauthors review the paper for language and typing
issues.
References  
Machine Learning in Computer Vision: A Review  
EAI Endorsed Transactions 
Scalable Information Systems 
06 2021 - 08 2021 | Volume 8 | Issue 32 | e4