Abdull
ah Ayub Khan, Asif Ali Laghari, and Shafique Ahmed Awan 
4 human neurons into artificial neurons from the very first 
time in 1943 [46], the notion of perception in NN given 
by Frank Rosenblatt, a probabilistic model for 
information storage, funded by US Naval and successfully implemented at Cornell Aeronautical Research Lab in 1958 [47]. The basic building block of NN; computational model working on parallel with no centralized control unit, weight is the primary mean of storing information in 
neurons for the long term and amend the weight then 
updating information storage of NN as well. The architecture of NN is based on three main parts: (i) number of neurons (ii) number of layers and (iii) connecti ons between layers [48].  
Feedforward neural networks (FFNN) is an acyclic 
network and input values move forward from input nodes to hidden, then hidden to output neurons. Feedforward has 
a single and  multilayer perceptron, single layer 
feedforward perceptron (SFFP) or linear threshold is 
typically based on a single output layer [49]. It contains an aggregate of input values with weights and activation function of artificial neurons only fire when the threshold 
value is zero (0). If the value of threshold is  less than zero 
(-1) then add parameter known as bias for stabling the 
output otherwise model goes deactivated. Bias is the 
constant intercept (output = sum (input * weight) + bias)[1] add to the product of aggregate input and weight for setting the thresh old value of activation function. In a 
multilayer feedforward perceptron (MFFP), nodes of each layer are fully connected to sub layers of others to make a network; means there is an input layer, one or more hidden layers and a single output layer [50].  
Each layer has a different number of neurons and 
connected with the same as an acyclic graph. The 
backpropagation learning algorithm, the essential task is 
to reduce the error rate by tuning the weight of NN [25]. In the phase of feedforward, the model cannot  work 
properly and produce error then backpropagation goes back in the previous iteration for retaining the probabilistic connecting weight for minimizing error 
value. For optimization algorithms, gradient descent is the 
iterative process that minimizes lo ss function by updating 
the parameter of the model (parameter refers to the weight of neural nets) [51]. In gradient descent, the learning rate is the size of those steps, which we take to reduce the rate 
of error. If we take a high learning rate, more ste ps cover 
to reach our desired result, but risk increases. If we take a low learning rate (local minima), the overall process is 
time-consuming but efficient, it takes fewer steps to move 
toward the goal with low risk [1]. Cost (also known as a loss) function tells how well our model or how our model performs accurately. It plots its own curve and gradient in the graph.  
This is the complete and concise overview of NN, 
advancement occurs when introducing innovation in the 
field of artificial NN is a convolut ional neural network 
(CNN) in DL [52, 53]. The main agenda behind the 
concept is to build strong AI which acts and think same as a human [54], CNN is an active learning algorithm  [1], 
the objective  is to recognized visual features of input 
image, ad just weight and bias (if needed) for differentiate 
object of one from others [55]. Moreover, researchers applied CNN mostly on a visual dataset to retrieve hidden information and make system knowledgeable for automatically recognized different objects from a different facet of an image. If we compare CNN with 
classification algorithms, CNN takes the low amount in 
the pre -processing phase while taking the high amount in 
the filtering process for enough training (ability to learn 
more characteristics), as compared t o this, classification 
algorithms are totally opposite of CNN. The contribution of CNN is not limited in CV but most of its features used 
for classifying sentences in Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) [56]. The architecture of CNN is inspired from the huma n visual cortex, connective patterns of brain neurons 
[57]. The receptive field in architecture, individual neuron responds only in a restricted region of visual field simultaneously [58  , 105 ]. In this context, defining the 
basic difference of DL and  neural nets, more than two 
hidden layers in NN model is probably called DL, which Highlighting the main aspect of gradient descent, learning rate, loss function, convolutional NN, and architecture of CNN.  
4. Tools and Applications
In this review paper, list of  eleven most popular tools of 
machine learning described in Table 1 with its features, platform capability, commercial and  non-commercial 
products,  and availability of supporting programming 
language domain.  
Table 1. Tools  and Application of Machine Learning
Name of Tool  Platform 
Support  Paid/Non -
paid  Language  Features  
Scikit Learn [59, 60]  Windows  
Linux  
Mac OS  Non-paid C 
C++ 
Python  Clustering  
Classification  
Regression  
Pre-processing  
Model Selection  
TensorFlow [61, 62]  Windows  Non-paid Python  Library for dataflow programming  
EAI Endorsed Transactions 
Scalable Information Systems 
06 2021 - 08 2021 | Volume 8 | Issue 32 | e4