Machine Learning in Computer Vision: A Review  
3 provides open research issues for future work. Finally, in 
section 8 we conclude this review paper.  
2.Machine Learning Techniques for
Image Processing
Image processing (IP) means process image through a digital computer. Utilization of algorithms for enhanced quality of an image, on the bases of this system, can extract crucial information from the image [22, 23]. There are two  main types namely: analogous and digital image 
processing (DIP) [24, 25]. In IP, get input as an image and after process system retrieves output in the form of an image. Mentioning the three important key factors of IP which are discussed below:  
•Start with the image acquisition
•Manipulating and analyzing the image
•Output in the form of an image which is based onanalyzing
In a digital computer, everything stores in the form of 
binary, storage of an image in pixels (raster), each pixel represents some numeric values of the two- dimensional 
array (i.e. x means row and y mean column). In analogue  
IP, processing can be applying on printout image, photographs mean any hard copies, utilize fundamental visual techniques to analyze the image. While at the other 
end, DIP manipulates digital images by simply follow 
three basic rules: (i) pre -processing, (ii) enhancement, and 
(iii) extraction of the information displayed throughdigital computer [26].
Phases of IP starts with image acquisition, it is the first 
step of IP were  applying to scale on load image (convert 
RGB into gray- scale) [27, 28]. Image enhancement 
technique facilitates to extract hidden detail from the input image. Image restoration dea ls with the degradation 
on the bases of the mathematical or probabilistic model. Color image processing is another phase of IP where it 
handles the color model (pseudo- color and full color) of 
IP. Wavelets and  multi- resolution processing used to 
check imag es from various levels of degree [29]. After 
completion angle rotation, shrink size and resolution of 
the image, this is known as compression.  
Morphological processing is one of the pivotal steps of 
IP and excerpt information of components and sends it to  
segmentation phases were partitioning the image into objects (the difficult task is to segment an autonomous picture) [30 , 102 ]. These objects represent the processed 
data transform from the solution space of segmentation [30, 103] . At last, object detection and recognition assign 
a label for those objects which use in future processing. In DIP, digitize analogue image or video signal, digitization is the process of converting continuous into a digital image, it can only be done when image function (x, y) digitized both spatial and in amplitude. Sampling refers to take a sample and determine the spatial resolution of an image, there are two main parts of sampling (i) up -
sampling and (ii) down- sampling [31]. Variation occurs in 
the signal randomly due to noise. In sampling, the process of reducing noise is to get more samples [32]. The process of quantization is opposite from sampling (digitize the amplitudes) and the level of gray in the scale determines the level of quantization [31]. There are three main t ypes 
of images use to process digitally: (i) binary image, (ii) 
gray-scale, and (iii) color image, further explain in the 
next paragraphs.  
ML is the imperative factor of IP, unsupervised used 
for feature extraction, and supervised used to label objects 
for detection and recognition [33, 34]. In unsupervised 
ML, researchers share various research  publicly related to 
the elicitation of critical features in an image. Segmentation applied through the process of histogram then clustering. In clustering, color -based segmentation 
only done by Fuzzy C, where similar color pixels group together means cluster, similarly, segment texture image through the K -mean algorithm [35]. Expectation 
Maximize algorithm’s parameters based on unsupervised operation in model -based segmentation [35].  
Several real -time IP applications running on 
unsupervised ML techniques one work provide by Zhong et.al successfully build computational intelligence in 
optical remote sensing using IP clustering [36]. Ghosh 
et.al elaborate unsupervised changes detection of remote sensing images and compare two images of the same geographical area using a fuzzy clustering algorithm [37, 38]. Moreover, it is  widely used in the CV medical 
imaging field where it helps the system to diagnose 
disease; manual assessment of diagnosing malaria is the 
long step process and prone to human error. Purwa et.al developed unsupervised automatic detection of sensitive malaria screening techniques [39].  
It is not the stopping point of unsupervised learning, 
but there are  more areas cover with the real -time 
application. Supervised Learning is learning where we train or test machines using the labelled  dataset, the label 
means already tagged data for classification purposes. In supervised learning, Support Vector Machine (SVM ) 
widely use in NLP for recognizing handwritten and scan 
text images [40]. Classify cell biology to recognize 
phenotypes in medical imaging [41]. In robotics, supervised machine learning plays a vital role in the visual perception of forest trail for mobile robots [42]. Erickson et.al labels “benign” and “malignant” to detect brain tumour  medical image [43]. Tuia et.al emphasis 
supervised learning in remote sensing image classification [44].  
3.Neural Network (NN) Based Models
Deep learning (DL) is the new est innovation of 
researchers, but the fact is DL is the subfield of ML; it  is 
just the model name of neural networks [45 , 104]. The 
idea of NN is popup by the concept of biological neurons of an individual. McCulloch and Walter Pitts derived 
EAI Endorsed Transactions 
Scalable Information Systems 
06 2021 - 08 2021 | Volume 8 | Issue 32 | e4