Abdull
ah Ayub Khan, Asif Ali Laghari, and Shafique Ahmed Awan 
6 continuously learning, Facebook suggests a 
list of friends, pages, ads you probably want 
to connect. One more thing, when we upload 
picture and person on the picture can automatically tag (face- recognition) on 
Facebook because of ML unsupervised.  
•Email spamming, rule -based spam filter
restricts spammer to track. The system
security programs powered by ML to detect
malware code patterns.
•Google search engine adopts ML techniquesto handle top results clicking by users,different algorithms run on the backend formanaging results as per visiting. Google also
use ML for translation and Gmail spam
filtering purpose.
5. Online Available Dataset for Computer
Vision/Image Processing
Ther
e are many datasets were developed for the research 
purpose, which varies according to the number of images, 
categories, and types of images such as medical, hyperspectral, satellites, video streams, grayscale and RGB natural images. In this paper, we enlist the most  
popular image dataset, which is used for image processing/computer vision.  
Labelled Faces in the Wild:  this dataset available 
on the web site of the University of Massachusetts [77], this dataset contains 13,000 labelled images of human faces, for use in  developing applications that involve 
facial recognition.  
Stanford Dogs Dataset:  this dataset provides by 
computer vision research group of Stanford University, which Contains 20,580 images and 120 different dog breed categories, with about 150 images pe r class [78].  
Places:  this dataset developed MIT Computer 
Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and  
available on the website, which is based on a Scene -
centric database with 205 scene categories and 2.5 million images with a category label [79].  
CelebFaces:  this dataset is designed by 
Multimedia laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong and this Face dataset contains more than 200,000 celebrity images, each with 40 attribute annotations [80].  
Plant Image Analysis:  this dataset based on the 
collection of plant images and collection based on over 1 million images of plants. It can choose from 11 species of 
plants [81].  
Indoor Scene Recognition:  this dataset based on 
the 67 indoor categories and contains 15620 images. This 
dataset is freely available for research purpose and all images are in the format of jpg and every category at least 100 images [82].    MedPix:  this dataset is based on the medical 
images and freely available for research purposes. This 
dataset contains 59000 images related to medical [83].  
6. Challenges, Issues,  and Limitations
In computer vision, limitations emerge due to training 
machine accordingly dataset, the concept rises called underfit and overfit, means not to train a system with less 
amount of data nor with the huge amount of data. In this 
paper, mention the five main aspects of raising challenges in the domain of image processing discuss below:  
6.1. Algorithms Required Huge Amount of 
Data for Better Performance:  
In this context, a machine requires a large amount of data 
for training and without this machine can’t perform well enough as expected [84, 85]. Underfitting occurs when the algorithm do es not fit the data and increase bias and 
decrease variance. Another scenario is overfitting it occurs in training phases, where model overload because of the ration of training data, decrease bias and increase variance [86]. The collection of valid data, which is useful for further process, is another critical issue rising by gathering data from different origins but ensure data is in 
a particular domain. The problem arises when conduct 
questionnaires, people can’t respond 100% as we expected results recei ved according to the filling of 
questionnaires by people and training and testing the model through vague data generates error ratio [87].  
6.2. Require Lengthy Offline Labelling of 
Training Data:  
Right now, AI is facing difficulty to label data, almost 
80% of real -world data are gathered, organizing, and label 
[1], data -labelling requires lots of efforts to train, validate, 
and tune model, this isn’t an easy task [88]. The vast gap between data- increment and data -recognition. Reason to 
require lengthy offl ine labelling: low quality, scale, 
inefficient or costly, quality assurance. Estimate steps to convert unlabelled  to labelled  training data: (i) data -
identification, (ii) data -aggregation, (iii) data -cleansing, 
(iv) data -augmentation and (v) data -labelling , after that
prepare algorithm for further process (vi) ML -
optimization, (vii) ML -model tuning, (viii) ML -model
training, and (ix) ML -algorithm development. These are
the main process of labelling  data to execute the ML
algorithm.
6.3. High Processing Power:  
Now, this is another challenging task to handle for the field researchers. ML requires more computational power 
EAI Endorsed Transactions 
Scalable Information Systems 
06 2021 - 08 2021 | Volume 8 | Issue 32 | e4