Abdullah A
yub Khan, Asif Ali Laghari, and Shafique Ahmed Awan 
2 (expert system: MYCIN), self -driving car, and 
humanoids.  
Whereas m achine learning is the subfield of AI [6]. 
The machine can learn automatically (train) from a given 
dataset and it will be  able to take a proper decision (test) 
by itself [ 7]. In ML, the dataset is the main key 
checkpoint contains millions of unique records  [8]. Data 
categories into two main formats, either it may  qualitative 
or quantitative. Qualitative data collected through interviews, observation, and written documents [9], while quantitative have numerical records which can be measured for statically analysis [10]. Qualitative means machine can recognize the s hape of different objects, 
color , size, weight, models, etc.  
ML can classify into three most important learning 
techniques: (i) supervised (SL), (ii) unsupervised (USL), and (iii) semi- supervised learning (SSL). SL, function to 
labelled  training data, used to prediction. Classification 
and regression come under supervised learning; popular algorithms are Support Vector Machine (SVM), KNN, 
logistic regression, Decision tree, and random forest [11]. 
On another end, USL has unlabelled training data, used to extract features from the input data [12].  
Clustering means a group of similar data or records and 
it is the part of unsupervised. If we talk about the 
clustering algorithm then only one thing popup in our mind, which is K -mean, but there are varied more lik e 
hierarchical clustering and DBSCAN, etc. At last, SSL is the collaboration of both SL and USL, it has a small amount of labelled and large amount of unlabelled data, mainly used in information retrieval, image processing, 
and bio -information [12]. In thi s process, first, we apply 
to cluster on an unlabelled dataset for group same data 
after labelling those data with the help of classification. Preferred algorithms are continuity, cluster, and manifold assumptions.  
At last, SSL is the collaboration of both  SL and USL, it 
has a small amount of labelled and large amount of unlabelled data, mainly used in information retrieval, image processing, and bio- information [13]. In this 
process, first, we apply to cluster on an unlabelled dataset for group same data a fter labelling those data with the 
help of classification. Preferred algorithms are continuity, cluster, and manifold assumptions.  
The journey of computer vision (CV) started in 1960, 
where father of computer vision Larry Roberts proposed 3D geometrical in formation extraction from 2D 
perspective polyhedral concepts in his Ph.D. thesis at MIT 
[13]. At the initial stage, CV illustrates, extraction of 
crucial information through digital images using computational models. Elaborating dual goals, vision is used as an autonomous system for the engineering point 
of views just like a human can perform a visual task, while computational models applied in the human 
biological system for detecting symptoms of diseases in 
the body [14].  
From an engineering perspective, CV has successfully 
applied to an educational environment where attendance monitoring systems used to get students’ attendance automatically by face detection and recognition through camera [15]. Unmanned Arial Vehicle (UAV) is a vision -
based agent using surveillance of unwanted situation without a human pilot, Kanellakis et.al wrote a survey article based on current development and latest application on UAV systems [16]. In a biological context, medical imaging (MI) is an emerging field, and the number of research is going to increase day -by-day for the 
betterment of society.  
The purpose of MI is to extract essential information 
from the medical image, but at a certain stage lack of quality of images can create another challenging aspect for all researchers . Kesner et.al highlights the concepts of 
digitizing and application of MI data in the innovation age 
[17]. MI is the costly process, automatic extraction of the 
labelled image with NLP from the radiology report for maintaining expert annotation [18]. In a  recent report of 
McKinsey and  Company, New York USA, author Alan 
Alexander et.al set the future direction of MI in 2021, where technology cluster growth rate, cutting edge 
practice, and the implication is the key aspect of future 
blockchain innovations [1 9]. At the same time, 
technology has little limitations in distinct areas which are discussed below:  
•In an agricultural viewpoint, farming
through robots using CV and ML techniques
for increasing productivity with quality.Encounter countless agricultural constraints:object color, size, texture, and reflectanceproperties [20].
•Several applications and research available
on handwritten and documented script text
recognition but detecting real -time image
e.g., street view image and recognize each
character properly of the image is still the
rising problem for machine learning [21].
•A smaller number of image dataset is one of
the limitations in ML where training and
testing can only be performed accuratelywhen providing a huge amount of labelled orunlabelle d data.
This paper will address the importance of machine 
learning and deep learning, state of art, and how ML is utilized in computer vision and image processing. This survey will provide details about the type of tools and applications, datasets, and techniques. Limitations of previous work and challenges of future work also discussed. Further, we identify and discuss a set of open 
issues yet to be addressed, for efficiently applying of ML 
in Computer vision and image process.  
The paper organized in 8 sections and section 2 is 
based on Machine learning techniques for image processing. In section 3 we provide details of Neural network models, section 4 is based on the tools and 
applications and section 5 provides information about 
datasets for computer vision and image processing. Similarly, section 6 based on the challenges and limitations of machine learning research and section 7 
EAI Endorsed Transactions 
Scalable Information Systems 
06 2021 - 08 2021 | Volume 8 | Issue 32 | e4