the distance between two sets of samples but we expect to
achieve this in a more simple and efﬁcient way by exploiting
the separable and tight clusters in the feature space. Draw-
ing inspiration from feature matching GANs [38] which op-
timizes the distance between the ﬁrst-order statistics of dis-
tributions and demonstrates striking results on SSL tasks,
we choose to extend it to work in a conditional way. For-
mally, we introduce the following cluster alignment loss:
La(Xs,Xt) =1
KK/summationdisplay
k=1/bardblλs,k−λt,k/bardbl2
2, (8)
whereλs,kandλt,kare calculated by
λs,k=1
|Xs,k|/summationdisplay
xis∈Xs,kf(xi
s), λt,k=1
|Xt,k|/summationdisplay
xi
t∈Xt,kf(xi
t)
(9)
whereXs,kis the subset of Xscontaining all the source
samples whose ground-truth labels are kandXt,kis the
subset of Xtincluding all the target samples annotated as
classkby the teacher classiﬁer ˜h. This loss is slightly dif-
ferent from the original feature matching loss: it matches
the statistics of the representation space Fwhich totally
determine the predictions instead of those produced by an
extra critic network. Arguably, the objective has a local op-
tima where class-conditional distributions are matched thor-
oughly. The cluster alignment loss and the discriminative
clustering loss work together to align the class-conditional
structures of the two domains in a discriminative way.
3.2.3 Improved marginal distribution alignment
In fact, the source domain and target domain in the existing
popular UDA tasks ( e.g., digits adaptation and Ofﬁce-31 )
have analogous marginal distributions. Therefore, in these
experiments, we combine CAT with the marginal distribu-
tion alignment methods, and CAT contributes to bias them
to match the cluster-based marginal distributions. The nega-
tive effects of these methods of ignoring the discriminability
may hurt the stability of training and the capability of con-
verged models. For example, several target circle samples
in Fig. 1-left will be misclassiﬁed by them.
We are dedicated to delivering a technique to improve
these models given the observation that in the early stages of
training, a portion of target samples lie around the decision
boundaries of the adapted classiﬁer, i.e., they have low clas-
siﬁcation conﬁdence (the largest output probability) and are
likely to be misclassiﬁed. Therefore, these samples are pos-
sible to be mapped into the incorrect clusters in the marginal
alignment process and the training falls into local optima.
To solve this, we propose to use conﬁdence-thresholding
method to hold out uncertain data points with conﬁdence
less than p, while aligning the conﬁdent instances whichare more geometrically close to the source domain with the
source data. Formally, we instantiate this technique in the
typical and brief RevGrad [7] and propose robust RevGrad
(rRevGrad) which optimizes the following loss:
min
θmax
φLd(Xs,Xt) =1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1/bracketleftbig
logc/parenleftbig
f(xi
s;θ);φ/parenrightbig/bracketrightbig
+
1
˜M˜M/summationdisplay
i=1/bracketleftbig
log/parenleftbig
1−c/parenleftbig
f(xi
t;θ);φ/parenrightbig/parenrightbig
γi/bracketrightbig
,(10)
wherecis the critic model parameterized by φandγiis an
indicator function which outputs 1 only if teacher’s conﬁ-
dence ofxi
tis greater than p. With the divergence between
the two domains decreasing, more and more target samples
are selected into the domain adversarial training. Gradually,
almost all the target samples are included in the training
which avoids the lost of target information. We empirically
observed that rRevGrad improves the classiﬁcation perfor-
mance on the target domain and enhances the stability of
training (see Sec.4).
3.3. Discussion
Comparison with SSL based deep UDA methods [41,
36, 6]. CAT not only implements of cluster assumption
for better classiﬁcation but also imposes a class-conditional
alignment between domains which is more principal in
UDA. However, [41, 36, 6] focus on improving classiﬁer
to make it more consistent and robust for the target domain
based on cluster assumption. Thus CAT is compatible to
these methods (see Sec. 4).
Comparison with MSTN [49]. The cluster alignment
loss using conditional feature matching technique is similar
to the semantic loss in MSTN [49]. However, in MSTN,
minimizing distance between centers is necessary but not
sufﬁcient to achieve semantic alignment. In CAT, we reg-
ularize the features to form separable and tight clusters, so
the feature matching based loss can match the clusters nat-
urally. They are also different in implementation.
Mini-batch stochastic training of CAT. We implement
the two objectives in CAT using stochastically sampled
mini-batches as XsandXt. Speciﬁcally, Lcis an instance-
wise loss and can work well. The class-conditional expecta-
tionλs,korλt,kinLccould be none when these is no points
belonging to class k. At this time, we remove the term cor-
responding to class kin Eq. 8 and calculate the mean of the
other terms. We empirically ﬁnd CAT needs only 0.05×
more training time on a GTX 1080Ti when combining with
existing methods.
Teacher-student paradigm. First, using teacher as la-
beling function on target domain avoids the error ampliﬁca-
tion issue. Furthermore, once the classiﬁer becomes more
accurate on the target domain, the teacher classiﬁer per-
9948