in the alignment procedure, thus hard to attain the objec-
tive of discriminative learning. Conversely, CAT explicitly
discovers classes in the feature space via a teacher model
and hence constructs a more reasonable matching proce-
dure. Concurrently, several works [51, 48] analyze the con-
ditional distribution shift and label distribution shift issues
in UDA theoretically, but only propose limited solutions. In
contrast, we provide a more practical and more powerful
way to solve them.
Using a teacher model for labeling data is inspired by the
impressive consistency-based methods in semi-supervised
learning (SSL) [16, 42]. Recent attempts to apply SSL
techniques in UDA include [6, 41, 46]. CAT differs from
these previous works in that CAT exploits the discrimina-
tive class-conditional structures in both the alignment and
classiﬁcation procedures while they focus on improving the
classiﬁer for the target domain by implementing the cluster
assumption [3]. CAT imposes a much stronger regulariza-
tion and assists in a better alignment.
3. Methodology
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the setting and frame-
work of deep UDA and then present the Cluster Alignment
with a Teacher (CAT). Finally, we discuss about CAT.
3.1. Deep unsupervised domain adaptation
In an UDA task, we are given a set of source sam-
plesXs={xi
s}N
i=1with labels Ys={yi
s}N
i=1,yi
s∈
{1,2,...,K}and a set of unlabeled target samples Xt=
{xi
t}M
i=1. Notably, the two sets of samples are drawn from
different distributions which lead to the domain shift chal-
lenge. Therefore, the UDA algorithms should learn to adapt
the classiﬁer trained on the source domain to the unlabeled
target domain. Deep learning techniques have been intro-
duced into UDA [7, 44, 2, 20, 23, 37, 22, 24] and they
demonstrate remarkable performance across tasks. Gener-
ally, in these methods, the classiﬁer h(parameterized by θ)
is constructed as h=g◦fwherefmaps samples into
features in the space Fandgoutputs the predictions based
on the extracted features. The learning includes simultane-
ously optimizing the classiﬁer hw.r.t. the labeled source
data and minimizing the distance between the marginal dis-
tributions of the two domains in the feature space F, result-
ing in a domain-invariant feature space. Technically, in the
source domain, we minimize the supervised loss as:
min
θLy(Xs,Ys) =1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1ℓ(h(xi
s;θ),yi
s), (1)
whereℓis a pre-deﬁned loss, e.g., cross-entropy loss. Mean-
while, we minimize the discrepancy loss as:
min
θLd(Xs,Xt) =D(f(Xs,θ),f(Xt,θ)), (2)whereDis a distance and usually correlated with the H∆H
distance in the error bound theory of DA [1]. The theory re-
veals that the expected error on target samples of any clas-
siﬁerhdrawn from a hypothesis set Hhas the following
bound [1, 49]:
ǫt(h)≤ǫs(h)+1
2dH∆H(s,t)
+min
ˆh∈H(ǫs(ˆh,ls)+ǫt(ˆh,lt))
≤ǫs(h)+1
2dH∆H(s,t)+ǫt(ls,lt)
+min
ˆh∈H(ǫs(ˆh,ls)+ǫt(ˆh,ls)),(3)
whereǫs(h)denotes the expected error on source samples
ofh, andlsandltrepresent the labelling functions [1] for
the source and target domains, respectively. ǫt(ls,lt)de-
notes the disagreement between the labelling functions in
the target domain. Notably, minˆh∈H(ǫs(ˆh,ls) +ǫt(ˆh,ls))
can be small enough by optimizing ˆhw.r.t. the labeled
source data. The supervised loss and discrepancy loss focus
on minimizing ǫs(h)anddH∆H(s,t)respectively to obtain
small target domain classiﬁcation error.
However, the methods working in the above framework
are not problemless. Theoretically, they ignore minimizing
ǫt(ls,lt)which may lead to a large upper bound of ǫt(h)
and result in unsatisfying target domain performance [49].
Empirically, the data in classiﬁcation naturally has a class-
conditional multi-modal structure, thus aligning marginal
distributions while ignoring the ﬁne-level discriminative
structures of domains may hurt the target classiﬁcation per-
formance (Fig. 1-left). Moreover, these methods may fail
in more practical and challenging problems, e.g. the source
and target domains have obviously different class imbalance
ratios (Fig. 1-right).
3.2. Cluster Alignment with a Teacher
To overcome these issues, we expect to exploit the ﬁne-
level structures in the feature space for discriminative learn-
ing and match the class-conditional distributions of source
and target domains to reduce of the mismatching between
lsandlt. Therefore, in the deep UDA scenario, we propose
Cluster Alignment with a Teacher (CAT), a new deep UDA
model for more effective adaptation. Speciﬁcally, for the
objectives of discriminative learning and class-conditional
alignment between domains, we propose a discriminative
clustering loss Lcto force the features of both the source
and the target domains to form discriminative clusters, and
a cluster-based alignment loss Lato align the clusters cor-
responding to the same class in different domains. Given
them, we propose to train CAT by solving the following op-
timization problem:
min
θLy+α(Lc+La), (4)
9946