Teacher 
PredictionsStudent
f(x)
f(    ) feature space
Labels
TeacherEnsemble
xs
xtys
˜h(xt)xs
f(    ) feature spacext
LaLc
Lc
Figure 2: The framework of CAT (The source supervised
lossLyis omitted for clarity).
where the hyper-parameter αsets a relative trade-off. The
whole framework is shown in Fig. 2. We build a teacher
classiﬁer, i.e. an implicit ensemble of the classiﬁer to be op-
timized, to provide pseudo labels for the unlabeled target
data. These pseudo labels will be used in LcandLa. We
use stochastically sampled mini-batches in the two objec-
tives and the two classiﬁers make predictions in a forward-
propagation way, thus CAT can be trained more efﬁciently
than [40]. Furthermore, LcandLaoptimize the feature
space directly and will be more effective than the nearest
neighbor based clustering loss in [40]. We elaborate Lcand
Lain the following sections.
3.2.1 Discriminative clustering with a teacher
For better classiﬁcation and alignment, we propose to dis-
cover the class-conditional structures in the feature space
in both the source and the target domains, and then shape
them to be discriminative clusters. In the source domain,
the class-conditional structure is obvious because the data is
fully labeled. Nevertheless, in the target domain, we cannot
obtain the class-conditional structure easily due to the lack
of labels. The semantic similarity between the two domains
implies that the classiﬁer htrained on the source domain can
predict most of target samples correctly. Consequently, us-
ing pseudo labels [18] as the annotations for target data and
conducting self-training is a direct approach, but it suffers
from the error ampliﬁcation issue which can be detrimental
to the learning procedure. To discover the class-conditional
structure of the target features in a reliable way, we intro-
duce a teacher classiﬁer ˜hdeﬁned as an implicit ensemble
of the previous student classiﬁer h[16] to provide pseudo
labels for target data.
Based on the pseudo labels given by the teacher, we can
explicitly force the target class-conditional structure to be
more discriminative using a clustering loss. For the source
domain, a similar one can be applied. Formally, resembling
the effective SNTG loss in [25], we employ the following
discriminative clustering loss (we omit the dependence of fonθfor clarity, unless stated otherwise):
Lc(Xs,Xt) =Lc(Xs)+Lc(Xt), (5)
Lc(X) =1
|X|2|X|/summationdisplay
i=1|X|/summationdisplay
j=1/bracketleftbig
δijd/parenleftbig
f(xi),f(xj)/parenrightbig
+
(1−δij)max/parenleftbig
0,m−d/parenleftbig
f(xi),f(xj)/parenrightbig/parenrightbig/bracketrightbig
,(6)
wheredis the distance ( e.g., squared Euclidean distance)
between two features, mis a pre-deﬁned margin, and δijis
an indicator function which outputs 1 only if xiandxjhave
the same ground truth label (source domain) or teacher-
annotated label (target domain). Lcencourages the fea-
tures from the same class to concentrate together and pushes
the features from different classes far away from each other
with a distance mat least. This loss modiﬁes the structures
in the representation space gradually, and consequently, it
demonstrates a class-conditional cluster structure (as shown
in Sec. 4.4). Note that minimizing Lcis consistent with the
cluster assumption [25] of classiﬁer and beneﬁts the perfor-
mance of classiﬁcation.
It’s a common doubt whether the incorrect predictions
of the teacher classiﬁer would destroy the training dynam-
ics. However, previous works on semi-supervised learn-
ing [16, 42] have validated that this kind of training al-
ways leads to good convergence and demonstrates robust-
ness against incorrect labels. Intuitively, the teacher in-
structs the training of one instance through a bundle of oth-
ers’ predictions which alleviates the negative inﬂuence of
incorrect predictions notably and aids the student to give
better predictions.
3.2.2 Cluster alignment via conditional feature match-
ing
Once the feature space presents discriminative cluster struc-
ture, the classiﬁer is expected to make more accurate predic-
tions. However, the label predictor gtrained on source do-
main features may fail due to the geometrical mismatching
between the clusters which correspond to the same class in
different domains. This kind of mismatching is brought by
the individual characteristics of each domain. As a result,
it is necessary to impose a class-conditional alignment of
two domains to learn better domain-invariant features and
adjust the target feature space to be more suitable for clas-
siﬁcation. Naturally, we expect to minimize the divergence
between the corresponding clusters in source domain and
the teacher-annotated target domain:
min
θD(Fs,k||Ft,k), (7)
whereFs,k(Ft,k) denotes the set consisting of all the fea-
tures belonging to class kof domain s(domaint). Exten-
sive previous works [9, 19] have been proposed to minimize
9947