Cluster Alignment with a Teacher for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhijie Deng, Yucen Luo, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Lab, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
{dzj17, luoyc15 }@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep learning methods have shown promise in unsuper-
vised domain adaptation, which aims to leverage a labeled
source domain to learn a classiﬁer for the unlabeled target
domain with a different distribution. However, such meth-
ods typically learn a domain-invariant representation space
to match the marginal distributions of the source and target
domains, while ignoring their ﬁne-level structures. In this
paper, we propose Cluster Alignment with a Teacher (CAT)
for unsupervised domain adaptation, which can effectively
incorporate the discriminative clustering structures in both
domains for better adaptation. Technically, CAT leverages
an implicit ensembling teacher model to reliably discover
the class-conditional structure in the feature space for the
unlabeled target domain. Then CAT forces the features of
both the source and the target domains to form discrimina-
tive class-conditional clusters and aligns the correspond-
ing clusters across domains. Empirical results demonstrate
that CAT achieves state-of-the-art results in several unsu-
pervised domain adaptation scenarios.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable performance in a
wide variety of computer vision tasks, such as image recog-
nition [15] and object detection [33]. However, classiﬁers
trained on speciﬁc datasets cannot always generalize ef-
fectively to new datasets owing to the well-known domain
shift problem [5, 43]. Enabling models to generalize from
a source domain to a target domain is usually referred to
as domain adaptation (DA) [1]. In many cases, it is ex-
pensive or difﬁcult to collect annotations on the target do-
main. Learning algorithms attempting to tackle the transfer-
ring problem from a fully labeled source domain to an unla-
beled target domain is called unsupervised domain adapta-
tion (UDA) [10]. UDA is particularly challenging because
the target domain cannot provide explicit information to fa-
cilitate the adaptation of classiﬁers.
∗Corresponding author.Source Target ClassiﬁerSource
TargetExisting methods Adapted
CATSource
TargetExisting methods Adapted
CAT
Figure 1: (Best viewed in color.) Left: The two domains
have diverse modes. Right: The two domains have differ-
ent class imbalance ratios. Existing methods aligning the
marginal distributions while ignoring the class-conditional
structures cannot perform well in these cases. However,
CAT incorporates the discriminative clustering structures
in both domains for better adaptation, thus delivers a more
reasonable domain-invariant cluster-structure feature space
with enhanced discriminative power. See Fig. 3 and Ap-
pendix. A for the learned feature space of real data.
Recently, deep models have been developed with
promise in unsupervised domain adaptation to learn expres-
sive features [45, 7, 22, 20, 44, 23, 37, 39, 36]. These deep
UDA methods mainly focus on matching the source and tar-
get domains via adversarial training [7, 44, 2, 20, 23, 49, 37,
13] or kernelized training [22, 23, 24]. The main hypothe-
sis behind them is that the marginal distributions of the two
domains can be aligned in some feature space learned by
optimizing a deep network, and thus the classiﬁer trained
with source data tends to perform well on the target domain.
Theoretical analysis [1] also shows that minimizing the di-
vergence between the marginal distributions in the learned
feature space is beneﬁcial to reduce the classiﬁer’s error.
However, these methods are not problemless. In clas-
siﬁcation, as the classes correspond to different semantics
and different characteristics, the marginal distribution of the
data naturally has a class-conditional multi-modal structure.
Moreover, the modes corresponding to the same class in dif-
ferent domains are not always geometrically similar. Thus,
it is not sufﬁcient for existing deep UDA methods to only
minimize the discrepancy between the marginal distribu-
tions while neglecting their structures, and such methods
tend to fail in challenging cases, such as those in Fig. 1.
9944