Properly incorporating this ﬁne-grained class-conditional
structure has been shown beneﬁcial in various tasks. For
example, Shi and Sha [40] make the discriminative cluster-
ingassumption which helps to adapt the decision bound-
aries for the source domain to the target domain discrimi-
natively.1However, one limitation of [40] is that it adopts
a simple linear transformation to learn the feature space,
which cannot effectively extract high-order features from
raw data (e.g., images) as the deep UDA methods. Another
limitation is that [40] builds a nearest neighbor based pre-
diction model, which outputs the prediction of one sample
based on all the source data. Then, the training is not com-
patible with the stochastic training of deep network and has
a high complexity.
In this paper, we present Cluster Alignment with a
Teacher (CAT), a new deep UDA model that incorporates
the class-conditional structures for more effective adapta-
tion. CAT conjoins the complimentary advantages of deep
learning methods and discriminative clustering methods for
UDA. Technically, there are three learning objectives in
CAT. At ﬁrst, CAT minimizes the supervised classiﬁcation
loss on the labeled source data and builds a teacher clas-
siﬁer, i.e. an implicit ensemble of the source classiﬁer, to
provide pseudo labels for unlabeled target data. The under-
lying notion is that the golden classiﬁer trained on source
domain can perform well on a majority of target samples
because of the similarity between the two domains and the
teacher-student paradigm is not sensitive to the false pseudo
labels [16]. To exploit the ﬁne-grained class-conditional
structures in the feature space and address the aforemen-
tioned issues suffered by existing deep UDA methods, CAT
also includes two objectives which depend on the pseudo
labels provided by the teacher classiﬁer. On one hand, for
discriminative learning in both domains, CAT deploys a
class-conditional clustering loss to force the features from
the same class to concentrate together and the features from
different classes to be separated. On the other hand, for
the class-conditional alignment between the two domains,
CAT aligns the clusters which correspond to the same class
but come from different domains via a conditional feature
matching loss. The prediction models used in CAT are a
student deep network and its implicit ensemble ( i.e., the
teacher classiﬁer), thus CAT can address the training issues
of [40] and also enjoy the more ﬂexible ability of feature
learning. Furthermore, it is obvious that CAT is compati-
ble to the marginal distribution alignment methods on the
tasks where the source data is similarly distributed as the
target data. The former can provide a ﬁne-grained class-
conditional alignment of domains and the latter can provide
a global alignment of them.
1Besides UDA tasks, previous work [30] has also shown an interesting
exploration of the class-conditional structures for learning deep models
that are robust against adversarial attacks.We evaluate the proposed CAT through extensive exper-
iments on both synthetic and real-world datasets. Empirical
results show that CAT presents striking performance across
various tasks. In addition, we further combine CAT with the
existing deep UDA methods, and CAT can bias them suc-
cessfully to achieve the discriminative alignment between
domains, establishing new state-of-the-art baselines on pop-
ular benchmarks. In the combined methods, we also pro-
pose a conﬁdence-thresholding technique to ﬁlter out low-
conﬁdence target samples (which are likely to be mapped
into incorrect clusters by the marginal distribution align-
ment methods) to enhance the stability of the training.
To summarize, our contributions are three-folds:
•We exploit the discriminative class-conditional struc-
tures of distributions in deep UDA and propose CAT
to achieve better alignment between the source domain
and the target domain.
•CAT is compatible and applicable to the existing UDA
methods which rely on marginal distribution align-
ment.
•Empirically, CAT is not sensitive to hyper-parameters
and can boost the marginal distribution alignment ap-
proaches signiﬁcantly, achieving new state-of-the-art
across various settings.
2. Related work
Unsupervised domain adaptation has drawn increasing
interests, and has been developed mainly in two directions:
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) based approaches
and adversarial training based approaches. Tzeng et al. [45]
and Long et al. [22] minimize MMD to match the two do-
mains while [23] proposes to align the joint distributions
of them using Joint MMD criterion. Since the develop-
ment of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9, 4],
adversarial training has been applied into domain adapta-
tion and fruitful works emerge. Ganin et al . [7] develop
the framework of domain adversarial training and plenty of
works are proposed to improve it by aligning source domain
and target domain better in the feature space [44, 49, 14]
or image space [20]. Zhang et al . [50] successfully ex-
tend RevGrad [7] to consider each domain’s characteristics
using collaborative games. Image to image translation ap-
proaches [8, 2, 13, 34, 28, 39] also play an important role in
the advancement of domain adaptation and demonstrate im-
pressive performance, especially on semantic segmentation
tasks. In addition, Saito et al. [37] propose to align the two
domains using decision boundaries of task-speciﬁc classi-
ﬁer. Associative DA [11] proposes an associative loss to
reduce discrepancy between domains and SimNet [31] pro-
poses to use a similarity-based classiﬁer in UDA. Though
the existing methods match the two domains in different
ways, most of them ignore the class-conditional information
9945