arXiv:1906.00591v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jun 2019Evaluating Gender Bias in Machine Translation
Gabriel Stanovsky1,2,Noah A. Smith1,2, and Luke Zettlemoyer1
1Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, Univ ersity of Washington, Seattle, USA
2Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, USA
{gabis,nasmith,lsz }@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
We present the ﬁrst challenge set and eval-
uation protocol for the analysis of gender
bias in machine translation (MT). Our ap-
proach uses two recent coreference resolution
datasets composed of English sentences which
cast participants into non-stereotypical gender
roles (e.g., “The doctor asked the nurse to help
herin the operation”). We devise an automatic
gender bias evaluation method for eight target
languages with grammatical gender, based on
morphological analysis (e.g., the use of female
inﬂection for the word “doctor”). Our analy-
ses show that four popular industrial MT sys-
tems and two recent state-of-the-art academic
MT models are signiﬁcantly prone to gender-
biased translation errors for all tested target
languages. Our data and code are publicly
available at shorturl.at/dimuD .
1 Introduction
Learned models exhibit social bias when their
training data encode stereotypes not relevant for
the task, but the correlations are picked up any-
way. Notable examples include gender biases in
visual SRL (cooking is stereotypically done by
women, construction workers are stereotypically
men; Zhao et al. ,2017 ), lexical semantics (“man
is to computer programmer as woman is to home-
maker”; Bolukbasi et al. ,2016 ), and natural lan-
guage inference (associating women with gossip-
ing and men with guitars; Rudinger et al. ,2017 ).
In this work, we conduct the ﬁrst large-scale
multilingual evaluation of gender-bias in machine
translation (MT), following recent small-scale
qualitative studies which observed that online MT
services, such as Google Translate or Microsoft
Translator, also exhibit biases, e.g., translating
nurses as females and programmers as males, re-
gardless of context ( Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola ,
2017 ;Font and Costa-Juss` a ,2019 ). Google Trans-The doctor asked the nurse to help her in the procedure
El doctor le pidio a la enfermera que le ayudara con el procedimiento
Figure 1: An example of gender bias in machine trans-
lation from English (top) to Spanish (bottom). In
the English source sentence, the nurse’s gender is un-
known, while the coreference link with “her” identi-
ﬁes the “doctor” as a female. On the other hand, the
Spanish target sentence uses morphological features
for gender: “ eldoctor” (male), versus “ laenfermer -
a” (female). Aligning between source and target sen-
tences reveals that a stereotypical assignment of gender
roles changed the meaning of the translated sentence by
changing the doctor’s gender.
late recently tried to mitigate these biases by al-
lowing users to sometimes choose between gen-
dered translations ( Kuczmarski ,2018 ).
As shown in Figure 1, we use data introduced
by two recent coreference gender-bias studies:
the Winogender ( Rudinger et al. ,2018 ), and the
WinoBias ( Zhao et al. ,2018 ) datasets. Follow-
ing the Winograd schema ( Levesque ,2011 ), each
instance in these datasets is an English sentence
which describes a scenario with human entities,
who are identiﬁed by their role (e.g., “the doc-
tor” and “the nurse” in Figure 1), and a pronoun
(“her” in the example), which needs to be correctly
resolved to one of the entities (“the doctor” in
this case). Rudinger et al. (2018 ) and Zhao et al.
(2018 ) found that while human agreement on the
task was high (roughly 95%), coreference reso-
lution models often ignore context and make so-
cially biased predictions, e.g., associating the fem-
inine pronoun “her” with the stereotypically fe-
male “nurse.”
We observe that for many target languages, a
faithful translation requires a similar form of (at