ES FR IT RU UK HE AR DE20406080100
6780
5244 4676
6069
4654
30 33 35 384457Accuracy (%)Stereotypical Non-Stereotypical
Figure 2: Google Translate’s performance on gender transla tion on our tested languages. The performance on the
stereotypical portion of WinoMT is consistently better tha n that on the non-stereotypical portion. The other MT
systems we tested display similar trends.
Original +Adj ∆
ES 53.1 63.5 +10.4
RU 37.7 48.9 +11.2
UK 38.4 42.9 +4.5
Table 4: Performance of Google Translate on Spanish,
Russian, and Ukranian gender prediction accuracy (%
correct) on the original WinoMT corpus, versus a mod-
iﬁed version of the dataset where we add sterotypical
gender adjectives (see Section 3.3).
cantly better on male roles, which may stem from
these being more frequent in the training set.
Perhaps most tellingly, ∆Smeasures the differ-
ence in performance ( F1score) between stereo-
typical and non-stereotypical gender role assign-
ments, as deﬁned by Zhao et al. (2018 ) who use
statistics provided by the US Department of La-
bor.6This metric shows that all tested systems
have a signiﬁcant and consistently better per-
formance when presented with pro-stereotypical
assignments (e.g., a female nurse), while their
performance deteriorates when translating anti-
stereotypical roles (e.g., a male receptionist).
For instance, Figure 2depicts Google Trans-
late absolute accuracies on stereotypical and non-
stereotypical gender roles across all tested lan-
guages. Other tested systems show similar trends.
3.3 Fighting Bias with Bias
Finally, we tested whether we can affect the
translations by automatically creating a version
of WinoMT with the adjectives “handsome” and
“pretty” prepended to male and female entities, re-
spectively. For example, the sentence in Figure 1
will be converted to: “The pretty doctor asked the
6https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htmnurse to help her in the operation”. We are inter-
ested in evaluating whether this “corrects” the pro-
fession bias by mixing signals, e.g., while “doc-
tor” biases towards a male translation, “pretty”
tugs the translation towards a female inﬂection.
Our results show that this improved performance
in some languages, signiﬁcantly reducing bias in
Spanish, Russian, and Ukrainian (see Table 4).
Admittedly, this is impractical as a general debi-
asing scheme, since it assumes oracle coreference
resolution, yet it attests to the relation between
coreference resolution and MT, and serves as a fur-
ther indication of gender bias in MT.
3.4 Human Validation
We estimate the accuracy of our gender bias evalu-
ation method by randomly sampling 100 instances
of all translation systems and target languages, an-
notating each sample by two target-language na-
tive speakers (resulting in 9,600 human annota-
tions). Each instance conformed to a format sim-
ilar to that used by our automatic gender detec-
tion algorithm: human annotators were asked to
mark the gender of an entity within a given target-
language sentence. (e.g., see “el doctor” as high-
lighted in the Spanish sentence in Figure 1). By
annotating at the sentence-level, we can account
for both types of possible errors, i.e., alignment
and gender extraction.
We compare the sentence-level human anno-
tations to the output of our automatic method,
and ﬁnd that the levels of agreement for all lan-
guages and systems were above 85%, with an
average agreement on 87% of the annotations.
In comparison, human inter-annotator agreement
was 90%, due to noise introduced by several inco-
herent translations.
Our errors occur when language-speciﬁc id-