least implicit) gender identiﬁcation. In addition,
in the many languages which associate between
biological and grammatical gender (e.g., most Ro-
mance, Germanic, Slavic, and Semitic languages;
Craig ,1986 ;Mucchi-Faina ,2005 ;Corbett ,2007 ),
the gender of an animate object can be identiﬁed
via morphological markers. For instance, when
translating our running example in Figure 1to
Spanish, a valid translation may be: “ La doc-
tora le pidio a la enfermera que le ayudara con
el procedimiento,” which indicates that the doctor
is a woman, by using a feminine sufﬁx inﬂection
(“doctor a”) and the feminine deﬁnite gendered ar-
ticle (“ la”). However, a biased translation system
may ignore the given context and stereotypically
translate the doctor as male, as shown at the bot-
tom of the ﬁgure.
Following these observations, we design a chal-
lenge set approach for evaluating gender bias in
MT using a concatenation of Winogender and
WinoBias. We devise an automatic translation
evaluation method for eight diverse target lan-
guages, without requiring additional gold trans-
lations, relying instead on automatic measures
for alignment and morphological analysis (Sec-
tion2). We ﬁnd that four widely used commercial
MT systems and two recent state-of-the-art aca-
demic models are signiﬁcantly gender-biased on
all tested languages (Section 3). Our method and
benchmarks are publicly available, and are easily
extensible with more languages and MT models.
2 Challenge Set for Gender Bias in MT
We compose a challenge set for gender bias in MT
(which we dub “WinoMT”) by concatenating the
Winogender and WinoBias coreference test sets.
Overall, WinoMT contains 3,888 instances, and is
equally balanced between male and female gen-
ders, as well as between stereotypical and non-
stereotypical gender-role assignments (e.g., a fe-
male doctor versus a female nurse). Additional
dataset statistics are presented in Table 1.
We use WinoMT to estimate the gender-bias of
an MT model, M, in target-language Lby per-
forming following steps (exempliﬁed in Figure 1):
(1)Translate all of the sentences in WinoMT into
LusingM, thus forming a bilingual corpus of En-
glish and the target language L.
(2)Align between the source and target transla-
tions, using fastalign (Dyer et al. ,2013 ), trained
on the automatic translations from from step (1).Winogender WinoBias WinoMT
Male 240 1582 1826
Female 240 1586 1822
Neutral 240 0 240
Total 720 3168 3888
Table 1: The coreference test sets and resulting
WinoMT corpus statistics (in number of instances).
We then map the English entity annotated in the
coreference datasets to its translation (e.g., align
between “the doctor” and “el doctor” in Figure 1).
(3) Finally, we extract the target-side entity’s
gender using simple heuristics over language-
speciﬁc morphological analysis, which we per-
form using off-the-shelf tools for each target lan-
guage, as discussed in the following section.
This process extracts the translated genders, ac-
cording to M, for all of the entities in WinoMT,
which we can then evaluate against the gold anno-
tations provided by the original English dataset.
This process can introduce noise into our eval-
uation in steps (2) and (3), via wrong alignments
or erroneous morphological analysis. In Section 3,
we will present a human evaluation showing these
errors are infrequent.
3 Evaluation
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the MT systems
and the target languages we use, our main results,
and their human validation.
3.1 Experimental Setup
MT systems We test six widely used MT mod-
els, representing the state of the art in both
commercial and academic research: (1) Google
Translate,1(2) Microsoft Translator,2(3) Ama-
zon Translate,3(4) SYSTRAN,4(5) the model
ofOtt et al. (2018 ), which recently achieved the
best performance on English-to-French transla-
tion on the WMT’14 test set, and (6) the model
ofEdunov et al. (2018 ), the WMT’18 winner on
English-to-German translation. We query the on-
line API for the ﬁrst four commercial MT sys-
tems, while for the latter two academic models we
use the pretrained models provided by the Fairseq
1https://translate.google.com
2https://www.bing.com/translator
3https://aws.amazon.com/translate
4http://www.systransoft.com