Source [Target lang.] Predicted translation Phenomenon
The janitor does not like the baker
because she always messes up the
kitchen.[ES] Al conserje no le gusta el panadero
porque ellasiempre desordena la cocina.Biased translation, giving “baker” a
male inﬂection, with a mismatched pro-
noun reference.
The janitor does not like the pretty
baker because shealways messes up
the kitchen.[ES] Al conserje no le gusta la panadera
bonita porque ellasiempre desordena la
cocina.Adding a stereotypically female adjec-
tive “ﬁxes” the translation.
The counselor asked the guard a few
questions and praised herfor the good
work.[FR] Le conseiller a pos´ e quelques ques-
tions ` a lagarde etl’a lou ´eepour le bon
travail.French uses “garde” for both male and
female guards, allowing for a more di-
rect translation from English.
Table 5: Examples of Google Translate’s output for differen t sentences in the WinoMT corpus. Words in blue,
red, and orange indicate male, female and neutral entities, respectively.
iosyncrasies introduce ambiguity to the morpho-
logical analysis. For example, gender for certain
words in Hebrew cannot be distinguished without
diacritics (e.g., the male and female versions of the
word “baker” are spelled identically), and the con-
tracted determiner in French and Italian ( l’) is used
for both masculine and feminine nouns. In ad-
dition, some languages have only male or female
inﬂections for professions which were stereotypi-
cally associated with one of the genders, for exam-
ple “sastre” (tailor) in Spanish or “soldat” (soldier)
in French, which do not have female inﬂections.
See Table 5for detailed examples.
4 Discussion
Related work This work is most related to sev-
eral recent efforts which evaluate MT through
the use of challenge sets . Similarly to our
use WinoMT, these works evaluate MT sys-
tems (either manually or automatically) on test
sets which are specially created to exhibit cer-
tain linguistic phenomena, thus going beyond
the traditional BLEU metric ( Papineni et al. ,
2002 ). These include challenge sets for language-
speciﬁc idiosyncrasies ( Isabelle et al. ,2017 ), dis-
course phenomena ( Bawden et al. ,2018 ), pronoun
translation ( M¨ uller et al. ,2018 ;Webster et al. ,
2018 ), or coreference and multiword expressions
(Burchardt et al. ,2017 ).
Limitations and future work While our work
presents the ﬁrst large-scale evaluation of gen-
der bias in MT, it still suffers from certain lim-
itations which could be addressed in follow up
work. First, like some of the challenge sets dis-
cussed above, WinoMT is composed of synthetic
English source-side examples. On the one hand,
this allows for a controlled experiment environ-
ment, while, on the other hand, this might intro-duce some artiﬁcial biases in our data and eval-
uation. Ideally, WinoMT could be augmented
with natural “in the wild” instances, with many
source languages, all annotated with ground truth
entity gender. Second, similar to any medium size
test set, it is clear that WinoMT serves only as
a proxy estimation for the phenomenon of gen-
der bias, and would probably be easy to overﬁt.
A larger annotated corpus can perhaps provide a
better signal for training. Finally, even though
in Section 3.3we show a very rudimentary debi-
asing scheme which relies on oracle coreference
system, it is clear that this is not applicable in
a real-world scenario. While recent research has
shown that getting rid of such biases may prove to
be very challenging ( Elazar and Goldberg ,2018 ;
Gonen and Goldberg ,2019 ), we hope that this
work will serve as a ﬁrst step for developing more
gender-balanced MT models.
5 Conclusions
We presented the ﬁrst large-scale multilingual
quantitative evidence for gender bias in MT, show-
ing that on eight diverse target languages, all
four tested popular commercial systems and two
recent state-of-the-art academic MT models are
signiﬁcantly prone to translate based on gen-
der stereotypes rather than more meaningful con-
text. Our data and code are publicly available at
shorturl.at/dimuD .
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Mark Yatskar, Iz Beltagy,
Tim Dettmers, Ronan Le Bras, Kyle Richardson,
Ariel and Claudia Stanovsky, and Paola Virga for
many insightful discussions about the role gender
plays in the languages evaluated in this work, as
well as the reviewers for their helpful comments.