of queries is based on the aforementioned statistics and is
rounded up to the nearest multiple of 213.
A 99th-percentile guarantee requires 262,742 queries, which
rounds up to 33213, or 270K. For both multistream and
server, this guarantee for vision tasks requires 270K queries, as
Table V shows. Because a multistream benchmark will process
Nsamples per query, the total number of samples will be
N270K. Machine translation has a 97th-percentile latency
guarantee and requires only 90K queries.
For repeatability, we run the multistream and server scenar-
ios several times. But the multistream scenario’s arrival rate
and query count guarantee a 2.5- to 7.0-hour run time. To strike
a balance between repeatability and run time, we require ﬁve
runs for the server scenario, with the result being the minimum
of these ﬁve. The other scenarios require one run. We expect
to revisit this choice in future MLPerf versions.
All benchmarks must also run for at least 60 seconds and
process additional queries and/or samples as the scenarios
require. The minimum run time ensures we measure the equi-
librium behavior of power-management systems and systems
that support dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS),
particularly for the single-stream scenario with few queries.
IV. I NFERENCE SUBMISSION SYSTEM
An MLPerf Inference submission system contains a system
under test (SUT), the Load Generator (LoadGen), a data set,
and an accuracy script. In this section we describe these vari-
ous components. Figure 3 shows an overview of an inference
system. The data set, LoadGen, and accuracy script are ﬁxed
for all submissions and are provided by MLPerf. Submitters
have wide discretion to implement an SUT according to their
architecture’s requirements and their engineering judgment.
By establishing a clear boundary between submitter-owned
and MLPerf-owned components, the benchmark maintains
comparability among submissions.
A. System Under Test
The submitter is responsible for the system under test.
The goal of MLPerf Inference is to measure system perfor-
mance across a wide variety of architectures. But realism,
comparability, architecture neutrality, and friendliness to small
submission teams require careful tradeoffs. For instance, some
deployments have teams of compiler, computer-architecture,
and machine-learning experts aggressively co-optimizing the
training and inference systems to achieve cost, accuracy, and
latency targets across a massive global customer base. An
unconstrained benchmark would disadvantage companies with
less experience and fewer ML-training resources.
Therefore, we set the model-equivalence rules to allow
submitters to, for efﬁciency, reimplement models on different
architectures. The rules provide a complete list of disallowed
techniques and a list of allowed-technique examples. We chose
an explicit blacklist to encourage a wide range of techniques
and to support architectural diversity. The list of examples
illustrates the blacklist boundaries while also encouraging
common and appropriate optimizations.TABLE V
NUMBER OF QUERIES AND SAMPLES PER QUERY FOR EACH TASK .
MODELNUMBER OF QUERIES / SAMPLES PER QUERY
SINGLE -STREAM MULTISTREAM SERVER OFFLINE
IMAGE CLASSIFICATION (HEAVY ) 1K / 1 270K / N 270K / 1 1 / 24K
IMAGE CLASSIFICATION (LIGHT ) 1K / 1 270K / N 270K / 1 1 / 24K
OBJECT DETECTION (HEAVY ) 1K / 1 270K / N 270K / 1 1 / 24K
OBJECT DETECTION (LIGHT ) 1K / 1 270K / N 270K / 1 1 / 24K
MACHINE TRANSLATION 1K / 1 90K /N 90K / 1 1 / 24K
Allowed techniques. Examples of allowed techniques in-
clude arbitrary data arrangement as well as different input
and in-memory representations of weights, mathematically
equivalent transformations, approximations (e.g., replacing a
transcendental function with a polynomial), out-of-order query
processing within the scenario’s limits, replacing dense opera-
tions with mathematically equivalent sparse operations, fusing
and unfusing operations, and dynamically switching between
one or more batch sizes.
To promote architecture and application neutrality, we
adopted untimed preprocessing. Implementations may trans-
form their inputs into system-speciﬁc ideal forms as an un-
timed operation. Ideally, a whole-system benchmark should
capture all performance-relevant operations. In MLPerf, how-
ever, we explicitly allow untimed preprocessing. There is no
vendor- or application-neutral preprocessing. For example,
systems with integrated cameras can use hardware/software
co-design to ensure that images reach memory in an ideal
format; systems accepting JPEGs from the Internet cannot.
We also allow and enable quantization to many different
numerical formats to ensure architecture neutrality. Submitters
register their numerics ahead of time to help guide accuracy-
target discussions. The approved list includes INT4, INT8,
INT16, UINT8, UINT16, FP11 (1-bit sign, 5-bit mantissa, and
5-bit exponent), FP16, bﬂoat16, and FP32. Quantization to
lower-precision formats typically requires calibration to ensure
sufﬁcient inference quality. For each reference model, MLPerf
provides a small, ﬁxed data set that can be used to calibrate a
quantized network. Additionally, it offers MobileNet versions
that are prequantized to INT8, since without retraining (which
we disallow) the accuracy falls dramatically.
Prohibited techniques. We prohibit retraining and pruning
to ensure comparability. Although this restriction may fail to
reﬂect realistic deployment in some cases, the interlocking
requirements to use reference weights (possibly with calibra-
tion) and minimum accuracy targets are most important for
comparability. We may eventually relax this restriction.
To simplify the benchmark evaluation, we disallow caching.
In practice, inference systems cache queries. For example, “I
love you” is one of Google Translate’s most frequent queries,
but the service does not translate the phrase ab initio each
time. Realistically modeling caching in a benchmark, however,
is difﬁcult because cache-hit rates vary substantially with the
application. Furthermore, our data sets are relatively small,
and large systems could easily cache them in their entirety.
We also prohibit optimizations that are benchmark or data-
set aware and that are inapplicable to production environ-