Number of Results
020406080
DSP FPGA CPU ASIC GPUSSD-ResNet34 SSD-MobileNets-v1 ResNet50-v1.5
MobileNets-v1 GNMTFig. 7. Results from the closed division. They cover almost every kind of
processor architecture—CPUs, GPUs, DSPs, FPGAs, and ASICs.
two. Even with this limited data, one clear implication is
that a performance comparison with unconstrained latency
has little bearing on a latency-constrained scenario. Therefore,
performance analysis should ideally include both.
Additionally, the performance impact of latency constraints
varies with network type. Across all ﬁve systems with NMT
results, the throughput reduction for the server scenario is
39–55%. In contrast, the throughput reduction for ResNet-50
v1.5 varies from 3% to 35% with an average of about 20%,
and the average for MobileNet-v1 is under 10%. The vast
throughput-reduction differences likely reﬂect some combina-
tion of NMT’s variable text input, more-signiﬁcant software-
stack optimization, and NMT’s more-complex network archi-
tecture. A second lesson from this data is that the impact of
latency constraints on different models extrapolates poorly.
Even among classiﬁcation models, the average performance
loss for ResNet-50 v1.5 is approximately double that of
MobileNet-v1.
C. Processor Types and Software Frameworks
A variety of platforms can employ ML solutions, from
fully general-purpose CPUs to programmable GPUs and DSPs,
FPGAs, and ﬁxed-function accelerators. Our results reﬂect
this diversity. Figure 7 shows that the MLPerf Inference
submissions covered most hardware categories, indicating our
v0.5 benchmark suite and method can evaluate any processor
architecture.
Many ML software frameworks accompany the various
processor types. Table VII shows the frameworks for bench-
marking the hardware platforms. ML software plays a vital
role in unleashing the hardware’s performance. Some run times
are designed to work with certain hardware types to fully
harness their capabilities; employing the hardware without the
corresponding framework may still succeed, but the perfor-
mance may fall short of the hardware’s potential. The table
shows that CPUs have the most framework diversity and that
TensorFlow has the most architectural variety.
D. System Diversity
The submissions cover a broad power and performance
range, from mobile and edge devices to cloud computing. The
performance delta between the smallest and largest inference
systems is four orders of magnitude, or about 10,000 .TABLE VII
FRAMEWORK VERSUS HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE .
ASIC CPU DSP FPGA GPU
ARMNN X X
FURIOSA AI X
HAILO SDK X
HANGUANG AI X
ONNX X
OPENVINO X
PYTORCH X
SNPE X
SYNAPSE X
TENSOR FLOW X X X
TENSOR FLOW LITE X
TENSOR RT X
Figure 8 shows the results across all tasks and scenarios
except for GNMT (MS), which had no submissions. In cases
such as the MobileNet-v1 single-stream scenario (SS), ResNet-
50 v1.5 (SS), and SSD-MobileNet-v1 ofﬂine (O), systems
exhibit a large performance difference (100 ). Because these
models have many applications, the systems that target them
cover everything from low-power embedded devices to high-
performance servers. GNMT server (S) exhibits much less
performance variation among systems.
The broad performance range implies that the tasks we
initially selected for MLPerf Inference v0.5 are general enough
to represent many use cases and market segments. The wide
array of systems also indicates that our method (the LoadGen,
metrics, etc.) is widely applicable.
E. Open Division
We received 429 results in the less restrictive open division.
A few highlights include 4-bit quantization to boost perfor-
mance, exploration of various models (instead of the reference
model) to perform the task, and high throughput under latency
bounds tighter than what the closed-division rules stipulate.
We also saw submissions that pushed the limits of mobile-
chipset performance. Typically, vendors use one accelerator
at a time. We are seeing instances of multiple accelerators
working concurrently to deliver high throughput in a multi-
stream scenario—a rarity in conventional mobile situations.
Together these results show the open division is encouraging
the industry to push system limits.
VII. L ESSONS LEARNED
Over the course of a year we have learned several lessons
and identiﬁed opportunities for improvement, which we
present here.
A. Models: Breadth vs. Use-Case Depth
Balancing the breadth of applications (e.g., image recog-
nition, objection detection, and translation) and models (e.g.,
CNNs and LSTMs) and the depth of the use cases (Table II) is
important to industry. We therefore implemented 4 versions of
each benchmark, 20 in total. Limited resources and the need
for speedy innovation prevented us from including more ap-
plications (e.g., speech recognition and recommendation) and