Relative performance
110100100010000
MobileNet-v1 (SS)MobileNet-v1 (MS)MobileNet-v1 (S)MobileNet-v1 (O)
ResNet-50 v1.5 (SS)ResNet-50 v1.5 (MS)ResNet-50 v1.5 (S)ResNet-50 v1.5 (O)
SSD-MobileNet-v1 (SS)SSD-MobileNet-v1 (MS)SSD-MobileNet-v1 (S)SSD-MobileNet-v1 (O)SSD-ResNet-34 (SS)SSD-ResNet-34 (MS)SSD-ResNet-34 (S)SSD-ResNet-34 (O)GNMT (SS)GNMT (MS)GNMT (S)GNMT (O)Fig. 8. Performance for different models in the single-stream (SS), multi-
stream (MS), server (S), and ofﬂine (O) scenarios. Scores are relative to the
performance of the slowest system for the particular scenario.
models (e.g., Transformers [50], BERT [16], and DLRM [38],
[19]), but we aim to add them soon.
B. Metrics: Latency vs. Throughput
Latency and throughput are intimately related, and consider-
ing them together is crucial: we use latency-bounded through-
put (Table III). A system can deliver excellent throughput yet
perform poorly when latency constraints arise. For instance,
the difference between the ofﬂine and server scenarios is
that the latter imposes a latency constraint and implements
a nonuniform arrival rate. The result is lower throughput
because large input batches become more difﬁcult to form. For
some systems, the server scenario’s latency constraint reduces
performance by as little as 3% (relative to ofﬂine); for others,
the loss is much greater (50%).
C. Data Sets: Public vs. Private
The industry needs larger and better-quality public data
sets for ML-system benchmarking. After surveying various
industry and academic scenarios, we found for the SSD-
large use case a wide spectrum of input-image sizes, rang-
ing roughly from 200x200 to 8 MP. We settled on two
resolutions as use-case proxies: small images, where 0.09
MP (300x300) represents mobile and some data-center ap-
plications, and large images, where 1.44 MP (1,200x1,200)
represents robotics (including autonomous vehicles) and high-
end video analytics. In practice, however, SSD-large employs
an upscaled (1,200x1,200) COCO data set (Table I), as dictated
by the lack of good public detection data sets with large
images. Some such data sets exist, but they are less than
ideal. ApolloScape [51], for example, contains large images,
but it lacks bounding-box annotations and its segmentation
annotations omit labels for some object pixels (e.g., when an
object has pixels in two or more noncontiguous regions, owing
to occlusion). Generating the bounding-box annotations istherefore difﬁcult in these cases. The Berkeley DeepDrive [56]
images are lower in resolution (720p). We need more data-set
generators to address these issues.
D. Performance: Modeled vs. Measured
Although it is common practice, characterizing a network’s
computational difﬁculty on the basis of parameter size or
operator count (Figure 1) can be an oversimpliﬁcation. For
example, 10 systems in the ofﬂine and server scenarios
computed the performance of both SSD-ResNet-34 and SSD-
MobileNet-v1. The former requires 175 more operations per
image, but the actual throughput is only 50–60 less. This
consistent 3 difference between the operation count and the
observed performance shows how network structure can affect
performance.
E. Process: Audits and Auditability
Because submitters can reimplement the reference bench-
mark to maximize their system’s capabilities, the result-review
process (Section V-B) was crucial to ensuring validity and
reproducibility. We found about 40 issues in the approximately
180 results from the closed division. We ultimately released
only 166 of these results. Issues ranged from failing to
meet the quality targets (Table I), latency bounds (Table III),
and query requirements (Table V) to inaccurately interpret-
ing the rules. Thanks to the LoadGen’s accuracy checkers
(Section IV-D) and submission-checker scripts, we identiﬁed
many issues automatically. The checkers also reduced the
burden so only about three engineers had to comb through
the submissions. In summary, since the diversity of options
at every level of the ML inference stack is complicated
(Figure 2), we found auditing and auditability to be necessary
for ensuring result integrity and reproducibility.
VIII. P RIOR ART IN AI/ML B ENCHMARKING
MLPerf strives to incorporate and build on the best aspects
of prior work while also including community input.
AI Benchmark. AI Benchmark [23] is arguably the ﬁrst
mobile-inference benchmark suite. Its results and leaderboard
focus on Android smartphones and only measure latency. The
suite provides a summary score, but it fails to explicitly specify
quality targets. We aim at a variety of devices (our submissions
range from IoT devices to smartphones and edge/server-scale
systems) as well as four scenarios per benchmark.
EEMBC MLMark. EEMBC MLMark [17] measures the
performance and accuracy of embedded inference devices. It
also includes image-classiﬁcation and object-detection tasks,
as MLPerf does, but it lacks use-case scenarios. MLMark
measures performance at explicit batch sizes, whereas MLPerf
allows submitters to choose the best batch sizes for different
scenarios. Also, the former imposes no target-quality restric-
tions, whereas the latter does impose restrictions.
Fathom. Fathom [2] provides a suite of models that incor-
porate several layer types (e.g., convolution, fully connected,
and RNN). Still, it focuses on throughput rather than accuracy.
Like Fathom, we include a suite of models that comprise