TABLE II
SCENARIO DESCRIPTION AND METRICS . EACH SCENARIO TARGETS A REAL -WORLD USE CASE BASED ON CUSTOMER AND VENDOR INPUT .
SCENARIO QUERY GENERATION METRIC SAMPLES /QUERY EXAMPLES
SINGLE -STREAM (SS) SEQUENTIAL 90TH-PERCENTILE LATENCY 1TYPING AUTOCOMPLETE ,
REAL -TIME AR
MULTISTREAM (MS) ARRIVAL INTERVAL WITH DROPPINGNUMBER OF STREAMS
SUBJECT TO LATENCY BOUNDNMULTICAMERA DRIVER ASSISTANCE ,
LARGE -SCALE AUTOMATION
SERVER (S) POISSON DISTRIBUTIONQUERIES PER SECOND
SUBJECT TO LATENCY BOUND1 TRANSLATION WEBSITE
OFFLINE (O) BATCH THROUGHPUT AT LEAST 24,576 PHOTO CATEGORIZATION
Similar to image classiﬁcation, we selected two models.
Our small model uses the 300x300 image size, which is
typical of resolutions in smartphones and other compact
devices. For the larger model, we upscale the data set to
more closely represent the output of a high-deﬁnition image
sensor (1.44 MP total). The choice of the larger input size
is based on community feedback, especially from automotive
and industrial-automation customers. The quality metric for
object detection is mean average precision (mAP).
The heavyweight object detector’s reference model is
SSD [34] with a ResNet-34 backbone, which also comes
from our training benchmark. The lightweight object detector’s
reference model uses a MobileNet-v1-1.0 backbone, which is
more typical for constrained computing environments. We se-
lected the MobileNet feature detector on the basis of feedback
from the mobile and embedded communities.
Translation. Neural machine translation (NMT) is pop-
ular in natural-language processing. NMT models translate
a sequence of words from a source language to a target
language and appear in translation applications and services.
Our translation data set is WMT16 EN-DE [52]. The quality
measurement is the Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU)
score [40], implemented using SacreBLEU [42]. Our reference
model is GNMT [53], which employs a well-established
recurrent-neural-network (RNN) architecture and is part of the
training benchmark. RNNs are popular for sequential and time-
series data, so including GNMT ensures our reference suite
captures a variety of compute motifs.
B. Robust Quality Targets
Quality and performance are intimately connected for all
forms of machine learning. Although the starting point for
inference is a pretrained reference model that achieves a target
quality, many system architectures can sacriﬁce model quality
to reduce latency, reduce total cost of ownership (TCO), or
increase throughput. The tradeoffs between accuracy, latency,
and TCO are application speciﬁc. Trading 1% model accuracy
for 50% lower TCO is prudent when identifying cat photos,
but it is less so during online pedestrian detection. To reﬂect
this important aspect, we established per-model quality targets.
We require that almost all implementations achieve a quality
target within 1% of the FP32 reference model’s accuracy.
(For example, the ResNet-50 v1.5 model achieves 76.46%
Top-1 accuracy, and an equivalent model must achieve at
least 75.70% Top-1 accuracy.) Initial experiments, however,showed that for mobile-focused networks—MobileNet and
SSD-MobileNet—the accuracy loss was unacceptable without
retraining. We were unable to proceed with the low accuracy as
performance benchmarking would become unrepresentative.
To address the accuracy drop, we took three steps. First,
we trained the MobileNet models for quantization-friendly
weights, enabling us to narrow the quality window to 2%.
Second, to reduce the training sensitivity of MobileNet-based
submissions, we provided equivalent MobileNet and SSD-
MobileNet implementations quantized to an 8-bit integer
format. Third, for SSD-MobileNet, we reduced the quality
requirement to 22.0 mAP to account for the challenges of
using a MobileNet backbone.
To improve the submission comparability, we disallow re-
training. Our prior experience and feasibility studies conﬁrmed
that for 8-bit integer arithmetic, which was an expected
deployment path for many systems, the 1% relative-accuracy
target was easily achievable without retraining.
C. Realistic End-User Scenarios
ML applications have a variety of usage models and many
ﬁgures of merit, which in turn require multiple performance
metrics. For example, the ﬁgure of merit for an image-
recognition system that classiﬁes a video camera’s output will
be entirely different than for a cloud-based translation system.
To address these scenarios, we surveyed MLPerf’s broad
membership, which includes both customers and vendors. On
the basis of that feedback, we identiﬁed four scenarios that
represent many critical inference applications: single-stream,
multistream, server, and ofﬂine. These scenarios emulate the
ML-workload behavior of mobile devices, autonomous vehi-
cles, robotics, and cloud-based setups (Table II).
Single-stream. The single-stream scenario represents one
inference-query stream with a query sample size of 1, re-
ﬂecting the many client applications where responsiveness is
critical. An example is ofﬂine voice transcription on Google’s
Pixel 4 smartphone. To measure performance, we inject a
single query into the inference system; when the query is
complete, we record the completion time and inject the next
query. The metric is the query stream’s 90th-percentile latency.
Multistream. The multistream scenario represents applica-
tions with a stream of queries, but each query comprises multi-
ple inferences, reﬂecting a variety of industrial-automation and
remote-sensing tasks. For example, many autonomous vehicles
analyze frames from multiple cameras simultaneously. To