Fig. 1. An example of ML-model diversity for image classiﬁcation (plot
from [9]). No single model is optimal; each one presents a design tradeoff
between accuracy, memory requirements, and computational complexity.
detection in autonomous vehicles has a much higher accu-
racy requirement than does labeling animals in photographs,
owing to the different consequences of incorrect predictions.
Similarly, quality-of-service (QoS) requirements for machine
learning inference vary by several orders of magnitude from
effectively no latency constraint for ofﬂine processes to mil-
liseconds for real-time applications.
Covering the vast design space necessitates careful selection
of models that represent realistic scenarios. But even for a
single ML task, such as image classiﬁcation, numerous models
present different tradeoffs between accuracy and computa-
tional complexity, as Figure 1 shows. These models vary
tremendously in compute and memory requirements (e.g., a
50difference in gigaﬂops), while the corresponding Top-
1 accuracy ranges from 55% to 83% [9]. This variation
creates a Pareto frontier rather than one optimal choice. Even
a small accuracy change (e.g., a few percent) can drasti-
cally alter the computational requirements (e.g., by 5–10 ).
For example, SE-ResNeXt-50 ([22], [54]) and Xception [13]
achieve roughly the same accuracy ( 79%) but exhibit a 2 
computational difference.
B. Deployment-Scenario Diversity
In addition to accuracy and computational complexity, a
representative ML benchmark must take into account the
input data’s availability and arrival pattern across a variety
of application-deployment scenarios. For example, in ofﬂine
batch processing, such as photo categorization, all the data
may be readily available in (network) storage, allowing accel-
erators to reach and maintain peak performance. By contrast,
CPUs GPUs TPUs NPUs DSPs Accelerators FPGAs Hardware 
Targets T ensorFlow PyT orch Caf fe MXNet CNTK Paddle 
Paddle Theano ResNet GoogLeNet SqueezeNet MobileNet SSD GNMT ImageNet COCO VOC KITTI WMT Computer 
V ision Speech Language 
T ranslation Autonomous 
Driving 
Linux Windows MacOS Android R T OS MKL 
DNN CUDA CuBLAS OpenBLAS Eigen XLA nGraph Glow TVM NNEF ONNX 
Operating 
Systems Optimized 
Libraries Graph 
Compilers Graph 
Formats ML
Frameworks ML
Models ML
Data Sets ML
Applications Fig. 2. The diversity of options at every level of the stack, along with the
combinations across the layers, make benchmarking inference systems hard.
translation, image tagging, and other tasks experience variable
arrival patterns based on end-user trafﬁc.
Similarly, real-time applications such as augmented reality
and autonomous vehicles handle a constant ﬂow of data rather
than having it all in memory. Although the same model
architecture could serve in each scenario, data batching and
similar optimizations may be inapplicable, leading to drasti-
cally different performance. Timing the on-device inference
latency alone fails to reﬂect the real-world requirements.
C. Inference-System Diversity
The possible combinations of inference applications, data
sets, models, machine-learning frameworks, tool sets, libraries,
systems, and platforms are numerous, further complicating
systematic and reproducible benchmarking. Figure 2 shows
the wide breadth and depth of the ML space. The hardware
and software side both exhibit substantial complexity.
On the software side, about a dozen ML frameworks
commonly serve for developing deep-learning models, such
as Caffe/Caffe2 [26], Chainer [49], CNTK [46], Keras [12],
MXNet [10], TensorFlow [1], and PyTorch [41]. Indepen-
dently, there are also many optimized libraries, such as
cuDNN [11], Intel MKL [25], and FBGEMM [28], supporting
various inference run times, such as Apple CoreML [5], Intel
OpenVino [24], NVIDIA TensorRT [39], ONNX Runtime [7],
Qualcomm SNPE [44], and TF-Lite [30]. Each combination
has idiosyncrasies that make supporting the most current
neural-network model architectures a challenge. Consider the
non-maximum-suppression (NMS) operator for object detec-
tion. When training object-detection models in TensorFlow, the
regular NMS operator smooths out imprecise bounding boxes
for a single object. But this implementation is unavailable
in TensorFlow Lite, which is tailored for mobile and instead
implements fast NMS. As a result, when converting the model
from TensorFlow to TensorFlow Lite, the accuracy of SSD-
MobileNet-v1 decreases from 23.1% to 22.3% mAP. Such
subtle differences make it hard to port models exactly from
one framework to another.
On the hardware side, platforms are tremendously diverse,
ranging from familiar processors (e.g., CPUs, GPUs, and