D. Accuracy Checker
The LoadGen also has features that ensure the submission
system complies with the rules. In addition, it can self-check
to determine whether its source code has been modiﬁed during
the submission process. To facilitate validation, the submitter
provides an experimental conﬁg ﬁle that allows use of non-
default LoadGen features. Details are in Section V-B.
V. S UBMISSION -SYSTEM EVALUATION
In this section, we describe the submission, review, and
reporting process. Participants can submit results to different
divisions and categories. All submissions are peer reviewed
for validity. Finally, we describe how the results are reported.
A. Result Submissions, Divisions, and Categories
A result submission contains information about the SUT:
performance scores, benchmark code, a system-description
ﬁle that highlights the SUT’s main conﬁguration character-
istics (e.g., accelerator count, CPU count, software release,
and memory system), and LoadGen log ﬁles detailing the
performance and accuracy runs for a set of task and scenario
combinations. All this data is uploaded to a public GitHub
repository for peer review and validation before release.
MLPerf Inference is a suite of tasks and scenarios that
ensures broad coverage, but a submission can contain a subset
of them. Many traditional benchmarks, such as SPEC CPU,
require submissions for all components. This approach is
logical for a general-purpose processor that runs arbitrary
code, but ML systems are often highly specialized.
Divisions. MLPerf Inference has two divisions for submit-
ting results: closed and open. Participants can send results to
either or both, but they must use the same data set.
The closed division enables comparison of different sys-
tems. Submitters employ the same models, data sets, and
quality targets to ensure comparability across wildly different
architectures. This division requires preprocessing, postpro-
cessing, and a model that is equivalent to the reference imple-
mentation. It also permits calibration for quantization (using
the calibration data set we provide) and prohibits retraining.
The open division fosters innovation in ML systems, algo-
rithms, optimization, and hardware/software co-design. Per-
ticipants must still perform the same ML task, but they may
change the model architecture and the quality targets. This
division allows arbitrary pre- and postprocessing and arbitrary
models, including techniques such as retraining. In general,
submissions are directly comparable neither with each other
nor with closed submissions. Each open submission must
include documentation about how it deviates from the closed
division.
Categories. Following MLPerf Training, participants clas-
sify their submissions into one of three categories on the
basis of hardware and software availability: available; preview;
and research, development, or other systems (RDO). This
categorization helps consumers identify the systems’ maturity
and whether they are readily available (for rent or purchase).B. Result Review
A challenge of benchmarking inference systems is that
many include proprietary and closed-source components, such
as inference engines and quantization ﬂows, that make peer
review difﬁcult. To accommodate these systems while ensuring
reproducible results that are free from common errors, we
developed a validation suite to assist with peer review. These
validation tools perform experiments that help determine
whether a submission complies with the deﬁned rules.
Accuracy veriﬁcation. The purpose of this test is to ensure
valid inferences in performance mode. By default, the results
that the inference system returns to the LoadGen are not
logged and thus are not checked for accuracy. This choice
reduces or eliminates processing overhead to allow accurate
measurement of the inference system’s performance. In this
test, results returned from the SUT to the LoadGen are logged
randomly. The log is checked against the log generated in
accuracy mode to ensure consistency.
On-the-ﬂy caching detection. The LoadGen produces
queries by randomly selecting query samples with replacement
from the data set, and inference systems may receive queries
with duplicate samples. This duplication is likely for high-
performance systems that process many samples relative to
the data-set size. To represent realistic deployments, the rules
prohibit caching of queries and intermediate data. The test
has two parts: the ﬁrst generates queries with unique sam-
ple indices, and the second generates queries with duplicate
sample indices. It measures performance in each case. The
way to detect caching is to determine whether the test with
duplicate sample indices runs signiﬁcantly faster than the test
with unique sample indices.
Alternate-random-seed testing. Ordinarily, the LoadGen
produces queries on the basis of a ﬁxed random seed. Op-
timizations based on that seed are prohibited. The alternate-
random-seed test replaces the ofﬁcial random seed with alter-
nates and measures the resulting performance.
Custom data sets. In addition to the LoadGen’s validation
features, we use custom data sets to detect result caching.
MLPerf Inference validates this behavior by replacing the
reference data set with a custom data set. We measure the
quality and performance of the system operating on the latter
and compare the results with operation on the former.
C. Result Reporting
MLPerf Inference provides no “summary score.” Bench-
marking efforts often elicit a strong desire to distill the
capabilities of a complex system to a single number and
thereby enable comparison of different systems. But not all
ML tasks are equally important for all systems, and the
job of weighting some more heavily than others is highly
subjective. At best, weighting and summarization are driven
by the submitter catering to customer needs, as some systems
may be designed for speciﬁc ML tasks. For instance, a system
may be highly optimized for vision rather than for translation.
In such cases, averaging the results across all tasks makes no
sense, as the submitter may not be targeting those markets.