In this paper, we present MLPerf Inference, a standard ML
inference benchmark suite with proper metrics and a bench-
marking method (that complements MLPerf Training [35]) to
fairly measure the inference performance of ML hardware,
software, and services. Industry and academia jointly devel-
oped the benchmark suite and its methodology using input
from researchers and developers at more than 30 organizations.
Over 200 ML engineers and practitioners contributed to the
effort. MLPerf Inference is a consensus on the best bench-
marking techniques, forged by experts in architecture, systems,
and machine learning. We explain why designing the right
ML benchmarking metrics, creating realistic ML inference
scenarios, and standardizing the evaluation methods enables
realistic performance optimization for inference quality.
1
We picked representative workloads for reproducibil-
ity and accessibility. The ML ecosystem is rife with models.
Comparing and contrasting ML-system performance across
these models is nontrivial because they vary dramatically in
model complexity and execution characteristics. In addition,
a name such as ResNet-50 fails to uniquely or portably de-
scribe a model. Consequently, quantifying system-performance
improvements with an unstable baseline is difﬁcult.
A major contribution of MLPerf is selection of represen-
tative models that permit reproducible measurements. Based
on industry consensus, MLPerf Inference comprises models
that are mature and have earned community support. Because
the industry has studied them and can build efﬁcient systems,
benchmarking is accessible and provides a snapshot of ML-
system technology. MLPerf models are also open source,
making them a potential research tool.
2
We identiﬁed scenarios for realistic evaluation. ML
inference systems range from deeply embedded devices to
smartphones to data centers. They have a variety of real-world
applications and many ﬁgures of merit, each requiring multiple
performance metrics. The right metrics, reﬂecting production
use cases, allow not just MLPerf but also publications to show
how a practical ML system would perform.
MLPerf Inference consists of four evaluation scenarios:
single-stream, multistream, server, and ofﬂine. We arrived
at them by surveying MLPerf’s broad membership, which
includes both customers and vendors. These scenarios rep-
resent many critical inference applications. We show that
performance can vary drastically under these scenarios and
their corresponding metrics. MLPerf Inference provides a way
to simulate the realistic behavior of the inference system under
test; such a feature is unique among AI benchmarks.
3
We prescribe target qualities and tail-latency bounds
in accordance with real-world use cases. Quality and perfor-
mance are intimately connected for all forms of ML. System
architectures occasionally sacriﬁce model quality to reduce
latency, reduce total cost of ownership (TCO), or increase
throughput. The tradeoffs among accuracy, latency, and TCO
are application speciﬁc. Trading 1% model accuracy for 50%
lower TCO is prudent when identifying cat photos, but it is
risky when detecting pedestrians for autonomous vehicles.
To reﬂect this aspect of real deployments, MLPerf deﬁnesmodel-quality targets. We established per-model and scenario
targets for inference latency and model quality. The latency
bounds and target qualities are based on input gathered from
ML-system end users and ML practitioners. As MLPerf im-
proves these parameters in accordance with industry needs, the
broader research community can track them to stay relevant.
4
We set permissive rules that allow users to show
both hardware and software capabilities. The community
has embraced a variety of languages and libraries, so MLPerf
Inference is a semantic-level benchmark. We specify the task
and the rules, but we leave implementation to submitters.
Our benchmarks allow submitters to optimize the reference
models, run them through their preferred software tool chain,
and execute them on their hardware of choice. Thus, MLPerf
Inference has two divisions: closed and open. Strict rules
govern the closed division, which addresses the lack of a stan-
dard inference-benchmarking workﬂow. The open division, on
the other hand, allows submitters to change the model and
demonstrate different performance and quality targets.
5
We present an inference-benchmarking method that
allows the models to change frequently while preserving
the aforementioned contributions. ML evolves quickly, so
the challenge for any benchmark is not performing the tasks,
but implementing a method that can withstand rapid change.
MLPerf Inference focuses heavily on the benchmark’s mod-
ular design to make adding new models and tasks less costly
while preserving the usage scenarios, target qualities, and
infrastructure. As we show in Section VI-E, our design has
allowed users to add new models easily. We plan to extend
the scope to include more areas and tasks. We are working
to add new models (e.g., recommendation and time series),
new scenarios (e.g., “burst” mode), better tools (e.g., a mobile
application), and better metrics (e.g., timing preprocessing) to
better reﬂect the performance of the whole ML pipeline.
Impact. MLPerf Inference (version 0.5) was put to the test
in October 2019. We received over 600 submissions from 14
organizations, spanning various tasks, frameworks, and plat-
forms. Audit tests automatically evaluated the submissions and
cleared 595 of them as valid. The results show a four-orders-
of-magnitude performance variation ranging from embedded
devices and smartphones to data-center systems, demonstrat-
ing how the different metrics and inference scenarios are useful
in more robustly accessing AI inference accelerators.
Staying up to date. Because ML is still evolving, we
established a process to regularly maintain and update MLPerf
Inference. See mlperf.org for the latest benchmarks, rules etc.
II. I NFERENCE -BENCHMARKING CHALLENGES
A useful ML benchmark must overcome three critical
challenges: the diversity of models, the variety of deployment
scenarios, and the array of inference systems.
A. Diversity of Models
Choosing the right models for a benchmark is difﬁcult; the
choice depends on the application. For example, pedestrian