Articles
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w1IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy. 2Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy. 3Viral Pathogenesis and 
Biosafety Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. 4Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), 
Bellinzona, Switzerland. 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. 6San Raffaele T elethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS, San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. 7UOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. 8Laboratory of Microbiology and Virology, 
IRCCS Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. 9Division of Gastroenterology, Center for Autoimmune Liver Diseases, 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. 10European Reference Network on Hepatological Diseases (ERN 
RARE-LIVER), San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. 11Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Immunology, Section 7631, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, København, Denmark. 12Monoclonal Antibody Discovery Lab, Fondazione T oscana Life Sciences, Siena, Italy. 13Faculty 
of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK. 14The William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, 
London, UK. 15These authors contributed equally: Matteo Stravalaci, Isabel Pagani. ✉e-mail: vicenzi.elisa@hsr.it; alberto.mantovani@humanitasresearch.it; 
cecilia.garlanda@humanitasresearch.itSARS-CoV-2 is a highly pathogenic coronavirus and the caus -
ative agent of the current COVID-19 pandemic1–3. Innate 
immunity is credited to play a fundamental role in this condi -
tion and may eradicate the infection in its early phases before adap -
tive immune responses take place. In severe forms of the disease, 
uncontrolled activation of innate and adaptive immunity results in hyperinflammatory responses, which affect the lung and blood ves
-
sels, contributing to acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock and multiorgan failure
4.
Innate immunity includes a cellular arm and a humoral arm5. 
The humoral arm consists of soluble PRMs belonging to differ -
ent families, which include collectins (for example, MBL), ficolins, pentraxins (C-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid P component (SAP) and PTX3) and C1q
5–7. Humoral PRMs represent functional 
ancestors of antibodies (ante-antibodies), as they recognize micro -
bial components and eliminate pathogens with common mecha -
nisms that include agglutination, neutralization, activation of the complement cascade and opsonization facilitating phagocytosis
5. Investigations of the role of humoral innate immunity in viral sens -
ing have shown that collectins bind to envelope glycoproteins on enveloped viruses, including influenza A virus, human immunode
-
ficiency virus, hepatitis C virus and herpes simplex virus, and to the non-enveloped rotavirus
6. This interaction may result in opsoniza -
tion, agglutination, inhibition of viral fusion and entry or comple -
ment activation, generally leading to inhibition of infection6. Among 
pentraxins, the long pentraxin PTX3 has been shown to interact with H3N2-subtype influenza virus type A by interacting with viral 
envelope hemagglutinin and neuraminidase glycoproteins through 
a sialic acid residue on its glycosidic moiety
8, with cytomegalovirus 
(CMV)9 and with the coronavirus murine hepatitis virus strain 1 
(ref. 10), preventing viral infection.
Several lines of evidence, including genetic associations, indi -
cate that cellular innate immunity and related cytokines and  
chemokines play a key role in SARS-CoV-2 recognition, antivi -
ral resistance and, at later stages, severe disease11–14. By contrast,  
little information is available concerning the role of the humoral Recognition and inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 by 
humoral innate immunity pattern recognition 
molecules
Matteo Stravalaci   1,2,15, Isabel Pagani3,15, Elvezia Maria Paraboschi1,2, Mattia Pedotti4, Andrea Doni1, 
Francesco Scavello1, Sarah N. Mapelli   1, Marina Sironi1, Chiara Perucchini1, Luca Varani4, 
Milos Matkovic4, Andrea Cavalli4,5, Daniela Cesana   6, Pierangela Gallina6, Nicoletta Pedemonte   7, 
Valeria Capurro7, Nicola Clementi   8, Nicasio Mancini8, Pietro Invernizzi   9,10, Rafael Bayarri-Olmos   11, 
Peter Garred   11, Rino Rappuoli   12,13, Stefano Duga   1,2, Barbara Bottazzi   1, Mariagrazia Uguccioni2,4, 
Rosanna Asselta   1,2, Elisa Vicenzi   3 ✉, Alberto Mantovani   1,2,14 ✉ and Cecilia Garlanda   1,2 ✉
The humoral arm of innate immunity includes diverse molecules with antibody-like functions, some of which serve as disease 
severity biomarkers in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The present study was designed to conduct a systematic inves-
tigation of the interaction of human humoral fluid-phase pattern recognition molecules (PRMs) with severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Of 12 PRMs tested, the long pentraxin 3 (PTX3) and mannose-binding lectin (MBL) bound the viral nucleocapsid and spike proteins, respectively. MBL bound trimeric spike protein, including that of variants of 
concern (VoC), in a glycan-dependent manner and inhibited SARS-CoV-2 in three in vitro models. Moreover, after binding to 
spike protein, MBL activated the lectin pathway of complement activation. Based on retention of glycosylation sites and model-ing, MBL was predicted to recognize the Omicron VoC. Genetic polymorphisms at the MBL2 locus were associated with disease 
severity. These results suggest that selected humoral fluid-phase PRMs can play an important role in resistance to, and patho-
genesis of, COVID-19, a finding with translational implications.
NAtURE IMMUNOLOG y | VOL 23 | FEBRUAR Y 2022 | 275–286 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology 275