Articles NATuRE IMMuNOLOGyarm of innate immunity in COVID-19 resistance and pathogen -
esis in spite of the clinical prognostic significance of CRP and 
PTX3 (refs. 15,16).
The present study was designed to conduct a systematic 
investigation of the interaction of the human humoral PRMs 
with SARS-CoV-2. We found that PTX3 and MBL bound the 
SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and spike protein, respec -
tively. MBL recognized VoC, had antiviral activity and activated the complement lectin pathway. Genetic polymorphisms at the MBL2 locus were associated with disease severity. Thus, selected 
fluid-phase PRMs (ante-antibodies) play an essential role in resis
-
tance to and pathogenesis of COVID-19, a finding with transla -
tional implications.
Results
Interaction of humoral PRMs with SARS-CoV-2 proteins. To 
study the role of humoral PRMs in recognizing SARS-CoV-2, we first investigated the interaction between recombinant human 
humoral innate immunity molecules and SARS-CoV-2 proteins 
using a solid-phase binding assay. We first analyzed pentraxins, and we did not observe specific binding of CRP or SAP to any of the SARS-CoV-2 proteins tested (spike protein subunit S1, spike 
protein subunit S2, spike protein active trimer, nucleocapsid and 
envelope protein) (Fig. 1a,b). By contrast, PTX3 bound specifically and in a dose-dependent manner to the nucleocapsid protein, one of the most abundant proteins of SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 
17) (Fig. 1c).  
We validated this result by confirming the binding of PTX3 with SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein obtained from different sources (Extended Data Fig. 1). PTX3 is a multimeric glycoprotein arranged 
in an octameric structure. Each protomer comprises a flexible 
N-terminal region and a C-terminal domain with homology to the short pentraxin family
5. To define which portion of the mol -
ecule was involved in the interaction, we compared the binding of full-length PTX3 and its N-terminal or C-terminal domains to SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein. Results indicate that PTX3 
interacts with SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein mainly through 
its N-terminal domain, although with lower affinity than full-length PTX3 (Fig. 1d).
We next investigated the interaction between PRMs of the clas
-
sical pathway and the lectin pathway of complement (C1q and the collectin MBL, respectively) and the viral proteins. C1q did not interact with any protein tested (Fig. 2a). By contrast, human 
MBL bound to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Wuhan strain
1, active 
trimer) but not to the individual SARS-CoV-2 spike protein sub -
units S1 (containing the receptor-binding domain (RBD)) and S2 (containing the membrane fusion domain) (Fig. 2b). We vali -
dated these data by analyzing the binding of MBL to different 
recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins obtained from different sources or produced in-house either in HEK293 cells, CHO cells 
or insect cells (Fig. 2c). All these preparations were bound by MBL, 
although with some differences. Notably, we did not observe bind
-
ing when we tested a non-covalent trimer of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. These results indicate that a native-like structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (presumably in the trimeric conforma
-
tion) is indispensable for MBL recognition.
MBL is a member of the collectin family, a class of PRMs com -
posed of a Ca2+-type lectin domain (also called carbohydrate rec -
ognition domain (CRD)) and a collagen-like domain6. Thus, we 
analyzed the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with other collectins involved in innate immunity, such as collectin-10, 
collectin-11 and collectin-12 (also known as CL-L1/CL-10, CL-K1/
CL-11 and CL-P1/CL-12) and the pulmonary surfactant proteins SP-A and SP-D. We also extended the analysis to recombinant ficolin-1, ficolin-2 and ficolin-3, a family of proteins known to 
activate the complement lectin pathway and structurally related to 
MBL. In contrast with MBL, collectin-10, collectin-11, collectin-12, SP-A, SP-D and ficolins did not bind to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Fig. 2d,e and Extended Data Fig. 1), indicating that recognition of 
the spike protein is unique to MBL.
We further characterized the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein with MBL by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Different concentrations of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike protein or RBD domain were flowed onto MBL immobilized on the biosen
-
sor surface. Trimeric SARS-CoV-2 spike protein formed a stable calcium-dependent complex with nanomolar affinity (K
d = 34 nM), 
whereas MBL did not bind the isolated RBD (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 2), confirming the results obtained using the S1 subunit.
These results indicate that of 12 humoral PRMs tested in a 
solid-phase binding assay, PTX3 and MBL bound the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and spike protein, respectively.
Interaction of MBL with spike-pseudotyped lentivirus. To mimic 
the interaction between MBL and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in its physiological conformation in the viral envelope, we investigated the binding of viral particles of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein pseudo
-
typed on a lentivirus vector to MBL-coated plates. The interaction was determined by lysing the bound pseudovirus and measuring the released lentiviral vector p24 core protein by ELISA. While len
-
tiviral control particles pseudotyped with the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)-g glycoprotein (VSV-pseudovirus) did not result in 0123450123Bound SAP
absorbance (OD450)
Bound CRP
absorbance (OD450)
Bound PTX3
absorbance (OD450)S
N
S1
S2
E
0123450123
SARS-CoV-2 proteins
(pmol per well)0123450123
0 10 20 3001234
SARS-CoV-2
Nucleocapsid protein (nM)PTX3 N-PTX3
C-PTX3c b a dBound SARS-CoV-2 N protein
absorbance (OD450)
Fig. 1 |  Interaction between pentraxins and SARS-CoV-2 proteins. a–c, Recombinant His tag SARS-CoV-2 proteins (spike active trimer (S), S1, S2, nucleocapsid 
(N) and envelope (E); the legend refers to a –c) were immobilized on 96-well nickel-coated plates at different concentrations. Fixed concentrations of SAP (a ), 
CRP (b ) and PTX3 (c ) were incubated over the captured viral proteins. Bound pentraxins were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with 
specific primary antibodies. d , Full-length PTX3 or the N- or C-terminal domains were captured on 96-well plates. Biotinylated SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid 
protein was incubated at different concentrations. Bound nucleocapsid was detected by ELISA using horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated streptavidin.  
All data are presented as mean ±  s.e.m.; n = 3 independent experiments performed in duplicate; OD450, optical density at 450 nm.
NAtURE IMMUNOLOG y | VOL 23 | FEBRUAR Y 2022 | 275–286 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology 276