Business: Theory and Practice, 2020, 21(2): 827–834 833
The appraisal process begins first with the selection of 
relevant sources, elimination of publication upon language 
barriers, scope, and content appraisal. The selected publi-
cations represented such areas as Marketing, information 
technology, AI, and related fields. In the abstract, content, 
and text shifting all were analysed to indicate the publi-
cation importance for the present research. The full-text 
elimination assured rigorous selection for synthesis and 
analysis.
After a detailed examination of the publications, the 
investigation was synthesised in the tabular form Table 2.
The analysis covered the main determinants of AI tools 
and trends in marketing. It relied on the meta-synthesis 
following the steps of ethnography. All the studies were 
compared and analysed accordingly. 
Research findings and conclusions
The research confirmed that AI is applied in various 
fields of marketing. While image/text recognition is ap-
plied extensively in commercial solutions, voice recogni-
tion is used poorly. The current AI tools in marketing are 
all about supporting the shift towards the more digital 
environment such as CRM, connecting multiple layers, 
customising, automation, and augmentation of market-
ing activities and profiling. The tools are merged with the 
existing marketing activities to augment capabilities and 
automate tasks and goals. Due to enormous data avail-
ability, new dimensions of analysis are available. Deep 
learning and labelling tools enable detailed and optimised 
profiling of customers and the environment. Since the 
technologies are still very new and still developing, inde-
pendent machines and robots can be seen as future trends 
in developing AI, especially in marketing activities such as 
intense customer interaction, networking different actors, 
customisations, and personalisation. 
Consequently, it can be concluded that in the last dec-
ades, AI was used to obtain information about customers and t to interact with them on a personalised level. AI in 
marketing tends to be used at the operational level, usu-
ally as one-off initiatives or activities. The research proved 
that AI applications are incorporated in all areas of market-
ing (marketing mix and marketing communication). The 
technologies are developing towards more independent 
machines. That means that there will be more information 
available and more ways to interact with the customers, 
faster and more effective. AI adoption improves marketing 
managers’ performance, increases their productivity, and lift 
the overall marketing strategy. It is recommended to the 
businesses to follow the developments in AI while integrat-
ing it in marketing. Organisations need to prepare their in-
frastructures for the future emergence of innovations in AI. 
Further research might develop methodological works on 
the impact of AI in firms marketing activities. It would also 
be helpful to capture the experiences and perspective of the 
marketing managers in the context of AI usage in market-
ing and its role in business goal achievements qualitatively.
Acknowledgements 
The research on Artificial Intelligence and its role in cur -
rent technological development is a matter of interest of 
many researchers in various fields. We are grateful to all 
of those whom we had the pleasure to work and share 
knowledge and experiences in this filed. We would like 
to express our gratitude to all colleagues who inspired us 
with their scientific works and achievements. We are also 
grateful to the Department of Management Team for sup-
port and advice during the study. 
Author contributions 
All authors contributed to the article, developing the theo-
retical data collection and analysis, data interpretation. 
Disclosure statement 
Authors do not have any competing financial, profession-
al, or personal interests from other parties.
References  
Abbott. (2019). What will the digital healthcare revolution look 
like?  https://www.abbott.com/corpnewsroom/products-and-
innovation/what-will-the-digital-healthcare-revolution-look-
like-.html
Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. (2018). Prediction machines: 
the simple economics of artificial intelligence. Harvard Business 
Review Press. 
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226613475.001.0001
Barutcu, S., Y aldir, A., & Hasiloglu, S. B. (2017). From mass to 
personalized mobile marketing strategies: the new dimen-
sions through expert systems.  European Scientific Journal, 
13(10), 400–409.
Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Manyika, J., & Woetzel, J. (2017).  Artificial 
intelligence: the next digital frontier. McKinsey Global Insti-
tute. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(17)30039-9Table 2. Synthesis of the studied publications  
(developed by authors)
No. Author(s) Ye ar Focus Paper type
1Agrawal et al. 2018 Strategic level conceptual
2Barutcu et al. 2017 Strategic level empirical
3Chui et al. 2018 Operational empirical
4Daugherty and 
Wilson2018 Strategic conceptual
5Harris 2010 strategic conceptual
6Ikka 2018 Operational empirical
7Jablonska and 
Polkowski2019 Operational empirical
8Kumar et al. 2019 Operational 
and strategicconceptual
9Tarafdar et al. 2019 Operational empirical
10 Tong et al. 2020 strategic conceptual