830 B. Peyravi et al. Revolutionised technologies for marketing: theoretical review with focus on artificial intelligence
Data Driven Marketing – related to big data analysis 
with AI to understand the consumer personality, imple-
ment and optimise the ongoing marketing campaigns. 
This also makes real-time interaction and engagement 
with customers, receives immediate feedback on ongo-
ing activities, and gives an accurate data-based prediction 
about future behaviours (Johnson et al., 2019). Competi-
tors’ analysis, screening their activities online, and creating 
the competitive offering are possible with AI intelligence 
tools; one example is the Cortex platform. Furthermore, 
investigation on positive or negative brand impact and 
identifying market trends are possible with Linkfluence 
Radarly software and Google Thinks AI tools. 
Personalised Marketing is associated with content 
customisation, suggesting an optimal time for interaction 
and matching the correct customer profile (Kumar et al., 
2019). For instance, AI tools like Socialbakers and OneS-
pot tools for emails and websites content personalisation 
and individualisation, personal mobile assistants like Siri 
and Alexa, travel planning with Mezi. Music; Spotify and 
Pandora, service delivery with Uber and Bolt, face rec-
ognition with Haytack, language translation Liv, smart 
home solutions by Nest, financial planning using Olivia, 
and much more AI tools have become concurrent part of 
our lives (Kumar et al., 2019).
Multichannel Marketing is about how to create, op-
timise, and monitor multichannel marketing campaigns, 
deliver a single strategy across different channels and plat-
forms, to maximise the ability to reach potential and exist-
ing customers. AI supports marketing assets optimisation, 
such as email, website, social media platforms, mobile ap-
plications, chat messaging, and other online channels.  AI 
also can guide on engagement with customers, as well as 
assist with management tasks, such as budget planning 
and optimisation, channel recommendations, targeting 
the right audience segment at the right time. As for to-
day, more than 42% population of the world is on Social 
Media, and each person spends an average of 2 hours and 
22 minutes on social networks and messaging (Emarsys, 
2019; Globalwebindex, 2018). AI in social media can cre-
ate the general content (using a subset of AI called natural 
language generation (NLG)) or create social posts (apply-
ing Hubspot Social Media Software), or have a conversa-
tion, generate and execute the content to followers, fans 
and customers (working with Sprout Social for example) 
(Emarsys, 2019; Hubspot, 2019).
Some of the related AI tools for a multichannel ap-
proach, which can be adopted at organisations are the fol-
lowing: SEO management and content research with Mar -
ketMuse, Netbase for social media listening, and brand 
conversations. Exceed.ai to qualify the leads and improve 
communication between marketing and sales, Node and 
Xinoah to recognise potential clients and help to pursue 
to buy products and services. Curata to promote the con-
tent across the online channels, Chorus AI platform for 
call recording and conversational tracking analysis, Aivo 
for voice and chat interactions with customers, and man y more (Single Grain, 2019; Google Digital Marketing Tool 
Box, 2019).    
AI also is used in sales optimisation. However, it does 
not mean that it takes the role of salespeople entirely. It 
makes sales data-driven, effective, and smarter. There are 
many AI integrated software which makes the sales pro-
cesses more effective and efficient such as (Abbott, 2019); 
 –Nudge (high customer engagement);
 –Chorus (recording and transcribing on spot conver -
sation);  
 –Inside Sales (assisting the quota management);
 –Cogito (monitor speech patterns);
 –Growbots (easing manual consumer search).
The mentioned software aims to ease the sales process 
for the salespeople in various dimensions:
1) Better performance with less admin management;
2) Maintaining predictive accuracy efficiency;
3) Sales forecasting efficiency and effectiveness; 
4) Recommendations engagement; 
5) Query solving at scale efficiency;    
6) Optimise content contribution efficiency and effec-
tiveness;  
7) Dynamic price optimisation management;     
8) Churn Prediction management.  
Overall, the necessity of AI in sales efficiency and ef-
fectiveness and in this context in management cannot be 
neglected. This would impact positively on the achieve-
ment of marketing strategies and goals. 
AI implementation in marketing
Early principles and concepts have been formed to exam-
ine marketing-related concerns and issues for a long time. 
However, the main utilisation and implementation in 
marketing have arisen in the last decade (Wierenga, 2010). 
Recent researches on the implementation of AI in market-
ing shows that majority of marketers are interested in AI 
in their marketing activities, whereas 20% of them were 
interested in AI solutions in 2017 for business purposes 
(Bughin et al., 2017). Practically, AI has been used to in-
crease and upgrade the outdated methods of marketing 
(Hoanca & Forrest, 2015). From the management point 
of view, the most known software for decision making in 
marketing is the Marketing Management Support System 
(MMSS), which allows information and data analysis with 
the help of AI (Wierenga, 2010). In today’s world, AI is an 
effective tool to support managers in various operations 
and tasks such as web development, digital marketing, so-
cial media monitoring, SEO, and email marketing (Kokina 
& Davenport, 2017).
AI implementation in marketing uses customer data, 
machine learning, and other computational concepts to 
estimate the action of the customers on products. Insuf-
ficient time, resources, and budgets, moreover, the expec-
tations on revenue growth, productivity, and efficiency in-
crease, greater return on investment on marketing spend-
ing are enormous, and it is a daily routine for marketers. 
They spend plenty of time planning, preparing, executing,