Business: Theory and Practice, 2020, 21(2): 827–834 831
monitoring, and analysing marketing activities. Artificial 
Intelligence could improve both sides’ productivity and 
marketing campaign effectiveness (Marketing Artificial 
Intelligence Institute, 2019). The studies have shown that 
marketers lack knowledge about AI and how to imple-
ment and integrate them into their marketing strategies. 
It is important to have an overview of AI marketing tools 
and values they can bring for their daily work routine. 
Processes automation will put the marketing strategy to 
the next level, improve planning, execution, forecasting, 
and improve results. Marketers need to start from under -
standing AI, implementing AI into marketing strategies, 
Experience AI, and Improve the AI in the marketing prac-
tice. The main areas for AI implementation in marketing 
are following voice, text, image technologies, analytical 
decision-making systems, and autonomous robots and 
vehicles (Jarek & Mazurek, 2019). AI helps organisations 
to reduce the costs and grow revenues, it helps to develop 
products and services, and AI helps marketing managers 
to focus on creative tasks and strategy development, tak-
ing care of daily routine tasks (Kumar and et al., 2019).
Before implementing AI in the organizations, it is im-
portant to evaluate if the company is ready to benefit from 
AI. Does the company have enough data to analyse and 
manage how this data is collected and organised (Kumar 
and et al., 2019)? Set the clear goals and expectations for 
AI, how to adopt and implement AI tools for daily opera-
tions, how to adapt the company structure and responsi-
bilities while adopting AI to the company ecosystem. Take 
into account the data privacy sensibility and possible bi-
ases using it for company purposes (Kumar et al., 2019).
AI impact on marketing
Jarek and Mazurek (2019), in research entitled “Marketing 
and Artificial Intelligence, ” distinguish the impact of AI 
on marketing activities in 3 perspectives. 1) AI implica-
tions in marketing, 2) The impact of AI on Consumer, 
and 3) The impact of AI on marketing management. First, 
research findings point to the impact of AI on the market-
ing mix (see Table 1). They emphasised on the two-way 
impact on marketing as “beneficiary of changes in the 
consumer” and “new solutions affect the entirety of the 
pursued marketing activities. ”Secondly, the research indicates the advantages of AI 
for consumers as more convenient and quicker shopping, 
new consumer experience via mass-scale hyper-personal-
isation, and a new dimension of the consumer-brand re-
lationship. Thirdly and finally, the research builds a bridge 
between AI and marketing managements by emphasizing 
its impact on eliminating laborious and time-consuming 
activities, creative and strategic activities, design innova-
tions, developing competencies of employees, and new 
ecosystem (Jarek & Mazurek, 2019).
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a sig-
nificant aspect of marketing, and AI can optimise it. Ac-
cording to Daugherty and Wilson (2018), deep learning 
tools can optimise the task assignment and schedule of the 
service providers for better service based on the outcomes 
of the data mining and profiling. Furthermore, businesses 
can automate the more repetitive and framed tasks to 
reduce time and increase productivity by applying enter -
prise cognitive computing into their services (Tarafdar 
et al., 2019). In advertisement and promotion, AI is com-
monly used to learn more about the customers and target 
them more precisely and personalise the messages towards 
them (Daugherty & Wilson, 2018).
2. Conceptual framework and methodology
The existing literature review was giving an opportunity 
to summarize and present AI impact on marketing. How-
ever, most studies focus specifically on AI technology, Big 
Data, Marketing, AI impact on Social Media, AI and Mar -
keting, Personalisation, some predictions for the future. 
There is no general overview of AI tools and trends for 
marketing, which would focus on its strategic usage, as 
well as its contribution to solutions of issues in market-
ing activities. Marketers need a better understanding of 
AI and how to adapt it to their strategies, as well as daily 
business routines. Current research aim contributes and 
answers to:
1)  What are the current AI tools used in marketing 
activities?
2)  What trends are fostering research and develop-
ment on AI?
Analysis of academic literature, articles, publica-
tions, case studies, relevant web sources accomplished. 
Table 1. Areas of the impact of AI on marketing mix (source: Jarek & Mazurek, 2019)
Product Price Promotion (Brand) Place (Sales and distribution)
– New product development
– Hyper-personalisation
– Automatic recommendations
– Creating additional value
– Additional solutions beyond 
product category– Price management and 
dynamic price matching to 
customer profile– Creating a unique experience
– Personalised communication
– Creating the wow factor and 
offering benefit
– Elimination of the process of 
learning product categories
– Positive impact on the 
customer
– Minimised disappointment– Convenient shopping
– The faster and simpler sales 
process
– 24/7 customer service 
(chatbot)
– Purchase automation
– Service-free shops
– Consultant-less customer 
support
– New distribution channels
– Merchandising automation