Business: Theory and Practice, 2020, 21(2): 827–834 829
Internet marketing basically consists of 6 categories:
 –Search engine marketing;
 –Promotion in social networks;
 –Direct or direct marketing;
 –PR (public relations – public relations);
 –Video marketing;
 –Web analytics.
All types of Internet marketing have their own goals, 
methods, and principles of work, but still, the ultimate 
goal is to raise the business to a new level, increase busi-
ness profits. Currently, more and more often, the main 
areas of communication with consumers on the internet 
are such:
 –Content marketing. It is based on the quality of which 
the success of other areas depends: SEO, SMM, news-
letters, etc.; the companies themselves decide which 
content format to prefer. Solid blogs, short posts on 
social networks, videos, infographics, or a mix of all 
of the above can be used. This is one of the most 
inexpensive types of online promotion with a high 
percentage of attraction.
 –Recent trends in content marketing include impres-
sive growth in video content consumption, includ-
ing live streaming; the popularity of Stories on social 
networks, on Instagram; an increase in the number 
of smartphone users.
 –SEO (search engine optimisation). Local search is 
growing in popularity – for example, through Google 
Maps or other virtual maps.
 –SMM (social network management). When quality 
content is ready, you need to consider its promotion 
in those social networks where the target audience is 
located. The number of advertisers is increasing, the 
cost of ads is increasing, and therefore, the cost of 
paid advertising is growing, and it is becoming more 
challenging to attract customers. The main trend is 
a personalised selection of video content in the feed 
of each user.
 –Analytics. Without tracking key metrics, ‘it is impos-
sible to figure out what needs to be fixed and how to 
do it. The new version of Search Console, created by 
Google, will help facilitate work.
 –Understanding the psychology of clients. Brands eve-
ry minute try to impose their goods or services – on 
the street, in transport, on TV or gadgets.
Most of such advertising not only does not help the 
client satisfy his needs, but is also annoying. Hence banner 
blindness and blocking of advertising messages – every 5th 
user does it. The emergence of new communication chan-
nels suggests that people need only one social network or 
messenger to communicate and express themselves. Un-
derstanding who the client is and what he expects (and 
what he does not want to see on his Facebook, Instagram, 
and so on) is a necessary condition for successful internet 
marketing. The potential of Internet marketing is huge, 
and the opportunities that open up for companies when 
using it are impressive.According to Barutcu et al. (2017), today, mass mobile 
marketing and advertising are beginning to lose their posi-
tions and personalised (individualised) mobile marketing 
has started to dominate as a new way of marketing strat-
egy, because expert systems, as a subsection of artificial 
intelligence, are able to help to send personalised messages 
to thousands of customers considering their differences 
in a very short time. Expert systems provide marketers to 
serve customers efficiently and individually and integrate 
customer characteristics, locations, data, and rules to send 
personalised messages like a marketer.
As mentioned before, developed mobile technologies 
allow businesses for quicker, more personalised, and bet-
ter services based on marketing activities. Thus, data col-
lection becomes a significant phenomenon for businesses. 
The data collection, however, shapes the base for other 
processes such as labelling and deep learning. Labelling 
means that a human works through data and teaches the 
machine how to recognise a certain aspect (Chui et al., 
2018). AI’s deep capacity for learning helps businesses 
continuously develop aid in the ways they use their data. 
According to Tractica (2016), the top 5 use cases of AI in 
2025 are: 
1) Algorithmic trading strategy performance improve-
ment;
2) Static image recognition, classification, and tagging;
3) Efficient, scalable processing of patient data;
4) Predictive maintenance;
5) Content distribution on social media.
The algorithms are programmed to identify trends 
and patterns in the data. The devices learn and adopt the 
practices accordingly. These technologies can be applied 
to automate processes and experiment with solutions, and 
to make predictions about outcomes that leads the per -
formance improvement (Agrawal et al., 2018). Data Min-
ing, however, refers to the process of working through big 
data and analysing it for patterns and correlations (Perry, 
2017).  Another powerful AI technology is deep learn-
ing (Machine Learning), which enables us to convert the 
enormous quantity of data into useful information. It 
presents a non-linear prediction solution that is not only 
based on correlation analysis and regression (Lapuschkin 
et al., 2019).
Artificial Intelligence tools can be used for marketing 
like profiling, automation, and augmentation of tasks, cus-
tomisation, and personalisation, multichannel marketing, 
analytics, and forecasting, as well in the decision-making 
processes. Artificial Intelligence Marketing institute claims 
that AI for marketing has become approachable and ac-
tionable. According to Hubspot (2019), AI for marketing 
is widely used nowadays to improve the consumer online 
experience using digital media channels. AI can be imple-
mented in many marketing strategies (Davenport et al., 
2019). Three main directions on how AI can be imple-
mented in marketing are Data-Driven marketing, Per -
sonalised, and Multichannel marketing (Davenport et al., 
2019).