828 B. Peyravi et al. Revolutionised technologies for marketing: theoretical review with focus on artificial intelligence
the significant role of AI in marketing activities today and 
in the future. This paper aims to illustrate the theoreti-
cal review of the nexus between AI and marketing, which 
would lead to understanding the future scope of AI and 
its penetration in marketing activities. Theoretical analy-
sis of relevant researches on AI tools and future trends, 
presentation of conceptual framework and methodology 
design, and presentation of the research findings are the 
objectives of the research.
The methodology is based on reviewing various theo-
retical approaches to the recent marketing trends and its 
nexus with AI. Therefore, this paper is looking for the an-
swers to current AI tools used in marketing activities and 
trends that foster research and development on AI. This 
study has potential limitations, such as the data collection 
process and access to the relevant literature.
1. Theoretical background, current trends,  
and AI tools used in marketing
“ All human actions are based on anticipated futures. We 
cannot know the future because it does not exist yet, but 
we can use our current knowledge to imagine futures and 
make them happen. The better we understand the present 
and the history that has created it, the better we can un-
derstand the possibilities of the future” (Ikka, 2018).
Historically, AI was termed in 1956 by John Mc Carthy 
in his work entitled “Dartmouth Summer Research Pro-
ject” . The main approach to the research has been made 
on “Thinking machines” that could mirror the human 
way of thinking and behaving (Marr, 2018). The emerg -
ing technologies such as mobile applications, data science, 
block-chain, big data, cloud computing, and artificial in-
telligence are changing the way we communicate; we 
behave, we live, we amuse, and work. From the business 
point of view, technological developments have changed 
the dynamics of the business world, prompted the glo-
balisation process, and increased global competition. This 
phenomenon was the departing point of the businesses 
in involving and penetrating in new markets. The current 
global and competitive business environment continu-
ously demands innovation; the existing knowledge base is 
getting invalid, continuously thriving for advancement in 
process improvement, and thus, looking for new models 
in marketing activities. AI technologies can assist market-
ing specialists in various areas such as lead generation, 
social media control, market research, and customisa-
tion of customer experiences (Sterne, 2017); for instance, 
salesforce (CRM software provider) has begun AI services 
which executes CRM solutions.
AI for marketing is already a driving force and has 
become a significant part of today’s competitive world. 
Businesses, no matter small or large, are implementing 
the marketing strategies to procure business goals and 
create massive breakthroughs using AI. In marketing, 
change is the dominant fact today and constantly speeding 
up (Corea, 2017). The main alteration in the marketing environment is the emergence of electronic data-process-
ing devices as a major tool of scientific marketing. Most 
businesses are taking benefit of online communication, 
electronic data-processing analyses, and information-re -
trieval systems as tools that help marketing to be more 
efficient and effective. This has led to the emergence of 
real-time marketing. In recent years, there are many sig-
nificant types of research on the nexus between AI and 
marketing such as “Network value creation through mar -
keting, management and business administration” by Ma-
zurek (2014); “The future of artificial intelligence” by Dhar 
(2016); and “The role of cognitive architectures in general 
artificial intelligence” by Lieto et al. (2017). They empha-
sise on the rapid development of AI in recent years, capa-
bilities of machines to learn based on the obtained data, 
the possibility to create previously non-existing informa-
tion, processing of various data such as numerical data, 
artificial intelligence processes texts, images, sounds, and 
the benefits and advantages of the marketing as the main 
beneficiary of developments in information technologies. 
Artificial Intelligence is a significant tool to obtain a 
sustainable competitive advantage in which always con-
nected to the global market needs where marketing ac-
tivities are required to deliver continuous, customised, 
insight-driven interactions with customers on an individ-
ual basis. Chaupham (2018) stated that “Marketers have 
to creatively involve customer segments in understanding 
the benefits of AI” . At this point, the presentation on 5p’s 
(planning, production, personalisation, promotion, and 
performance) of marketing AI by Marketing Artificial In-
telligence Institute (MAII) must be addressed. This struc-
ture was shaped to simplify and visualise the ground on 
how marketing can benefit from AI (Roetzer, 2017). 
As like other business components, marketing has 
changed a lot over the past few years, and the transfor -
mation of the digitalisation process of activities have in-
creased. Digital marketers have a range of tools at their 
disposal for understanding customers and prospects on 
social media. The use of AI enables 3 important dimen -
sions, such as marketing tasks automation, accuracy 
improvement, and human efforts reduction. The digital 
transformation can be seen in the changing of business 
processes through the use of technology. Therefore, with 
the introduction of big data, businesses can transform 
the management perspectives and adopt digital business 
models that allow them to evolve the interaction with the 
microenvironment. Another big sight of digital transfor -
mation is the change in consumer behaviour.
Modern dictionaries define online marketing as us-
ing all aspects and elements of traditional marketing in 
a network space. The main objective of online marketing 
is to get the maximum effect from potential site users 
and increase their flow. Internet marketing is a set of 
techniques on the internet aimed at attracting atten-
tion to a product or service, popularising this product 
(site) on the network and its effective promotion for sale 
(Tong et al., 2020).