832 B. Peyravi et al. Revolutionised technologies for marketing: theoretical review with focus on artificial intelligence
Assessment of various scientific sources and reviewed 
studies on AI and AI marketing helped answer the re-
search questions and formulate conclusions. The explora-
tory research on AI’s impact on marketing was conducted. 
The qualitative analysis of AI tools for marketing is com-
pleted. The secondary data analysis contributes to the lit-
erature and brings the following insights:
 –Overview of AI;
 –Overview of AI Tools for Data-Driven Marketing;
 –Personalised Marketing and Multichannel Marketing;
 –Current trends;
 –Impact on Marketing;
 –Future effects of AI in Marketing.
The present systematic literature review is based on 
SALSA method, which departs from scoping search to 
appraisal and finishing with synthesis and analysis. It 
aimed to illustrate the determining of current AI tools and 
trends. The purpose of the scoping research is delivered 
in Figure 1.   Based on the scope of the research, the searched terms 
are divided into 3 categories related to AI. The first term 
refers to Tools (Automation, Customisation, and Augmen-
tation). The second covers the trends (Personalisation, in-
teraction, and networking). The third group is directed to 
the market and marketing.
The search process is limited to the papers published 
between 2010 and 2020. It takes into scope scientific pub-
lications, official reports, and sites. The search process (The 
existing literature review was giving an opportunity to pre-
sent AI impact on marketing. However, most studies focus 
specifically on AI technology, Big Data, Marketing, AI im-
pact on Social Media, AI and Marketing, Personalisation, 
some predictions for future implementations of the intelli-
gence systems. Analysis of academic literature, articles, pub-
lications, case studies, relevant web sources accomplished. 
Assessment of various scientific sources and reviewed stud-
ies on AI and AI marketing helped to answer the research 
questions, formulate conclusions) delivered in Figure 2.
Figure 1. The process of the systematic literature review (developed by authors)Research scope 
 – Selecting terms 
 – Selecting database 
 – Selectin g authors  Search optimisation 
– Publications 
 – Oﬃcial reports 
 – Oﬃcial sites  
Total Numbe r (382) 
Research Appraisals  
– Relevant sources (122)  
 – Non-english (0) 
 – Irrelevant subject scope (146)  
 – Inaccessible sources (25)  
 – Content related sources (199)   
 
Content, Abstract and full 
text elimination 
 
/T_he papers synthesised in  
tabular form  
Anal ysis: meta-synthesis to  
ethnography 
Figure 2. The process of search optimisation (prepared by authors) Key words 
Arti/f_icial Intelligence, 
Marketing, 
Personalisation, Marketing  
automation, Neuro 
marketing, Viral 
marketing, Information 
technology, Big Data, 
Multichannel Marketing,  
Arti/f_icial Intelligence  
Tools  
Publication title  Article title 
Oﬃcial report title  
Oﬃcial site title