VQA-Med: Overview of the Medical Visual
Question Answering Task at ImageCLEF 2019
Asma Ben Abacha1, Sadid A. Hasan2, Vivek V. Datla2, Joey Liu2, Dina
Demner-Fushman1, and Henning M uller3
1Lister Hill Center, National Library of Medicine, USA
2Philips Research Cambridge, USA
3University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Sierre, Switzerland
asma.benabacha@nih.gov
sadid.hasan@philips.com
Abstract. This paper presents an overview of the Medical Visual Ques-
tion Answering task (VQA-Med) at ImageCLEF 2019. Participating sys-
tems were tasked with answering medical questions based on the visual
content of radiology images. In this second edition of VQA-Med, we fo-
cused on four categories of clinical questions: Modality, Plane, Organ
System, and Abnormality. These categories are designed with dierent
degrees of diculty leveraging both classication and text generation
approaches. We also ensured that all questions can be answered from
the image content without requiring additional medical knowledge or
domain-specic inference. We created a new dataset of 4,200 radiology
images and 15,292 question-answer pairs following these guidelines. The
challenge was well received with 17 participating teams who applied a
wide range of approaches such as transfer learning, multi-task learning,
and ensemble methods. The best team achieved a BLEU score of 64.4%
and an accuracy of 62.4%. In future editions, we will consider designing
more goal-oriented datasets and tackling new aspects such as contextual
information and domain-specic inference.
Keywords: Visual Question Answering, Data Creation, Deep Learning,
Radiology Images, Medical Questions and Answers
1 Introduction
Recent advances in articial intelligence opened new opportunities in clinical de-
cision support. In particular, relevant solutions for the automatic interpretation
of medical images are attracting a growing interest due to their potential appli-
cations in image retrieval and in assisted diagnosis. Moreover, systems capable of
understanding clinical images and answering questions related to their content
could support clinical education, clinical decision, and patient education. From a
Copyright c
2019 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Com-
mons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0). CLEF 2019, 9-12 Septem-
ber 2019, Lugano, Switzerland.
Published in Proceedings of Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum  (CLEF) 2019 Working Notes, 
Lugano, Switzerland, 9-12 September 2019, which should be cited to refer to this work.