computational perspective, this Visual Question Answering (VQA) task presents
an exciting problem that combines natural language processing and computer
vision techniques. In recent years, substantial progress has been made on VQA
with new open-domain datasets [3, 8] and approaches [23, 7].
However, there are challenges that need to be addressed when tackling VQA
in a specialized domain such as Medicine. Ben Abacha et al. [4] analyzed some
of the issues facing medical visual question answering and described four key
challenges (i) designing goal-oriented VQA systems and datasets, (ii) catego-
rizing the clinical questions, (iii) selecting (clinically) relevant images, and (iv)
capturing the context and the medical knowledge.
Inspired by the success of visual question answering in the general domain,
we conducted a pilot task (VQA-Med 2018) in ImageCLEF 2018 to focus on
visual question answering in the medical domain [9]. Based on the success of the
initial edition, we continued the task this year with enhanced focus on a well
curated and larger dataset.
In VQA-Med 2019, we selected radiology images and medical questions that
(i) asked about only one element and (ii) could be answered from the image
content. We targeted four main categories of questions with dierent diculty
levels: Modality, Plane, Organ system, and Abnormality. For instance, the rst
three categories can be tackled as a classication task, while the fourth category
(abnormality) presents an answer generation problem. We intentionally designed
the data in this manner to study the behavior and performance of dierent
approaches on both aspects. This design is more relevant to clinical decision
support than the common approach in open-domain VQA datasets [3, 8] where
the answers consist of one word or number (e.g. yes, no, 3, stop).
In the following section, we present the task description with more details
and examples. We describe the data creation process and the VQA-Med-2019
dataset in section 3. We present the evaluation methodology and discuss the
challenge results respectively in sections 4 and 5.
2 Task Description
In the same way as last year, given a medical image accompanied by a clinically
relevant question, participating systems in VQA-Med 2019 are tasked with an-
swering the question based on the visual image content. In VQA-Med 2019, we
specically focused on radiology images and four main categories of questions:
Modality, Plane, Organ System, and Abnormality. We mainly considered medi-
cal questions asking only about one element: e.g., \what is the organ principally
shown in this MRI?", \in what plane is this mammograph taken?", \is this a
t1 weighted, t2 weighted, or 
air image?", \what is most alarming about this
ultrasound?").
All selected questions can be answered from the image content without re-
quiring additional domain-specic inference or context. Other questions includ-
ing these aspects will be considered in future editions of the challenge, e.g.: "Is
this modality safe for pregnant women?", "What is located immediately inferior