nonlinear dynamical systems in the asymptotic limit of sufﬁcient data [Sastry and Bodson, 2011,
Sastry, 2013]. More recent, non-asymptotic studies have focused almost entirely on linear systems,
where the controller is generated using data from multiple independent trajectories [Fiechter, 1997,
Dean et al., 2019, Faradonbeh et al., 2018a, 2019]. Assuming the model is known, stabilizing
policies may also be synthesized via convex optimization [Prajna et al., 2004] by combining a ‘dual
Lyapunov theorem’ [Rantzer, 2001] with sum-of-squares programming [Parrilo, 2003]. Relative to
these analysis our focus is on strengthening the theoretical foundations of model-free procedures and
establishing rigorous guarantees that policy gradient methods can also be used to generate stabilizing
controllers.
Online control. Online control studies the problem of adaptively ﬁne-tuning the performance of an
already-stabilizing control policy on a single trajectory [Dean et al., 2018, Faradonbeh et al., 2018b,
Cohen et al., 2019, Mania et al., 2019, Simchowitz and Foster, 2020, Hazan et al., 2020, Simchowitz
et al., 2020, Kakade et al., 2020]. Though early papers in this direction consider systems without
pre-given stabilizing controllers [Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári, 2011], their guarantees degrade
exponentially in the system dimension (a penalty ultimately shown to be unavoidable by Chen and
Hazan [2021]). Rather than ﬁne-tuning an already stabilizing controller, we focus on the more basic
problem of ﬁnding a controller which is stabilizing in the ﬁrst place, and allow for the use of multiple
independent trajectories.
Model-free approaches. Model-free approaches eschew trying to approximate the underlying dy-
namics and instead directly search over the space of control policies. The landmark paper of Fazel
et al. [2018] proves that, despite the non-convexity of the problem, direct policy search on the
inﬁnite-horizon LQR objective efﬁciently converges to the globally optimal policy, assuming the
search is initialized at an already stabilizing controller. Fazel et al. [2018] pose the synthesis of this
initial stabilizing controller via policy gradients as an open problem; one that we solve in this work.
Following this result, there have been a large number of works studying policy gradients procedures
in continuous control, see for example Feng and Lavaei [2020], Malik et al. [2019], Mohammadi
et al. [2020, 2021], Zhang et al. [2021] just to name a few. Relative to our analysis, these papers
consider questions of policy ﬁnite-tuning, derivative-free methods, and robust (or distributed) con-
trol which are important, yet somewhat orthogonal to the stabilization question considered herein.
The recent analysis by Lamperski [2020] is perhaps the most closely related piece of prior work.
It proposes a model-free, off-policy algorithm for computing a stabilizing controller for determin-
istic LQR systems. Much like discount annealing, the algorithm also works by alternating between
policy optimization (in their case by a closed-form policy improvement step based on the Riccati
update) and increasing a damping factor. However, whereas we provide precise ﬁnite-time conver-
gence guarantees to a stabilizing controller for both linear and nonlinear systems, the guarantees
in Lamperski [2020] are entirely asymptotic and restricted to linear systems. Furthermore, we pay
special attention to quantifying the various error tolerances in the gradient and cost queries to ensure
that the algorithm can be efﬁciently implemented in ﬁnite samples.
1.3 Background on stability of dynamical systems
Before introducing our results, we ﬁrst review some of the basic concepts and deﬁnitions regarding
stability of dynamical systems. In this paper, we study discrete-time, noiseless, time-invariant dy-
namical systems with states xt2Rdxand control inputs ut2Rdu. In particular, given an initial
state x0, the dynamics evolves according to xt+1=G(xt;ut)whereG:RdxRdu!Rdxis
a state transition map. An equilibrium point of a dynamical system is a state x?2Rdxsuch that
G(x?;0) = x?. As per convention, we assume that the origin x?= 0 is the desired equilibrium
point around which we wish to stabilize the system.
This paper restricts its attention to static state-feedback policies of the form ut=Kxtfor a ﬁxed
matrixK2Rdudx. Abusing notation slightly, we conﬂate the matrix Kwith its induced policy.
Our aim is to ﬁnd a policy Kwhich is exponentially stabilizing around the equilbrium point.
Time-invariant, linear systems, where G(x;u) =Ax+Buare stabilizable if and only if there exists
aKsuch thatA+BK is a stable matrix [Callier and Desoer, 2012]. That is if (A+BK)<1, where
(X)denotes the spectral radius, or the largest eigenvalue magnitude, of a matrix X. For general
nonlinear systems, our goal is to ﬁnd controllers which satisfy the following general, quantitative
3