Stabilizing Dynamical Systems via Policy Gradient
Methods
Juan C. Perdomo
University of California, BerkeleyJack Umenberger
MITMax Simchowitz
MIT
Abstract
Stabilizing an unknown control system is one of the most fundamental problems
in control systems engineering. In this paper, we provide a simple, model-free
algorithm for stabilizing fully observed dynamical systems. While model-free
methods have become increasingly popular in practice due to their simplicity and
ﬂexibility, stabilization via direct policy search has received surprisingly little at-
tention. Our algorithm proceeds by solving a series of discounted LQR problems,
where the discount factor is gradually increased. We prove that this method efﬁ-
ciently recovers a stabilizing controller for linear systems, and for smooth, nonlin-
ear systems within a neighborhood of their equilibria. Our approach overcomes
a signiﬁcant limitation of prior work, namely the need for a pre-given stabiliz-
ing control policy. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on
common control benchmarks.
1 Introduction
Stabilizing an unknown control system is one of the most fundamental problems in control systems
engineering. A wide variety of tasks - from maintaining a dynamical system around a desired equi-
librium point, to tracking a reference signal (e.g a pilot’s input to a plane) - can be recast in terms
of stability. More generally, synthesizing an initial stabilizing controller is often a necessary ﬁrst
step towards solving more complex tasks, such as adaptive or robust control design [Sontag, 1999,
2009].
In this work, we consider the problem of ﬁnding a stabilizing controller for an unknown dynamical
system via direct policy search methods. We introduce a simple procedure based off policy gradients
which provably stabilizes a dynamical system around an equilibrium point. Our algorithm only
requires access to a simulator which can return rollouts of the system under different control policies,
and can efﬁciently stabilize both linear and smooth, nonlinear systems.
Relative to model-based approaches, model-free procedures, such as policy gradients, have two key
advantages: they are conceptually simple to implement, and they are easily adaptable; that is, the
same method can be applied in a wide variety of domains without much regard to the intricacies of
the underlying dynamics. Due to their simplicity and ﬂexibility, direct policy search methods have
become increasingly popular amongst practitioners, especially in settings with complex, nonlinear
dynamics which may be challenging to model. In particular, they have served as the main workhorse
for recent breakthroughs in reinforcement learning and control [Silver et al., 2016, Mnih et al., 2015,
Andrychowicz et al., 2020].
Despite their popularity amongst practitioners, model-free approaches for continuous control have
only recently started to receive attention from the theory community [Fazel et al., 2018, Kakade
et al., 2020, Tu and Recht, 2019]. While these analyses have begun to map out the computational
and statistical tradeoffs that emerge in choosing between model-based and model-free approaches,
Correspondence to jcperdomo@berkeley.edu
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).