they all share a common assumption: that the unknown dynamical system in question is stable, or
that an initial stabilizing controller is known. As such, they do not address the perhaps more basic
question, how do we arrive at a stabilizing controller in the ﬁrst place?
1.1 Contributions
We establish a reduction from stabilizing an unknown dynamical system to solving a series of dis-
counted, inﬁnite-horizon LQR problems via policy gradients, for which no knowledge of an initial
stable controller is needed. Our approach, which we call discount annealing , gradually increases the
discount factor and yields a control policy which is near optimal for the undiscounted LQR objec-
tive. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the ﬁrst model-free procedure shown to provably
stabilize unknown dynamical systems, thereby solving an open problem from Fazel et al. [2018].
We begin by studying linear, time-invariant dynamical systems with full state observation and as-
sume access to inexact cost and gradient evaluations of the discounted, inﬁnite-horizon LQR cost of
a state-feedback controller K. Previous analyses (e.g., [Fazel et al., 2018]) establish how such eval-
uations can be implemented with access to (ﬁnitely many, ﬁnite horizon) trajectories sampled from
a simulator. We show that our method recovers the controller K?which is the optimal solution of
theundiscounted LQR problem in a bounded number of iterations, up to optimization and simulator
error. The stability of the resulting K?is guaranteed by known stability margin results for LQR. In
short, we prove the following guarantee:
Theorem 1 (informal). For linear systems, discount annealing returns a stabilizing state-feedback
controller which is also near-optimal for the LQR problem. It uses at most polynomially many,
"-inexact gradient and cost evaluations, where the tolerance "also depends polynomially on the
relevant problem parameters.
Since both the number of queries and error tolerance are polynomial, discount annealing can be
efﬁciently implemented using at most polynomially many samples from a simulator.
Furthermore, our results extend to smooth, nonlinear dynamical systems. Given access to a sim-
ulator that can return damped system rollouts, we show that our algorithm ﬁnds a controller that
attains near-optimal LQR cost for the Jacobian linearization of the nonlinear dynamics at the equi-
librium. We then show that this controller stabilizes the nonlinear system within a neighborhood of
its equilibrium.
Theorem 2 (informal). Discount annealing returns a state-feedback controller which is exponen-
tially stabilizing for smooth, nonlinear systems within a neighborhood of their equilibrium, using
again only polynomially many samples drawn from a simulator.
In each case, the algorithm returns a near optimal solution Kto the relevant LQR problem (or local
approximation thereof). Hence, the stability properties of Kare, in theory, no better than those of
the optimal LQR controller K?. Importantly, the latter may have worse stability guarantees than
the optimal solution of a corresponding robust control objective (e.g. H1synthesis). Nevertheless,
we focus on the LQR subroutine in the interest of simplicity, clarity, and in order to leverage prior
analyses of model-free methods for LQR. Extending our procedure to robust-control objectives is
an exciting direction for future work.
Lastly, while our theoretical analysis only guarantees that the resulting controller will be stabilizing
within a small neighborhood of the equilibrium, our simulations on nonlinear systems, such as the
nonlinear cartpole, illustrate that discount annealing produces controllers that are competitive with
established robust control procedures, such as H1synthesis, without requiring any knowledge of
the underlying dynamics.
1.2 Related work
Given its central importance to the ﬁeld, stabilization of unknown and uncertain dynamical systems
has received extensive attention within the controls literature. We review some of the relevant litera-
ture and point the reader towards classical texts for a more comprehensive treatment [Sontag, 2009,
Sastry and Bodson, 2011, Zhou et al., 1996, Callier and Desoer, 2012, Zhou and Doyle, 1998].
Model-based approaches. Model-based methods construct approximate system models in order to
synthesize stabilizing control policies. Traditional analyses consider stabilization of both linear and
2