Figure 1: Our RUBi approach aims at reducing the amount of unimodal biases learned by a
VQA model during training. As depicted, current VQA models often rely on unwanted statistical
correlations between the question and the answer instead of using both modalities.
results on most of these benchmarks and are even able to surpass the human accuracy on a speciﬁc
benchmark accounting for compositional reasoning [ 23]. However, it has been shown that they tend
to exploit statistical regularities between answer occurrences and certain patterns in the question
[24,10,25,23,13]. While they are designed to merge information from both modalities, in practice
they often answer without considering the image modality. When most of the bananas are yellow ,a
model does not need to learn the correct behavior to reach a high accuracy for questions asking about
the color of bananas. Instead of looking at the image, detecting a banana and assessing its color, it is
much easier to learn from the statistical shortcut linking the words what ,color andbananas with the
most occurring answer yellow .
One way to quantify the amount of statistical shortcuts from each modality is to train unimodal
models. For instance, a question-only model trained on the widely used VQA v2 dataset [ 9] predicts
the correct answer approximately 44% of the time over the test set. VQA models are not discouraged
to exploit these statistical shortcuts from the question modality, because their training set often follows
the same distribution as their testing set. However, when evaluated on a test set that displays different
statistical regularities, they usually suffer from a signiﬁcant drop in accuracy [ 10,25]. Unfortunately,
these statistical regularities are hard to avoid when collecting real datasets. As illustrated in Figure 1,
there is a crucial need to develop new strategies to reduce the amount of biases coming from the
question modality in order to learn better behaviors.
We propose RUBi, a training strategy to reduce the amount of biases learned by VQA models. Our
strategy reduces the importance of the most biased examples, i.e. examples that can be correctly
classiﬁed without looking at the image modality. It implicitly forces the VQA model to use the two
input modalities instead of relying on statistical regularities between the question and the answer.
We take advantage of the fact that question-only models are by design biased towards the question
modality. We add a question-only branch on top of a base VQA model during training only. This
branch inﬂuences the VQA model, dynamically adjusting the loss to compensate for biases. As
a result, the gradients backpropagated through the VQA model are reduced for the most biased
examples and increased for the less biased. At the end of the training, we simply remove the
question-only branch.
We run extensive experiments on VQA-CP v2 [ 10] and demonstrate the ability of RUBi to surpass
current state-of-the-art results from a signiﬁcant margin. This dataset has been speciﬁcally designed
to assess the capacity of VQA models to be robust to biases by the question modality. We show
that our RUBi learning framework provides gains when applied on several VQA architectures such
as Stacked Attention Networks [ 26] and Top-Down Bottom-Up Attention [ 15]. We also show that
RUBi is competitive on the standard VQA v2 dataset [ 9] when compared to approaches that reduce
unimodal biases.
2 Related work
Real-world datasets display some form of inherent biases due to their collection process [ 27,28,29].
As a result, machine learning models tend to reﬂect these biases because they capture often undesirable
2