correlations between the inputs and the ground truth annotations [ 30,31,32]. Procedures exist to
identify certain kinds of biases and to reduce them. For instance, some methods are focused on gender
biases [ 33,34], some others on the human reporting biases [ 35], and also on the shift in distribution
between lab-curated data and real-world data [ 36]. In the language and vision context, some works
evaluate unimodal baselines [ 37,38] or leverage language priors [ 39]. In the following, we discuss
about related works that assess and reduce unimodal biases learned by VQA models.
Assessing unimodal biases in datasets and models Despite being designed to merge the two
input modalities, it has been found that VQA models often rely on superﬁcial correlations between
inputs from one modality and the answers without considering the other modality [ 40,32]. An
interesting way to quantify the amount of unimodal biases that can potentially be learned by a VQA
model consists in training models using only one of the two modalities [ 8,9]. The question-only
model is a particularly strong baseline because of the large amount of statistical regularities that can
be leveraged from the question modality. With the RUBi learning strategy, we take advantage of this
baseline model to prevent VQA models from learning question biases.
Unfortunately, biased models that exploit statistical shortcuts from one modality usually reach
impressive accuracy on most of the current benchmarks. VQA-CP v2 and VQA-CP v1 [ 10] were
recently introduced as diagnostic datasets containing different answer distributions for each question-
type between train and test splits. Consequentially, models biased towards the question modality fail
on these benchmarks. We use the more challenging VQA-CP v2 dataset extensively in order to show
the ability of our approach to reduce the learning of biases coming from the question modality.
Balancing datasets to avoid unimodal biases Once the unimodal biases have been identiﬁed, one
method to overcome these biases is to create more balanced datasets. For instance, the synthetic
datasets for VQA [ 23,13] minimize question-conditional biases via rejection sampling within families
of related questions to avoid simple shortcuts to the correct answer.
Doing rejection sampling in real VQA datasets is usually not possible due to the cost of annotations.
Another solution is to collect complementary examples to increase the difﬁculty of the task. For
instance, VQA v2 [ 9] has been introduced to weaken language priors in the VQA v1 dataset [ 8] by
identifying complementary images. For a given VQA v1 question, VQA v2 also contains a similar
image with a different answer to the same question. However, even with this additional balancing,
statistical biases from the question remain and can be leveraged [ 10]. That is why we propose an
approach to reduce unimodal biases during training. It is designed to learn unbiased models from
biased datasets. Our learning strategy dynamically modiﬁes the loss values to reduce biases from
the question. By doing so, we reduce the importance of certain examples, similarly to the rejection
sampling approach, while increasing the importance of complementary examples which are already
in the training set.
Architectures and learning strategies to reduce unimodal biases In parallel of these previous
works on balancing datasets, an important effort has been carried out to design VQA models to
overcome biases from datasets. [ 10] proposed a hand-designed architecture called Grounded VQA
model (GVQA). It breaks the task of VQA down into a ﬁrst step of locating and recognizing the visual
regions needed to answer the question, and a second step of identifying the space of plausible answers
based on a question-only branch. This approach requires training multiple sub-models separately. In
contrast, our learning strategy is end-to-end. Their complex design is not straightforward to apply
on different architectures while our approach is model-agnostic. While we rely on a question-only
branch, we remove it at the end of the training.
The work most related to ours in terms of approach is [ 25]. The authors propose a learning strategy
to overcome language priors in VQA models. They ﬁrst introduce an adversary question-only branch.
It takes as input the question encoding from the VQA model and produces a question-only loss. They
use a gradient negation of this loss to discourage the question encoder to capture unwanted biases that
could be exploited by the VQA model. They also propose a loss based on the difference of entropies
between the VQA model and the question-only branch output distributions. These two losses are
only backpropagated to the question encoder. In contrast, our learning strategy targets the full VQA
model parameters to reduce the impact of unwanted biases more effectively. Instead of relying on
these two additional losses, we use the question-only branch to dynamically adapt the value of the
3