a mask to increase the score of the correct answer while decreasing the scores of the others. As a
result, the loss is much lower for these biased examples. In other words, the gradients backpropagated
through the VQA model are smaller, thereby reducing the importance of these examples in the
learning. As illustrated in the ﬁrst row of Figure 3, given the question what color is the banana ,
the mask takes a high value of 0.8 for the answer yellow which is the most likely answer for this
question in the training set. On the other hand, the value for the other answers green andwhite are
smaller. We see that the mask inﬂuences the VQA model to produce new predictions where the score
associated with the answer yellow increases from 0.8 to 0.94. Compared to the classical learning
approach, the loss is smaller with RUBi and decreases from 0.22 to 0.06. Secondly, we increase the
importance of examples that cannot be answered without using both modalities. For these examples,
the question-only branch outputs a mask that increases the score of the wrong answer. As a result, the
loss is much higher and the VQA model is encouraged to learn from these examples. We illustrate
this behavior in the second row of Figure 3for the same question about the color of the banana. When
the image contains a green banana, RUBi increases the loss from 0.69 to 1.20.
Joint learning procedure We jointly optimize the parameters of the base VQA model and its
question-only branch using the gradients computed from two losses. The main loss LQMrefers to the
cross-entropy loss associated with the predictions of fQM(vi,qi)from Equation 4. We backpropagate
this loss to optimize all the parameters ✓QMwhich contributed to this loss. ✓QMis the union of the
parameters of the base VQA model, the encoders, and the neural network nnqof the question-only
branch. In our setup, we share the parameters of the question encoder eqbetween the VQA model
and the question-only branch. The question-only loss LQOis a cross-entropy loss associated with
the predictions of fQ(qi)from Equation 3. We use this loss to only optimize ✓QO, union of the
parameters of cqandnnq. By doing so, we further improve the question-only branch ability to
capture biases. Note that we do not backpropagate this loss to the question encoder eqpreventing it
from directly learning question biases. We obtain our ﬁnal loss LRUBiby summing the two losses
together in the following equation:
LRUBi(✓QM,✓QO;D)= LQM(✓QM;D)+LQO(✓QO;D) (5)
3.2 Baseline architecture
Most VQA architectures from the state of the art are compatible with our RUBi learning strategy.
To test our strategy, we design a fast and simple architecture inspired from [ 16]. This baseline
architecture is detailed in the supplementary material. As common in the state of the art, our baseline
architecture encodes the image as a bag of nvvisual features vi2Rdvusing the pretrained Faster
R-CNN by [ 15], and encodes the question as a vector q2Rdqusing a GRU, pretrained on the
skipthought task [ 3]. The VQA model consists of a Bilinear BLOCK fusion [ 17] which merges the
question representation qwith the features viof each region of the image. The output is aggregated
using a max pooling on the nvregions. The resulting vector is then fed into a MLP classiﬁer which
outputs the ﬁnal predictions. While most of our experiments are done with this fast and simple
baseline architecture, we experimentally demonstrate that the RUBi learning strategy is effective on
other VQA architectures.
4 Experiments
Experimental setup We train and evaluate our models on VQA-CP v2 [ 10]. This dataset was
developed to evaluate the models robustness to question biases. We follow the same training and
evaluation protocol as [ 25], who also propose a learning strategy to reduce biases. For each model,
we report the standard VQA evaluation metric [ 8]. We also evaluate our models on the standard VQA
v2 [9]. Further implementation details are included in the supplementary materials, as well as results
on VQA-CP v1 and grounding experiments on VQA-HAT [ 44].
4.1 Results
State-of-the-art comparison In Table 1, we compare our approach consisting of our baseline
architecture trained with RUBi on VQA-CP v2 against the state of the art. To be fair, we only report
approaches that use the strong visual features from [ 15]. We compute the average accuracy over 5
experiments with different random seeds. Our RUBi approach reaches an average overall accuracy
6