RUBi: Reducing Unimodal Biases
for Visual Question Answering
Remi Cadene1⇤, Corentin Dancette1⇤, Hedi Ben-younes1, Matthieu Cord1, Devi Parikh2,3
1Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris,
2Facebook AI Research,3Georgia Institute of Technology
{remi.cadene, corentin.dancette, hedi.ben-younes, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr ,
parkih@gatech.edu
Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is the task of answering questions about an
image. Some VQA models often exploit unimodal biases to provide the correct
answer without using the image information. As a result, they suffer from a huge
drop in performance when evaluated on data outside their training set distribution.
This critical issue makes them unsuitable for real-world settings.
We propose RUBi, a new learning strategy to reduce biases in any VQA model.
It reduces the importance of the most biased examples, i.e. examples that can be
correctly classiﬁed without looking at the image. It implicitly forces the VQA
model to use the two input modalities instead of relying on statistical regularities
between the question and the answer. We leverage a question-only model that
captures the language biases by identifying when these unwanted regularities are
used. It prevents the base VQA model from learning them by inﬂuencing its
predictions. This leads to dynamically adjusting the loss in order to compensate
for biases. We validate our contributions by surpassing the current state-of-the-art
results on VQA-CP v2. This dataset is speciﬁcally designed to assess the robustness
of VQA models when exposed to different question biases at test time than what
was seen during training.
Our code is available: github.com/cdancette/rubi.bootstrap.pytorch
1 Introduction
The recent Deep Learning success in computer vision [ 1] and natural language understanding [ 2]
allowed researchers to tackle multimodal tasks that combine visual and textual modalities [ 3,4,5,6,7].
Among these tasks, Visual Question Answering (VQA) attracts increasing attention. The goal of the
VQA task is to answer a question about an image. It requires a high-level understanding of the visual
scene and the question, but also to ground the textual concepts in the image and to use both modalities
adequately. Solving the VQA task could have tremendous impacts on real-world applications such as
aiding visually impaired users in understanding their physical and online surroundings, searching
through large quantities of visual data via natural language interfaces, or even communicating with
robots using more efﬁcient and intuitive interfaces.
Several large real image VQA datasets have recently emerged [ 8,9,10,11,12,13,14]. Each one
of them targets speciﬁc abilities that a VQA model would need to be used in real-world settings
such as ﬁne-grained recognition, object detection, counting, activity recognition, commonsense
reasoning, etc. Current end-to-end VQA models [ 15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22] achieve impressive
⇤Equal contribution
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.