The lexicon was created using MeSH (Medical Subject Headings), Dorland ’s Illustrated
Medical Dictionary and general English Dictionaries. The Centre d ’Informatique Hospitaliere
of the Hopital Cantonal de Geneve is working on an electronic archiving environment with
NLP features [ 81,119]. In the first phase, patient records were archived. At later stage the
LSP-MLP has been adapted for French [ 10,72,94,113], and finally, a proper NLP system
called RECIT [ 9,11,17,106] has been developed using a method called Proximity Processing
[88]. It’s task was to implement a robust and multilingual system able to analyze/comprehend
medical sentences, and to preserve a knowledge of free text into a language independent
knowledge representation [ 107,108]. The Columbia university of New York has developed an
NLP system called MEDLEE (MEDical Language Extraction and Encoding System) thatidentifies clinical information in narrative reports and transforms the textual information into
structured representation [ 45].
3.3 NLP in talk
We next discuss some of the recent NLP projects implemented by various companies:
a) ACE Powered GDPR Robot Launched by RAVN Systems [ 134]
RAVN Systems, a leading expert in Artificial Intelligence (AI), Search and Knowledge
Management Solutions, announced the launch of a RAVN ( “Applied Cognitive Engine ”)
i.e. powered software Robot to help and facilitate the GDPR ( “General Data Protection
Regulation ”) compliance. The Robot uses AI techniques to automatically analyze documents
and other types of data in any business system which is subject to GDPR rules. It allows usersto search, retrieve, flag, classify, and report on data, mediated to be super sensitive underGDPR quickly and easily. Users also can identify personal data from documents, view feedson the latest personal data that requires attention and provide reports on the data suggested to
be deleted or secured. RAVN ’s GDPR Robot is also able to hasten requests for information
(Data Subject Access Requests - “DSAR ”) in a simple and efficient way, removing the need
for a physical approach to these requests which tends to be very labor thorough. Peter
Wallqvist, CSO at RAVN Systems commented, “GDPR compliance is of universal para-
mountcy as it will be exploited by any organization that controls and processes data concern-ing EU citizens.
Link: http://markets.financialcontent.com/stocks/news/read/33888795/RAVN_Systems_
Launch_the_ACE_Powered_GDPR_Robot
b) Eno A Natural Language Chatbot Launched by Capital One [ 56]
Capital One announces a chatbot for customers called Eno. Eno is a natural language chatbot
that people socialize through texting. CapitalOne claims that Eno is First natural languageSMS chatbot from a U.S. bank that allows customers to ask questions using natural language.Customers can interact with Eno asking questions about their savings and others using a textinterface. Eno makes such an environment that it feels that a human is interacting. This
provides a different platform than other brands that launch chatbots like Facebook Messenger
and Skype. They believed that Facebook has too much access to private information of aperson, which could get them into trouble with privacy laws U.S. financial institutions workunder. Like Facebook Page admin can access full transcripts of the bot ’s conversations. If that3728 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744