of up to 2.8 bi-lingual evaluation understudy (BLEU) scores compared to various neural
machine translation systems. It outperformed the commonly used MT system on a WMT 14dataset.
Fan et al. [ 41] introduced a gradient-based neural architecture search algorithm that
automatically finds architecture with better performance than a transformer, conventionalNMT models. They tested their model on WMT14 (English-German Translation), IWSLT14(German-English translation), and WMT18 (Finnish-to-English translation) and achieved30.1, 36.1, and 26.4 BLEU points, which shows better performance than Transformerbaselines.
Wiese et al. [ 150] introduced a deep learning approach based on domain adaptation
techniques for handling biomedical question answering tasks. Their model revealed the
state-of-the-art performance on biomedical question answers, and the model outperformed
the state-of-the-art methods in domains.
Seunghak et al. [ 158] designed a Memory-Augmented-Machine-Comprehension-Network
(MAMCN) to handle dependencies faced in reading comprehension. The model achievedstate-of-the-art performance on document-level using TriviaQA and QUASAR-T datasets, andparagraph-level using SQuAD datasets.
Xie et al. [ 154] proposed a neural architecture where candidate answers and their repre-
sentation learning are constituent centric, guided by a parse tree. Under this architecture, the
search space of candidate answers is reduced while preserving the hierarchical, syntactic, and
compositional structure among constituents. Using SQuAD, the model delivers state-of-the-artperformance.
4.2 State-of-the-art models in NLP
Rationalist approach or symbolic approach assumes that a crucial part of the knowledge in thehuman mind is not derived by the senses but is firm in advance, probably by genetic
inheritance. Noam Chomsky was the strongest advocate of this approach. It was believed that
machines can be made to function like the human brain by giving some fundamentalknowledge and reasoning mechanism linguistics knowledge is directly encoded in rule orother forms of representation. This helps the automatic process of natural languages [ 92].
Statistical and machine learning entail evolution of algorithms that allow a program to inferpatterns. An iterative process is used to characterize a given algorithm ’s underlying algorithm
that is optimized by a numerical measure that characterizes numerical parameters and learningphase. Machine-learning models can be predominantly categorized as either generative or
discriminative. Generative methods can generate synthetic data because of which they create
rich models of probability distributions. Discriminative methods are more functional and haveright estimating posterior probabilities and are based on observations. Srihari [ 129]e x p l a i n s
the different generative models as one with a resemblance that is used to spot an unknownspeaker ’s language and would bid the deep knowledge of numerous languages to perform the
match. Discriminative methods rely on a less knowledge-intensive approach and usingdistinction between languages. Whereas generative models can become troublesome whenmany features are used and discriminative models allow use of more features [ 38]. Few of the
examples of discriminative methods are Logistic regression and conditional random fields(CRFs), generative methods are Naive Bayes classifiers and hidden Markov models (HMMs).
(a) Naive Bayes Classifiers3733 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744