1 Introduction
A language can be defined as a set of rules or set of symbols where symbols are combined and
used for conveying information or broadcasting the information. Since all the users may not be
well-versed in machine specific language, Natural Language Processing (NLP) caters those
users who do not have enough time to learn new languages or get perfection in it. In fact, NLPis a tract of Artificial Intelligence and Linguistics, devoted to make computers understand thestatements or words written in human languages. It came into existence to ease the user ’sw o r k
and to satisfy the wish to communicate with the computer in natural language, and can beclassified into two parts i.e. Natural Language Understanding or Linguistics and Natural
Language Generation which evolves the task to understand and generate the text. Linguistics
is the science of language which includes Phonology that refers to sound, Morphology word
formation, Syntax sentence structure, Semantics syntax and Pragmatics which refers to
understanding. Noah Chomsky, one of the first linguists of twelfth century that startedsyntactic theories, marked a unique position in the field of theoretical linguistics because herevolutionized the area of syntax (Chomsky, 1965) [ 23]. Further, Natural Language Genera-
tion (NLG) is the process of producing phrases, sentences and paragraphs that are meaningfulfrom an internal representation. The first objective of this paper is to give insights of thevarious important terminologies of NLP and NLG.
In the existing literature, most of the work in NLP is conducted by computer scientists
while various other professionals have also shown interest such as linguistics, psychologists,and philosophers etc. One of the most interesting aspects of NLP is that it adds up to theknowledge of human language. The field of NLP is related with different theories andtechniques that deal with the problem of natural language of communicating with thecomputers. Few of the researched tasks of NLP are Automatic Summarization ( Automatic
summarization produces an understandable summary of a set of text and provides summaries
or detailed information of text of a known type), Co-Reference Resolution ( Co-reference
resolution refers to a sentence or larger set of text that determines all words which refer to the
same object), Discourse Analysis ( Discourse analysis refers to the task of identifying the
discourse structure of connected text i.e. the study of text in relation to social context),MachineTranslation (Machine translation refers to automatic translation of text from one language to
another),Morphological Segmentation ( Morphological segmentation refers to breaking words
into individual meaning-bearing morphemes), Named Entity Recognition ( Named entity
recognition (NER) is used for information extraction to recognized name entities and then
classify them to different classes), Optical Character Recognition ( Optical character recogni-
tion(OCR) is used for automatic text recognition by translating printed and handwritten text
into machine-readable format), Part Of Speech Tagging ( Part of speech tagging describes a
sentence, determines the part of speech for each word) etc. Some of these tasks have directreal-world applications such as Machine translation, Named entity recognition, Optical char-acter recognition etc. Though NLP tasks are obviously very closely interwoven but they areused frequently, for convenience. Some of the tasks such as automatic summarization, co-reference analysis etc. act as subtasks that are used in solving larger tasks. Nowadays NLP is inthe talks because of various applications and recent developments although in the late 1940s
the term wasn ’t even in existence. So, it will be interesting to know about the history of NLP,
the progress so far has been made and some of the ongoing projects by making use of NLP.
The second objective of this paper focus on these aspects. The third objective of this paper ison datasets, approaches, evaluation metrics and involved challenges in NLP. The rest of this3714 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744