d) There are around 160,000 sentence pairings in the IWSLT 14. The dataset includes
descriptions in English-German (En-De) and German-English (De-En) languages. There
are around 200 K training sentence sets in the IWSLT 13 dataset.
e) The IIT Bombay English-Hindi corpus comprises parallel corpora for English-Hindi as
well as monolingual Hindi corpora gathered from several existing sources and corporagenerated over time at IIT Bombay ’s Centre for Indian Language Technology.
4. Question Answering System: Question answering systems provide real-time responses
which are widely used in customer care services. The datasets used for dialogue system/question answering system are as follows:
a) Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD): it is a reading comprehension dataset
made up of questions posed by crowd workers on a collection of Wikipedia articles.
b) Natural Questions: It is a large-scale corpus presented by Google used for training and
assessing open-domain question answering systems. It includes 300,000 naturally occur-ring queries as well as human-annotated responses from Wikipedia pages for use in QAsystem training.
c) Question Answering in Context (QuAC): This dataset is used to describe, comprehend,
and participate in information seeking conversation. In this dataset, instances are made up
of an interactive discussion between two crowd workers: a student who asks a series of
open-ended questions about an unknown Wikipedia text, and a teacher who responds byoffering brief extracts from the text.
The neural learning models are overtaking traditional models for NLP [ 64,127]. In [ 64],
authors used CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) model for sentiment analysis of moviereviews and achieved 81.5% accuracy. The results illustrate that using CNN was an appro-priate replacement for state-of-the-art methods. Authors [ 127] have combined SST and
Recursive Neural Tensor Network for sentiment analysis of the single sentence. This modelamplifies the accuracy by 5.4% for sentence classification compared to traditional NLPmodels. Authors [ 135] proposed a combined Recurrent Neural Network and Transformer
model for sentiment analysis. This hybrid model was tested on three different datasets: TwitterUS Airline Sentiment, IMDB, and Sentiment 140: and achieved F1 scores of 91%, 93%, and90%, respectively. This model ’s performance outshined the state-of-art methods.
Santoro et al. [ 118] introduced a rational recurrent neural network with the capacity to learn
on classifying the information and perform complex reasoning based on the interactions
between compartmentalized information. They used the relational memory core to handle
such interactions. Finally, the model was tested for language modeling on three differentdatasets (GigaWord, Project Gutenberg, and WikiText-103). Further, they mapped the perfor-mance of their model to traditional approaches for dealing with relational reasoning oncompartmentalized information. The results achieved with RMC show improved performance.
Merity et al. [ 86] extended conventional word-level language models based on Quasi-
Recurrent Neural Network and LSTM to handle the granularity at character and word level.They tuned the parameters for character-level modeling using Penn Treebank dataset and
word-level modeling using WikiText-103. In both cases, their model outshined the state-of-art
methods.
Luong et al. [ 70] used neural machine translation on the WMT14 dataset and performed
translation of English text to French text. The model demonstrated a significant improvement3732 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744