relevant references cited therein. The use of BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers) [ 33] model and successive models have also played an important role for
NLP.
Many researchers worked on NLP, building tools and systems which makes NLP what it is
today. Tools like Sentiment Analyser, Parts of Speech (POS) Taggers, Chunking, NamedEntity Recognitions (NER), Emotion detection, Semantic Role Labeling have a huge contri-bution made to NLP, and are good topics for research. Sentiment analysis(Nasukawaetal.,2003) [ 156] works by extracting sentiments about a given topic, and it consists
of a topic specific feature term extraction, sentiment extraction, and association by relationshipanalysis. It utilizes two linguistic resources for the analysis: the sentiment lexicon and thesentiment pattern database. It analyzes the documents for positive and negative words and tries
to give ratings on scale −5 to +5. The mainstream of currently used tagsets is obtained from
English. The most widely used tagsets as standard guidelines are designed for Indo-European
languages but it is less researched on Asian languages or middle- eastern languages. Variousauthors have done research on making parts of speech taggers for various languages such asArabic (Zeroual et al., 2017) [ 160], Sanskrit (Tapswi & Jain, 2012) [ 136], Hindi (Ranjan &
Basu, 2003) [ 105] to efficiently tag and classify words as nouns, adjectives, verbs etc. Authors
in [136] have used treebank technique for creating rule-based POS Tagger for Sanskrit
Language. Sanskrit sentences are parsed to assign the appropriate tag to each word using
suffix stripping algorithm, wherein the longest suffix is searched from the suffix table and tags
are assigned. Diab et al. (2004) [ 34] used supervised machine learning approach and adopted
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) which were trained on the Arabic Treebank to automati-cally tokenize parts of speech tag and annotate base phrases in Arabic text.
Chunking is a process of separating phrases from unstructured text. Since simple tokens
may not represent the actual meaning of the text, it is advisable to use phrases such as “North
Africa ”as a single word instead of ‘North ’and‘Africa ’separate words. Chunking known as
“Shadow Parsing ”labels parts of sentences with syntactic correlated keywords like Noun
Phrase (NP) and Verb Phrase (VP). Chunking is often evaluated using the CoNLL 2000 sharedtask. Various researchers (Sha and Pereira, 2003; McDonald et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2008) [ 83,
122,130] used CoNLL test data for chunking and used features composed of words, POS tags,
and tags.
There are particular words in the document that refer to specific entities or real-world
objects like location, people, organizations etc. To find the words which have a unique contextand are more informative, noun phrases are considered in the text documents. Named entityrecognition (NER) is a technique to recognize and separate the named entities and group them
under predefined classes. But in the era of the Internet, where people use slang not the
traditional or standard English which cannot be processed by standard natural languageprocessing tools. Ritter (2011) [ 111] proposed the classification of named entities in tweets
because standard NLP tools did not perform well on tweets. They re-built NLP pipelinestarting from PoS tagging, then chunking for NER. It improved the performance in comparisonto standard NLP tools.
Emotion detection investigates and identifies the types of emotion from speech, facial
expressions, gestures, and text. Sharma (2016) [ 124] analyzed the conversations in Hinglish
means mix of English and Hindi languages and identified the usage patterns of PoS. Theirwork was based on identification of language and POS tagging of mixed script. They tried todetect emotions in mixed script by relating machine learning and human knowledge. Theyhave categorized sentences into 6 groups based on emotions and used TLBO technique to help3723 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744