the users in prioritizing their messages based on the emotions attached with the message. Seal
et al. (2020) [ 120] proposed an efficient emotion detection method by searching emotional
words from a pre-defined emotional keyword database and analyzing the emotion words,
phrasal verbs, and negation words. Their proposed approach exhibited better performance than
recent approaches.
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) works by giving a semantic role to a sentence. For example,
in the PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005) [ 100] formalism, one assigns roles to words that are
arguments of a verb in the sentence. The precise arguments depend on the verb frame and ifmultiple verbs exist in a sentence, it might have multiple tags. State-of-the-art SRL systemscomprise several stages: creating a parse tree, identifying which parse tree nodes represent thearguments of a given verb, and finally classifying these nodes to compute the corresponding
SRL tags.
Event discovery in social media feeds (Benson et al.,2011) [ 13], using a graphical model to
analyze any social media feeds to determine whether it contains the name of a person or name
of a venue, place, time etc. The model operates on noisy feeds of data to extract records ofevents by aggregating multiple information across multiple messages, despite the noise ofirrelevant noisy messages and very irregular message language, this model was able to extractrecords with a broader array of features on factors.
We first give insights on some of the mentioned tools and relevant work done before
moving to the broad applications of NLP.
3.2 Applications of NLP
Natural Language Processing can be applied into various areas like Machine Translation,Email Spam detection, Information Extraction, Summarization, Question Answering etc. Next,we discuss some of the areas with the relevant work done in those directions.
a) Machine Translation
As most of the world is online, the task of making data accessible and available to all is a
challenge. Major challenge in making data accessible is the language barrier. There are amultitude of languages with different sentence structure and grammar. Machine Translation isgenerally translating phrases from one language to another with the help of a statistical enginelike Google Translate. The challenge with machine translation technologies is not directlytranslating words but keeping the meaning of sentences intact along with grammar and tenses.
The statistical machine learning gathers as many data as they can find that seems to be parallel
between two languages and they crunch their data to find the likelihood that something inLanguage A corresponds to something in Language B. As for Google, in September 2016,announced a new machine translation system based on artificial neural networks and Deeplearning. In recent years, various methods have been proposed to automatically evaluatemachine translation quality by comparing hypothesis translations with reference translations.Examples of such methods are word error rate, position-independent word error rate (Tillmannet al., 1997) [ 138], generation string accuracy (Bangalore et al., 2000) [ 8], multi-reference
word error rate (Nießen et al., 2000) [ 95], BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) [ 101], NIST
score (Doddington, 2002) [ 35] All these criteria try to approximate human assessment and
often achieve an astonishing degree of correlation to human subjective evaluation of fluencyand adequacy (Papineni et al., 2001; Doddington, 2002) [ 35,101].3724 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744