but for the emphasis on heavy evaluation, starting a trend that became a major feature in 1990s
(Young and Chase, 1998; Sundheim and Chinchor,1993) [ 131,157]. Work on user modeling
(Wahlster and Kobsa, 1989) [ 142] was one strand in a research paper. Cohen et al. (2002) [ 28]
had put forwarded a first approximation of a compositional theory of tune interpretation,together with phonological assumptions on which it is based and the evidence from which theyhave drawn their proposals. At the same time, McKeown (1985) [ 85] demonstrated that
rhetorical schemas could be used for producing both linguistically coherent and communica-tively effective text. Some research in NLP marked important topics for future like word sensedisambiguation (Small et al., 1988) [ 126] and probabilistic networks, statistically colored NLP,
the work on the lexicon, also pointed in this direction. Statistical language processing was amajor thing in 90s (Manning and Schuetze,1999) [ 75], because this not only involves data
analysts. Information extraction and automatic summarizing (Mani and Maybury,1999) [ 74]
was also a point of focus. Next, we present a walkthrough of the developments from the early2000.
3.1 A walkthrough of recent developments in NLP
The main objectives of NLP include interpretation, analysis, and manipulation of naturallanguage data for the intended purpose with the use of various algorithms, tools, and methods.
However, there are many challenges involved which may depend upon the natural language
data under consideration, and so makes it difficult to achieve all the objectives with a singleapproach. Therefore, the development of different tools and methods in the field of NLP andrelevant areas of studies have received much attention from several researchers in the recentpast. The developments can be seen in the Fig. 3:
In early 2000, neural language modeling in which the probability of occurring of next word
(token) is determined given nprevious words. Bendigo et al. [ 12] proposed the concept of feed
forward neural network and lookup table which represents the n previous words in sequence.
Collobert et al. [ 29] proposed the application of multitask learning in the field of NLP, where
two convolutional models with max pooling were used to perform parts-of-speech and named
entity recognition tagging. Mikolov et.al. [ 87]p r o p o s e da word embedding process where the
dense vector representation of text was addressed. They also report the challenges faced bytraditional sparse bag-of-words representation. After the advancement of word embedding,neural networks were introduced in the field of NLP where variable length input is taken forfurther processing. Sutskever et al. [ 132] proposed a general framework for sequence-to-
sequence mapping where encoder and decoder networks are used to map from sequence to
vector and vector to sequence respectively. In fact, the use of neural networks have played a
very important role in NLP. One can observe from the existing literature that enough use ofneural networks was not there in the early 2000s but till the year 2013enough discussion hadhappened about the use of neural networks in the field of NLP which transformed many thingsand further paved the way to implement various neural networks in NLP. Earlier the use ofConvolutional neural networks (CNN )contributed to the field of image classification and
analyzing visual imagery for further analysis. Later the use of CNNs can be observed intackling problems associated with NLP tasks like Sentence Classification [ 127], Sentiment
Analysis [ 135], Text Classification [ 118], Text Summarization [ 158], Machine Translation
[70] and Answer Relations [ 150].An article by Newatia (2019) [ 93] illustrates the general
architecture behind any CNN model, and how it can be used in the context of NLP. One canalso refer to the work of Wang and Gang [ 145] for the applications of CNN in NLP. Further3721 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744