would be the case then the admins could easily view the personal banking information of
customers with is not correct.
Link: https://www.macobserver.com/analysis/capital-one-natural-language-chatbot-eno/
c) Future of BI in Natural Language Processing [ 140]
Several companies in BI spaces are trying to get with the trend and trying hard to ensure thatdata becomes more friendly and easily accessible. But still there is a long way for this.BI willalso make it easier to access as GUI is not needed. Because nowadays the queries are made bytext or voice command on smartphones.one of the most common examples is Google mighttell you today what tomorrow ’s weather will be. But soon enough, we will be able to ask our
personal data chatbot about customer sentiment today, and how we feel about their brand nextweek; all while walking down the street. Today, NLP tends to be based on turning naturallanguage into machine language. But with time the technology matures –especially the AI
component –the computer will get better at “understanding ”the query and start to deliver
answers rather than search results. Initially, the data chatbot will probably ask the question‘how have revenues changed over the last three-quarters? ’and then return pages of data for
you to analyze. But once it learns the semantic relations and inferences of the question, it willbe able to automatically perform the filtering and formulation necessary to provide an
intelligible answer, rather than simply showing you data.
Link: http://www.smartdatacollective.com/eran-levy/489410/here-s-why-natural-language-
processing-future-bi
d) Using Natural Language Processing and Network Analysis to Develop a Conceptual
Framework for Medication Therapy Management Research [ 97]
Natural Language Processing and Network Analysis to Develop a Conceptual Framework for
Medication Therapy Management Research describes a theory derivation process that is used
to develop a conceptual framework for medication therapy management (MTM) research. TheMTM service model and chronic care model are selected as parent theories. Review articleabstracts target medication therapy management in chronic disease care that were retrievedfrom Ovid Medline (2000 –2016). Unique concepts in each abstract are extracted using Meta
Map and their pair-wise co-occurrence are determined. Then the information is used toconstruct a network graph of concept co-occurrence that is further analyzed to identify contentfor the new conceptual model. 142 abstracts are analyzed. Medication adherence is the most
studied drug therapy problem and co-occurred with concepts related to patient-centered
interventions targeting self-management. The enhanced model consists of 65 concepts clus-tered into 14 constructs. The framework requires additional refinement and evaluation todetermine its relevance and applicability across a broad audience including underservedsettings.
Link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28269895?dopt=Abstract
e) Meet the Pilot, world ’s first language translating earbuds [ 96]
The world ’s first smart earpiece Pilot will soon be transcribed over 15 languages. According to
Spring wise, Waverly Labs ’Pilot can already transliterate five spoken languages, English,
French, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish, and seven written affixed languages, German, Hindi,3729 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744