Russian, Japanese, Arabic, Korean and Mandarin Chinese. The Pilot earpiece is connected via
Bluetooth to the Pilot speech translation app, which uses speech recognition, machinetranslation and machine learning and speech synthesis technology. Simultaneously, the
user will hear the translated version of the speech on the second earpiece. Moreover, it is
not necessary that conversation would be taking place between two people; only theusers can join in and discuss as a group. As if now the user may experience a few secondlag interpolated the speech and translation, which Waverly Labs pursue to reduce. ThePilot earpiece will be available from September but can be pre-ordered now for $249.The earpieces can also be used for streaming music, answering voice calls, and gettingaudio notifications.
Link: https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/mee t-the-pilot-smart-earpiece-language-
translator-headphones-travel#/
4 Datasets in NLP and state-of-the-art models
The objective of this section is to present the various datasets used in NLP and some state-of-the-art models in NLP.
4.1 Datasets in NLP
Corpus is a collection of linguistic data, either compiled from written texts or transcribed fromrecorded speech. Corpora are intended primarily for testing linguistic hypotheses - e.g., todetermine how a certain sound, word, or syntactic construction is used across a culture orlanguage. There are various types of corpus: In an annotated corpus, the implicit information inthe plain text has been made explicit by specific annotations. Un-annotated corpus containsraw state of plain text. Different languages can be compared using a reference corpus. Monitor
corpora are non-finite collections of texts which are mostly used in lexicography. Multilingual
corpus refers to a type of corpus that contains small collections of monolingual corporabased on the same sampling procedure and categories for different languages. Parallelcorpus contains texts in one language and their translations into other languages whichare aligned sentence phrase by phrase. Reference corpus contains text of spoken (formaland informal) and written (formal and informal) language which represents various socialand situational contexts. Speech corpus cont ains recorded speech and transcriptions of
recording and the time each word occurred in the recorded speech. There are various
datasets available for natural language processing; some of these are listed below for
different use cases:
1. Sentiment Analysis: Sentiment analysis is a rapidly expanding field of natural language
processing (NLP) used in a variety of fields such as politics, business etc. Majorly used
datasets for sentiment analysis are:
a) Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST): Socher et al. introduced SST containing sentiment
labels for 215,154 phrases in parse trees for 11,855 sentences from movie reviews posingnovel sentiment compositional difficulties [ 127].
b) Sentiment140: It contains 1.6 million tweets annotated with negative, neutral and positive
labels.3730 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744