0 and 1. For example, if ground truth is “He is playing chess in the backyard ”and output
sentences are S1: “He is playing tennis in the backyard ”,S 2 : “He is playing badminton in
the backyard ”,S 3 : “He is playing movie in the backyard ”and S4: “backyard backyard
backyard backyard backyard backyard backyard ”. The score of S1, S2 and S3 would be
6/7,6/7 and 6/7. All sentences are getting the same score though information in S1 and S3
is not same. This is because BELU considers words in a sentence contribute equally to themeaning of a sentence which is not the case in real-world scenario. Using combination ofuni-gram, bi-gram and n-grams, we can to capture the order of a sentence. We may alsoset a limit on how many times each word is counted based on how many times it appearsin each reference phrase, which helps us prevent excessive repetition.
b) GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation) score: Previously, NLP models
were almost usually built to perform effectively on a unique job. Various models such asLSTM, Bi-LSTM were trained solely for this task, and very rarely generalized to othertasks. The model which is used for named entity recognition can perform for textualentailment. GLUE is a set of datasets for training, assessing, and comparing NLP models.It includes nine diverse task datasets designed to test a model ’s language understanding.
To acquire a comprehensive assessment of a model ’s performance, GLUE tests the model
on a variety of tasks rather than a single one. Single-sentence tasks, similarity andparaphrase tasks, and inference tasks are among them. For example, in sentiment analysis
of customer reviews, we might be interested in analyzing ambiguous reviews and
determining which product the client is referring to in his reviews. Thus, the modelobtains a good “knowledge ”of language in general after some generalized pre-training.
When the time comes to test out a model to meet a given task, this universal “knowledge ”
gives us an advantage. With GLUE, researchers can evaluate their model and score it onall nine tasks. The final performance score model is the average of those nine scores. Itmakes little difference how the model looks or works if it can analyze inputs and predictoutcomes for all the activities.
Considering these metrics in mind, it helps to evaluate the performance of an NLP model for aparticular task or a variety of tasks.
5.2 Challenges
The applications of NLP have been growing day by day, and with these new challenges arealso occurring despite a lot of work done in the recent past. Some of the common challenges
are: Contextual words and phrases in the language where same words and phrases can have
different meanings in a sentence which are easy for the humans to understand but makes achallenging task. Such type of challenges can also be faced with dealing Synonyms in thelanguage because humans use many different words to express the same idea, also in thelanguage different levels of complexity such as large, huge, and big may be used by thedifferent persons which become a challenging task to process the language and designalgorithms to adopt all these issues. Further in language, Homonyms, the words used to bepronounced the same but have different definitions are also problematic for question answer-
ing and speech-to-text applications because they aren ’t written in text form. Sentences using
sarcasm and irony sometimes may be understood in the opposite way by the humans, and so
designing models to deal with such sentences is a really challenging task in NLP. Furthermore,the sentences in the language having any type of ambiguity in the sense of interpreting in more3736 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744