b) Components and Levels of Representation
The process of language generation involves the following interweaved tasks. Content selec-
tion: Information should be selected and included in the set. Depending on how this informa-
tion is parsed into representational units, parts of the units may have to be removed while some
others may be added by default. Textual Organization : The information must be textually
organized according to the grammar, it must be ordered both sequentially and in terms oflinguistic relations like modifications. Linguistic Resources : To support the information ’s
realization, linguistic resources must be chosen. In the end these resources will come downto choices of particular words, idioms, syntactic constructs etc. Realization : The selected and
organized resources must be realized as an actual text or voice output.
c) Application or Speaker
This is only for maintaining the model of the situation. Here the speaker just initiates the
process doesn ’t take part in the language generation. It stores the history, structures the content
that is potentially relevant and deploys a representation of what it knows. All these forms thesituation, while selecting subset of propositions that speaker has. The only requirement is thespeaker must make sense of the situation [ 91].
3 NLP: Then and now
In the late 1940s the term NLP wasn ’t in existence, but the work regarding machine translation
(MT) had started. In fact, Research in this period was not completely localized. Russian andEnglish were the dominant languages for MT (Andreev,1967) [ 4]. In fact, MT/NLP research
almost died in 1966 according to the ALPAC report, which concluded that MT is going
nowhere. But later, some MT production systems were providing output to their customers
(Hutchins, 1986) [ 60]. By this time, work on the use of computers for literary and linguistic
studies had also started. As early as 1960, signature work influenced by AI began, with theBASEBALL Q-A systems (Green et al., 1961) [ 51]. LUNAR (Woods,1978) [ 152] and
Winograd SHRDLU were natural successors of these systems, but they were seen asstepped-up sophistication, in terms of their linguistic and their task processing capabilities.There was a widespread belief that progress could only be made on the two sides, one isARPA Speech Understanding Research (SUR) project (Lea, 1980) and other in some major
system developments projects building database front ends. The front-end projects (Hendrix
et al., 1978) [ 55] were intended to go beyond LUNAR in interfacing the large databases. In
early 1980s computational grammar theory became a very active area of research linked withlogics for meaning and knowledge ’s ability to deal with the user ’s beliefs and intentions and
with functions like emphasis and themes.
By the end of the decade the powerful general purpose sentence processors like SRI ’s Core
Language Engine (Alshawi,1992) [ 2] and Discourse Representation Theory (Kamp and
Reyle,1993) [ 62] offered a means of tackling more extended discourse within the
grammatico-logical framework. This period was one of the growing communities. Practicalresources, grammars, and tools and parsers became available (for example: Alvey NaturalLanguage Tools) (Briscoe et al., 1987) [ 18]. The (D)ARPA speech recognition and message
understanding (information extraction) conferences were not only for the tasks they addressed3720 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744