is achieved by recognizing the entity referenced by an anaphor to resolve the references used
within the text with the same sense. For example, (i) Ram topped in the class. (ii) He wasintelligent. Here i) and ii) together form a discourse. Human beings can quickly understand
that the pronoun “he”in (ii) refers to “Ram”in (i). The interpretation of “He”depends on
another word “Ram ”presented earlier in the text. Without determining the relationship
between these two structures, it would not be possible to decide why Ram topped the class
and who was intelligent. Coreference resolution is achieved by finding all expressions thatrefer to the same entity in a text. It is an important step in various NLP applications thatinvolve high-level NLP tasks such as document summarization, information extraction etc. Infact, anaphora is encoded through one of the processes called co-reference.
g) Pragmatic
Pragmatic level focuses on the knowledge or content that comes from the outside the content
of the document. It deals with what speaker implies and what listener infers. In fact, it analyzesthe sentences that are not directly spoken. Real-world knowledge is used to understand what isbeing talked about in the text. By analyzing the context, meaningful representation of the textis derived. When a sentence is not specific and the context does not provide any specificinformation about that sentence, Pragmatic ambiguity arises (Walton, 1996) [ 143]. Pragmatic
ambiguity occurs when different persons derive different interpretations of the text, dependingon the context of the text. The context of a text may include the references of other sentences ofthe same document, which influence the understanding of the text and the backgroundknowledge of the reader or speaker, which gives a meaning to the concepts expressed in thattext. Semantic analysis focuses on literal meaning of the words, but pragmatic analysis focuses
on the inferred meaning that the readers perceive based on their background knowledge. For
example, the sentence “Do you know what time is it? ”is interpreted to “Asking for the current
time”in semantic analysis whereas in pragmatic analysis, the same sentence may refer to
“expressing resentment to someone who missed the due time ”in pragmatic analysis. Thus,
semantic analysis is the study of the relationship between various linguistic utterances and theirmeanings, but pragmatic analysis is the study of context which influences our understanding oflinguistic expressions. Pragmatic analysis helps users to uncover the intended meaning of thetext by applying contextual background knowledge.
The goal of NLP is to accommodate one or more specialties of an algorithm or system. The
metric of NLP assess on an algorithmic system allows for the integration of languageunderstanding and language generation. It is even used in multilingual event detection.
Rospocher et al. [ 112] purposed a novel modular system for cross-lingual event extraction
for English, Dutch, and Italian Texts by using different pipelines for different languages. The
system incorporates a modular set of foremost multilingual NLP tools. The pipeline integratesmodules for basic NLP processing as well as more advanced tasks such as cross-lingual namedentity linking, semantic role labeling and time normalization. Thus, the cross-lingual frame-work allows for the interpretation of events, participants, locations, and time, as well as therelations between them. Output of these individual pipelines is intended to be used as input fora system that obtains event centric knowledge graphs. All modules take standard input, to do
some annotation, and produce standard output which in turn becomes the input for the next
module pipelines. Their pipelines are built as a data centric architecture so that modules can beadapted and replaced. Furthermore, modular architecture allows for different configurationsand for dynamic distribution.3718 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744