Phonology is “the study of sound pertaining to the system of language ”whereas Lass1998
[66]wrote that phonology refers broadly with the sounds of language, concerned with sub-
discipline of linguistics, behavior and organization of sounds. Phonology includes semantic
use of sound to encode meaning of any Human language.
b) MorphologyThe different parts of the word represent the smallest units of meaning known as Morphemes.
Morphology which comprises Nature of words, are initiated by morphemes. An example ofMorpheme could be, the word precancellation can be morphologically scrutinized into three
separate morphemes: the prefix pre, the root cancella , and the suffix -tion. The interpretation
of morphemes stays the same across all the words, just to understand the meaning humans canbreak any unknown word into morphemes. For example, adding the suffix –edto a verb,
conveys that the action of the verb took place in the past. The words that cannot be divided andhave meaning by themselves are called Lexical morpheme (e.g.: table, chair). The words (e.g. -ed,−ing,−est,−ly,−ful) that are combined with the lexical morpheme are known as
Grammatical morphemes (eg. Worked, Consulting, Smallest, Likely, Use). The Grammatical
morphemes that occur in combination called bound morphemes (eg. -ed, −ing) Bound
morphemes can be divided into inflectional morphemes and derivational morphemes. Adding
Inflectional morphemes to a word changes the different grammatical categories such as tense,
gender, person, mood, aspect, definiteness and animacy. For example, addition of inflectionalmorphemes –edchanges the root park toparked . Derivational morphemes change the
semantic meaning of the word when it is combined with that word. For example, in the wordnormalize, the addition of the bound morpheme –izeto the root normal changes the word from
an adjective ( normal )t oav e r b( normalize ).
c) Lexical
In Lexical, humans, as well as NLP systems, interpret the meaning of individual words.
Sundry types of processing bestow to word-level understanding –the first of these being a
part-of-speech tag to each word. In this processing, words that can act as more than one part-of-speech are assigned the most probable part-of-speech tag based on the context in which theyoccur. At the lexical level, Semantic representations can be replaced by the words that haveone meaning. In fact, in the NLP system the nature of the representation varies according to thesemantic theory deployed. Therefore, at lexical level, analysis of structure of words is
performed with respect to their lexical meaning and PoS. In this analysis, text is divided into
paragraphs, sentences, and words. Words that can be associated with more than one PoS arealigned with the most likely PoS tag based on the context in which they occur. At lexical level,semantic representation can also be replaced by assigning the correct POS tag which improvesthe understanding of the intended meaning of a sentence. It is used for cleaning and featureextraction using various techniques such as removal of stop words, stemming, lemmatizationetc. Stop words such as ‘in’,‘the’,‘and’etc. are removed as they don ’t contribute to any
meaningful interpretation and their frequency is also high which may affect the computation
time. Stemming is used to stem the words of the text by removing the suffix of a word to
obtain its root form. For example: consulting andconsultant words are converted to the word
consult after stemming, using word gets converted to usanddriver is reduced to driv.
Lemmatization does not remove the suffix of a word; in fact, it results in the source word3716 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:3713–3744