Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 55
In reinforcement learning, at each timestep, an agent observes the state (sit-
uation) that it is currently in, chooses an action according to a policy (a learnedmapping from states to actions), and receives an intermediate reward that de-
pends on the chosen action and the current state, which leads the agent to the
next state, where the process repeats. For example, let us consider an RL systemthat is used for the management of glucose levels of Type 1 diabetes patientsby regulating the amount of synthetic insulin in the blood. The state is repre-sented by the patient’s information, including diet, exercise level, weight, so on;
actions include the amount of insulin to inject; rewards are positive if the blood
sugar level is within a healthy range and negative otherwise. Figure 18shows
the schematic diagram of a reinforcement learning system based on the diabetesexample.
Reinforcement learning is more challenging than a standard supervised set-
ting: the agent does not receive all the data at once (in fact, the agent is re-
sponsible for collecting data by exploring the environment); sometimes besides
immediate rewards, there are delayed rewards when feedback is provided onlyafter some sequence of actions, or even after the goal is achieved (for example,the positiverewardonaself-driving caragentisprovidedafteritreachesadesti-nation). Because reinforcement learning involves long-term consequences to ac-tions, because actions and states depend on each other, and because agents need
to collect data through exploration, interpretability generally becomes more dif-
ﬁcult than in a standard supervised learning. Search spaces for RL can be mas-sive since we need to understand which action to take in each state based onan estimate of future rewards, uncertainty of these estimates, and explorationstrategy. In deep reinforcement learning [ 210,273], policies are deﬁned by deep
neural networks, which helps to solve complex applied problems, but typically
the policies are essentially impossible to understand or trust.
Interpretability could be particularly valuable in RL. Interpretability might
help to reduce the RL search space; if we understand the choices and intent ofthe RL system, we can remove actions that might lead to harm. Interpretabil-ity could make it easier to troubleshoot (and use) RL for long-term medical
treatment or to train an agent for human-robot collaboration.
One natural way to include interpretability in a reinforcement learning sys-
tem is by representing the policy or value function by a decision tree or rule list[248,272]. In a policy tree representation, the nodes might contain a small set
of logical conditions, and leaves might contain an estimate of the optimal prob-ability distribution over actions (see Figure 19). A policy tree can be grown, for
example, in a greedy incremental way by updating the tree only when the esti-
mated discounted future reward would increase suﬃciently [ 248]; in the future,
one could adapt methods like those from Challenge 1 to build such trees.
Other methods make speciﬁc assumptions about the domain or problem that
allows for interpretable policies. One of the most popular simpliﬁcations is toconsider a symbolic or relational state representation. In this case, the state
is a combination of logical or relational statements. For example, in the classic
Blocks World domain, where the objective is to learn how to stack blocks on topof each other to achieve a target conﬁguration, these statements comprising the