42 C. Rudin et al.
to preserve as much information as possible from the high-dimensional space,
includingthedistancesorrankinformationbetweenpairsofpoints.Thesemeth-ods usually apply matrix decomposition over the data or pairwise distance ma-
trix, and are widely used for data preprocessing. These methods usually fail to
preserve local structure, including cluster structure.
To solve these problems, researchers later (early 2000s) developed methods
thataimedatlocalstructure,becausetheyhadknowledgethathighdimensionaldata lie along low-dimensional manifolds. Here, it was important to preserve the
local information along the manifolds. Isomap [ 285], Local Linear Embedding
(LLE) [249], Hessian Local Linear Embedding [ 87], and Laplacian Eigenmaps
[24] all try to preserve exact local Euclidean distances from the original space
when creating low-dimensional embeddings. But distances between points be-have diﬀerently in high dimensions than in low dimensions, leading to problemspreserving the distances. In particular, these methods tended to exhibit what
is called the “crowding problem,” where samples in the low-dimensional space
crowd together, devastating the local neighborhood structure and losing infor-mation. t-SNE [ 297] was able to handle this problem by transforming the high-
dimensional distances between each pair of points into probabilities of whetherthe two points should be neighbors in the low-dimensional space. Doing thisaims to ensure that local neighborhood structure is preserved. Then, during
the projection to low dimensions, t-SNE enforces that the distribution over dis-
tances between points in the low-dimensional space is a speciﬁc transformationof the distribution over distances between points in the high-dimensional space.Forcing distances in the low-dimensional space to follow a speciﬁc distributionavoids the crowding problem, which is when a large proportion of the distancesare almost zero.
Though more successful than previous methods, t-SNE still suﬀers from slow
running times, sensitivity to hyperparameter changes, and lack of preservationof global structure. A series of t-SNE variants aim to improve on these short-comings. The most famous among them are BH t-SNE [ 296] and FIt-SNE [ 187].
BH t-SNE constructs a k-nearest neighbor graph over the high dimensional
space to record local neighborhood structure, and utilizes the Barnes-Hut force
calculation algorithm [which is typically used for multi-body simulation; 20]
to accelerate optimization of the low-dimensional embedding. These choices re-duced the complexity for each step in the optimization from O(n
2), where nis
the number of samples in the dataset, to a smaller O(nlogn). FIt-SNE further
accelerates the rendering phase with a Fast Fourier Transform, and brings down
the complexity to O(n). Besides these variants, multiple new algorithms have
been created based on the framework of t-SNE. Prominent examples includeLargeVis [ 284], which is widely used in network analysis, and UMAP [ 204],
which is widely used in computational biology. With a better initialization cre-ated by unsupervised machine learning algorithms (such as spectral clustering)andbetter lossfunctions, thesealgorithmsimproveglobalstructurepreservation
and run-time eﬃciency. Figure 13demonstrates diﬀerences in results from DR
methods on a dataset of isotropic Gaussians. As the ﬁgure shows, the results ofdiﬀerent DR techniques look quite diﬀerent from each other. Recent studies on