Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 3
necessary authority to the black box [ 253]. There is a clear need for innovative
machine learning models that are inherently interpretable.
There is now a vast and confusing literature on some combination of in-
terpretability and explainability. Much literature on explainability confounds it
with interpretability/comprehensibility, thus obscuring the arguments (and thusdetracting from their precision), and failing to convey the relative importanceand use-cases of the two topics in practice. Some of the literature discusses top-ics in such generality that its lessons have little bearing on any speciﬁc problem.
Some of it aims to design taxonomies that miss vast topics within interpretable
ML. Some of it provides deﬁnitions that we disagree with. Some of it evenprovides guidance that could perpetuate bad practice. Importantly, most of itassumes that one would explain a black box without consideration of whetherthere is an interpretable model of the same accuracy. In what follows,we providesome simple and general guiding principles of interpretable machine learning.
These are not meant to be exhaustive. Instead they aim to help readers avoid
common but problematic ways of thinking about interpretability in machinelearning.
The major part of this survey outlines a set of important and fundamental
technical grand challenges in interpretable machine learning. These are bothmodern and classical challenges, and some are much harder than others. They
are all either hard to solve, or diﬃcult to formulate correctly. While there
are numerous sociotechnical challenges about model deployment (that can bemuch more diﬃcult than technical challenges), human-computer interactionchallenges, and how robustness and fairness interact with interpretability, thosetopics can be saved for another day. We begin with the most classical and mostcanonical problems in interpretable machine learning: how to build sparse mod-
els for tabular data, including decision trees (Challenge #1) and scoring systems
(Challenge #2). We then delve into a challenge involving additive models (Chal-lenge #3), followed by another in case-based reasoning (Challenge #4), whichis another classic topic in interpretable artiﬁcial intelligence. We then move tomore exotic problems, namely supervised and unsupervised disentanglement of
concepts in neural networks (Challenges #5 and #6). Back to classical prob-
lems, we discuss dimension reduction (Challenge #7). Then, how to incorporatephysicsorcausalconstraints(Challenge#8).Challenge#9involvesunderstand-ing, exploring, and measuring the Rashomon set of accurate predictive models.Challenge #10 discusses interpretable reinforcement learning. Table 1provides
a guideline that may help users to match a dataset to a suitable interpretable
supervised learning technique. We will touch on all of these techniques in the
challenges.
General principles of interpretable machine learning
Our ﬁrst fundamental principle deﬁnes interpretable ML, following [ 250]:
Principle 1 An interpretable machine learning model obeys a domain-speciﬁc
set of constraints to allow it (or its predictions, or the data) to be more easily