44 C. Rudin et al.
for instance, Euclidean distance may not be suitable for measuring distances
between weights (or activations) of a neural network [see 50, for a detailed
example of such a failure]. We would like DR methods to better capture
information from the high dimensional space to avoid such pitfalls.
7.2How should we select hyperparameters for DR?
ModernDRmethods,duetotheirmulti-stagecharacteristics,involvealargenumberofhyperparameters,includingthenumberofhigh-dimensionalnear-est neighbors to be preserved in the low-dimensional space and the learn-
ing rate used to optimize the low-dimensional embedding. There are often
dozens of hyperparameters in any given DR method, and since DR meth-ods are unsupervised and we do not already know the structure of thehigh-dimensional data, it is diﬃcult to tune them. A poor choice of hy-perparameters may lead to disappointing (or even misleading) DR results.Fig14shows some DR results for the Mammoth dataset [ 133,64]u s i n g
t-SNE, LargeVis, UMAP, TriMAP and PaCMAP with diﬀerent sets of rea-
sonable hyperparameters. When their perplexity parameter or the numberof nearest neighbors is not chosen carefully, algorithms can fail to preservethe global structure of the mammoth (speciﬁcally, the overall placement ofthe mammoth’s parts), and they create spurious clusters (losing connectiv-ity between parts of the mammoth) and lose details (such as the toes on the
feet of the mammoth). For more detailed discussions about the eﬀect of dif-
ferent hyperparameters, see [ 314,64]. Multiple works [for example 25,313]
aimed to alleviate this problem for the most inﬂuential hyperparameters,but the problem still exists, and the set of hyperparameters remains data-dependent. The tuning process, which sometimes involves many runs of aDR method, is time and power consuming, and requires user expertise in
both the data domain and in DR algorithms. It could be extremely helpful
to achieve better automatic hyperparameter selection for DR algorithms.
7.3Can the DR transformation from high- to low-dimensions be made
more interpretable or explainable? The DR mapping itself – that is,
the transformation from high to low dimensions – typically is complex.
There are some cases in which insight into this mapping can be gained, for
instance, if PCA is used as the DR method, we may be able to determinewhich of the original dimensions are dominant in the ﬁrst few principlecomponents. It may be useful to design modern approaches to help usersunderstand how the ﬁnal two or three dimensions are deﬁned in terms of thehigh-dimensional features. This may take the form of explanatory post-hoc
visualizations or constrained DR methods.
Example: Computational biologists often apply DR methods to single-cell
RNA sequence data to understand the cell diﬀerentiation process and discoverpreviously-unknown subtypes of cells. Without a suitable way to tune parame-ters, they may be misled by a DR method into thinking that a spurious cluster
from a DR method is actually a new subtype of cell, when it is simply a failure
of the DR method to capture local or global structure (Challenge 7.2 above).Since tuning hyperparameters in a high-dimensional space is diﬃcult (with-