Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 53
issues with parameterization, but the pattern Rashomon ratio has its
own problems. Would variable importance space be suitable, whereeach axis represents the importance of a raw variable, as in the work
of Dong and Rudin [ 86]? Or is there an easier space and metric to work
with?
(b)Are there approximation algorithms or other techniques that
will allow us to eﬃciently compute or approximate the sizeof the Rashomon set? At worst, computation over the Rashomon
set requires a brute force calculation over a large discrete hypothesis
space. In most cases, the computation should be much easier. Perhapswe could use dynamic programming or branch and bound techniquesto reduce the search space so that it encompasses the Rashomon setbut not too much more than that? In some cases, we could actuallycompute the size of the Rashomon set analytically. For instance, for
linear regression, a closed-form solution in parameter space for the vol-
ume of the Rashomon set has been derived based on the singular valuesof the data matrix [ 269].
9.2What techniques can be used to visualize the Rashomon set? Visu-
alizationoftheRashomonsetcanpotentiallyhelpustounderstanditsprop-
erties, issues with the data, biases, or underspeciﬁcation of the problem. To
give an example of how visualization can be helpful in troubleshooting mod-els generally, Li et al .[181] visualized the loss landscape of neural networks
and, as a result, found answers to questions about the selection of the batchsize, optimizer, and network architecture. Kissel and Mentch [ 151]p r o p o s e d
a tree-based graphical visualization to display outputs of the model path
selection procedure that ﬁnds models from the Rashomon set based on a for-
ward selection of variables. The visualization helps us to understand the sta-bility of the model selection process, as well as the richness of the Rashomonset, since wider graphical trees imply that there are more models availablefor the selection procedure. To characterize the Rashomon set in variable
importance space, variable importance diagrams have been proposed [ 86],
which are 2-dimensional projections of the variable importance cloud .T h e
variable importance cloud is created by mapping every variable to its impor-
tance for every good predictive model (every model in the Rashomon set).Figure16(b) uses a similar technique of projection in two-dimensional space
and depicts the visualization of the example of the Rashomon set of Figure
16(a). This simple visualization allows us to see the Rashomon set’s layout,
estimate its size or locate sparser models within it. Can more sophisticatedapproaches be developed that would allow good visualization? The successofthese techniquesmostlikelywillhavetodepend onwhether wecandesigna good metric for the model class. After the metric is designed, perhaps wemight be able to utilize techniques from Challenge 7 for the visualization.
9.3What model to choose from the Rashomon set? When the Rashomon
setislarge,itcancontainmultipleaccuratemodelswithdiﬀerentproperties.Choosing between them might be diﬃcult, particularly if we do not know