Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 9
These two data extremes show that in machine learning, the dichotomy be-
tween the accurate black box and the less-accurate interpretable model is false.The often-discussed hypothetical choice between the accurate machine-learning-
based robotic surgeon and the less-accurate human surgeon is moot once some-
one builds an interpretable robotic surgeon. Given that even the most diﬃcultcomputervisionbenchmarkscanbesolvedwithinterpretablemodels,thereisnoreason to believe that an interpretable robotic surgeon would be worse than itsblack box counterpart. The question ultimately becomes whether the Rashomon
set should permit such an interpretable robotic surgeon–and all scientiﬁc evi-
dence so far (including a large-and-growing number of experimental papers oninterpretable deep learning) suggests it would.
Our next principle returns to the data science process.
Principle 4 As part of the full data science process, one should expect both the
performance metric and interpretability metric to be iteratively reﬁned.
The knowledge discovery process in Figure 1explicitly shows these important
feedback loops. We have found it useful in practice to create many interpretablemodels (satisfying the known constraints) and have domain experts choose be-tween them. Their rationale for choosing one model over another helps to reﬁne
the deﬁnition of interpretability. Each problem can thus have its own unique
interpretability metrics (or set of metrics).
The ﬁfth principle is as follows:
Principle 5 For high stakes decisions, interpretable models should be used if
possible, rather than “explained” black box models.
Hence, this survey concerns the former. This is not a survey on Explainable
AI (XAI, where one attempts to explain a black box using an approximationmodel, derivatives, variable importance measures, or other statistics), it is a sur-vey onInterpretable Machine Learning (creating a predictive model that is not
a black box). Unfortunately, these topics are much too often lumped together
within the misleading term “explainable artiﬁcial intelligence” or “XAI” despitea chasm separating these two concepts [ 250]. Explainability and interpretability
techniques are not alternative choices for many real problems, as the recent sur-veys often imply; one of them (XAI) can be dangerous for high-stakes decisionsto a degree that the other is not.
Interpretable ML is not a subset of XAI. The term XAI dates from ∼2016,
and grew out of work on function approximation; i.e., explaining a black boxmodel by approximating its predictions by a simpler model [e.g., 70,69], or
explaining a black box using local approximations. Interpretable ML also has a(separate) long and rich history, dating back to the days of expert systems inthe 1950’s, and the early days of decision trees. While these topics may sound
similar to some readers, they diﬀer in ways that are important in practice.
Inparticular,therearemanyseriousproblemswiththeuseofexplainingblack
boxes posthoc, as outlined in several papers that have shown why explaining