48 C. Rudin et al.
proximating solutions to PDEs. Other models, especially non-parametric
regression models cannot be diﬀerentiated easily – even though there havebeen some works that used Gaussian processes for approximating solutions
to PDEs, these Gaussian-process solutions often rely on discrete (ﬁnite-
diﬀerence) approximations for the original PDEs [see 335], or they could be
non-diﬀerentiable at times where there are observations [see 16]. How one
can incorporate diﬀerential constraints (in terms of diﬀerential equations)into non-parametric regression models remains an open question.
Going beyond PDEs to other types of complex constraints that encode prior
knowledge, Kursuncu et al .[166] proposed the concept of knowledge infused
deep learning, where the learning of a deep neural network is guided bydomain knowledge represented as a knowledge graph. Knowledge graphsencode relationships between entities in the world, including common senseknowledge. Thus, being able to incorporate information from a knowledge
graph could be very helpful if we can ﬁgure out ways to do it eﬀectively.
Example: Suppose that a team of aerospace engineers wants to study the aero-
dynamics for a new design of aircraft wing. They want to use a physics-guidedmachine learning model to approximate a solution to the physical model (a setof PDEs), because numerically computing the PDE solution is computationally
expensive. They want to try diﬀerent machine learning models, but they need
to ﬁrst think about how they can integrate the PDE constraints into machinelearning models that are not easily diﬀerentiable with respect to input (Chal-lenge 8.3). If they use a PINN, they need to ensure that training does not suﬀerfrom gradient pathologies (Challenge 8.1). In addition, collecting data to sup-port training of a PINN by conducting experiments or running simulations can
be expensive. They want to know how to integrate experimental/simulation de-
sign with training of PINNs to achieve the best model (Challenge 8.2). How tointegrate constraints into various models, and how to improve training and toco-design experiments/simulations with model training are challenges that bur-den not only aerospace engineers but any scientist working with physics-guidedmachine learning models.
9. Characterization of the “Rashomon” set of good models
In many practical machine learning problems, there is a multiplicity of almost-
equally-accurate models. This set of high performing models is called the
Rashomon set , based on an observation of the Rashomon eﬀect by the statis-
tician Leo Breiman. The Rashomon eﬀect occurs when there are multiple de-scriptions of the same event [ 41] with possibly no ground truth. The Rashomon
set includes these multiple descriptions of the same dataset [and again, none ofthem are assumed to be the truth, see 269,97,86,201]. Rashomon sets occur
in multiple domains, including credit score estimation, medical imaging, nat-
ural language processing, health records analysis, recidivism prediction, model
explanations for planning and robotics, and so on [ 74,201,280]. We have dis-
cussed in Challenges 4 and 5 that even deep neural networks for computer