28 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 7. (a) Prototype-based classiﬁcation of the network from Li et al .[183]. The network
compares a previously unseen image of “6” with 15 prototypes of handwritten digits, learnedfrom the training set, and classiﬁes the image as a 6 because it looks like the three proto-types of handwritten 6’s, which have been visualized by passing them through a decoder from
latent space into image space. (b) Part-based prototype classiﬁcation of a ProtoPNet [ 53].
The ProtoPNet compares a previously unseen image of a bird with prototypical parts of aclay colored sparrow, which are learned from the training set. It classiﬁes the image as aclay colored sparrow because (the network thinks that) its head looks like a prototypical headfrom a clay-colored sparrow, its wing bars look like prototypical wing bars from a clay-colored
sparrow, and so on. Here, the prototypes do not need to be passed through a decoder, they are
images from the training set.
a convex combination of training examples as a prototype would be suitable for
some data types (e.g., tabular data, where a convex combination of real training
examples might resemble a realistic observation), but for images, averaging the
latent positions of units in latent space may not correspond to a realistic-lookingimage, which means the prototype may not look like a real image, which couldbe a disadvantage to this type of approach.
Recently, there are works that integrate deep learning with prototype- and
prototype-parts-based classiﬁcation. This idea was ﬁrst explored by Li et al .
[183] for image classiﬁcation. They created a neural network architecture that
contains an autoencoder and a special prototype layer, where each unit of thatlayer (i.e., a prototype) stores a weight vector that resembles some encodedtraininginput.Givenaninputinstance,thenetworkcomparestheencodedinputinstance with the learned prototypes (stored in the prototype layer), which can
be visualized using the decoder. The prediction of the network is based on the /lscript
2
distances between the encoded input instance and the learned prototypes. The
authors applied the network to handwritten digit recognition [MNIST, 177], and
the network was able to learn prototypical cases of how humans write digits byhand. Given a test image of a handwritten digit, the network was also able toﬁnd prototypical cases that are similar to the test digit (Figure 7(a)).
More recently, Chen et al .[53] extended the work of Li et al .[183] to create
aprototypical part network (ProtoPNet) whose prototype layer stores proto-