Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 5
It might not be initially clear which deﬁnition of interpretability to use. This
deﬁnition might require reﬁnement, sometimes over multiple iterations with do-main experts. There are many papers detailing these issues, the earliest dating
from the mid-1990s [e.g., 157].
Interpretability diﬀers across domains just as predictive performance met-
rics vary across domains. Just as we might choose from a variety of perfor-mance metrics (e.g., accuracy, weighted accuracy, precision, average precision,precision@N, recall, recall@N, DCG, NCDG, AUC, partial AUC, mean-time-to-failure, etc.), or combinations of these metrics, we might also choose froma combination of interpretability metrics that are speciﬁc to the domain. We
may not be able to deﬁne a single best deﬁnition of interpretability; regardless,
if our chosen interpretability measure is helpful for the problem at hand, weare better oﬀ including it. Interpretability penalties or constraints can includesparsity of the model, monotonicity with respect to a variable, decomposibilityinto sub-models, an ability to perform case-based reasoning or other types ofvisual comparisons, disentanglement of certain types of information within the
model’s reasoning process, generative constraints (e.g., laws of physics), pref-
erences among the choice of variables, or any other type of constraint that isrelevant to the domain. Just as it would be futile to create a complete list ofperformance metrics for machine learning, any list of interpretability metricswould be similarly fated.
Our 10 challenges involve how to deﬁne some of these interpretability con-
straints and how to incorporate them into machine learning models. For tabular
data, sparsity is usually part of the deﬁnition of interpretability, whereas for
computer vision of natural images, it generally is not. (Would you ﬁnd a modelfor natural image classiﬁcation interpretable if it uses only a few pixels from theimage?) For natural images, we are better oﬀ with interpretable neural networksthat perform case-based reasoning or disentanglement, and provide us with avisual understanding of intermediate computations; we will describe these in
depth. Choices of model form (e.g., the choice to use a decision tree, or a spe-
ciﬁc neural architecture) are examples of interpretability constraints. For mostproblems involving tabular data, a fully interpretable model, whose full calcula-tionscanbeunderstoodbyhumanssuchasasparsedecisiontreeorsparselinearmodel, is generally more desirable than either a model whose calculations canonly be partially understood, or a model whose predictions (but not its model)
can be understood. Thus, we make a distinction between fully interpretable and
partially interpretable models, often preferring the former.
Interpretable machine learning models are not needed for all machine learn-
ing problems. For low-stakes decisions (e.g., advertising), for decisions where anexplanation would be trivial and the model is 100% reliable (e.g., “there is no le-sion in this mammogram” where the explanation would be trivial), for decisionswhere humans can verify or modify the decision afterwards (e.g., segmentation
of the chambers of the heart), interpretability is probably not needed.
1On the
1Obviously, this document does not apply to black box formulas that do not depend on
randomness in the data, i.e., a calculation of deterministic function, not machine learning.