Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 25
number of component functions might be appropriate since the doctor can vi-
sualize each component function. If there are too many component functions(GAM without sparsity control), analyzing contributions from all of them could
be overwhelming (see Challenge 3.1). If the researcher could control the sparsity,
smoothness, and monotonicity of the component functions, she might be able todesign a model that not only predicts well, but also reveals interesting relation-ships between observed variables and outcomes. This model could also help usto determine whether important variables were missing, recorded inconsistently
or incorrectly, and could help identify key risk factors (see Challenge 3.2).
From there, the researcher might want to develop even simpler models, such
as decision trees or scoringsystems, foruse in the clinic (see Challenges 1 and 2).
4. Modern case-based reasoning
Case-based reasoning is a paradigm that involves solving a new problem using
known solutions to similar past problems [ 1]. It is a problem-solving strategy
that we humans use naturally in our decision-making processes [ 219]. For ex-
ample, when ornithologists classify a bird, they will look for speciﬁc featuresor patterns on the bird and compare them with those from known bird speciesto decide which species the bird belongs to. The interesting question is: can a
machine learning algorithm emulate the case-based reasoning process that we
humans are accustomed to? A model that performs case-based reasoning is ap-pealing, because by emulating how humans reason, the model can explain itsdecision-making process in an interpretable way.
The potential uses for case-based reasoning are incredibly broad: whereas
the earlier challenges apply only to tabular data, case-based reasoning applies
to both tabular and raw data, including computer vision. For computer vision
and other raw data problems, we distinguish between the feature extraction andprediction steps. The feature extraction can be veriﬁed by a human, and theprediction steps are simple calculations. That is, while a human may not under-standthemappingfromtheoriginalimagetothefeaturespace,theycanvisuallyverify that a particular interpretable concept/feature has been extracted. Then,
the features/concepts are combined to form a prediction, which is done via a
sparse linear combination, or another calculation that a human can understand.
Case-based reasoning has long been a subject of interest in the artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) community [ 246,160,120]. There are, in general, two types of
case-based reasoning techniques: (i) nearest neighbor-based techniques, and (ii)prototype-based techniques, illustrated in Figure 6. There are many variations
of each of these two types.
Fig 6. Case-based reasoning types. Left: Nearest neighbors (just some arrows are shown for
3-nearest neighbors). Right: Prototype-based reasoning, shown with two prototypes.