Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 37
drawn (e.g., random natural images in the space of natural images). The statis-
tical independence between the latent features makes it easy to disentangle therepresentation [ 27]: a disentangled representation simply guarantees that know-
ing or changing one latent feature (and its corresponding concept) does not
aﬀect the distribution of any other. Results on simple imagery datasets showthat these generative models can decompose the data generation process intodisjoint factors (for instance, age, pose, identity of a person) and explicitly rep-resent them in the latent space, without any supervision on these factors; this
happens based purely on statistical independence of these factors in the data.
Recently, the quality of disentanglement in deep generative models has beenimproved [ 57,124]. These methods achieve full disentanglement without super-
vision by maximizing the mutual information between latent variables and theobservations. However, these methods only work for relatively simple imagerydata, such as faces or single 3D objects (that is, in the image, there is only one
object, not a whole scene). Learning the decomposition of a scene into groups of
objects in the latent space, for example, is not yet achievable by these deep gen-erative models. One reason for the failure of these approaches might be that theoccurrence of objects may not be statistically independent; for example, someobjects such as “bed” and “lamp” tend to co-occur in the same scene. Also, thesame type of object may occur multiple times in the scene, which cannot be
easily encoded by a single continuous latent feature.
Neural networks that incorporate compositional inductive bias: Another line
of work designs neural networks that directly build compositional structure intoa neural architecture. Compositional structure occurs naturally in computervision data, as objects in the natural world are made of parts. In areas thathave been widely studied beyond computer vision, including speech recognition,
researchers have already summarized a series of compositional hypotheses, and
incorporated them into machine learning frameworks. For example, in computervision, the “vision as inverse graphics” paradigm [ 23] tries to treat vision tasks
astheinverseofthecomputergraphicsrenderingprocess.Inotherwords,ittriesto decode images into a combination of features that might control rendering of
a scene, such as object position, orientation, texture and lighting. Many studies
on unsupervised disentanglement have been focused on creating this type of rep-resentation because it is intrinsically disentangled. Early approaches toward thisgoal includes DC-IGN [ 165] and Spatial Transformers [ 135]. Recently, Capsule
Networks [ 126,261] have provided a new way to incorporate compositional as-
sumptions into neural networks. Instead of using neurons as the building blocks,
Capsule Networks combine sets of neurons into larger units called “Capsules,”
and force them to represent information such as pose, color and location of ei-ther a particular part or a complete object. This method was later combinedwith generative models in the Stack Capsule Autoencoder (SCAE) [ 163]. With
the help of the Set Transformer [ 179] in combining information between layers,
SCAE discovers constituents of the image and organizes them into a smaller set
of objects. Slot Attention modules [ 191] further use an iterative attention mech-
anism to control information ﬂow between layers, and achieve better results onunsupervised object discovery. Nevertheless, similar to the generative models,