60 C. Rudin et al.
data to obtain an interpretable model for individual treatment eﬀects, or
an interpretable policy (i.e., treatment regimes).
•How should we measure variable importance? There are several
types of variable importance measures: those that measure how important
a variable is to a speciﬁc prediction, those that measure how important avariable is generally to a model, and those that measure how importanta variable is independently of a model. Inherently interpretable modelsshould generally not need the ﬁrst one, as it should be clear how much a
variable contributed to the prediction; for instance, for decision trees and
otherlogicalmodels,scoringsystems,GAMs,case-basedreasoningmodels,and disentangled neural networks, the reasoning process that comes witheach prediction tells us explicitly how a variable (or concept) contributedto a given prediction. There are many explainable ML tutorials to describehow to estimate the importance of variables for black box models. For the
other two types of variable importance, we refer readers to the work of
Fisher et al .[97], which has relevant references. If we can decide on an
ideal variable importance measure, we may be able to create interpretablemodels with speciﬁc preferences on variable importance.
•What are the practical challenges in deploying interpretable ML
models? There are many papers that provide useful background about
the use of interpretability and explainability in practice. For instance,
an interesting perspective is provided by Bhatt et al .[31] who conduct
an explainability survey showing that explanations are often used onlyinternally for troubleshooting rather than being shown to users. Severalstudies, e.g. [ 141,237], have performed extensive human experiments on
interpretable models and posthoc explanations of black box models, with
some interesting and sometimes nonintuitive results.
•What type of explanation is required by law? The question of what
explanations are legally required is important and interesting, but we willleave those questions to legal scholars (e.g., [ 32,303]). Interestingly, schol-
ars have explicitly stated that a “Right to Explanation” for automated
decision-making does not actually exist in the European Union’s General
Data Protection Regulation, despite the intention [ 303]. Rudin [ 250]p r o -
poses that for a high-stakes decision that deeply aﬀects lives, no black boxmodel should be used unless the deployer can prove that no interpretablemodel exists with a similar accuracy. If enacted, this would likely meanthat black box models rarely (if ever) would be deployed for high-stakes
decisions.
•What are other forms of interpretable models? It is not possible
to truly review all interpretable ML models. One could argue that mostof applied Bayesian statistics ﬁts into our deﬁnition of interpretable MLbecause the models are constrained to be formed through an interpretablegenerative process. This is indeed a huge ﬁeld, and numerous topics that
we were unable to cover also would have deserved a spot in this survey.