20 C. Rudin et al.
down randomly. They also propose a greedy method where the sum of coef-
ﬁcients is ﬁxed and coeﬃcients are rounded one at a time. Sokolovska et al .
[277] propose an algorithm that ﬁnds a local minimum by improving the so-
lution at each iteration until no further improvements are possible. Ustun and
Rudin [293] propose a combination of rounding and “polishing.” Their rounding
method is called Sequential Rounding. At each iteration, Sequential Roundingchooses a coeﬃcient to round and whether to round it up or down. It makes thischoice by evaluating each possible coeﬃcient rounded both up and down, and
chooses the option with the best objective. After Sequential Rounding produces
an integer coeﬃcient vector, a second algorithm, called Discrete Coordinate De-scent (DCD), is used to “polish” the rounded solution. At each iteration, DCDchooses a coeﬃcient, and optimizes its value over the set of integers to obtaina feasible integer solution with a better objective. All of these algorithms areeasy to program and might be easier to deal with than troubleshooting a MIP
or LP solver.
Computer-aided exploration techniques. These are design interfaces where do-
main experts can modify the model itself rather than relying directly on opti-mizationtechniquestoencodeconstraints.Billietetal .[35,34]createdatoolbox
that allows users to make manual adjustments to the model, which could po-tentially help users design interpretable models according to certain types ofpreferences. Xie et al .[320] also suggest an expert-in-the-loop approach, where
heuristics such as the Gini splitting criteria can be used to help discretize con-
tinuous variables. Again, with these approaches, the domain expert must knowhow they want the model to depend on its variables, rather than consideringoverall performance optimization.
2.1Improve the scalability of optimal sparse scoring systems: As dis-
cussed, for scoring systems, the only practical approaches that produce op-timal scoring systems require a MIP solver, and these approaches may notbe able to scale to large problems, or optimally handle continuous vari-
ables. Current state-of-the-art methods for optimal scoring systems (like
RiskSLIM) can deal with a dataset with about thousands of samples andtens of variables within an hour. However, an hour is quite long if one wantsto adjust constraints and rerun it several times. How to scale up to largedatasets or to reduce solving time remains a challenge, particularly whenincluding complicated sets of constraints.
2.2Ease of constraint elicitation and handling: Since domain experts
often do not know the full set of constraints they might want to use in ad-vance, and since they also might want to adjust the model manually [ 34],
a more holistic approach to scoring systems design might be useful. Thereare many ways to cast the problem of scoring system design with feedbackfrom domain experts. For instance, if we had better ways of representing
and exploring the Rashomon set (see Challenge 9), domain experts might
be able to search within it eﬀectively, without fear of leaving that set andproducing a suboptimal model. If we knew domain experts’ views about the