Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 61
12. Conclusion
In this survey, we hoped to provide a pathway for readers into important topics
in interpretable machine learning. The literature currently being generated on
interpretableandexplainableAIcanbedownrightconfusing.Thesheerdiversityof individuals weighing in on this ﬁeld includes not just statisticians and com-puter scientists but legal experts, philosophers, and graduate students, many ofwhom have not either built or deployed a machine learning model ever. It is
easy to underestimate how diﬃcult it is to convince someone to use a machine
learning model in practice, and interpretability is a key factor. Many works overthe last few years have contributed new terminology, mistakenly subsumed theolder ﬁeld of interpretable machine learning into the new ﬁeld of “XAI,” andreview papers have universally failed even to truly distinguish between the ba-sic concepts of explaining a black box and designing an interpretable model.
Because of the misleading terminology, where papers titled “explainability” are
sometimes about “interpretability” and vice versa, it is very diﬃcult to followthe literature (even for us). At the very least, we hoped to introduce some fun-damental principles, and cover several important areas of the ﬁeld and showhow they relate to each other and to real problems. Clearly this is a massiveﬁeld that we cannot truly hope to cover, but we hope that the diverse areas we
covered and problems we posed might be useful to those needing an entrance
point into this maze.
Interpretable models are not just important for society, they are also beauti-
ful. One might also ﬁnd it absolutely magical that simple-yet-accurate modelsexist for so many real-world datasets. We hope this document allows you to seenot only the importance of this topic but also the elegance of its mathematics
and the beauty of its models.
Acknowledgments
We thank Leonardo Lucio Custode for pointing out several useful references to
Challenge 10. Thank you to David Page for providing useful references on early
explainable ML. Thank you to the anonymous reviewers that made extremelyhelpful comments.
References
[1]Aamodt, A. andPlaza, E. (1994). Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational
Issues, Methodological Variations, and System Approaches. AI Communi-
cations739–59.
[2]Adebayo, J. ,Gilmer, J. ,Muelly, M. ,Goodfellow, I. ,Hardt, M.
andKim, B. (2018). Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. In Proceedings of
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[3]Adel, T. ,Ghahramani, Z. andWeller, A. (2018). Discovering in-
terpretable representations for both deep generative and discriminative