Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 57
Fig 19. (a) An example of a learned decision tree policy for the Cart-Pole balancing problem
adapted from Silva et al .[272]. In the Cart-Pole environment, a pole is attached to a cart
by a joint. The cart moves along the horizontal axis. The goal is to keep the pole balancedupright, preventing it from falling. The state consists of four features: Cart Position, CartVelocity, Pole Angle and Pole Velocity At Tip. Here, angle 0
◦means straight upwards. There
are two possible actions at each state, including push cart to the left or push cart to the right.(b) is a visualization of the policy from Silva et al .[272] based on two features: Pole Angle
and Pole Velocity At Tip. Interestingly, it is easy to see from this ﬁgure that the policy is not
left-right symmetric. Note that there are many reasonable policies for this problem, includingmany that are asymmetric.
10.1What constraints would lead to an accurate interpretable policy?
In relational methods, policies or value functions could be represented bydecision or regression trees, however, since these methods work for sym-bolic domains only, they have limited practical use without a method of
extracting interpretable relations from the domain. Can interpretable deep
neural network methods similar to those in Challenge 5 provide an inter-pretablepolicywithouttheperformancecompromise?Arethereotherwaysof adding constraints or structure to the policy that will ensure human-understandable actions and intent? Will adding other sparsity or inter-
pretability constraints, as in Challenges 1 and 2, to the policy or value
function help improve interpretability without sacriﬁcing accuracy? Canwedesigninterpretablemodelswhoseexplanationscancapturelongertermconsequences of actions?
10.2Under what assumptions does there exist an interpretable pol-
icy that is as accurate as the more complicated black-box model?
Reinforcement learning systems are tricky to train, understand and debug.
It is a challenge in itself to decide what constraints will lead to an inter-pretable policy without loss of performance. For example, for PIRL [ 300],
there was a drop in performance of the resulting rule-based policy. Ofcourse, one of the possible reasons for this drop could be the fact thatit used posthoc approximations rather than inherently interpretable mod-
els; another reason is that there might not be a well-performing sparse
rule-based policy. So, the question is: how would we know if it is useful tooptimize for an interpretable policy? A simple test that tells the modeler if