Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 59
quantiﬁcation and interpretability, and Antoran et al .[15] discuss inter-
pretable uncertainty estimation.
•Can we divide the observations into easier cases and harder
cases, assigning more interpretable models to the easier cases?
Not all observations are equally easy to classify. As noted in the workof Wang et al .[309,312], it is possible that easier cases could be han-
dled by simpler models, leaving only the harder cases for models with lessinterpretability.
•Do we need interpretable neural networks for tabular data? There
have been numerous attempts to design interpretable neural networks fortabular data, imposing sparsity, monotonicity, etc. However, it is unclearwhether there is motivation for such formulations, since neural networksdo not generally provide much beneﬁt for tabular data over other kindsof models. One nice beneﬁt of the “optimal” methods discussed above is
that when we train them we know how far we are from a globally optimal
solution; the same is not true for neural networks, rendering them not justless interpretable but also harder to implement reliably.
•What are good ways to co-design models with their visualiza-
tions?Work in data and model visualization will be important in convey-
ing information to humans. Ideally, we would like to co-design our model
in a way that lends itself to easier visualization. One particularly impres-
sive interactive visualization was done by Gomez et al .[111] for a model
on loan decisions. Another example of an interactive model visualizationtool is that of Chen et al .[54]. These works demonstrate that as long as
the model can be visualized eﬀectively, it can be non-sparse but still beinterpretable. In fact, these works on loan decisions constitute an example
of when a sparse model might not be interpretable, since people might
ﬁnd a loan decision model unacceptable if it does not include many typesof information about the applicant’s credit history. Visualizations can al-low the user to hone in on the important pieces of the model for eachprediction.
•Can we do interpretable matching in observational causal infer-
ence?In the classical potential outcomes framework of causal inference,
matching algorithms are often used to match treatment units to con-trol units. Treatment eﬀects can be estimated using the matched groups.Matching in causal inference can be considered a form of case-based rea-soning (Challenge 4). Ideally, units within each matched group would be
similar on important variables. One such framework for matching is the
Almost Matching Exactly framework [also called “learning to match,” see310], which learns the important variables using a training set, and prior-
itizes matching on those important variables.Matchingopensthedoorforinterpretablemachinelearningincausalinfer-ence because it produces treatment and control data whose distributions
overlap. Interpretable machine learning algorithms for supervised classi-
ﬁcation discussed in Challenges 1, 2, and 3 can be directly applied tomatched data; for instance, a sparse decision tree can be used on matched