32 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 8. Disentangled latent space. The axes (neurons) of the latent space are aligned with
supervised concepts, e.g. “lamp,” “bed,” “nightstand,” “curtain.” All information about theconcept up to that point in the network travels through that concept’s corresponding neuron.
to create a classiﬁer for each concept (e.g., create a lamp classiﬁer), but this
is not a good strategy: it might be that the network only requires the lightof the lamp rather than the actual lamp body, so creating a lamp classiﬁercould actually reduce performance. Instead, we would want to encourage the
information that is used about a concept (if any is used) to go along one path
through the network.
Disentanglement is not guaranteed in standard neural networks. In fact, in-
formation about any concept could be scattered throughout the latent space of
a standard DNN. For example, post hoc analyses on neurons of standard con-volutional neural networks [ 336,337] show that concepts that are completely
unrelated could be activated on the same axis, as shown in Figure 9.E v e ni fw e
create a vector in the latent space that is aimed towards a single concept [as isdone in147,338], that vector could activate highly on multiple concepts, which
means the signal for the two concepts is not disentangled. In that sense, vectors
in the latent space are “impure” in that they do not naturally represent singleconcepts [see 58, for a detailed discussion].
This challenge focuses on supervised disentanglement of neural networks, i.e.,
the researcher speciﬁes which concepts to disentangle in the latent space. (In thenext section we will discuss unsupervised disentanglement.) Earlier work in thisdomain disentangles the latent space for speciﬁc applications, such as face recog-nition, where we might aim to separate identity and pose [ 341]. Recent work
in this area aims to disentangle the latent space with respect to a collection of
predeﬁned concepts [ 58,158,193,3]. For example, Chen et al .[58] adds con-
straints to the latent space to decorrelate the concepts and align them with axesin the latent space; this is called “concept whitening.” (One could think of this