Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 29
typical parts of encoded training images. The prototypical parts are patches
of convolutional-neural-network-encoded training images, and represent typicalfeatures observed for various image classes. Given an input instance, the net-
work compares an encoded input image with each of the learned prototypical
parts, and generates a prototype activation map that indicates both the location
and the degree of the image patch most similar to that prototypical part. Theauthors applied the network to the benchmark Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011(CUB-200-2011) dataset [ 305] for bird recognition, and the ProtoPNet was able
to learn prototypical parts of 200 classes of birds, and use these prototypes to
classify birds with an accuracy comparable to non-interpretable black-box mod-els. Given a test image of a bird, the ProtoPNet was able to ﬁnd prototypicalparts that are similar to various parts of the test image, and was able to providean explanation for its prediction, such as “this bird is a clay-colored sparrow,because its head looks like that prototypical head from a clay-colored sparrow,
and its wingbars looklikethose prototypical wing bars from aclay-coloredspar-
row” (Figure 7(b)). In their work, Chen et al .[53] also removed the decoder, and
instead introduced prototype projection , which pushes every prototypical part
to the nearest encoded training patch of the same class for visualization. Thisimproved the visualization quality of the learned prototypes (in comparison tothe approach of Li et al .[183] which used a decoder).
These two works (i.e., [ 183,53]) have been extended in the domain of deep
case-based reasoning and deep prototype learning. In the image recognitiondomain, Nauta et al .[215] proposed a method for explaining what visual char-
acteristics a prototype (in a trained ProtoPNet) is looking for; Nauta et al .
[216] proposed a method for learning neural prototype trees based on a proto-
type layer; Rymarczyk et al .[260] proposed data-dependent merge-pruning of
the prototypes in a ProtoPNet, to allow prototypes that activate on similarlylooking parts from various classes to be pruned and shared among those classes.In the sequence modeling domain (such as natural language processing), Minget al.[209] and Hong et al .[129] took the concepts in [ 183]a n d[53], and inte-
gratedprototypelearningintorecurrentneuralnetworksformodelingsequential
data. Barnett et al .[21] extended the ideas of Chen et al .[53] and developed an
application to interpretable computer-aided digital mammography.
Despite the recent progress, many challenges still exist in the domain of case-
based reasoning, including:
4.1How to extend the existing case-based reasoning approach to han-
dling more complex data, such as video? Currently, case-based reason-
ing has been used for structured (tabular) data, static images, and simplesequences such as text. It remains a challenge to extend the existing case-based reasoning approach to handling more complex data, such as videodata, which are sequences of static images. While Trinh et al .[290] recently
extended the ideas in Chen et at .[53] and developed a dynamic prototype
network (DPNet) which learns prototypical video patches from deep-faked
and real videos, how to eﬃciently compare various videos and ﬁnd simi-lar videos (for either nearest-neighbor or prototype-based classiﬁcation) re-