54 C. Rudin et al.
how to explore the Rashomon set. Interactive methods might rely on dimen-
sion reduction techniques (that allow users to change the location of dataon the plot or to change the axis of visualization), weighted linear models
(that allow the user to compute weights on speciﬁc data points), continuous
feedback from the user (that helps to continuously improve models predic-tion in changing environments, for example, in recommender systems) inorder to interpret or choose a speciﬁc model with desired property. Das etal.[75] design a system called BEAMES that allows users to interactively
select important features, change weights on data points, visualize and se-
lect a speciﬁc model or even an ensemble of models. BEAMES searches thehypothesis space for models that are close to the practitioners’ constraintsand design choices. The main limitation of BEAMES is that it works withlinear regression classiﬁers only. Can a similar framework that searches theRashomon set, instead of the whole hypothesis space, be designed? What
would the interactive speciﬁcation of constraints look like in practice to help
the user choose the right model? Can collaboration with domain experts inother ways be useful to explore the Rashomon set?
Example : Suppose that a ﬁnancial institution would like to make data-driven
loan decisions. The institution must have a model that is as accurate as possible,
and must provide reasons for loan denials. In practice, loan decision prediction
problems have large Rashomon sets, and many machine learning methods per-form similarly despite their diﬀerent levels of complexity. To check whether theRashomon set is indeed large, the ﬁnancial institution wishes to measure thesize of the Rashomon set (Challenge 9.1) or visualize the layout of it (Challenge9.2) to understand how many accurate models exist, and how many of them
are interpretable. If the Rashomon set contains multiple interpretable models,
the ﬁnancial institution might wish to use an interactive framework (Challenge9.3) to navigate the Rashomon set and design constraints that would help tolocate the best model for their purposes. For example, the institution couldadditionally optimize for fairness or sparsity.
10. Interpretable reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods determine what actions to take at diﬀer-
ent states in order to maximize a cumulative numerical reward [e.g., see 282]. In
RL, a learning agent interacts with the environment by a trial and error process,
receiving signals (rewards) for the actions it takes. Recently, deep reinforcement
learning algorithms have achieved state-of-the-art performance in mastering thegame of Go and various Atari games [ 273,210] and have been actively used in
robotic control [ 156,283], simulated autonomous navigation and self-driving
cars [150,265], dialogue summarization, and question answering [ 182]. RL has
also been applied to high-stakes decisions, such as healthcare and personalized
medicine, including approaches for dynamic treatment regimes [ 190,326], treat-
ment of sepsis [ 162], treatment of chronic disorders including epilepsy [ 117], for
HIV therapy [ 230], and management of Type 1 diabetes [ 136].