Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 49
vision exhibit Rashomon sets, because neural networks that perform case-based
reasoning on disentanglement still yielded models that were equally accurateto their unconstrained values; thus, these interpretable deep neural models are
within the Rashomon set. Rashomon sets present an opportunity for data scien-
tists: if there are many equally-good models, we can choose one that has desiredproperties that go beyond minimizing an objective function. In fact, the modelthat optimizes the training loss might not be the best to deploy in practiceanyway due to the possibilities of poor generalization, trust issues, or encoded
inductive biases that are undesirable [ 74]. More careful approaches to problem
formulation and model selection could be taken that include the possibility ofmodel multiplicity in the ﬁrst place. Simply put – we need ways to explore theRashomon set, particularly if we are interested in model interpretability.
Formally, the Rashomon set is the set of models whose training loss is below a
speciﬁc threshold, as shown in Figure 16(a). Given a loss function and a model
classF, the Rashomon set can be written as
R(F,f
∗,/epsilon1)={f∈Fsuch that Loss(f)≤Loss(f∗)+/epsilon1},
wheref∗can be an empirical risk minimizer, optimal model or any other refer-
ence model. We would typically choose Fto be complex enough to contain
models that ﬁt the training data well without overﬁtting. The threshold /epsilon1,
which is called the Rashomon parameter, can be a hard hyper-parameter set
by a machine learning practitioner or a percentage of the loss (i.e., /epsilon1becomes
/epsilon1/primeLoss(f∗)). We would typically choose /epsilon1or/epsilon1/primeto be small enough that suﬀering
this additional loss would have little to no practical signiﬁcance on predictiveperformance. For instance, we might choose it to be much smaller than the(generalization) error between training and test sets. We would conversely want
to choose /epsilon1or/epsilon1
/primeto be as large as permitted so that we have more ﬂexibility to
choose models within a bigger Rashomon set.
It has been shown by Semenova et al .[269] that when the Rashomon set is
large, under weak assumptions, it must contain a simple (perhaps more inter-pretable) model within it. The argument goes as follows: assume the Rashomonset is large, so that it contains a ball of functions from a complicated functionclassF
complicated (think of this as high-dimensional polynomials that are com-
plex enough to ﬁt the data well without overﬁtting). If a set of simpler functions
Fsimplercould serve as approximating set for Fcomplicated (think decision trees
of a certain depth approximating the set of polynomials), it means that eachcomplicated function could be well-approximated by a simpler function (andindeed, polynomials can be well-approximated by decision trees). By this logic,the ball of F
complicated that is within the Rashomon set must contain at least
one function within Fsimpler, which is the simple function we were looking for.
Semenova et al .[269] also suggested a useful rule of thumb for determining
whether a Rashomon set is large: run many diﬀerent types of machine learn-
ing algorithms (e.g., boosted decision trees, support vector machines, neural
networks, random forests, logistic regression) and if they generally perform sim-ilarly, it correlates with the existence of a large Rashomon set (and thus the