38 C. Rudin et al.
these networks perform poorly when aiming to discover concepts on more realis-
ticdatasets.Forexample,SCAEcanonlydiscoverstroke-likestructuresthatareuninterpretable to humans on the Street View House Numbers (SVHN) dataset
[218]( s e eF i g u r e 11). The reason is that the SCAE can only discover visual
structures that appear frequently in the dataset, but in reality the appearanceof objects that belong to the same category can vary a lot. There have beenproposals [e.g., GLOM 125] on how a neural network with a ﬁxed architecture
could potentially parse an image into a part-whole hierarchy. Although the idea
seems to be promising, no working system has been developed yet. There is still
a lot of room for development for this type of method.
Fig 11. Left: Sample images collected from the SVHN dataset [ 218]. Right: Stroke-like tem-
plates discovered by the SCAE. Although the objects in the dataset are mostly digits, currentcapsule networks are unable to discover them as concepts without supervision.
Works that perform unsupervised disentanglement implicitly : Many other in-
terpretable neural networks can also learn disjoint concepts in the latent space
although the idea of “disentanglement” is not explicitly mentioned in these pa-
pers. For example, as mentioned in Section 4,C h e ne ta l .[53] propose to create
a prototype layer, storing prototypical parts of training images, to do case basedreasoning.Whenclassifyingbirds,theprototypicalpartsareusuallyobjectpartssuch as heads and wings of birds. Interestingly, a separation cost is applied tothe learned prototypes to encourage diversity of the prototypical parts, which
is very similar to the idea of disentanglement. Zhang et al .[333]p r o p o s et o
maximize mutual information between the output of convolutional ﬁlters andpredeﬁned part templates (feature masks with positive values in a localized re-gion and negative in other places). The mutual information regularization termis essentially the sum of two disentanglement losses, (a) an inter-category en-tropy loss that encourages each ﬁlter to be exclusively activated by images of
one category and not activated on other categories; (b) a spatial entropy loss
that encourages each ﬁlter to be activated only on a local region of the image.Results show the convolutional ﬁlters with the mutual information loss tend