Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 51
Fig 16. (a) An illustration of a possible Rashomon set in two-dimensional hypothesis space.
Models from two local minima that are below the red plane belong to the Rashomon set. (b)
An illustration of a possible visualization of the Rashomon set. Models inside the shaded redregions belong to the Rashomon set. The plot is created as a contour plot of the loss over thehypothesis space. Green dots represent a few simpler models inside the Rashomon set. Thesemodels are simpler because they are sparse: they depend on one less dimension than other
models in the Rashomon set.
volume of the Rashomon set is a useful indirect indicator of the existence of
interpretablemodels.Therehavebeenseveralworksthatsuggestcomputingstatistics of the Rashomon set in parameter space, such as the volume in pa-rameterspace,whichiscalledthe Rashomon volume .TheRashomonvolume
orotherstatisticsthatcharacterizetheRashomonsetcanbecomputedmore
easily if the volume in parameter space has a single global minimum [ 127,
83,144,144,52]; these variations include /epsilon1-ﬂatness [ 127,83]a n d/epsilon1-sharpness
[144,83]. TheRashomon ratio provides some perspective on the size of the
Rashomon set, deﬁned as the ratio of the Rashomon volume to the volumeof the whole hypothesis space [ 269], assuming that both are bounded.
There are several problems that arise when computing the size of the
Rashomon set in parameter space. First, the volume of a set of functionscan be hard to compute or estimate, but there are ways to do it, includ-ing sampling (or analytical computation in some simple cases when thereis one minimum). Second, the choice of parameterization of the hypothe-sis space matters when working in parameter space. Overparametrization
or underparametrization can cause volumes in parameter space to be ar-
tiﬁcially made larger or smaller without a change in the actual space offunctions [ 83]. For instance, if we make a copy of a variable and include it
in the datasets, it can change the Rashomon ratio. A third but separateproblem with the Rashomon ratio is its denominator: the denominator isthe volume of all models we might reasonably consider before seeing the
data. If we change the set of models we might consider, we change the de-
nominator, and the ratio changes. And, because diﬀerent model spaces arediﬀerent, there might not be a way to directly compare the Rashomon ratios