Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 39
to be activated only on a speciﬁc part of the object. These two methods are
capable of learning single objects or parts in the latent space but have not yetbeen generalized to handle more comprehensive concepts (such as properties of
scenes, including style of an indoor room – e.g., cozy, modern, etc., weather for
outdoor scenes, etc.), since these concepts are not localized in the images.
Despite multiple branches of related work targeting concept discovery in dif-
ferent way, many challenges still exist:
6.1How to quantitatively evaluate unsupervised disentanglement?
Recall that unsupervised disentanglement is desired (but challenging) intwo diﬀerent types of domains: (a) domains in which we do not know whatthe concepts are (e.g., materials science); (b) domains in which concepts areknown but labeling biases exist.Let us start with a version of case (b) where some concepts are known,
such as objects in natural images. Let us say we are just missing a subset
of concept labels in the dataset, which is a simple type of missing databias. If we build a neural network that disentangles the latent space, we canquantitatively evaluate the quality of disentanglement. For instance, let ussay we know a collection of concepts that we would like disentangled (say,a collection of speciﬁc objects that appear in natural images). If we use
an unsupervised algorithm for disentangling the space, and then evaluate
whether it indeed disentangled the known concepts, then we have a usefulquantitative evaluation [ 124,56,148,92,84].
If we are working in a domain where we do not know the concepts to disen-tangle (case (a)), we also might not know what regularization (or other typeof inductive bias) to add to the algorithm so that it can discover concepts
that we would ﬁnd interpretable. In that case, it becomes diﬃcult to eval-
uate the results quantitatively. Materials science, as discussed above, is anexample of one of these domains, where we cannot ﬁnd ground-truth labelsof key patterns, nor can we send queries to human evaluators (since evenmaterial scientists do not know the key patterns in many cases). Evaluation
metrics from natural images do not work. Evaluating disentanglement in
these domains is thus a challenge.Going back to case (b), in situations where labeling biases exist (i.e., whenonly some concepts are labeled, and the set of labels are biased), currentevaluation metrics of disentanglement that rely only on human annota-tions can be problematic. For instance, most annotations in current im-
agery datasets concern only objects in images but ignore useful information
such as lighting and style of furniture. An unsupervised neural network maydiscover important types of concepts that do not exist in the annotations.Medical images may be an important domain here, where some conceptsare clearly known to radiologists, but where labels in available datasets areextremely limited.
6.2How to adapt neural network architectures designed with compo-
sitional constraints to other domains?Incorporating compositional assumptions into network architecture design