Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 35
the ﬁnal prediction, i.e., c→y, often remains a black box. This leaves a
gap between the interpretability of the latent space and the interpretabilityof the entire model. Current methods either rely on variable importance
methods to explain c→yposthoc [ 58], or simply make c→ya linear
layer [158]. However, a linear layer might not be expressive enough to learn
c→y.[158] also shows that a linear function c→yis less eﬀective than
nonlinear counterparts when the user wants to intervene in developing thedisentangled representation, e.g., replacing predicted concept values ˆ c
jwith
true concept values cj. Neural networks like neural additive models [ 5]a n d
neural decision trees [ 322] could potentially be used to model c→y,s i n c e
they are both diﬀerentiable, nonlinear, and intrinsically interpretable oncethe input features are interpretable.
Example: Suppose machine learning practitioners and doctors want to build
a supervised disentangled DNN on X-ray data to detect and predict arthritis.
First, they aim to choose a set of relevant concepts that have been assessed by
doctors (Challenge 5.3). They should also choose thresholds to turn continuousconcepts (e.g., age) into binary variables to create the concept datasets (Chal-lenge 5.3). Using the concept datasets, they can use supervised disentanglementmethods like concept whitening [ 58] to build a disentangled DNN. However, if
they choose too many concepts to disentangle in the neural network, loading
samples from all of the concept datasets may take a very long time (Challenge5.1). Moreover, doctors may have chosen diﬀerent levels of concepts, such asbone spur (high-level) and shape of joint (low-level), and they would like thelow-level concepts to be disentangled by neurons in earlier layers, and high-levelconcepts to be disentangled in deeper layers, since these concepts have a hi-
erarchy according to medical knowledge. However, current methods only allow
placing them in the same layer (Challenge 5.2). Finally, all previous steps canonlymakeneuronsintheDNNlatentspacealignedwithmedicalconcepts,whilethe way in which these concepts combine to predict arthritis remains uninter-pretable (Challenge 5.4).
6. Unsupervised disentanglement of neural networks
The major motivation of unsupervised disentanglement is the same as Challenge
5, i.e., making information ﬂow through the network easier to understand andinteract with. But in the case where we do not know the concepts, or in the
case where the concepts are numerous and we do not know how to parameter-
ize them, we cannot use the techniques from Challenge 5. In other words, theconceptcin Constraint ( 5.1) is no longer a concept we predeﬁne, but it must
still be an actual concept in the existing universe of concepts. There are situ-ations where concepts are actually unknown; for example, in materials science,the concepts, such as key geometric patterns in the unit cells of materials, have
generally not been previously deﬁned. There are also situations where concepts
are generally known but too numerous to handle; a key example is computervision for natural images. Even though we could put a name to many concepts