16 C. Rudin et al.
bounds have never been used (as far as we know). Future work could go
into improving the determination of when to check these bounds, or prov-ing that a subset of all possible dummy variables still preserves closeness to
optimality.
1.3Can we handle constraints more gracefully? Particularly for greedy
methods that create trees using local decisions, it is diﬃcult to enforceglobalconstraintsontheoveralltree.Giventhatdomain-speciﬁc constraintsmay be essential for interpretability, an important challenge is to deter-
minehowtoincorporatesuch constraints. Optimization approaches (mathe-
matical programming, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound) are moreamenable to global constraints, but the constraints can make the prob-lem much more diﬃcult. For instance, falling constraints [306,55] enforce
decreasing probabilities along a rule list, which make the list more inter-pretable and useful in practice, but make the optimization problem harder,
even though the search space itself becomes smaller.
Example: Suppose a hospital would like to create a decision tree that will
be used to assign medical treatments to patients. A tree is convenient becauseit corresponds to a set of questions to ask the patient (one for each internalnode along a path to a leaf). A tree is also convenient in its handling of multiple
medicaltreatments;eachleafcouldevenrepresentadiﬀerentmedicaltreatment.
The tree can also handle complex interactions, where patients can be askedmultiple questions that build on each other to determine the best medication forthe patient. To train this tree, the proper assumptions and data handling weremade to allow us to use machine learning to perform causal analysis (in practicethese are more diﬃcult than we have room to discuss here). The questions
we discussed above arise when the variables are continuous; for instance, if
we split on age somewhere in the tree, what is the optimal age to split atin order to create a sparse tree? (See Challenge 1.2.) If we have many othercontinuous variables (e.g., blood pressure, weight, body mass index), scalabilityin choosing how to split them all becomes an issue. Further, if the hospitalhas additional preferences, such as “falling probabilities,” where fewer questions
should be asked to determine whether a patient is in the most urgent treatment
categories, again it could aﬀect our ability to ﬁnd an optimal tree given limitedcomputational resources (see Challenge 1.3).
2. Scoring systems
Scoring systems are linear classiﬁcation models that require users to add, sub-
tract, and multiply only a few small numbers in order to make a prediction.These models are used to assess the risk of numerous serious medical con-ditions since they allow quick predictions, without using a computer. Suchmodels are also heavily used in criminal justice. Table 2shows an example
of a scoring system. A doctor can easily determine whether a patient screens
positive for obstructive sleep apnea by adding points for the patient’s age,whether they have hypertension, body mass index, and sex. If the score is above