Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 15
For methods that use the mathematical programming solvers, a good for-
mulation is key to reducing training time. For example, MIP solvers usebranch-and-bound methods, which partition the search space recursively
and solve Linear Programming (LP) relaxations for each partition to pro-
duce lower bounds. Small formulations with fewer variables and constraintscan enable the LP relaxations to be solved faster, while stronger LP relax-ations (which usually involve more variables) can produce high quality lowerbounds to prune the search space faster and reduce the number of LPs to
be solved. How to formulate the problem to leverage the full power of MIP
solvers is an open question. Currently, mathematical programming solversare not as eﬃcient as the best customized algorithms.For customized branch-and-bound search algorithms such as GOSDT andOSDT [185,131], there are several mechanisms to improve scalability: (1)
eﬀective lower bounds, which prevent branching into parts of the search
space where we can prove there is no optimal solution, (2) eﬀective schedul-
ing policies, which help us search the space to ﬁnd close-to-optimal solu-tions quickly, which in turn improves the bounds and again prevents usfrom branching into irrelevant parts of the space, (3) computational reuse,whereby if a computation involves a sum over (even slightly) expensivecomputations, and part of that sum has previously been computed and
stored, we can reuse the previous computation instead of computing the
whole sum over again, (4) eﬃcient data structures to store subproblemsthat can be referenced later in the computation should that subproblemarise again.
1.2Can we eﬃciently handle continuous variables? While decision trees
handle categorical variables and complicated interactions better than other
types of approaches (e.g., linear models), one of the most important chal-
lenges for decision tree algorithms is to optimize over continuous features.Many current methods use binary variables as input [ 131,185,301,222,78],
which assumes that continuous variables have been transformed into indi-cator variables beforehand (e.g., age >50). These methods are unable to
jointly optimize the selection of variables to split at each internal tree node,
the splitting threshold of that variable (if it is continuous), and the treestructure (the overall shape of the tree). Lin et al .[185] preprocess the data
by transforming continuous features into a set of dummy variables, withmany diﬀerent split points; they take split points between every orderedpair of unique values present in the training data. Doing this preserves opti-
mality, but creates a huge number of binary features, leading to a dramatic
increase in the size of the search space, and the possibility of hitting eithertime or memory limits. Some methods [ 301,222] preprocess the data using
an approximation, whereby they consider a much smaller subset of possiblethresholds, potentially sacriﬁcing the optimality of the solution [see 185,
Section 3, which explains this]. One possible technique to help with this
p r o b l e mi st ou s e similar support bounds, identiﬁed by Angelino et al .[11],
but in practice these bounds have been hard to implement because checkingthe bounds repeatedly is computationally expensive, to the point where the