Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 41
potheses. DR can help us design features so that we can build an interpretable
supervised model, allowing us to work with high-dimensional data in a way wewould not otherwise be able to. With DR, biases or pervasive noise in the data
may be illuminated, allowing us to be better data caretakers. However, with
the wrong DR method, information about the high-dimensional relationshipsbetween points can be lost when projecting onto a 2D or 3D space.
DR methods are unsupervised ML methods that are constrained to be in-
terpretable. Referring back to our generic interpretable ML formulation ( *),
DR methods produce a function mapping data x
1,x2,...,xnfromp-dimensional
space to y1,y2, ...ynin a low dimensional space (usually 2D). The constraint of
mapping to 2 dimensions is an interpretability constraint. DR methods typically
have a loss function that aims to preserve a combination of distance informa-
tion between points and neighborhood information around each point whenprojecting to 2D. Each DR algorithm chooses the loss function diﬀerently. Eachalgorithmalsochoosesitsowndistanceorneighborhoodinformationtopreserve.
Fig 12. Visualization of the MNIST dataset [ 177] using diﬀerent kinds of DR methods: PCA
[232], t-SNE [ 297,187,236], UMAP [ 204], and PaCMAP [ 313]. The axes are not quantiﬁed
because these are projections into an abstract 2D space.
Generally speaking, there are two primary types of approaches to DR for
visualization, commonly referred to as local and global methods. Global meth-
ods aim mainly to preserve distances between any pair of points (rather thanneighborhoods), while the local methods emphasize preservation of local neigh-borhoods (that is, which points are nearest neighbors). As a result, local meth-ods can preserve the local cluster structure better, while failing to preserve the
overall layout of clusters in the space, and vice versa. Figure 12demonstrates
the diﬀerence between the two kinds of algorithms over the MNIST handwrittenﬁgure dataset [ 177], which is a dataset where local structure tends to be more
important than global structure. The only global method here, Principal Com-ponent Analysis (PCA) [ 232], fails to separate diﬀerent digits into clusters, but
it gives a sense of which digits are diﬀerent from each other. t-SNE [ 297], which
is a local method, successfully separated all the digits, but does not keep the
scale information that is preserved in the PCA embedding. More recent meth-ods, such as UMAP [ 204]a n dP a C M A P[ 313] also separated the digits while
preserving some of the global information.
Early approaches toward this problem, including PCA [ 232] and Multidi-
mensional Scaling (MDS) [ 289], mostly fall into the global category. They aim