40 C. Rudin et al.
is a way to create intrinsically interpretable disentangled representations.
Thatsaid,suchassumptionsareusuallymodality-andtask-speciﬁc,severelylimiting the general applicability for such designs. Let us take Capsule Net-
works [261] and the Slot Attention module [ 191] in the computer vision ﬁeld
as examples: these modules try to create object-centric and part-centric rep-resentations inside the latent space of the network. These ideas are based onthe assumption that an image can be understood as a composition of diﬀer-ent objects, and the interference between objects is negligible. Nevertheless,
such an assumption cannot necessarily be applied to materials science, in
which a material’s physical properties could depend jointly, in a complexway, on the patterns of constituent materials within it. How would we re-deﬁne the compositional constraints derived in computer vision for naturalimages to work for other domains such as materials science?
6.3How to learn part-whole disentanglement for more complicated
patterns in large vision datasets? A speciﬁc area within unsupervised
disentanglement in computer vision is to semantically segment the imageinto diﬀerent parts, where each part represents an object or a part of anobject [71,261,163,191]. Current networks can achieve convincing results
over simple, synthetic datasets (where objects consist of simple geometricshapes or digits). (Such datasets include CLEVR6, [ 137], d-Sprite, [ 202],
and Objects Room and Tetrominoes, [ 139].) However, no work has suc-
cessfully learned part-whole relationships on more realistic datasets such asImageNet. New techniques may be needed to handle various interactionsbetween diﬀerent objects in a real-world dataset.
Example: Suppose material scientists want to build a classiﬁcation model that
can predict whether the designs of metameterials support existence of band
gaps (same example as Figure 10). Because unit cells of metamaterials are usu-
ally represented as a matrix/tensor of what constituent materials are placed ateach location, the researchers plan to build a deep neural network, since neuralnetworks excel at extracting useful information from raw inputs. They might en-counter several challenges when building the disentangled neural network. First,
they need to identify the disentanglement constraints to build into the network
architecture. Architectures that work well for imagery data may not work forunit cells of metamaterials, since key patterns in unit cells can be completelydiﬀerent from objects/concepts in imagery data (Challenge 6.2 above). More-over, evaluation of disentanglement can be challenging as the material patterns
have no ground truth labels (Challenge 6.1 above).
7. Dimension reduction for data visualization
Even in data science, a picture is worth a thousand words. Dimension reduc-
tion (DR) techniques take, as input, high-dimensional data and project it down
to a lower-dimensional space (usually 2D or 3D) so that a human can better
comprehend it. Data visualization can provide an intuitive understanding of theunderlying structure of the dataset. DR can help us gain insight and build hy-