4 C. Rudin et al.
Table 1
Rule of thumb for the types of data that naturally apply to various supervised learning
algorithms. “Clean” means that the data do not have too much noise or systematic bias.
“Tabular” means that the features are categorical or real, and that each feature is a
meaningful predictor of the output on its own. “Raw” data is unprocessed and has a complex
data type, e.g., image data where each pixel is a feature, medical records, or time series data.
Models Data type
decision trees / decision lists(rule lists) / decision sets somewhat clean tabular data with interactions, includ-ing multiclass problems. Particularly useful for cate-gorical data with complex interactions (i.e., more thanquadratic). Robust to outliers.
scoring systems somewhat clean tabular data, typically used in medicine
and criminal justice because they are small enough that
they can be memorized by humans.
generalized additive models(GAMs) continuous data with at most quadratic interactions,useful for large-scale medical record data.
case-based reasoning any data type (diﬀerent methods exist for diﬀerent data
types), including multiclass problems.
disentangled neural net-
worksdata with raw inputs (computer vision, time series, tex-tual data), suitable for multiclass problems.
understood by humans. These constraints can diﬀer dramatically depending on
the domain.
Atypicalinterpretablesupervisedlearningsetup,withdata {zi}i,andmodels
chosen from function class Fis:
min
f∈F1
n/summationdisplay
iLoss(f,zi)+C·InterpretabilityPenalty( f),subject to (*)
InterpretabilityConstraint( f),
where the loss function, as well as soft and hard interpretability constraints, are
chosentomatchthedomain.(Forclassiﬁcation zimightbe( xi,yi),xi∈Rp,yi∈
{−1,1}.) The goal of these constraints is to make the resulting model for its
predictions more interpretable. While solutions of ( *) would not necessarily be
suﬃciently interpretable to use in practice, the constraints would generally help
usﬁndmodelsthatwouldbeinterpretable(ifwedesignthemwell),andwemightalso be willing to consider slightly suboptimal solutions to ﬁnd a more usefulmodel. The constant Ctrades oﬀ between accuracy and the interpretability
penalty, and can be tuned, either by cross-validation or by taking into accountthe user’s desired tradeoﬀ between the two terms.
Equation ( *)can be generalizedto unsupervised learning, wherethe loss term
would simply be replaced by a loss term for the unsupervised problem, whetherit is novelty detection, clustering, dimension reduction, or another task.
Creating interpretable models can sometimes be much more diﬃcult than
creating black box models for many diﬀerent reasons including: (i) Solving theoptimization problem may be computationally hard, depending on the choice of
constraints and the model class F. (ii) When one does create an interpretable
model, one invariably realizes that the data are problematic and require trou-bleshooting, which slows down deployment (but leads to a better model). (iii)