56 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 18. An illustration of an RL system based on the example of Type 1 diabetes manage-
ment. This is theoretically a closed-loop system, where the agent observes the state from theenvironment, makes an action, and receives a reward based on the action. For diabetes con-trol, the state consists of measurements of glucose and other patient data, the actions are
injections of insulin, and the rewards are based on sugar levels.
statemightlooklike on(block1, block2) ;on(block1, table) ;free(block2) .Typically,
in relational reinforcement learning, policies are represented as relational regres-sion trees [ 90,91,143,96,76] that are more interpretable than neural networks.
A second set of assumptions is based on a natural decomposition of the prob-
lemformulti-taskorskillslearning.Forexample,Shuetal .[271]usehierarchical
policies that are learned over multiple tasks, where each task is decomposed intomultiple sub-tasks (skills). The description of the skills is created by a human,so that the agent learns these understandable skills (for instance, task stack blue
blockcan be decomposed into the skills ﬁnd blue block ,get blue block ,a n dput
blue block ).
Asfarasweknow,therearecurrentlynogeneralinterpretablewell-performing
methods for deep reinforcement learning that allow transparency in the agent’sactions or intent. Progress has been made instead on explainable deep rein-forcement learning (posthoc approximations), including tree-based explanations[66,189,81,22,73], reward decomposition [ 138], and attention-based methods
[330,213]. An interesting approach is that of Verma et al .[300], who deﬁne
rule-based policies through a domain-speciﬁc, human-readable programminglanguage that generalizes to unseen environments, but shows slightly worse per-formance than neural network policies it was designed to explain. The approachworks for deterministic policies and symbolic domains only and will not workfor the domains where the state is represented as a raw data image, unless an
additional logical relation extractor is provided.
Based on experience from supervised learning (discussed above), we know
that post-hoc explanations suﬀer from multiple problems, in that explanationsare often incorrect or incomplete. Atrey et al .[18] have argued that for deep
reinforcement learning, saliency maps should be used for exploratory, and not
explanatory, purposes. Therefore, developing interpretable reinforcement learn-
ing policies and other interpretable RL models is important. The most crucialchallenges for interpretable reinforcement learning area include: