24 C. Rudin et al.
when we have prior knowledge, e.g., that risk increases with age. In the
case when component functions are estimated by splines, many works ap-ply convex regularizers (e.g., /lscript
1) to control both smoothness and sparsity
[186,245,206,324,234,194,262,121]. For example, they add “roughness”
penaltiesandlassotypepenaltiesonthe fj’sintheobjectivefunctiontocon-
trol both the smoothness of component functions and sparsity of the model.Similarly, if the f
j’s are sums of indicators, as in ( 3.1), we could regularize
to reduce the cj,j/primecoeﬃcients to induce smoothness. These penalties are
usually convex, therefore, when combined with convex loss functions, con-
vex optimization algorithms minimize their (regularized) objectives. Therecould be some disadvantages to this setup: (1) as we know, /lscript
1regulariza-
tion imposes a strong unintended bias on the coeﬃcients when aiming forvery sparse solutions. (2) Lou et al .[195] ﬁnd that imposing smoothness
may come at the expense of accuracy, (3) imposing smoothness may miss
important naturally-occurring patterns like a jump in a component func-
tion; in fact, they found such a jump in mortality as a function of age thatseems to occur around retirement age. In that case, it might be more in-terpretable to include a smooth increasing function of age plus an indicatorfunction around retirement age. At the moment, these types of choices arehand-designed, rather than automated.
As mentioned earlier, boosting can be used to train GAMs to produce ac-
curate models. However, sparsity and smoothness are hard to control withAdaBoost since it adds a new term to the model at each iteration.
3.2How to use GAMs to troubleshoot complex datasets? GAMs are
often used on raw medical records or other complex data types, and thesedatasets are likely to beneﬁt from troubleshooting. Using a GAM, we might
ﬁnd counterintuitive patterns; e.g., as shown in [ 49], asthma patients fared
better than non-asthma patients in a health outcomes study. Caruana etal.[49] provides a possible reason for this ﬁnding, which is that asthma
patients are at higher natural risk, and are thus given better care, leadingto lower observed risk. Medical records are notorious for missing important
information or providing biased information such as billing codes. Could
a GAM help us to identify important missing confounders, such as retire-ment eﬀects or special treatment for asthma patients? Could GAMs help usreconcile medical records from multiple data storage environments? Thesedata quality issues can be really important.
Example : Suppose a medical researcher has a stack of raw medical records and
would like to predict the mortality risk for pneumonia patients. The data arechallenging, including missing measurements (structural missingness as well asdata missing not at random, and unobserved variables), insurance codes thatdo not convey exactly what happened to the patient, nor what their state was.However, the researcher decides that there is enough signal in the data that it
could be useful in prediction, given a powerful machine learning method, such
as a GAM trained with boosted trees. There are also several important con-tinuous variables, such as age, that could be visualized. A GAM with a small