Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 31
typical of breast cancer (Challenge 4.2)? If a trained model contains a prototype
of “text” in the mammograms (such text could be doctor’s notes or patient IDsleft on some training images), how can we replace the unwanted prototype with
another prototype that is more medically relevant, without retraining the model
from scratch (Challenge 4.3)?
5. Complete supervised disentanglement of neural networks
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art predictive perfor-
mance for many important tasks [ 176]. DNNs are the quintessential “black box”
because the computations within its hidden layers are typically inscrutable. As a
result, there have been many works that have attempted to “disentangle” DNNs
in various ways so that information ﬂow through the network is easier to under-stand. “Disentanglement” here refers to the way information travels through thenetwork: we would perhaps prefer that all information about a speciﬁc concept(say “lamps”) traverse through one part of the network while information aboutanother concept (e.g., “airplane”) traverse through a separate part. Therefore,
disentanglement is an interpretability constraint on the neurons. For example,
suppose we hope neuron “neur” in layer lis aligned with concept c,i nw h i c h
case, the disentanglement constraint is
DisentanglementConstraint( c,neur,l) : Signal( c,neur) = Signal( c,l),(5.1)
where Signal( c,x) means the signal of concept cthat passes through x,w h i c h
measures similarity between its two arguments. This constraint means allsignal
about concept cin layerlwillonlypass through neuron neur. In other words,
using these constraints, we could constrain our network to have the kind of
“Grandmother node” that scientists have been searching for in both real andartiﬁcial convolutional neural networks [ 115].
In this challenge, we consider the possibility of fully disentangling a DNN
so that each neuron in a piece of the network represents a human-interpretable
concept.
The vector space whose axes are formed by activation values on the hidden
layer’s neurons is known as the latent space of a DNN. Figure 8shows an exam-
ple of what an ideal interpretable latent space might look like. The axes of thelatent space are aligned with individual visual concepts, such as “lamp,” “bed,”“nightstand,” “curtain.” Note that the “visual concepts” are not restricted to
objects but can also be things such as weather or materials in a scene. We hope
all information about the concept travels through that concept’s correspondingneuron on the way to the ﬁnal prediction. For example, the “lamp” neuron willbe activated if and only if the network thinks that the input image contains in-formation about lamps. This kind of representation makes the reasoning processof the DNN much easier to understand: the image is classiﬁed as “bedroom”
because it contains information about “bed” and “lamp.”
Suchalatentspace,madeofdisjointdatagenerationfactors,isadisentangled
latent space [ 26,123]. An easy way to create a disentangled latent space is just