30 C. Rudin et al.
mainsanopenchallengeforcase-basedvideoclassiﬁcationtasks.Performing
case-based reasoning on video data is technically challenging because of thehigh dimensionality of the input data. On the other hand, a video is an or-
deredcombinationofframesandwecantakeadvantageofthesequentialna-
ture of the data. For example, current algorithms can be reﬁned or improvedwith more information that comes from neighboring video frames; couldprototypes be designed from neighboring frames or parts of the frames?
4.2How to integrate prior knowledge or human supervision into pro-
totype learning? Current approaches to prototype learning do not take
into account prior knowledge or expert opinions. At times, it may be ad-vantageous to develop prototype-learning algorithms that collaborate withhuman experts in choosing prototypical cases or prototypical features. Forexample, in healthcare, it would be beneﬁcial if a prototype-based classi-ﬁer learns, under the supervision of human doctors, prototypical signs of
cancerous growth. For example, the doctors might prune prototypes, design
them, or specify a region of interest where the prototypes should focus. Suchhuman-machine collaboration would improve the classiﬁer’s accuracy andinterpretability, and would potentially reduce the amount of data needed totrain the model. However, human-machine collaboration is rarely exploredin the context of prototype learning, or case-based reasoning in general.
4.3How to troubleshoot a trained prototype-based model to improve
the quality of prototypes? Prototype-basedmodelsmakedecisionsbased
on similarities with learned prototypes. However, sometimes, the prototypesmay not be learned well enough, in the sense that they may not capturethe most representative features of a class. This is especially problematicfor part-based prototype models, because these models reason by compar-
ing subsets of features they deem important. In the case of a (part-based)
prototype model with “invalid” prototypes that capture non-representativeor undesirable features (e.g., a prototype of text in medical images, whichrepresents information that improves training accuracy but not test accu-racy), one way to “ﬁx” the model is to get rid of the invalid prototypes, but
this may lead to an imbalance in the number of prototypes among diﬀerent
classes and a bias for some classes that are over-represented with abundantprototypes. An alternative solution is to replace each undesirable prototypewith a diﬀerent prototype that does not involve the undesirable features.The challenge here lies in how we can replace undesirable prototypes sys-tematically without harming the model performance, and at the same time
improve the given model incrementally without retraining from scratch.
Example: Suppose that a doctor wants to evaluate the risk of breast cancer
among patients [see 21]. The dataset used to predict malignancy of breast can-
cer usually contains a set of mammograms, and a set of patient features (e.g.,age). Given a particular patient, how do we characterize prototypical signs of
cancerous growth from a sequence of mammograms taken at various times (this
is similar to a video, see Challenge 4.1)? How can a doctor supervise prototypelearning by telling a prototype-based model what (image/patient) features are