36 C. Rudin et al.
that exist in natural scenes, labeled datasets for computer vision have a severe
labeling bias: we tend only to label entities in images that are useful for a spe-ciﬁc task (e.g., object detection), thus ignoring much of the information found
in images. If we could eﬀectively perform unsupervised disentanglement, we can
rectify problems caused by human bias, and potentially make scientiﬁc discov-eries in uncharted domains. For example, an unsupervised disentangled neuralnetwork can be used to discover key patterns in materials and characterize theirrelation to the physical properties of the material (e.g., “will the material al-
low light to pass through it?”). Figure 10shows such a neural network, with
a latent space completely disentangled and aligned with the key patterns dis-covered without supervision: in the latent space, each neuron corresponds toa key pattern and all information about the pattern ﬂows through the corre-sponding neuron. Analyzing these patterns’ contribution to the prediction of adesired physical property could help material scientists understand what corre-
lates with the physical properties and could provide insight into the design of
new materials.
Fig 10. Neural network with unsupervised disentanglement in the latent space. The input (on
the left) is a unit cell of metameterial, made of stiﬀ (yellow) and soft (purple) constituentmaterials. The target of the neural network is predicting whether the material with unit cellon the left supports the formation of forbidden frequency bands of propagation, i.e. existenceof “band gaps.” Key patterns related to the band gap (illustrated in blue) have been discov-
ered without supervision. Neurons in the latent space are aligned with these patterns. Figure
adapted from [ 59].
Multiple branches of works are related to unsupervised disentanglement of
deep neural networks, and we will describe some of them.
Disentangled representations in deep generative models: Disentanglement of
generative models have long been studied [ 267,79]. Deep generative models such
as generative adversarial networks [GANs, 112] and variational auto-encoders
[VAE,149] try to learn a mapping from points in one probability distribution
to points in another. The ﬁrst distribution is over points in the latent space,
and these points are chosen i.i.d .according to a zero-centered Gaussian dis-
tribution. The second distribution is over the space from which the data are