18 C. Rudin et al.
fis a linear model, f(x)=p/summationdisplay
j=1λjxj,
with small integer coeﬃcients, ∀j, λj∈{ −10,−9,..,0,..,9,10}
and additional user constraints. (2.1)
Here, the user would specify the loss function (logistic loss, etc.), the tradeoﬀ
parameter Cbetween the number of nonzero coeﬃcients and the training loss,
and possibly some additional constraints, depending on the domain.
The integrality constraint on the coeﬃcients makes the optimization problem
verydiﬃcult. Theeasiest waytosatisfy these constraints is toﬁt realcoeﬃcients
(e.g., run logistic regression, perhaps with /lscript1regularization) and then round
these real coeﬃcients to integers. However, rounding can go against the lossgradient and ruin predictive performance. Here is an example of a coeﬃcientvector that illustrates why rounding might not work:
[5.3,6.1,0.31,0.30,0.25,0.25,0.24,...,0.05]→(rounding) →[5,6,0,0,...,0].
When rounding, we lose all signal coming from all variables except the ﬁrst
two. The contribution from the eliminated variables may together be signiﬁcanteven if each individual coeﬃcient is small, in which case, we lose predictive
performance.
Compounding the issue with rounding is the fact that /lscript
1regularization in-
troduces a strong bias for very sparse problems. To understand why, considerthat the regularization parameter must be set to a very large number to get avery sparse solution. In that case, the /lscript
1regularization does more than make
the solution sparse, it also imposes a strong /lscript1bias. The solutions disintegrate
in quality as the solutions become sparser, then rounding to integers only makes
the solution worse.
An even bigger problem arises when trying to incorporate additional con-
straints, as we allude to in ( 2.1). Even simple constraints such as “ensure pre-
cision is at least 20%” when optimizing recall would be very diﬃcult to satisfy
manually with rounding. There are four main types of approaches to building
scoring systems: i) exact solutions using optimization techniques, ii) approxi-mation algorithms using linear programming, iii) more sophisticated roundingtechniques, iv) computer-aided exploration techniques.
Exact solutions. There are several methods that can solve ( 2.1) directly [ 294,
291,292,293,256]. To date, the most promising approaches use mixed-integer
linear programming solvers (MIP solvers) which are generic optimization soft-ware packages that handle systems of linear equations, where variables can beeitherlinearorinteger.CommercialMIPsolvers(currentlyCPLEXandGurobi)are substantially faster than free MIP solvers, and have free academic licenses.MIP solvers can be used directly when the problem is not too large and when
the loss function is discrete or linear (e.g., classiﬁcation error is discrete, as it
takes values either 0 or 1). These solvers are ﬂexible and can handle a hugevariety of user-deﬁned constraints easily. However, in the case where the loss