Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 47
Fig 15. Physics-informed neural network (PINN) framework for solving the one-dimensional
heat equation∂u
∂t=k∂2u
∂x2with initial condition u(x,0) = f(x)and Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions u(0,t)=0and u(L, t)=0. Here, uis the model, which is the output of a neural network
(left), obeys the heat equation (upper right) and initial and boundary conditions (lower right).
The degree to which udoes not obey the heat equation or initial or boundary conditions is
reﬂected in the loss function.
al.[227] used the neural-network-induced Gaussian process (NNGP) regression
for solving PDEs.
Despite recent success of PINNs or physics-guided machine learning in gen-
eral, challenges still exist, including:
8.1How to improve training of a PINN? Wang et al .[308] discussed the
problem of numerical stiﬀness in gradient backpropagation during trainingof a PINN. To mitigate the problem, they proposed an algorithm to dynam-
ically balance various loss terms during training. How to further improve
training of a PINN is still an open challenge that needs to be addressed.
8.2How do we combine PINNs with optimal experimental/simulation
design to quickly reduce uncertainty in approximating physicalmodels? Currently, data that might be used for training PINNs are often
collected (from experiments or simulations) beforehand (i.e., prior to train-
ing of PINNs). This could lead to large uncertainty bands on areas of the
input domain where data are scarce, and when the parameters of the PDEneed to be learned from these data. Integrating experimental/simulationdesign with training of PINNs could lead to a more eﬃcient data collectionprocess and could reduce uncertainty of PINNs in approximating physicalmodels. However, how to achieve this is still an open question.
8.3Are there other ways of incorporating PDE (or other) constraints
into models other than neural networks? Neural networks can be
easily diﬀerentiated using the chain rule. This makes them ideal for ap-