50 C. Rudin et al.
possibility of a simpler function also achieving a similar level of accuracy). The
knowledge that there might exist a simple-yet-accurate function before ﬁndingit could be very useful, particularly in the cases where ﬁnding an optimal sparse
model is NP-hard, as in Challenge 1. Here, the user would run many diﬀer-
ent algorithms to determine whether it would be worthwhile to solve the hardproblem of ﬁnding an interpretable sparse model.
The knowledge of the functions that lie within Rashomon sets sees value in
multiple interesting use cases. Models with various important properties be-sides interpretability can exist in the Rashomon set, including fairness [ 67]a n d
monotonicity. Thus, understanding the properties of the Rashomon set couldbe pivotal for analysis of a complex machine learning problem and its possiblemodeling choices.
Thesize of the Rashomon set can be considered as a way of measuring the
complexity of a learning problem . Problems with large Rashomon sets are less
complicated problems, since more good solutions exist to these problems. TheRashomon set is a property of the model class and dataset. The size of the
Rashomon set diﬀers from other known characterizations of the complexity in
machinelearning.Waysthatcomplexityoffunctionclasses,algorithms,orlearn-ing problems are typically measured in statistical learning theory include theVC dimension, covering numbers, algorithmic stability, Rademacher complexity,or ﬂat minima [see, for instance, 279,140,339,266,161,39,299]; the size of the
Rashomon set diﬀers from all of these quantities in fundamental ways, and it is
important in its own right for showing the existence of simpler models.
A useful way to represent the hypothesis for a problem is by projecting it
to variable importance space, where each axis represents the importance of a
variable. That way, a single function is represented by a point in this space (i.e.,
a vector of coordinates), where each coordinate represents how important avariable is to that model. (Here, variable importance for variable vis measured
bymodel reliance orconditional model reliance , which represents the change
in loss we would incur if we scrambled variable v.) The Rashomon set can be
represented as a subset of this variable importance space. Fisher et al .[97]u s e d
this representation to create a model independent notion of variable importance:
speciﬁcally, they suggest to consider the maximum and minimum of variableimportance across all models in the Rashomon set. This is called the ModelClass Reliance (MCR). For any user who would pick a “good” model (i.e., amodel in the Rashomon set), then the importance of the variable is within therange given by the MCR. Dong and Rudin [ 86] expand on this by suggesting
to visualize the “cloud” of variable importance values for models within the
Rashomon set. This cloud helps us understand the Rashomon set well enoughto choose a model we might ﬁnd interpretable.
Current research works have barely scratched the characterization and usage
of model multiplicity and Rashomon sets in machine learning. Exploring theRashomon set is critical if we hope to ﬁnd interpretable models within the setof accurate models. We ask the following questions about the Rashomon set:
9.1How can we characterize the Rashomon set? As discussed above, the