Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 33
Fig 9. Example of an impure neuron in standard neural network from [ 337]. This ﬁgure shows
images that highly activate this neuron. Both dining tables (green) and Greek-style buildings(red) are highly activated on the neuron, even though these two concepts are unrelated.
as analogous to a type of principal components analysis for neural networks.)
To deﬁne the concepts, a separate dataset is labeled with concept information(or the main training dataset could also serve as this separate dataset as longas it has labels for each concept.) These concept datasets are used to align thenetwork’s axes along the concepts. This type of method can create disentangledlatent spaces where concepts are more “pure” than those of a standard DNN,
without hurting accuracy. With the disentangled latent space, one can answer
questions about how the network gradually learns concepts over layers [ 58], or
one could interact with the model by intervening on the activations of con-cept neurons [ 158]. Many challenges still exist for supervised disentanglement
of DNNs, including:
5.1How to make a whole layer of a DNN interpretable? Current meth-
ods can make neurons in a single layer interpretable but all of them havelimitations. Several works [ 158,193,3] have tried to directly learn a con-
cept classiﬁer in the latent space. However, good discriminative power on
concepts does not guarantee concept separation and disentanglement [ 58].
That is, we could easily have our network classify all the concepts correctly,in addition to the overall classiﬁcation task, but this would not mean thatthe information ﬂow concerning each concept goes only though that con-cept’s designated path through the network; the activations of the diﬀerent
concept nodes would likely still be correlated. The method discussed earlier,
namely that of [ 58], can fully disentangle the latent space with respect to
a few pre-deﬁned concepts. But it also has two disadvantages if we want todisentangle all neurons in a layer, namely: (i) this method currently has agroupofunconstrainedneuronstohandleresidualinformation,whichmeansit does not disentangle all neurons in a layer, just some of them, and (ii) it
requires loading samples of all target concepts to train the latent space. If
the layer to be disentangled contains 500 neurons, we would need to loadsamples for all 500 concepts, which takes a long time. Perhaps the latterproblem could be solved by training with a small random subset of conceptsat each iteration; but this has not been tried in current methods at the timeof this writing. The ﬁrst problem might be solved by using an unsupervised
concept detector from Challenge 6 and having a human interact with the
concepts to determine whether each one is interpretable.
5.2How to disentangle all neurons of a DNN simultaneously? Current