Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 11
in practice, see 317]. A model with 130 hand-typed inputs is more error-
prone than one involving 5 hand-typed inputs.
Inthatsense, explainability methods are often used as an excuse to use a black
box model–whether or not one is actually needed . Explainability techniques give
authority to black box models rather than suggesting the possibility of modelsthat are understandable in the ﬁrst place [ 253].
XAI surveys have (thus far) universally failed to acknowledge the important
pointthatinterpretabilitybegetsaccuracywhenconsideringthefulldatascience
process, and not the other way around. Perhaps this point is missed because of
the more subtle fact that one does generally lose accuracy when approximatinga complicated function with a simpler one, so it would appear that the simplerapproximation is less accurate. (Again the approximations must be imperfect,otherwise one would throw out the black box and instead use the explanation asan inherently interpretable model.) But function approximators are not used in
interpretable ML; instead of approximating a known function (a black box ML
model), interpretable ML can choose from a potential myriad of approximately-equally-good models, which, as we noted earlier, is called “the Rashomon set”[41,97,269]. We will discuss the study of this set in Challenge 9. Thus, when
one explains black boxes, one expects to lose accuracy, whereas when one creates
an inherently interpretable ML model, one does not.
In this survey, we do not aim to provide yet another dull taxonomy of “ex-
plainability” terminology. The ideas of interpretable ML can be stated in justone sentence: an interpretable model is constrained, following a domain-speciﬁcset of constraints that make reasoning processes understandable. Instead, wehighlight important challenges, each of which can serve as a starting point for
someone wanting to enter into the ﬁeld of interpretable ML.
1. Sparse logical models: Decision trees, decision lists, decision sets
The ﬁrst two challenges involve optimization of sparse models. We discuss both
sparse logical models in Challenge #1 and scoring systems (which are sparse
linearmodels withintegercoeﬃcients) inChallenge#2. Sparsityisoftenused asa measure of interpretability for tabular data where the features are meaningful.Sparsity is useful because humans can handle only 7 ±2 cognitive entities at
t h es a m et i m e[ 208], and sparsity makes it easier to troubleshoot, check for
typographical errors, and reason about counterfactuals (e.g., “How would my
prediction change if I changed this speciﬁc input?”). Sparsity is rarely the only
consideration for interpretability, but if we can design models to be sparse, wecan often handle additional constraints. Also, if one can optimize for sparsity,a useful baseline can be established for how sparse a model could be with aparticular level of accuracy.
We remark that more sparsity does not always equate to more interpretabil-
ity. This is because “humans by nature are mentally opposed to too simplistic
representations of complex relations” [ 93,100]. For instance, in loan decisions,
we may choose to have several sparse mini-models for length of credit, history of