52 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 17. A one-dimensional example of computation of the Rashomon ratio. The hypothesis
space consists of decision stumps f(x)={1[x≤a]},a∈[0,1]. (The function is 1ifx≤aand
0otherwise.) The loss function is the zero-one loss: loss (f,x,y)=1[f(x)=y], which is 1 if
the model makes a mistake and zero otherwise. A model fbelongs to the Rashomon set if/summationtext
iloss(f,xi,yi)≤0.2, that is, the model made 2mistakes. The Rashomon ratio in (a) is
equal to 0.4and is computed as the ratio of volumes of decision stumps in the Rashomon set
(blue shaded region) to the volume of all possible decision stumps in the area where data reside(blue and orange shaded region). The pattern Rashomon ratio in (b) is equal to 3/11and is
computed as the ratio of classiﬁers that belong to the Rashomon set (blue stumps, of which
there are 3 unique stumps with respect to the data) to the number of all possible classiﬁers(orange and blue stumps, of which there are 11). This ﬁgure shows that there are multipleways to compute the size of the Rashomon set and it is not clear which one to choose.
computed on diﬀerent hypothesis spaces to each other.
This brings us to another way to measure the Rashomon set: The pat-
tern Rashomon ratio [269,201], which could potentially be used to handle
some of these problems. The pattern Rashomon ratio considers unique pre-dictions on the data (called “patterns”) rather than the count of functionsthemselves. In other words, the pattern Rashomon ratio considers the countof predictions that could be made rather than a count of functions. Figure17illustrates the diﬀerence between the Rashomon ratio and the pattern
Rashomon ratio. The pattern Rashomon ratio has a ﬁxed denominator (all
possible patterns one could produce on the data using functions from theclass). A direct comparison of the pattern Rashomon ratio over functionclasses is meaningful. However, it is still diﬃcult to compute. It is also moresensitive to small shifts and changes in data.
Despite that multiple measures, including /epsilon1-ﬂatness, /epsilon1-sharpness, Rashomon
ratio, and pattern ratio, have been proposed to measure the size of theRashomon set, they do not provide a universal and simple-to-calculate wayof characterization the size of the Rashomon set. Many challenges to remainopen:
(a)What is a good space in which to measure the size of the
Rashomon set? What is a good measure of the size of theRashomon set? As discussed above, the parameter space suﬀers from