34 C. Rudin et al.
methods try to disentangle at most a single layer in the DNN (that is, they
attempt only the problem discussed above). This means one could only in-terpret neurons in that speciﬁc layer, while semantic meanings of neurons
in other layers remain unknown. Ideally, we want to be able to completely
understand and modify the information ﬂowing through all neurons in thenetwork. This is a challenging task for many obvious reasons, the ﬁrst onebeing that it is hard practically to deﬁne what all these concepts couldpossibly be. We would need a comprehensive set of human-interpretable
concepts, which is hard to locate, create, or even to parameterize. Even if
we had this complete set, we would probably not want to manually specifyexactly what part of the network would be disentangled with respect toeach of these numerous concepts. For instance, if we tried to disentanglethe same set of concepts in all layers, it would be immediately problem-atic because DNNs are naturally hierarchical: high-level concepts (objects,
weather, etc.) are learned in deeper layers, and the deeper layers leverage
low-level concepts (color, texture, object parts, etc.) learned in lower layers.Clearly, complex concepts like “weather outside” could not be learned wellin earlier layers of the network, so higher-level concepts might be reservedfor deeper layers. Hence, we also need to know the hierarchy of the conceptsto place them in the correct layer. Deﬁning the concept hierarchy manually
is almost impossible, since there could be thousands of concepts. But how
to automate it is also a challenge.
5.3How to choose good concepts to learn for disentanglement? In su-
pervised disentanglement, the concepts are chosen manually. To gain usefulinsights from the model, we need good concepts. But what are good con-cepts in speciﬁc application domains? For example, in medical applications,
past works mostly use clinical attributes that already exist in the datasets.
However, Chen et al .[58] found that attributes in the ISIC dataset might
be missing the key concept used by the model to classify lesion malignancy.Active learning approaches could be incredibly helpful in interfacing withdomain experts to create and reﬁne concepts.
Moreover, it is challenging to learn concepts with continuous values. These
concepts might be important in speciﬁc applications, e.g., age of the patientand size of tumors in medical applications. Current methods either deﬁnea concept by using a set of representative samples or treat the concept as abinary variable, where both are discrete. Therefore, for continuous concepts,a challenge is how to choose good thresholds to transform the continuous
concept into one or multiple binary variables.
5.4How to make the mapping from the disentangled layer to the out-
put layer interpretable? The decision process of current disentangled
neural networks contains two parts, x→cmapping the input xto the
disentangled representation (concepts) c,a n dc→ymapping the disen-
tangled representation cto the output y. [The notations are adopted from
158]. All current methods on neural disentanglement aim at making the
cinterpretable, i.e., making the neurons in the latent space aligned with
human understandable concepts, but how these concepts combine to make