10 C. Rudin et al.
black boxes can be misleading and why explanations do not generally serve their
intended purpose [ 250,173,171]. The most compelling such reasons are:
•Explanations for black boxes are often problematic and misleading, poten-
tially creating misplaced trust in black box models. Such issues with ex-planations have arisen with assessment of fairness and variable importance[258,82] as well as uncertainty bands for variable importance [ 113,97].
There is an overall diﬃculty in troubleshooting the combination of a blackbox and an explanation model on top of it; if the explanation model is
not always correct, it can be diﬃcult to tell whether the black box model
is wrong, or if it is right and the explanation model is wrong. Ultimately,posthoc explanations are wrong (or misleading) too often.One particular type of posthoc explanation, called saliency maps (alsocalled attention maps) have become particularly popular in radiology
and other computer vision domains despite known problems [ 2,53,334].
Saliency maps highlight the pixels of an image that are used for a predic-tion, but do not explain how the pixels are used. As an analogy, considera real estate agent who is pricing a house. A “black box” real estate agentwouldprovidethepricewithnoexplanation.A“saliency”realestateagentwould say that the price is determined from the roof and backyard, but
doesn’t explain how the roof and backyard were used to determine the
price. In contrast, an interpretable agent would explain the calculation indetail, for instance, using “comps” or comparable properties to explainhow the roof and backyard are comparable between properties, and howthese comparisons were used to determine the price. One can see from thisreal estate example how the saliency agent’s explanation is insuﬃcient.
Saliency maps also tend to be unreliable; researchers often report that dif-
ferent saliency methods provide diﬀerent results, making it unclear whichone (if any) actually represents the network’s true attention.
2
•Black boxes are generally unnecessary, given that their accuracy is gener-
ally not better than a well-designed interpretable model. Thus, explana-
tions that seem reasonable can undermine eﬀorts to ﬁnd an interpretable
model of the same level of accuracy as the black box.
•Explanations for complex models hide the fact that complex models are
diﬃcult to use in practice for many diﬀerent reasons. Typographical errorsin input data are a prime example of this issue [as in the use of COMPAS
2To clear possible confusion, techniques such as SHAP and LIME are tools for explaining
black box models, are not needed for inherently interpretable models, and thus do not belongin this survey. These methods determine how much each variable contributed to a prediction.Interpretable models do not need SHAP values because they already explicitly show what
variables they are using and how they are using them. For instance, sparse decision trees
and sparse linear models do not need SHAP values because we know exactly what variablesare being used and how they are used. Interpretable supervised deep neural networks thatuse case-based reasoning (Challenge #4) do not need SHAP values because they explicitlyreveal what part of the observation they are paying attention to, and in addition, how that
information is being used (e.g., what comparison is being made between part of a test image
and part of a training image). Thus, if one creates an interpretable model, one does not needLIME or SHAP whatsoever.