Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 21
importance of features, we should be able to incorporate that through regu-
larization[ 307].Betterinterfacesmightelicitbetterconstraintsfromdomain
experts and incorporate such constraints into the models. Faster optimiza-
tion methods for scoring systems would allow users faster turnaround for
creating these models interactively.
Example : A physician wants to create a scoring system for predicting seizures
in critically ill patients [similarly to 281]. The physician has upwards of 70
clinical variables, some of which are continuous (e.g., patient age). The physi-cian creates dummy variables for age and other continuous features, combinesthem with the variables that are already binarized, runs /lscript
1-regularized logis-
tic regression and rounds the coeﬃcients. However, the model does not look
reasonable, as it uses only one feature, and isn’t very accurate. The physician
thinks that the model should instead depend heavily on age, and have a falsepositive rate below 20% when the true positive rate is above 70% (see Chal-lenge 2.2). The physician downloads a piece of software for developing scoringsystems. The software reveals that a boosted decision tree model is much more
accurate, and that there is a set of scoring systems with approximately the
same accuracy as the boosted tree. Some of these models do not use age andviolate the physician’s other constraint, so these constraints are then added tothe system, which restricts its search. The physician uses a software tool tolook at models provided by the system and manually adjusts the dependenceof the model on age and other important variables, in a way that still main-
tains predictive ability. Ideally, this entire process takes a few hours from start
to ﬁnish (see Challenge 2.1). Finally, the physician takes the resulting modelinto the clinic to perform a validation study on data the model has not beentrained with, and the model is adopted into regular use as a decision aid forphysicians.
3. Generalized additive models
Generalizedadditivemodels(GAMs)wereintroducedtopresentaﬂexibleexten-
sion of generalized linear models (GLMs) [ 217], allowing for arbitrary functions
for modeling the inﬂuence of each feature on a response ([ 122], see also [ 318]).
The set of GAMs includes the set of additive models, which, in turn, includes
the set of linear models, which includes scoring systems (and risk scores). Figure4shows these relationships.
The standard form of a GAM is:
g(E[y]) =β
0+f1(x·1)+...+fp(x·p),
wherex·jindicates the jth feature, g(·) is a link function and the fi’s are
univariate component functions that are possibly nonlinear; common choices are
step functions and splines. If the link function g(·) is the identity, the expression
describes an additive model such as a regression model; if the link functionis the logistic function, then the expression describes a generalized additive