Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 27
Prototype-based techniques. Despite the popularity of nearest-neighbor
techniques, those techniques often require a substantial amount of distance com-putations (e.g., to ﬁnd out the nearest neighbors of a test input), which can be
slow in practice. Also, it is possible that the nearest neighbors may not be par-
ticularly good representatives of a class, so that reasoning about nearest neigh-bors may not be interpretable. Prototype-based techniques are an alternative tonearest-neighbortechniquesthathaveneitherofthesedisadvantages.Prototype-based techniques learn, from the training data, a set of prototypical cases for
comparison. Given a previously unseen test instance, they make a decision by
ﬁnding prototypical cases (instead of training instances from the entire trainingset) that most closely resemble the particular test instance. One of the earliestprototype learning techniques is learning vector quantization (LVQ) [ 159]. In
LVQ, each class is represented by one or more prototypes, and points are as-signed to the nearest prototype. During training, if the training example’s class
agrees with the nearest prototype’s class, then the prototype is moved closer
to the training example; otherwise the prototype is moved further away fromthe training example. In more recent works, prototype learning is also achievedby solving a discrete optimization program, which selects the “best” prototypesfrom a set of training instances according to some training objective. For exam-ple, Bien and Tibshirani [ 33] formulated the prototype learning problem as a
set-cover integer program (an NP-complete problem), which can be solved using
standard approximation algorithms such as relaxation-and-rounding and greedyalgorithms. Kim et al .[145] formulated the prototype learning problem as an
optimization program that minimizes the squared maximum mean discrepancy,which is a submodular optimization problem and can be solved approximatelyusing a greedy algorithm.
Part-based prototypes. One issue that arises with both nearest neighbor
and prototype techniques is the comparison of a wholeobservation to another
wholeobservation.Thismakeslittlesense,forinstance,withimages,wheresome
aspects resemble a known past image, but other aspects resemble a diﬀerent im-age. For example, we consider architecture of buildings: while some architectural
elements of a building may resemble one style, other elements resemble another.
Another example is recipes. A recipe for a cheesecake with strawberry toppingmay call for part of a strawberry pancake recipe according to the typical prepa-ration for a strawberry sauce, while the cheesecake part of the recipe couldfollow a traditional plain cheesecake recipe. In that case, it makes more sense tocompare the strawberry cheesecake recipe to both the pancake recipe and the
plain cheesecake recipe. Thus, some newer case-based reasoning methods have
been comparing partsof observations to partsof other observations, by creating
comparisons on subsets of features. This allows case-based reasoning techniquesboth more ﬂexibility and more interpretability.
Kim et al .[146] formulated a prototype-parts learning problem for structured
(tabular) data using a Bayesian generative framework. They considered the
example (discussed above) of recipes in their experiments. Wu and Tabak [ 319]
used a convex combination of training instances to represent a prototype, wheretheprototypedoesnotnecessarilyneedtobeamemberofthetrainingset.Using