Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 19
function is nonlinear, like the classical logistic loss/summationtext
ilog(1 + exp( −yif(xi))),
MIP solvers cannot be used directly. In that case, it is possible to use an algo-rithm called RiskSLIM [ 293] that uses sophisticated optimization tools: cutting
planes within a branch-and-bound framework, using “callback” functions to a
MIP solver. A major beneﬁt of scoring systems is that they can be used asdecision aids in very high stakes settings; RiskSLIM has been used to create amodel (the 2HELPS2B score) that is used in intensive care units of hospitals tomake treatment decisions about critically ill patients [ 281].
While exact optimization approaches provide optimal solutions, they strug-
gle with larger problems. For instance, to handle nonlinearities in continuouscovariates, these variables are often discretized to form dummy variables bysplitting on all possible values of the covariate (similar to the way continuousvariables are handled for logical model construction as discussed above, e.g.,create dummy variables for age <30, age<31, age<32, etc.). Obviously doing
this can turn a small number of continuous variables into a large number of
categorical variables. One way to reduce the size of the problem is to use onlya subset of thresholds (e.g., age <30, age<35, age<40, etc.), but it is possible
to lose accuracy if not enough thresholds are included. Approximation methodscan be valuable in such cases.
Approximate methods. Several works solveapproximate versions of ( 2.1), includ-
ingworksof[ 277,276,35,34,48].Theseworksgenerallyuseapiecewiselinearor
piecewise constant loss function, and sometimes use the /lscript
1norm for regulariza-
tion as a proxy for the number of terms. This allows for the possibility of solvinglinear programs using a mathematical programming solver, which is generallycomputationally eﬃcient since linear programs can be solved much faster than
mixed-integer programs. The main problems with approximation approaches is
that it is not clear how well the solution of the approximate optimization prob-lem is to the solution of the desired optimization problem, particularly whenuser-deﬁned constraints or preferences are required. Some of these constraintsmay be able to be placed into the mathematical program, but it is still not clear
whether the solution of the optimization problem one solves would actually be
close to the solution of the optimization problem we actually care about.
It is possible to use sampling to try to ﬁnd useful scoring systems, which can
be useful for Bayesian interpretations, though the space of scoring systems canbe quite large and hard to sample [ 251].
Sophisticated rounding methods. Keeping in mind the disadvantages to rounding
discussed above, there are some compelling advantages to sophisticated round-ing approaches, namely that they are easy to program and use in practice.Rounding techniques cannot easily accommodate constraints, but they can beused for problems without constraints, problems where the constraints are weakenough that rounding would not cause us to violate them, or they can be used
within the middle of algorithms like RiskSLIM [ 293] to help ﬁnd optimal solu-
tions faster. There are several variations of sophisticated rounding. Chevaleyreet al.[60] propose randomized rounding, where non-integers are rounded up or