8 C. Rudin et al.
it was computed. If we cannot trust reported numerical performance results,
then interpretability would be a crucial remaining ingredient to assess trust.
In a full data science process, like the one shown in Figure 1, interpretability
plays a key role in determining how to update the other steps of the process for
the next iteration. One interprets the results and tunes the processing of thedata, the loss function, the evaluation metric, or anything else that is relevant,as shown in the ﬁgure. How can one do this without understanding how themodel works? It may be possible, but might be much more diﬃcult. In essence,
the messiness that comes with messy data and complicated black box models
causes lower quality decision-making in practice.
Let’s move on to a case where the problem is instead controlled, so that we
have a static dataset and a ﬁxed evaluation metric.
Static datasets. Most benchmarking of algorithms is done on static datasets,
where the data and evaluation metric are not cleaned or updated as a result of
a run of an algorithm. In other words, these experiments are not done as partof a data science process, they are only designed to compare algorithms in acontrolled experimental environment.
Even with static datasets and ﬁxed evaluation metrics, interpretable models
do not generally lead to a loss in accuracy over black box models. Even for deep
neural networks for computer vision, even on the most challenging of benchmark
datasets, a plethora of machine learning techniques have been designed that do
not sacriﬁce accuracy but gain substantial interpretability [333,53,158,58,12,
216].
Let us consider two extremes of data types: tabular data, where all vari-
ables are real or discrete features, each of which is meaningful (e.g., age, race,
sex, number of past strokes, congestive heart failure), and “raw” data, such as
images, sound ﬁles or text, where each pixel, bit, or word is not useful on itsown. These types of data have diﬀerent properties with respect to both machinelearning performance and interpretability.
For tabular data, most machine learning algorithms tend to perform similarly
in terms of prediction accuracy. This means it is often diﬃcult even to beat
logistic regression, assuming one is willing to perform minor preprocessing suchas creating dummy variables [e.g., see 61]. In these domains, neural networks
generally ﬁnd no advantage. It has been known for a very long time that verysimple models perform surprisingly well for tabular data [ 128]. The fact that
simple models perform well for tabular data could arise from the Rashomon
Eﬀect discussed by Leo Breiman [ 41]. Breiman posits the possibility of a large
Rashomon set, i.e., a multitude of models with approximately the minumumerror rate, for many problems. Semenova et al .[269] show that as long as a large
Rashomonsetexists,itismorelikelythatsomeofthesemodelsareinterpretable.
For raw data, on the other hand, neural networks have an advantage cur-
rently over other approaches [ 164]. In these raw data cases, the deﬁnition of
interpretability changes; for visual data, one may require visual explanations.
In such cases, asdiscussed earlierand inChallenges 4and 5, interpretable neuralnetworks suﬃce, without losing accuracy.