58 C. Rudin et al.
such a model exists (similar to the characterizations of the Rashomon sets
in Challenge 9) would be helpful before trying to develop an algorithm toﬁnd this well-performing model (if it exists).
10.3Can we simplify or interpret the state space? Deep reinforcement
learning often operates on complex data (raw data) or huge, if not continu-ous state spaces. The agent might be required to do a lot of exploration tolearn useful policies in this case. Simplifying the state space might not onlymake the RL system learn more eﬃciently, but might also help humans to
understand the decisions it is making. For example, by applying t-SNE to
the last layer activation data of Mnih et al .’s deep Q-learning model [ 210],
Zahavy [ 329] showed that the network automatically discovers hierarchical
structures. Previously, these structures had not been used to simplify thestate space. Guan et al .[116] improved sample eﬃciency by incorporat-
ing domain knowledge through human feedback and visual explanations.
Zhang et al .[332] improved over batch RL by computing the policy only at
speciﬁc decision points where clinicians treat patients diﬀerently, insteadof at every timestep. This resulted in a signiﬁcantly smaller state spaceand faster planning.
Example: Consider a machine learning practitioner that is working on plan-
ning for assistive robots that help the elderly to perform day-to-day duties. Incases when the robot does some damage during its task execution or chooses aunusual plan to execute, it might be hard to understand the logic behind the
robot’s choices. If the practitioner can check that an interpretable model exists
(Challenge 10.2), optimize for it (Challenge 10.1), and interpret the state space(Challenge 10.3), debugging the robot’s failed behavior and correcting it can bemuch faster than without these techniques. Further, interpretability will help tostrengthen trust between the robot and the human its assisting, and help it togeneralize to new unforeseen cases.
11. Problems that were not in our top 10 but are really important
We covered a lot of ground in the 10 challenges above, but we certainly did not
cover all of the important topics related to interpretable ML. Here are a few
that we left out:
•Can we improve preprocessing to help with both interpretabil-
ity and test accuracy? As we discussed, some interpretable modeling
problems are computationally diﬃcult (or could tend to overﬁt) without
preprocessing. For supervised problems with tabular data, popular meth-ods like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) would generally transformthe data in a way that damages interpretability of the model. This isbecause each transformed feature is a combination of all of the originalfeatures. Perhaps there are other general preprocessing tools that would
preserve predictive power (or improve it), yet retain interpretability.
•Can we convey uncertainty clearly? Uncertainty quantiﬁcation is al-
ways important. Tomsett et al .[288] discuss the importance of uncertainty