12 C. Rudin et al.
default, etc., which are then assembled at the end into a larger model composed
oftheresultsofthemini-models[see 54,whoattemptedthis].Ontheotherhand,
sparsity is necessary for many real applications, particularly in healthcare and
criminal justice where the practitioner needs to memorize the model.
Logical models, which consist of logical statements involving “if-then,” “or,”
and “and” clauses are among the most popular algorithms for interpretablemachine learning, since their statements provide human-understandable reasonsfor each prediction.
When would we use logical models? Logical models are usually an excellent
choice for modeling categorical data with potentially complicated interactionterms (e.g., “IF (female AND high blood pressure AND congenital heart fail-ure), OR (male AND high blood pressure AND either prior stroke OR age >
70) THEN predict Condition 1 = true”). Logical models are also excellent formulticlass problems. Logical models are also known for their robustness to out-
liers and ease of handling missing data. Logical models can be highly nonlinear,
and even classes of sparse nonlinear models can be quite powerful.
Figure2visualizes three logical models: a decision tree, a decision list, and
a decision set. Decision trees are tree-structured predictive models where each
branch node tests a condition and each leaf node makes a prediction. Decision
lists, identical to rule lists or one-sided decision trees, are composed of if-then-
else statements. The rules are tried in order, and the ﬁrst rule that is satisﬁed
makes the prediction. Sometimes rule lists have multiple conditions in eachsplit, whereas decision trees typically do not. A decision set ,a l s ok n o w na sa
“disjunction of conjunctions,” “disjunctive normal form” (DNF), or an “OR ofANDs” is comprised of an unordered collection of rules, where each rule is aconjunction of conditions. A positive prediction is made if at least one of the
rules is satisﬁed. Even though these logical models seem to have very diﬀerent
forms, they are closely related: every decision list is a (one-sided) decision treeand every decision tree can be expressed as an equivalent decision list (by listingeach path to a leaf as a decision rule). The collection of leaves of a decision tree(or a decision list) also forms a decision set.
Let us provide some background on decision trees. Since Morgan and Son-
quist [212] developed the ﬁrst decision tree algorithm, many works have been
proposed to build decision trees and improve their performance. However, learn-ing decision trees with high performance and sparsity is not easy. Full decisiontree optimization is known to be an NP-complete problem [ 174], and heuristic
greedy splitting and pruning procedures have been the major type of approach
since the 1980s to grow decision trees [ 40,239,192,205]. These greedy methods
for building decision trees create trees from the top down and prune them backafterwards.Theydonotgobacktoﬁxabadsplitifonewasmade.Consequently,the trees created from these greedy methods tend to be both less accurate andless interpretable than necessary. That is, greedy induction algorithms are notdesigned to optimize any particular performance metric, leaving a gap between
the performance that a decision tree might obtain and the performance that
the algorithm’s decision tree actually attains, with no way to determine howlarge the gap is (see Figure 3for a case where the 1984 CART algorithm did