Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 7
ically, sparsity, but model creators generally would not equateinterpretability
with sparsity. Sparsity is often one component of interpretability, and a modelthat is suﬃciently sparse but has other desirable properties is more typical.
While there is almost always a tradeoﬀ of accuracy with sparsity (particularly
for extremely small models), there is no evidence of a general tradeoﬀ of ac-curacy with interpretability. Let us consider both (1) development and use ofML models in practice, and (2) experiments with static datasets; in neither casehave interpretable models proven to be less accurate.
Development and use of ML models in practice. A key example of the pitfalls
of black box models when used in practice is the story of COMPAS [ 224,258].
COMPAS is a black box because it is proprietary: no one outside of its design-ers knows its secret formula for predicting criminal recidivism, yet it is usedwidely across the United States and inﬂuences parole, bail, and sentencing de-
cisions that deeply aﬀect people’s lives [ 13]. COMPAS is error-prone because
it could require over 130 variables, and typographical errors in those variablesinﬂuence outcomes [ 317]. COMPAS has been explained incorrectly ,w h e r et h e
news organization ProPublica mistakenly assumed that an important variablein an approximation to COMPAS (namely race) was also important to COM-PAS itself, and used this faulty logic to conclude that COMPAS depends on
race other than through age and criminal history [ 13,258]. While the racial bias
of COMPAS does not seem to be what ProPublica claimed, COMPAS still hasunclear dependence on race . And worst, COMPAS seems to be unnecessarily
complicated as it does not seem to be any more accurate than a very sparse de-
cision tree [ 10,11] involving only a couple of variables. The story of COMPAS
is a key example simultaneously demonstrating many pitfalls of black boxes in
practice. And, it shows an example of when black boxes are unnecessary, but
used anyway.
Other systemic issues arise when using black box models in practice, or when
developing them as part of a data science process, that would cause them to beless accurate than an interpretable model. A full list is beyond the scope of this
survey, but an article that points out many serious issues that arise with black
box models in a particular domain is that of Afnan et al .[4], who discuss in
vitro fertilization (IVF). In modern IVF, black box models that have not beensubjected to randomized controlled trials determine who comes into existence.Afnan et al .[4] point out ethical and practical issues, ranging from the inabil-
ity to perform shared decision-making with patients, to economic consequences
of clinics needing to “buy into” environments that are similar to those where
the black box models are trained so as to avoid distribution shift; this is nec-essary precisely because errors cannot be detected eﬀectively in real-time usingthe black box. They also discuss accountability issues (“Who is accountablewhen the model causes harm?”). Finally, they present a case where a standardperformance metric (namely area under the ROC curve – AUC) has been mis-
construed as representing the value of a model in practice, potentially leading to
overconﬁdence in the performance of a black box model. Speciﬁcally, a reportedAUC was inﬂated by including many “obvious” cases in the sample over which