26 C. Rudin et al.
Nearest neighbor-based techniques. These techniques make a decision
for a previously unseen test instance, by ﬁnding training instances that mostcloselyresembletheparticulartestinstance(i.e.,thetraininginstancesthathave
thesmallest“distance”orthelargest“similarity”measurestothetestinstance).
A classic example of nearest neighbor-based techniques is k-nearest neighbors
(kNN) [98,68]. Traditionally, a kNN classiﬁer is non-parametric and requires no
trainingatall–givenapreviouslyunseentestinstance,a kNNclassiﬁerﬁndsthe
ktraining instances that have the smallest /lscript
2distances to the test instance, and
the class label of the test instance is predicted to be the majority label of those k
training instances. Many variants of the original kNN classiﬁcation scheme have
been developed in the 1970s and 80s [ 89,106,142,30]. Some later papers on
nearest neighbor-based techniques focused on the problem of “adaptive kNN,”
where the goal is to learn a suitable distance metric to quantify the dissimilaritybetween any pair of input instances (instead of using a pre-determined distance
metric such as the Euclidean /lscript
2distance measure), to improve the performance
of nearest neighbor-based techniques. For example, [ 316] proposed a method to
learn a parametrized distance metric (such as the matrix in a Mahalanobis dis-tance measure) for kNN. Their method involves minimizing a loss function on
the training data, such that for every training instance, the distance between thetraininginstanceandits“target”neighbors(ofthesameclass)willbeminimized
while the distance between the training instance and its “imposter” neighbors
(from other classes) will be maximized (until those neighbors are at least 1 dis-tance unit away from the training instance). More recently, there are works thatbegan to focus on “performing kNN in a learned latent space,” where the latent
space is often learned using a deep neural network. For example, Salakhutdinovand Hinton [ 264] proposed to learn a nonlinear transformation, using a deep
neural network that transforms the input space into a feature space where a
kNN classiﬁer will perform well (i.e., deep kNN). Papernot and McDaniel [ 229]
proposed an algorithm for deep kNN classiﬁcation, which uses the k-nearest
neighbors of a test instance from every hidden layer of a trained neural network.Card et al .[46] introduced a deep weighted averaging classiﬁer, which classiﬁes
an input based on its latent-space distances to other training examples.
We remark that the notion of “adaptive kNN” is mathematically the same as
“performing kNNinalearnedlatentspace.”Letusshowwhythatis.Inadaptive
kNN, we would learn a distance metric d(·,·) such that k-nearest neighbors
tends to be an accurate classiﬁer. The distance between points x
1andx2would
bed(x1,x2). For latent space nearest neighbor classiﬁcation, we would learn a
mapping φ:x→φ(x) from our original space to the latent space, and then
compute /lscript2distances in the latent space. That is, /bardblφ(x1)−φ(x2)/bardbl2. Equating
these two perspectives, we have d(x1,x2)=/bardblφ(x1)−φ(x2)/bardbl2. That is, the latent
space mapping acts as a transformation of the original metric so that /lscript2distance
works well for kNN.
As an aside, the problem of matching in observational causal inference also
can use case-based reasoning. Here treatment units are matched to similar con-
trol units to estimate treatment eﬀects. We refer readers to recent work on thistopic for more details [ 310,231].