13
perturbations can be on a feature level by replacing certain
features by zero or random counterfactual instances, picking
one or group of pixels (superpixels) for explanation, blurring,
shifting, or masking operations, etc. As we discussed in
the prior sections, LIME algorithm works on superpixels
of information or features as illustrated in Figure 9. By
iteratively providing input patches, visual explanations of
individual superpixels are generated. SHAP has a similar
method of probing feature correlations by removing features in
a game theoretic framework. Intuitively, we see that methods
trying to understand neuronal activities and the impact of
individual features to a corresponding class output by any
input perturbations mentioned above can be categorized as
a group of method, which we here call perturbation-based
XAI method. The methods described in this section are further
summarized in Table III.
1) DeConvolution nets for Convolution Visualizations:
Zeiler et al. [71] visualized the neural activations of individual
layers of a deep convolutional network by occluding different
segments of the input image and generating visualizations
using a deconvolution network (DeConvNet). DeConvNets are
CNNs designed with ﬁlters and unpooling operations to render
opposite results than a traditional CNN. Hence, instead of
reducing the feature dimensions, a DeConvNet, as illustrated
in Figure 14, is used to create an activation map which maps
back to the input pixel space thereby creating a visualization
of the neural (feature) activity. The individual activation maps
could help understand what and how the internal layers of the
deep model of interest is learning - allowing for a granular
study of DNNs.
Fig. 14. Deconvolution operation is applied using a DeConv layer attached to
the end of a ConvNet. Here the DeConvNet generates an approximate version
of the convolution features thereby providing visual explanations. Figure from
[71].2) Prediction Difference Analysis: A conditional sampling
based multi-variate approached was used by Zintgraf et al. [62]
to generate more targeted explanations on image classiﬁcation
CNNs. By assigning a relevance value to each input features
with respect to the predicted class c, the authors summarize
the positive and negative correlation of individual data features
to a particular model decision. Given an input feature x, its
feature relevance can be estimated by studying the changes in
model output prediction for the inputs with different hidden
features. Hence, if xnidenotes the set of all input features
exceptx, the task is to ﬁnd the difference between p(cjx)
andp(cjxni).
3) Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation (RISE):
The RISE method introduced by Petsiuk et al. [57] perturb
an input image by multiplying it with randomized masks. The
masked images are given as inputs and the saliency maps
corresponding to individual images are captured. Weighted
average of the masks according to the conﬁdent scores is used
to ﬁnd the ﬁnal saliency map with a positive valued heatmap
for individual predictions. Importance maps of the blackbox
prediction is estimated using Monte Carlo sampling. A high-
level architecture is illustrated in Figure 15.
4) Randomization and Feature Testing: The Interpretability
Randomization Test (IRT) and the One-Shot Feature Test
(OSFT) introduced by Burns et al. [55] focuses on discovering
important features by replacing the features with uninformative
counterfactuals. Modeling the feature replacement with a hy-
pothesis testing framework, the authors illustrate an interesting
way to examine contextual importance. Unfortunately, for deep
learning algorithms, removing one or more features from
the input isn’t possible due to strict input dimensions for
a pre-trained deep model. Zero-ing out values or ﬁlling in
counterfactual values might lead to unsatisfactory performance
due to correlation between features.
Fig. 15. The input image given to a deep learning model is perturbed using
various randomized masks. A conﬁdence score is found out for individual
masked inputs. A ﬁnal saliency map is generated using a weighting function
[57].
B. BackPropagation- or Gradient-Based
Perturbation-based methods, as we saw in the previous
section, focuses on variations in the input feature space to
explain individual feature attributions of ftowards the output
classc. Gradient-based explainability methods, in contrast,
utilize the backward pass of information ﬂow in a neural
network to understand neuronal inﬂuence and relevance of the