20
Fig. 20. Illustration from [114] showing adversarial attacks involving small perturbations to input layer of neural network. We see that small perturbations
doesn’t affect the accuracy of predictions. However, feature importance maps are highly affected by the small changes. This illustrates the ﬂaws in current
gradient-based techniques.
sky. As human evaluators, we can make sense of this output
because human experience suggests that a sandbar involve
a beach, hopefully on a sunny day with bright blue clouds.
A stark difference is apparent in Grad-CAM visualizations
where the class output generated a heatmap which is focused
primarily on the plastic chair and sandy beach, without much
emphasis on the clouds. Perturbation-based methods such as
LIME and SHAP generated superpixels which maximized
the class probability. Here, we see that LIME is focusing on
primarily the chairs and the sky, whereas SHAP is focusing on
the beach and the sky. We also note that SHAP values generated
are very low, indicating lesser inﬂuence to the conﬁdence score.
D. Limitations of XAI Visualizations and Future Directions
The discussion above brings some important ﬂaws of XAI
visualizations and interpretability techniques - 1) the inability of
human-attention to deduce XAI explanation maps for decision-
making, and 2) unavailability of a quantitative measure of
completeness and correctness of the explanation map. This
suggests that the further use of visualization techniques for
mission-critical applications must be reconsidered moving
forward. Also, better ways of representing and presenting
explanations should be considered. For example, in [115],
Weerts et al. studied the impact of SHAP explanations in
improving human performance for alert processing tasks.
The authors presented a human-grounded study to evaluate
whether certain decision-making scenarios can be improved
by providing explanations to decisions. Results showed that
additional SHAP explanations to class output probability did
not improve the decision-making of individuals. Authors saw
more interest in ﬁnal class score for making decisions which
could be catastrophic in mission-critical scenarios.
Similarly, in [110], Mohseni et al. presented a human-
grounded evaluation benchmark and evaluated performance
of LIME algorithm by comparing the explanation map gen-
erated by LIME to that of weighted explanation map of 10
human annotations. Results suggested that LIME creates some
attributions irrelevant to human explanations which causeslow explanation precision compared to weighted explanation
map generated by human annotators. This sheds light to
the importance of understanding the mode of explanations
as application-grounded, human-grounded, and functionally-
grounded explanations [102] to improve explanation maps
by meta information generated by humans, adding more
constraints to explanations, or introducing formal deﬁnitions
of explanations to the optimization problem.
Several other ﬂaws of explanation map visualization are
explained by researchers in recent publications. In [114],
Ghorbani et al. showed that small perturbations on the input
instance generate large changes in the output interpretations that
popular XAI methods generate. These adversarial examples,
thus threw off the interpretable saliency maps generated by
popular methods such as DeepLIFT and Integrated Gradients.
This is illustrated in Figure 20. Additionally, in [116], Wang
et al. showed that bias term which is often ignored could have
high correlations towards attributions.
In [117], Kindermans et al. explained that explanations of
networks are easily manipulable by simple transformations.
Authors note that expressiveness of Integrated Gradients
[59] and Deep Taylor Decomposition [61] highly depend on
the reference point, for example a baseline image x0, and
suggest that the reference point should be a hyperparameter
instead of being determined a priori . Authors mentioned that
most gradient-based methods attribute incorrectly to constant
vector transformations and that input invariances should be a
prerequisite for reliable attributions.
In [118], Adebayo et al. suggested that gradient-based
methods are inherently dependent on the model and data gen-
erating process. Authors proposed two randomization tests for
gradient methods namely model parameter randomization test
and data randomization test. Model parameter randomization
test compared the output of saliency method for a trained
model versus the same model with random weights. Data
randomization test applied the same saliency method for an
input instance and the same instance with a set of invariances.
Authors found that Gradients and GradCAM passed the sanity