19
Fig. 19. We evaluate different gradient-based and perturbation-based techniques in this ﬁgure. LIME and SHAP uses segmented superpixels to understand
feature importance, while gradient based saliency maps, Integrated Gradients, LRP, DeepLIFT, and Grad-CAM use backpropagation based feature importance
in a pixel level. Original prediction accuracies of a pre-trained InceptionV3 model on the images in each rows provided are as follows: (a) ‘koala’, 94:5%,
(b) ‘sandbar’, 38:0%, (c) ‘arabian camel’, 17:4%, and (d) ‘leaf beetle’, 95:5%. Each column represents the attribution map generated by individual XAI
methods. Scales to assess Grad-CAM and SHAP values are provided in the lower right section of the image. Gradient visualizations of this ﬁgure are created
using DeepExplain package while visualizations for Grad-CAM, LIME, and SHAP are created by their own individual implementations. The experiments were
carried out in Jetstream cloud [112]. This image is better viewed in color.
IML package [113] is maintained by Christoph Molnar,
author of [89]. The package covers feature importance, par-
tial dependence plots, individual conditional expectation
plots, accumulated local effects, tree surrogates, LIME,
and SHAP. Available at https://github.com/christophM/iml.
DeepExplain package is maintained by Marco Ancona,
author of [60]. The package supports various gradient-
based techniques such as saliency maps, gradientinput,
integrated gradients, DeepLIFT, LRP, etc. and perturbation-
based methods such as occlusion, SHAP, etc. Available
at https://github.com/marcoancona/DeepExplain.
DrWhy by ModelOriented is a package with several
model agnostic and model speciﬁc XAI techniques in-
cluding feature importance, ceteris paribus, partial de-
pendency plots, conditional dependency, etc. Available at
https://github.com/ModelOriented/DrWhy
C. A Case-study on Understanding Explanation Maps
In Figure 19, we illustrate the explanation maps generated
using various gradient- and perturbation-based XAI techniques
for four images from ImageNet [111] dataset to explain the
decisions an InceptionV3 model pre-trained on ImageNet. Here,
each row starts with an original image from ImageNet followed
by explanation map generated by gradient algorithms such as 1)
saliency maps, 2) gradient times input, 3) integrated gradients,
4) LRP, 5) DeepLIFT, and 6) GradCAM, and perturbation-based
techniques such as 1) LIME and 2) SHAP.GradCAM generates a heatmap of values ranging from 0 to
1, where 0 means no inﬂuence and 1 means highest inﬂuence of
individual pixels towards the model output decision. Similarly,
SHAP method follows a scale for SHAP values. However,
SHAP scale ranges from -0.3 to +0.3 indicating that negative
values decrease output class probability and positive values
increase the output class probability for the corresponding input.
Here 0.3 is the largest SHAP value generated for the set of
four images considered. Gradient visualizations of this ﬁgure
are created using DeepExplain package while visualizations
for Grad-CAM, LIME, and SHAP are created by their own
individual implementations.
Original image column of row (a) in Figure 19 indicates
a correct prediction of an image of a Koala with 94:5%
prediction accuracy, row (b) indicates a correct prediction of
a sandbar image with 38:0%accuracy, row (c) indicates an
incorrect prediction of a horse as an arabian camel with 17:4%
accuracy, and row (d) indicates correct prediction of a leaf
beetle with 95:5% percentage accuracy. We then compare the
explanation maps, in different columns, generated by various
XAI techniques as discussed above.
Focusing on saliency maps, gradient times input, and
integrated gradients in Figure 19, we can visually verify the
improvements achieved by integrated gradients over the prior
gradient-based methods. This is apparent in the images with
lower class probabilities. For example, in row (b), we can verify
that the integrated gradients generated high attributions around
the sandy beach, plastic chairs, and a little bit of the blue