4
in a classiﬁcation problem. Now, the model inference can be
described as y=f(;x)where yis the output prediction.
We now deﬁne the key concepts explored in the survey, namely
explainability of deep learning models. Further sections of the
survey explain these deﬁnitions in ﬁner detail.
Deﬁnition 1: Interpretability is a desirable quality or
feature of an algorithm which provides enough expressive
data to understand how the algorithm works.
Here, interpretable domains could include images or text
which are comprehensible by humans. Cambridge Dictionary
deﬁnes: “ If something is interpretable, it is possible to ﬁnd its
meaning or possible to ﬁnd a particular meaning in it ”.
Deﬁnition 2: Interpretation is a simpliﬁed representation
of a complex domain, such as outputs generated by a machine
learning model, to meaningful concepts which are human-
understandable and reasonable.
Output predictions of a simple rule-based model can be
easily interpreted by traversing the rule-set. Similarly a small
decision tree can be easily understood. Or the Deep Convolution
Networks (CNN) model that can identify the parts of the input
image that led to the decision.
Deﬁnition 3: Anexplanation is additional meta information,
generated by an external algorithm or by the machine learning
model itself, to describe the feature importance or relevance
of an input instance towards a particular output classiﬁcation.
For a deep learning model fwith inputxand output
prediction of yof classc, an explanation gcan be generated,
generally as an explanation map E, whereE:Rd!Rd.
Here,gis an object of same shape as the input which describes
the feature importance or relevance of that particular dimension
to the class output. For an image, the explanation map can
be an equally sized pixel map whereas for text, it might be
word-by-word inﬂuence scores.
Deﬁnition 4: For a deep learning model f, if the model
parametersand the model architecture information are known,
the model is considered a white-box .
A white-box model improves model-debugging and promotes
trust. However, knowing the model architecture and parameters
alone won’t make the model explainable.
Deﬁnition 5: A deep learning model fis considered a
black-box if the model parameters and network architectures
are hidden from the end-user.
Typically, deep learning models served on web-based ser-
vices or restricted business platforms are exposed using APIs
which takes an input form the user and provides the model
result as text, visual, or auditory presentation respective to the
expected model output y.
A. Why Is Research on XAI Important?
With the use of AI algorithms in healthcare [46], credit
scoring [47], loan acceptance [48], and more, the need to
explain an ML model result is important for ethical, judicial,
as well as safety reasons. Even though there are different
facets to why XAI is important, our study suggests that the
most important concerns are three-fold: 1) trustability, 2)
transparency, and 3) bias and fairness of AI algorithms. Current
business models include interpretation as a step before serving
Fig. 3. Illustration from [35] showing an adversarial attack where an image
class Panda is deliberately attacked to predict as a Gibbon with high conﬁdence.
Note that the attacked image is visually similar to the original image and
humans are unable to understand any changes.
Fig. 4. Illustration from [49] showing how text in images can fool classiﬁers
into believing that the text is a feature for a particular task.
the ML models on production systems, however are often
limited to small tree-based models. With the use of highly non-
linear deep learning algorithms with millions of parameters in
ML pipelines, XAI techniques must improve all three concerns
mentioned above.
1)Improves Transparency : XAI improves transparency and
fairness by creating a human-understandable justiﬁcation
to the decisions and could ﬁnd and deter adversarial
examples [35] if used properly.
Deﬁnition 6: A deep learning model is considered
transparent if it is expressive enough to be human-
understandable. Here, transparency can be a part of the
algorithm itself or using external means such as model
decomposition or simulations.
Transparency is important to assess the quality of output
predictions and to ward off adversaries. An adversarial
example could hinder accurate decision making capabili-
ties of a classiﬁer by fooling the classiﬁer into believing
that a fake image is infact real. Figure 3 illustrates such
an example where an image of a Panda is predicted
as a Gibbon with high conﬁdence after the original
Panda image was tampered by adding some adversarial
noise. Figure 4 illustrates a classiﬁer learning to classify
based on text data such as source tags or watermarks in
advertisements in images. As we rely more on autonomous
algorithms to aid our daily lives, quality of AI algorithms
to mitigate attacks [34] and provide transparency in terms
of model understanding, textual, or visual reports should
be of prime importance.
2)Improves Trust : As a social animal, our social lives,
decisions, and judgements are primarily based on the
knowledge and available explanations to situations and