6
TABLE II
TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation Deﬁnition
ACE Automatic Concept-based Explanations
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
API Application Programming Interface
BAM Benchmarking Attribution Methods
BRL Bayesian Rule List
CaCE Causal Concept Effect
CAM Class Activation Mapping
CA V Concept Activation Vectors
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
DeConvNet Deconvolution Neural Network
DL Deep Learning
DNN Deep Neural Network
EG Expected Gradients
FMRI Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
GAM Generalized Additive Models
IG Integrated Gradients
IRT Interpretability Randomization Test
LIME Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations
LRP Layer-wise Relevance BackPropagation
ML Machine Learning
NAM Neural Additive Models
OSFT One-Shot Feature Test
ReLU Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
RISE Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
SCS System Causability Scale
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanations
SPDA Sparse Penalized Discriminant Analysis
SpRAy Spectral Relevance Analysis
SR Salient Relevance
TCA V Testing with Concept Activation Vectors
t-SNE t-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
V AE Variational Auto Encoders
XAI Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
to feature correlations for many subspaces in the data
distribution to understand fairness in AI. By tracing back
the output prediction discriminations back to the input
using XAI techniques, we can understand the subset of
features correlated to particular class-wise decisions [82].
As we discussed previously, the use of XAI could provide a
software-engineering design on AI with a continuously evolving
model based on prior parameters, explanations, issues, and
improvements to overall design thereby reducing human bias.
However, choosing the right methods for explanation should be
done with care, while considering to bake-in interpretability to
machine learning models [40]. We now proceed with detailed
discussions as per the taxonomies.
IV. S COPE OF EXPLANATION
A. Local Explanations
Consider a scenario where a doctor has to make a decision
based on the results of a classiﬁer output. The doctor needs
careful understanding of the model predictions and concrete
answers to the ‘Why this decision?’ question which requires
an explanation of the local data point under scrutiny. This
Fig. 7. High-level illustration of locally explainable models. Generally, a
single input instance is used for explanations.
level of explaining individual decisions made by a classiﬁer
is categorized under locally explainable algorithms. Generally,
locally explainable methods focus on a single input data
instance to generate explanations by utilizing the different data
features. Here, we are interested in generating gfor explaining
the decisions made by ffor a single input instance x. A
high-level diagram is illustrated in Figure 7.
Founding research in local explanations used heatmaps, rule-
based methods, Bayesian techniques, and feature importance
matrices to understand feature correlations and importance
towards output predictions. The output explanations were
always positive real-valued matrices or vectors. Newer research
in local explainable models improves the old methods by
attribution maps, graph-based, and game-theory based models
in which we get a feature-wise score of positive and negative
correlations towards an output classiﬁcation. Here, a positive
attribution value means that the particular feature improves
output class probability and a negative value means the feature
decreased the output class probability. Mathematical equations
described in this section and the rest of the survey follows
notations tabulated in Table I.
1) Activation Maximization: Interpreting a layer-wise feature
importance of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model
is simpler in the ﬁrst layer which generally learns the high-
level textures and edges. However, as we move deeper into
the CNN, importance of speciﬁc layers towards a particular
prediction is hard to summarize and visualize since parameters
of subsequent layers are inﬂuenced by that of the previous
layers. Hence, preliminary research tried to understand the
neuronal activations to input instances as well as individual
ﬁlters of speciﬁc layers.
In 2010, a locally explainable method called Activation
Maximization was introduced by Erhan et al. [74], with focus
on input patterns which maximize a given hidden unit activation.
Here, the authors set an optimization problem of maximizing
the activation of a unit. If is the parameters of the model,
zi;j(;x)is the activation of a particular unit ifrom layer
j. By assuming ﬁxed parameters , an activation map can be
found as:
x= arg max
x s:t:kxk=zij(;x) (1)
After the optimization converges, we could either ﬁnd an
average of all local minima’s to ﬁnd an explanation map g
or pick the one which maximizes the activations. Here, the