14
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF PUBLISHED RESEARCH IN PERTURBATION -BASED METHODS
Method Name Interpretation Perspective Applied Network Comments and Discussions
DeConv Nets by Zeiler et
al. [71]Neural activation of individual layers by occlud-
ing input instance and visualizing using DeConv
NetsAlexNet Authors trained an AlexNet model on Ima-
geNet dataset and layer-wise ﬁlter visualiza-
tions were carried out, studied feature gener-
alization, and brought important insights in
dataset bias and issues with small training
samples.
LIME by Ribeiro et al.
[65]Iterative perturbation to input data instance by
ﬁnding superpixels- Authors generated locally faithful explana-
tions using input perturbations around a point
of interest. A human/user study was carried
out to assess the impact of using LIME as
an explanation and found that explanations
can improve a untrustworthy classiﬁer.
SHAP by Lundberg et al.
[64]Probing feature correlations by removing features
in a game theoretic framework- SHAP produced consistently better results
than LIME. A user study indicated that
SHAP explanations are consistent with hu-
man explanations. However, as we will see
in the evaluation section, some recent studies
argue that SHAP values, albeit good in
generating explanations, does not improve
ﬁnal decision making.
Prediction Difference
Analysis by Zintgraf et al.
[62]By studyingfremoving individual features from
x, ﬁnd the positive and negative correlation of
individual features towards the output.AlexNet,
GoogLeNet,
VGGOne of the ﬁrst works to look at positive and
negative correlation of individual features
towards the output by ﬁnding a relevance
value to each input feature. Trained various
models on ImageNet dataset to understand
the support for the output classes from
various layers of deep nets.
Randomized Input Sam-
pling for Explanation by
Petsiuk et al. [57]Study saliency maps by randomized masking of
inputsResNet50,
VGG16-
Randomization and Fea-
ture Testing by Burns et
al. [55]Counterfactual replacements of features to study
feature importanceInception V3,
BERT-
inputxtowards the output. As we will see in the following
subsections, majority of gradient-based methods focuses on
either visualization of activations of individual neurons with
high inﬂuence or overall feature attributions reshaped to the
input dimensions. A natural advantage of gradient-based XAI
methods are the generation of human understandable visual
explanations.
1) Saliency Maps: As mentioned in sub-section IV-A 2,
Simonyan et al. [73] introduced a gradient based method to
generate saliency maps for convolutional nets. DeConvNet work
by Zeiler et al. [71] mentioned previously as a perturbation
method uses backpropagation for activation visualizations.
DeConvNet work was impressive due to relative importance
given to gradient value during backprop. With Rectiﬁed Linear
Unit (ReLU) activation, a backprop on traditional CNNs
would result in zero values for negative gradients. However,
in DeConvNets, the gradient value is not clipped at zero. This
allowed for accurate visualizations. Guided backpropagation
methods [67], [96] are also another class of gradient based
explanation which improved upon [73].
2) Gradient class activation mapping (CAM): Most saliency
methods use global average pooling layer for all pooling
operations instead of maxpooling. Zhou et al. [66] modiﬁed
global average pooling function with class activation mapping
(CAM) to localize class-speciﬁc image regions on an input
image with a single forward-pass. Grad-CAM [63] and Grad-
CAM++ [56] improved the CAM operation for deeper CNNs
and better visualizations.GradCAM is a class-discriminative attribution technique for
localizing the neuronal activity of a CNN network. It allows
class-speciﬁc query of an input image and also counterfactual
explanations which highlights regions in the image which
negatively contribute to a particular model output. GradCAM is
successfully applied to explain classiﬁers in image classiﬁcation,
image segmentation, visual question answering (VQA), etc.
Figure 16 illustrates a segmentation method utilizing GradCAM
to improve the segmentation algorithm. Here, we see another
example of using XAI explanations to improve performance
of deep neural networks.
3) Salient Relevance (SR) Maps: Li et al. [54] proposed
Salient Relevance (SR) map which is a context aware salience
map based on the LRP of input image. Hence, the ﬁrst step is
to ﬁnd LRP relevance map for input image of interest with the
same input dimensions. A context aware salience relevance map
algorithm takes the LRP relevance maps and ﬁnds a saliency
value for individual pixels. Here, a pixel is salient if a group
of neighboring pixels are distinct and different from other
pixel patches in the same and multiple scales. This is done to
differentiate between background and foreground layers of the
image.
To aid visualization, a canny-edge based detector is superim-
posed with the SR map to provide context to the explanation.
We place SR in gradient based methods due to the use of
LRP. Other relevance propagation methods based on Taylor
decomposition [61] are also explored in literature, which are