1
Opportunities and Challenges in Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): A Survey
Arun Das, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Paul Rad, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Nowadays, deep neural networks are widely used in
mission critical systems such as healthcare, self-driving vehicles,
and military which have direct impact on human lives. However,
the black-box nature of deep neural networks challenges its use in
mission critical applications, raising ethical and judicial concerns
inducing lack of trust. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
is a ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) that promotes a set of
tools, techniques, and algorithms that can generate high-quality
interpretable, intuitive, human-understandable explanations of
AI decisions. In addition to providing a holistic view of the
current XAI landscape in deep learning, this paper provides
mathematical summaries of seminal work. We start by proposing
a taxonomy and categorizing the XAI techniques based on
their scope of explanations, methodology behind the algorithms,
and explanation level or usage which helps build trustworthy,
interpretable, and self-explanatory deep learning models. We
then describe the main principles used in XAI research and
present the historical timeline for landmark studies in XAI
from 2007 to 2020. After explaining each category of algorithms
and approaches in detail, we then evaluate the explanation
maps generated by eight XAI algorithms on image data, discuss
the limitations of this approach, and provide potential future
directions to improve XAI evaluation.
Index Terms —explainable ai, xai, interpretable deep learning,
machine learning, computer vision, neural network.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) based algorithms, especially using
deep neural networks, are transforming the way we approach
real-world tasks done by humans. Recent years have seen
a surge in the use of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms
in automating various facets of science, business, and social
workﬂow. The surge is partly due to the uptick of research in a
ﬁeld of ML, called Deep Learning (DL), where thousands (even
billions) of neuronal parameters are trained to generalize on
carrying out a particular task. Successful use of DL algorithms
in healthcare [1]–[3], ophthalmology [4]–[6], developmental
disorders [7]–[9], in autonomous robots and vehicles [10]–[12],
in image processing classiﬁcation and detection [13], [14], in
speech and audio processing [15], [16], cyber-security [17],
[18], and many more indicate the reach of DL algorithms in
our daily lives. Easier access to high-performance compute
nodes using cloud computing ecosystems, high-throughput AI
accelerators to enhance performance, and access to big-data
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
A. Das is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78249 USA. e-mail:
arun.das@utsa.edu.
P. Rad is with the Department of Information Systems and Cyber Security,
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78249 USA. e-mail:
peyman.najaﬁrad@utsa.edu.scale datasets and storage enables deep learning providers to
research, test, and operate ML algorithms at scale in small edge
devices [19], smartphones [20], and AI-based web-services
using Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) for wider
exposure to any applications.
The large number of parameters in Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) make them complex to understand and undeniably
harder to interpret. Regardless of the cross-validation accuracy
or other evaluation parameters which might indicate a good
learning performance, deep learning (DL) models could inher-
ently learn or fail to learn representations from the data which
a human might consider important. Explaining the decisions
made by DNNs require knowledge of the internal operations
of DNNs, missing with non-AI-experts and end-users who are
more focused on getting accurate solution. Hence, often the
ability to interpret AI decisions are deemed secondary in the
race to achieve state-of-the-art results or crossing human-level
accuracy.
Recent interest in XAI, even from governments especially
with the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
[21] regulation, shows the important realization of the ethics
[22]–[26], trust [27]–[29], bias [30]–[33] of AI, as well as the
impact of adversarial examples [34]–[37] in fooling classiﬁer
decisions. In [38], Miller et al. describes that curiosity is
one of the primary reason why people ask for explanations
to speciﬁc decisions. Another reason might be to facilitate
better learning - to reiterate model design and generate better
results. Each explanation should be consistent across similar
data points and generate stable or similar explanation on the
same data point over time [39]. Explanations should make
the AI algorithm expressive to improve human understanding,
conﬁdence in decision making, and promote impartial and just
decisions. Thus, in order to maintain transparency, trust, and
fairness in the ML decision-making process, an explanation or
an interpretable solution is required for ML systems.
An explanation is a way to verify the output decision made
by an AI agent or algorithm. For a cancer detection model
using microscopic images, an explanation might mean a map
of input pixels which contribute to the model output. For a
speech recognition model, an explanation might be the power
spectrum information during a speciﬁc time which contributed
more towards the current output decision. Explanations can
be also based on the parameters or activations of the trained
models explained either by using surrogates such as decision
trees or by using gradients or other methods. In the context
of reinforcement learning algorithms, an explanation might be
given as to why an agent made a certain decision over another.
However, the deﬁnitions of interpretable and explainable AI
are often generic and might be misleading [40] and shouldarXiv:2006.11371v2  [cs.CV]  23 Jun 2020