2
XAI
Scope : Where is the XAI
method focusing on?
Is it on a local instance
or trying to understand
the model as a whole?Methodology : What is the
algorithmic approach?
Is it focused on the
input data instance or
the model parameters?Usage : How is the XAI
method developed? Is it
integrated to the model
or can be applied to
any model in general?
Local : Mainly focus on
explanation of individual
data instances. Generates
one explanation map gper
datax2X.
Global : Tries to understand
the model as a whole.
Generally takes a group of
data instances to generate
one or more explanation
maps.BackProb : Core algorithmic
logic is dependent on
gradients that are back-
propagated from the output
prediction layer back to the
input layer.
Perturbation : Core algorith-
mic logic is dependent on
random or carefully chosen
changes to features in the
input data instance.Intrinsic : Explainability is
baked into the neural net-
work architecture itself and
is generally not transferrable
to other architectures.
Post-Hoc : XAI algorithm is
not dependent on the model
architecture and can be
applied to already trained
neural networks.
Fig. 1. General categorization of the survey in terms of scope, methodology, and usage.
integrate some form of reasoning [41].
A collection of AI models, such as decision-trees and rule-
based models, is inherently interpretable. However, there are
affected by the drawbacks of Interpretability-versus-Accuracy
trade-off compared to the Deep Learning models. This pa-
per discusses the different approaches and perspectives of
researchers to address the problem of the explainability of deep
learning algorithms. Methods can be used effectively if the
model parameters and architecture are already known. However,
modern API-based AI services produce more challenges
because of the relative ‘black-box’ [42] nature of the problem
where the end-user has information only on the input provided
to the deep learning model and not the model itself.
In this survey, we present a comprehensive overview of
explainable and interpretable algorithms with a timeline of
important events and research publications into three well-
deﬁned taxonomies as illustrated in Figure 1. Unlike many other
surveys which only categorize and summarize the published
research in a high-level, we provide additional mathematical
overviews and algorithms of seminal works in the ﬁeld of
XAI. The algorithms presented in the survey are clustered into
three well-deﬁned categories which are described in detail in
the following sections. Various evaluation techniques for XAI
presented in literature are also discussed along with discussion
on the limitations and future directions of these methods.
Our contributions can be summarized as the following:
1)In order to systematically analyze explainable and inter-
pretable algorithms in deep learning, we taxonomize XAI
to three well-deﬁned categories to improve clarity and
accessibility of the approaches.
2)We examine, summarize and classify the core mathemati-
cal model and algorithms of recent XAI research on the
proposed taxonomy and discuss the timeline for seminal
work.
3)We generate and compare the explanation maps for
eight different XAI algorithms, outline the limitations
of this approach, and discuss potential future directions to
improve trust, transparency, and bias and fairness usingdeep neural network explanations.
Our survey is based on published research, from the year
2007 to 2020, from various search sources including Google
Scholar, ACM Digital Library, IEEEXplore, ScienceDirect,
Spinger, and preprints from arXiv. Keywords such as explain-
able artiﬁcial intelligence ,XAI,explainable machine learning ,
explainable deep learning ,interpretable machine learning were
used as search parameters.
II. T AXONOMIES AND ORGANIZATION
Prior published survey’s on general explainability have
classiﬁed XAI techniques based on scope and usage [43].
Key differences of this survey are classiﬁcation based on
methodology behind the XAI algorithms for deep learning,
focus on mathematical summaries of the seminal papers, and
evaluation strategies for XAI algorithms. We also mention
popular open-source software implementations of various algo-
rithms described in this survey. We summarize the taxonomies
discussed in the survey in this section based on the illustration
provided in Figure 1:
Scope : Scope of explanations can be either local or
global . Some methods can be extended to both. Locally
explainable methods are designed to express, in general,
the individual feature attributions of a single instance of
input dataxfrom the data population X. For example,
given a text document and a model to understand the
sentiment of text, a locally explainable model might
generate attribution scores for individual words in the
text. Globally explainable models provide insight into
the decision of the model as a whole - leading to an
understanding about attributions for an array of input data.
Local and global scope of explanations are described in
detail in Section IV.
Methodology : Core algorithmic concept behind the ex-
plainable model can generally be categorized based on the
methodology of implementation. In general, both local and
global explainable algorithms can be categorized as either