8
Fig. 9. Local explanations of an image classiﬁcation prediction described using LIME [65]. Here, top three classes are ”electric guitar” (p= 0:32), ”acoustic
guitar” (p= 0:24) and ”labrador” (p= 0:21). By selecting a group of ‘superpixels’ from the input image, the classiﬁer provides visual explanations to
the top predicted labels.
Considerg2G, the explanation as a model from a class
of potentially interpretable models G. Here,gcan be decision
trees, linear models, or other models of varying interpretability.
Let explanation complexity be measured by 
(g). Ifx(z)is
a proximity measure between two instances xandzaroundx,
andL(f;g;x)represents faithfulness of gin approximating
fin locality deﬁned by x, then, explanation for the input
data samplexis given by the LIME equation:
(x) = arg min
g2GL(f;g;x) + 
(g) (7)
Now, in Equation 7, the goal of LIME optimization is
to minimize the locality-aware loss L(f;g;x)in a model
agnostic way. Example visualization of LIME algorithm on a
single instance is illustrated in Figure 9. Algorithm 1 shows
the steps to explain the model for a single input sample and
the overall procedure of LIME. Here, for the input instance
we permute data by ﬁnding a superpixel of information (‘fake’
data). Then, we calculate distance (similarity score) between
permutations and original observations. Now, we know how
different the class scores are for the original input and the new
‘fake’ data.
We can then make predictions on new ‘fake’ data using the
complex model f. This depends on the amount of superpixels
you choose from the original data. The most descriptive feature
can be picked which improved prediction on the permuted
data. If we ﬁt a simple model, often times a locally weighted
regression model, to the permuted data with mfeatures and
similarity scores as weights, we can use the feature weights,
or coefﬁcients, from the simple model to make explanations
for the local behavior of the complex model. Recent years
have seen many research improving and extending the LIME
algorithm to a variety of new tasks. We summarize a few of
them below:
In [84], Mishra et al. extended LIME algorithm to music
content analysis by temporal segmentation, and frequency
and time-frequency segmentation of input mel-spectogram.
Their approach was called Sound-LIME (SLIME) and was
applied to explain the predictions of a deep vocal detector.
In [85], Tomi Peltola described a KullbackLeibler diver-
gence based LIME called KL-LIME to explain Bayesian
predictive models. Similar to LIME, the explanations aregenerated using an interpretable model, whose parameters
are found by minimizing the KL-divergence from the
predictive model. Thus, local interpretable explanations
are generated by projecting information from the predic-
tive distribution to a simpler interpretable probabilistic
explanation model.
In [86], Rehman et al. used agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering (HC) and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algo-
rithms to replace the random perturbation of the LIME
algorithm. Here, authors use the HC method to group
training data together as clusters and the KNN is used to
ﬁnd closest neighbors to a test instance. Once the KNN
picks a cluster, that cluster is passed as the input data
perturbation instead of a random perturbation as in LIME
algorithm. Authors report that their approach generates
model explanations which are more stable than traditional
LIME algorithm.
In [87], Bramhall et al. adjusted the linear relations
of LIME to consider non-linear relationships using a
quadratic approximation framework called Quadratic-
LIME (QLIME). They achieve this by considering the
linear approximations as tangentials steps within a com-
plex function. Results on a global stafﬁng company dataset
suggests that the mean square loss (MSE) of LIME’s linear
relationship at local level improves while using QLIME.
In [88], Shi et al. introduced a replacement method to pick
superpixels of information for image data using Modiﬁed
Perturbed Sampling operation for LIME (MPS-LIME). Au-
thors converted the traditional superpixel picking operation
into a clique set construction problem by converting the
superpixels to an undirected graph. The clique operation
improves the runtime due to a considerable reduction
in the number of perturbed samples in the MPS-LIME
method. Authors compared their method with LIME
using Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Coefﬁcient of
determination R2and reported better results in terms of
understandability, ﬁdelity, and efﬁciency.
5) SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP): A game the-
oretically optimal solution using Shapley values for model
explainability was proposed by Lundberg et al. [64]. SHAP
explains predictions of an input xby computing individual
feature contributions towards that output prediction. By formu-