3
backpropagation-based orperturbation-based methods. In
backpropagation-based methods, the explainable algorithm
does one or more forward pass through the neural network
and generates attributions during the backpropagation
stage utilizing partial derivatives of the activations. Exam-
ples include saliency maps, saliency relevance maps, and
class activation maps.
Perturbation-based explainable algorithms focus on per-
turbing the feature set of a given input instance by either
using occlusion, partially substituting features using ﬁlling
operations or generative algorithms, masking, conditional
sampling, etc. Here, generally, only forward pass is enough
to generate the attribution representations without the
need for backpropagating gradients. These methodology
differences are described in Section V.
Usage : A well developed explainable method with a
speciﬁc scope and methodology can be either embedded to
the neural network model itself or applied as an external
algorithm for explanation. Any explainable algorithm
which is dependent on the model architecture fall into the
model-intrinsic category. Most model-intrinsic algorithms
are model-speciﬁc such that any change in the architecture
will need signiﬁcant changes in the method itself or minor
changes of hyperparameters of the explainable algorithm.
Generally, signiﬁcant research interest is seen in devel-
oping model-agnostic post-hoc explanations, where the
predictions of an already existing well-performing neural
network model can be explained using ad-hoc explainable
methods. Post-hoc methods are also widely applied in
variety of input modalities such as images, text, tabular
data, etc. These differences in the ’usage’ of explainability
methods are described in Section VI.
In Section VII, we discuss some of the evaluation strategies
used to qualitatively or quantitatively evaluate the performance
of XAI algorithms discussed in this survey. We present a
list of desirable constraints applicable to XAI algorithms to
improve its real-world performance as well as expressiveness
in terms of transparency, trust, and bias understanding. These
desirable qualities can be used as a guide to generate novel XAI
algorithms which is favorable as well as expressive. Our study
suggests that the evaluation methods are still immature and have
an enormous potential for further research. We also provide
a list of popular software packages that are open-sourced in
GitHub platform. We chose the packages with considerable user
support and implemented algorithms. All software platforms
supports explaining either Scikit-Learn, Tensorﬂow, or PyTorch
machine learning models. After describing the evaluation
methods and software packages, we conclude our survey in
Section VIII.
In our survey, all mathematical equations and algorithms
described are based on a set of notations as described in Table
I. The mathematical equations described in the survey might
be different from their respective research publications as we
have used similar notations to describe the same mathematical
idea throughout the survey. This is done to aid the readers
and have a common repository of notations. Also, a timeline
of seminal research in the ﬁeld is illustrated in Figure 6. TheTABLE I
TABLE OF NOTATIONS
Notation Description
x Single instance of input data from a population
X
xni Set of all input features except ith feature
y Class label of input xfrom a population Y
y Predicted label for input x
xiith feature in input instance x
x(i)Single instance from Xat locationi
y(i)Single instance from Yat locationi
y(i)Predicted label for input x(i)
f(:) Neural network model
 Parameters of the neural network
G Explanation function
g Explanation of a model f
zi;j(;x) Activation output of node or layer jfor feature
i
zj Activation output summary of node or layer j
for all features
xActivation map of input x
x0Binary activation map of input x
Sc Class score function
Z0Coalition vector for SHAP
M Maximum coalition size
j2R Feature attribution for feature j
R(zj) Relevance of activation zj
I Input image
timeline provides information such as the name of the XAI
method, name of ﬁrst author, and year of publication.
III. D EFINITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES
Various prior publications debate the nuances in deﬁning
Explainability and Interpretability of neural networks [44],
[45]. We support the general concept of explainable AI as a
suite of techniques and algorithms designed to improve the
trustworthiness and transparency of AI systems. Explanations
are described as extra metadata information from the AI model
that offers insight into a speciﬁc AI decision or the internal
functionality of the AI model as a whole. Various Explainability
approaches applied to Deep Neural Networks are presented
in this literature survey. Figure 2 illustrates one such deep
learning model which takes one input and generates one output
prediction. Goal of explainable algorithms applied to deep
neural networks are towards explaining these predictions using
various methods summarized in this survey.
Fig. 2. High-level illustration of deep learning model f. Generally, a single
input instancexgenerates outputs y. No other metadata or explanations are
generated other than the output classiﬁcation. Most model inference scenarios
involve this method where model fis considered as a blob of information
which takes an input xand generates an output y
Generally, for an input x2Rd, a deep learning model
functionf()describesf:Rd!RC, whereCis the
number of output classes and the parameters of the model