17
3) Sparse LDA and Discriminant Analysis: A Bayesian
non-parametric model, Graph-Sparse LDA, was introduced in
[101] to ﬁnd interpretable, predictive topic summaries to textual
categories on datasets with hierarchical labeling. Grosenick et al.
[75] introduced a method called Sparse Penalized Discriminant
Analysis (SPDA) to improve the spatio-temporal interpretability
and classiﬁcation accuracy of learning algorithms on Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (FMRI) data.
As we see in published research, there are several restrictions
to use model intrinsic architectures as it requires careful algo-
rithm development and ﬁne-tuning to the problem setting. The
difﬁculty in using concepts from model intrinsic architectures
and apply them in existing high-accuracy models to improve
interpretability is a disadvantage of model-intrinsic methods.
However, as long as a reasonable performance limit is set,
model intrinsic architectures for XAI could help accelerate
inherently interpretable models for future AI research.
B. Post-Hoc
Explaining pre-trained classiﬁer decisions require algorithms
to look at AI models as black or white boxes. A black box
means the XAI algorithm doesn’t know the internal operations
and model architectures. In white box XAI, algorithms have
access to the model architecture and layer structures. Post-
hoc explanation methodology is extremely useful as existing
accurate models can beneﬁt from added interpretability. Most
post-hoc XAI algorithms are hence model-agnostic such that
the XAI algorithm will work on any network architectures as
illustrated in Figure 18. This is one of the main advantages
of post-hoc explainable algorithms. For example, an already
trained well established neural network decision can be
explained without sacriﬁcing the accuracy of the trained model.
Deconvolution network [71] could be used to generate post-
hoc explanations of layer-wise activations. Saliency maps [73]
and most attribution based methods [59] are applied considering
the network as a white or black box. LRP technique [69]
discussed above is done after training the model completely.
Shapley sampling methods [64] are also post-hoc and model
agnostic. Activation maximization technique [74] is applicable
to any network in which we can ﬁnd gradients values to
optimize activations.
Fig. 18. High-level illustration of post-hoc model explainability algorithms.
Here, the explainability algorithm is applied on fsuch thatfis made
explainable externally.VII. E VALUATION METHODOLOGIES , ISSUES ,AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
So far, we focused on XAI algorithms and methods catego-
rized under scope, methodology, and usage. The seminar works
discussed in the survey is tabulated in Table V. A fundamental
challenge in XAI research is to evaluate the several proposed
algorithms on real-world settings. Our survey on evaluation
techniques suggested that the ﬁeld is still immature with
primary focus on a human-in-the-loop evaluations. Quantitative
general evaluation schemes are yet to be explored. However, we
summarize here some of the methods which improve human
understandability of explainability method results based on
[38], [102], [103]. In general, each explanation should follow
the below constraints to be usable by humans in a real-world
setting:
1)Identity or Invariance: Identical data instances must
produce identical attributions or explanations.
2)Stability: Data instances belonging to the same class c
must generate comparable explanations g.
3)Consistency: Data instances with change in all but one
feature must generate explanations which magniﬁes the
change.
4)Separability: Data instances from different populations
must have dissimilar explanations.
5)Similarity: Data instances, regardless of class differences,
closer to each other, should generate similar explanations.
6)Implementation Constraints: Time and compute require-
ment of the explainable algorithm should be minimal.
7)Bias Detection: Inherent bias in data instances should be
detectable from the testing set. Similarity and separability
measures help achieve this.
A. Evaluation Schemes
Several evaluation schemes have been suggested by the
research community in the recent years. We present here some
of the evaluation techniques that are actively gaining traction
from the research community:
System Causability Scale (SCS): As the explainability
methods are applied to human-facing AI systems which
does automated analysis of data, evaluation of human-
AI interfaces as a whole is also important. A System
Causability Scale (SCS) was introduced in [104] to
understand the requirements for explanations of a user-
facing human-AI machine-interface, which are often
domain speciﬁc. Authors described a medical scenario
where the SCS tool was applied to Framingham Risk
Tool (FRT) to understand the inﬂuence and importance
of speciﬁc characteristics of the human-AI interface.
Benchmarking Attribution Methods (BAM): In a preprint
publication, [105] introduced a framework called Bench-
marking Attribution Methods (BAM) to evaluate the
correctness of feature attributions and their relative impor-
tance. A BAM dataset and several models were introduced.
Here, the BAM dataset is generated by copying pixel
groups, called Common Features (CF), representing object
categories from MSCOCO dataset [106] and pasting them
to MiniPlaces dataset [107]. The hypothesis is that, if