9
lating the data features as players in a coalition game, Shapley
values can be computed to learn to distribute the payout fairly.
In SHAP method, a data feature can be individual categories
in tabular data or superpixel groups in images similar to LIME.
SHAP then deduce the problem as a set of linear function of
functions where the explanation is a linear function of features
[89]. If we consider gas the explanation model of an ML model
f,z02f0;1gMas the coalition vector, Mthe maximum
coalition size, and j2Rthe feature attribution for feature j,
g(z0)is the sum of bias and individual feature contributions
such that:
g(z0) =0+MX
j=1jz0
j(8)
Lundberg et al. [64] further describes several variations
to the baseline SHAP method such as KernelSHAP which
reduces evaluations required for large inputs on any ML model,
LinearSHAP which estimates SHAP values from a linear
model’s weight coefﬁcients given independent input features,
Low-Order SHAP which is efﬁcient for small maximum
coalition size M, and DeepSHAP which adapts DeepLIFT
method [59] to leverage the compositional nature of deep
neural networks to improve attributions. Since KernelSHAP
is applicable to all machine learning algorithms, we describe
it in Algorithm 2. The general idea of KernelSHAP is to
carry out an additive feature attribution method by randomly
sampling coalitions by removing features from the input data
and linearizing the model inﬂuence using SHAP kernels.
SHAP was also explored widely by the research community,
was applied directly, and improved in many aspects. Use of
SHAP in the medical domain to explain clinical decision-
making and some of the recent works which have signiﬁcant
merits are summarized here:
In [90], Antwarg et al. extended SHAP method to explain
autoencoders used to detect anomalies. Authors classify
anomalies using the autoencoder by comparing the actual
data instance with the reconstructed output. Since the
ﬁnal output is a reconstruction, authors suggests that the
explanations should be based on the reconstruction error.
SHAP values are found for top performing features and
were divided into those contributing to and offsetting
anomalies.
In [91], Sundararajan et al. express various disadvantages
of SHAP method such as generating counterintuitive expla-
nations for cases where certain features are not important.
This ‘uniqueness’ property of attribution method is im-
proved using Baseline Shapley (BShap) method. Authors
Algorithm 2 KernelSHAP Algorithm for Local Explanations
Input: classiﬁerf, input sample x
Output: explainable coefﬁcients from the linear model
1:zk SampleByRemovingFeature (x)
2:zk hx(zk).hxis a feature transformation to reshape to x
3:yk f(zk)
4:Wx SHAP (f;zk;yk)
5:LinearModel( Wx).fit()
6:Return LinearModel.coefficients()further extend the method using Integrated Gradients to
the continuous domain.
In [92], Aas et al. explored the dependence between
SHAP values by extending KernelSHAP method to handle
dependent features. Authors also presented a method to
cluster Shapley values corresponding to dependent features.
A thorough comparison of the KernelSHAP method was
carried out with four proposed methods to replace the
conditional distributions of KernelSHAP method using
empirical approach and either the Gaussian or the Gaussian
copula approaches.
In [93], Lundberg et al. described an extension of SHAP
method for trees under a framework called TreeExplainer
to understand the global model structure using local
explanations. Authors described an algorithm to compute
local explanation for trees in polynomial time based on
exact Shapley values.
In [94], VegaGarcia et al. describe a SHAP-based method
to explain the predictions of time-series signals involving
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks. Authors
used DeepSHAP algorithm to explain individual instances
in a test set based on the most important features from the
training set. However, no changes in the SHAP method
was done, and explanations were generated for each time
step of each input instances.
B. Global Explanations
AI model behavior for a suite of input data points could
provide insights on the input features, patterns, and their
output correlations thereby promoting transparency of model
behavior. Various globally explainable methods deduce the
complex deep models to linear counterparts which are easier to
interpret. Rule-based and tree-based models such as decision
trees are inherently globally interpretable. Output decision of
individual branches of a tree can be traced back to the source.
Similarly, linear models are often fully explainable given model
parameters.
Generally, globally explainable methods work on an array
of inputs to summarize the overall behavior of the blackbox
model as illustrated in Figure 10. Here, the explanation gf
describes the feature attributions of the model as a whole and
not just for individual inputs. Thus, global explainability is
important to understand the general behavior of the model f
on large distributions of input and previously unseen data.
Fig. 10. High-level illustration of a globally explainable algorithm design.