HyperGCN: A New Method of Training Graph
Convolutional Networks on Hypergraphs
Naganand Yadati
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
y.naganand@gmail.comMadhav Nimishakavi
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
cse.madhav@gmail.com
Prateek Yadav
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
ugprateek@gmail.comVikram Nitin
Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani
vikramnitin9@gmail.com
Anand Louis
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
anandl@iisc.ac.inPartha Talukdar
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
partha@talukdar.net
Abstract
In many real-world networks such as co-authorship, co-citation, etc., relationships
are complex and go beyond pairwise associations. Hypergraphs provide a ﬂexible
and natural modeling tool to model such complex relationships. The obvious
existence of such complex relationships in many real-world networks naturally
motivates the problem of learning with hypergraphs. A popular learning paradigm
is hypergraph-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) where the goal is to assign
labels to initially unlabelled vertices in a hypergraph. Motivated by the fact that
a graph convolutional network (GCN) has been effective for graph-based SSL,
we propose HyperGCN, a novel way of training a GCN for SSL on hypergraphs
based on tools from sepctral theory of hypergraphs. We demonstrate HyperGCN’s
effectiveness through detailed experimentation on real-world hypergraphs for SSL
and combinatorial optimisation and analyse when it is going to be more effective
than state-of-the art baselines. We have made the source code available.
1 Introduction
In many real-world network datasets such as co-authorship, co-citation, email communication, etc.,
relationships are complex and go beyond pairwise associations. Hypergraphs provide a ﬂexible and
natural modeling tool to model such complex relationships. For example, in a co-authorship network
an author (hyperedge) can be a co-author of more than two documents (vertices).
The obvious existence of such complex relationships in many real-world networks naturaly motivates
the problem of learning with hypergraphs [ 52,22,49,17]. A popular learning paradigm is graph-
based / hypergraph-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) where the goal is to assign labels to initially
unlabelled vertices in a graph / hypergraph [ 10,54,42]. While many techniques have used explicit
Laplacian regularisation in the objective [ 51,53,11,48], the state-of-the-art neural methods encode
the graph / hypergraph structure G= (V;E)implicitly via a neural network f(G;X )[25,3,17] (X
contains the initial features on the vertices for example, text attributes for documents).
Work done while at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.