Model#Metric! Training time Density Training time (DBLP) Training time (Pubmed)
HGNN 170s 337 0:115s 0:019s
FastHyperGCN 143s 352 0:035s 0:016s
Table 1: average training time of an epoch (lower is better)
While explicit Laplacian regularisation assumes similarity among vertices in each edge / hyperedge,
implicit regularisation of graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [ 25] avoids this restriction and
enables application to a broader range of problems in combinatorial optimisation [ 19,26,38,31],
computer vision [ 12,37], natural language processing [ 44,34], etc. In this work, we propose,
HyperGCN, a novel training scheme for a GCN on hypergraph and show its effectiveness not only in
SSL where hyperedges encode similarity but also in combinatorial optimisation where hyperedges do
not encode similarity. Combinatorial optimisation on hypergraphs has recently been highlighted as
crucial for real-world network analysis [2, 36].
Methodologically, HyperGCN approximates each hyperedge of the hypergraph by a set of pairwise
edges connecting the vertices of the hyperedge and treats the learning problem as a graph learning
problem on the approximation. While the state-of-the-art hypergraph neural networks (HGNN) [ 17]
approximates each hyperedge by a clique and hence requiressC2(quadratic number of) edges for
each hyperedge of size s, our method, i.e. HyperGCN, requires a linear number of edges (i.e. O(s))
for each hyperedge. The advantage of this linear approximation is evident in Table 1 where a faster
variant of our method has lower training time on synthetic data (with higher density as well) for
densestk-subhypergraph and SSL on real-world hypergraphs (DBLP and Pubmed). In summary, we
make the following contributions:
We propose HyperGCN, a new method of training a GCN on hypergraph using tools from
spectral theory of hypergraphs and introduce FastHyperGCN, its faster variant (Section 4).
We apply our methods to the problems of SSL and combinatorial optimisation on real-
world hypergraphs. Through detailed experimentation, we demonstrate their effectiveness
compared to the state-of-the art HGNN [17] and other baselines (Sections 5, and 7).
We thoroughly discuss when we prefer our methods to HGNN (Sections 6, and 8).
While the motivation of our methods is based on similarity of vertices in a hyperedge, we show they
can be effectively used for combinatorial optimisation where hyperedges do not encode similarity.
2 Related work
In this section, we discuss related work and then the background in the next section.
Deep learning on graphs :Geometric deep learning [5] is an umbrella phrase for emerging tech-
niques attempting to generalise (structured) deep neural network models to non-Euclidean domains
such as graphs and manifolds. Graph convolutional network (GCN) [ 25] deﬁnes the convolution
using a simple linear function of the graph Laplacian and is shown to be effective on semi-supervised
classiﬁcation on attributed graphs. The reader is referred to a comprehensive literature review [ 5] and
extensive surveys [20, 4] on this topic of deep learning on graphs.
Learning on hypergraphs : The clique expansion of a hypergraph was introduced in a seminal work
[52] and has become a popular approach for learning on hypergraph-structured data [ 39,16,50,43].
Hypergraph neural networks [ 17] and their variants [ 23,24] use the clique expansion to extend GCNs
for hypergraphs. Powerset convolutional networks [ 47] utilise tools from signal processing to deﬁne
convolution on set functions. Another line of work uses mathematically appealing tensor methods
[40, 6], but they are limited to uniform hypergraphs.
Spectral Theory of Hypergraphs : The clique expansion of a hypergraph essentially models it as
a graph by converting each hyperedge to a clique subgraph [ 1]. It has been well established that
this approximation causes distortion, fails to utilise higher-order relationships in the data and leads
to unreliable learning performance for clustering, SSL, active learning, etc. [ 28,13]. A simple yet
effective way to overcome the limitations is to introduce hyperedge-dependent vertex weights [14].
Researchers have fully utilised the hypergraph structure also through non-linear Laplacian operators
[22,32,8]. It has been shown that these operators enable Cheeger-type inequality for hypergraphs,
2