Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 21 of 67 1
Logical perspective The TeleoR declarative programming language exploits logical rules
for information representation. In particular, each TR node represents both percepts andbeliefs through logical facts and rules. Furthermore, TeleoR is based on the Qu-Prolog sys-tem
10logic/functional programming language, which extends Prolog with a ﬂexible type
system supporting higher-order functional terms and functions. These are exploited in TeleoRfor belief storage, inference, and deliberation.
Technological notes: The TeleoR technology is available as part of the QuLog system on the project home-
page. Only the source code is distributed and actively maintained, even if license information is missing.
The provided code requires the Qu-Prolog system, for which pre-compiled binaries are not available. Our
attempts to compile Qu-Prolog were unsuccessful, so we did not evaluate TeleoR further.
ASTRA (2015)
Primary references: [88]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [139,299]
URL: http://astralanguage.com
http://github.com/remcollier/astra
MAS perspective Similarly to Jason, ASTRA allows developers to deﬁne agent plans in a
declarative way; yet, unlike Jason, it offers a tighter integration with the Java language andruntime. Java objects and types can in fact directly be used within ASTRA scripts.
Logical perspective ASTRA exploits BDI logic. ASTRA is an implementation of the
AgentSpeak(TR) language (not to be confused with AgentSpeak(ER) presented in the sequel),that is, a logic-based agent programming language combining AgentSpeak(L) with teleo-reactive functions designed and implemented by the ASTRA’s developers.
Technological notes: The ASTRA technology essentially consists of a plug-in for the Eclipse IDE. Even if
the Java source code of ASTRA can be found unmaintained on GitHub, we were able to install the ASTRAplug-in on a fresh new Eclipse setup. Links for installation are available on the ASTRA homepage. Wesuccessfully tested ASTRA against the code snippets available on the project ofﬁcial documentation.
AgentSpeak(ER) & Jason-ER (2019)
Primary references: [299]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [45,88]
URL: http://github.com/agentspeakers/jason-er
MAS perspective AgentSpeak(ER) is an extension of AgentSpeak(L) featuring plan
encapsulation, i.e. the possibility to deﬁne plans that fully encapsulate the strategy toachieve the corresponding goals, integrating both the proactive and the reactive behaviour.AgentSpeak(ER) agents expose “g-plans” that can be repeatedly re-executed until a givengoal-condition about the beliefs of some agent is met. AgentSpeak(ER) comes with two pro-totype implementations, one based on ASTRA by Collier et al. [ 88] and the other one based
on Jason. Jason-ER
11provides the syntactical and semantic extensions needed by Jason to
support AgentSpeak(ER).
Logical perspective The logical perspective is similar to the Jason one with some enhance-
ments. The Jason-ER extension turns out to bring some beneﬁts to agent programming based
10http://staff.itee.uq.edu.au/pjr/HomePages/QuPrologHome.html , last accessed in April 2020.
11https://github.com/agentspeakers/jason-er , last accessed in April 2020.
123