Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 3 of 67 1
Among them, logic-based techniques are not just the oldest ones, but possibly represent
the most straightforward path towards human understanding: if for no other reason, forthe fact that logic—as the study of correct reasoning—targets ﬁrst of all human cognitiveprocesses. Also, logic-based approaches are since long time at the core of many successfulagent-based models and technologies. Generally speaking, cognitive agents in intelligentMAS straightforwardly exploit logic-based models and technologies for rational process,knowledge representation, expressive communication, and effective coordination. Overall,MAS and logic-based technologies have already crossed their paths in the last decades, andcan be expected to do so more and more in the years to come.
Altogether, this is why this paper focuses on logic-based approaches in MAS: as they
are to be counted among the most promising techniques for building understandable andexplainable intelligent systems. More precisely, given the unavoidable push towards theengineering of intelligent systems, here we explicitly target logic-based technologies :w e
mean to understand and represent the current status of the available logic-based technologiesin the MAS ﬁeld that are actually usable in the engineering of intelligent systems.
Of course, we acknowledge that other papers in the past have already (and often brilliantly)
surveyed MAS technologies as well as logic-based approaches within MAS. What motivatesa new study on the subject, however, it is not just the renewed interest and public investmenton AI, or, our focus on technologies. Instead, to the best of our knowledge, no systematicreview has been performed on the subject to date. And, the requirement of veriﬁability andreproducibility of scientiﬁc literature can be satisﬁed by SLR (systematic literature review)only—particularly nowadays, when AI research is more and more subject to the publicscrutiny, precisely for the overwhelming interest it has raised. Then, the goal of this paperis to provide an exhaustive and organised view of the available logic-based technologies forMAS, by performing a carefully-designed and implemented SLR on the subject.
Accordingly, the paper is organised as follows. Section 2introduces the method used for
the SLR, discussing the technical details from the fundamental research questions down tothe technical operations actually leading to the material discussed in the paper. Section 3
presents and organises the technologies devised out according to a MAS-based perspective,and provides a brief description for each one. Section 4collects and displays information from
the sources and the selected technologies in form of tables and word clouds. Section 5provides
for an overall view on logic-based technologies for MAS, offering some interpretation criteriaon their current state of the art and perspectives. Lastly, Sect. 6concludes the paper with
some ﬁnal remarks.
2 Method
2.1 Premises
Making a review systematic requires ﬁrst of all that the main concepts are deﬁned clearly
enough not just to make its scope precise, but mostly to make the review itself reproducible—to some extent. This does not mean of course that notions like agents and multi-agent systemsare to be re-deﬁned here ex novo , or, with more detail than is typically used in the literature:
but, at least, it means that the acceptations of terms used in the remainder of this paper haveto be well-founded and understandable.
So, when including/excluding MAS technologies in/from our survey, we refer to the well-
known deﬁnition of agents by Wooldridge and Jennings [ 356], or, to a basically-equivalent
123