1 Page 6 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
and check them for the required content and references. The aforementioned sources have to
be searched extensively given that their coverage by the most common sources for scientiﬁcliterature is often incomplete at best.
In detail, the sources used for intensive search (via keyword-based queries) are the fol-
lowing:
(i) Google Scholar— http://scholar.google.com
(ii) IEEE Xplore— http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
(iii) ScienceDirect— http://www.sciencedirect.com
(iv) SpringerLink— http://www.springerlink.com
(v) DBLP— http://dblp.uni-trier.de
(vi) ACM Digital Library— http://dl.acm.org .
Each of these sources is queried with the following combinations of keywords:
(KW1) multi agent system logic technology
(KW2) multi agent system logic implementation
(KW3) multi agent system logic industry
(KW4) multi agent system logic veriﬁcation
(KW5) multi agent system logic agent programming
(KW6) multi agent system logic agent reasoning
(KW7) multi agent system logic society
(KW8) multi agent system logic environment
and the ﬁrst hundred results returned are considered as potential candidates: the occurrence
of a logic-based approach for MAS is ﬁrst checked for each paper, then, in case it is found,the existence of a technology is looked for and possibly veriﬁed.
2.4 Papers classification
Papers resulting from the above search activity are classiﬁed according to three main classes:
primary papers—i.e., those papers introducing and describing a technology of interest
auxiliary papers—i.e., those papers mentioning a technology of interest—meaning that
the mentioned technology has been employed in some way in the development of thecontribution of the papersecondary papers—i.e., those papers surveying technologies of interest.
Given their obvious relevance to a systematic survey, secondary papers are not only
used as the direct source for technologies of interest; instead, their extensive and organ-ised bibliographic references is recursively searched for new possible items of interest.In particular, we extensively search references from the following secondary works:[23,44,147,245,246,248,277,307,357].
It is worth pointing out that the aforementioned secondary works are similar in purpose
to this work, yet they are not systematic literature reviews. This work, in turn, has a widerscope, an updated background, and it is based on a structured and reproducible method.Furthermore, in this paper, we provide a technological assessment of each technology with anunprecedented level of detail. In particular, Baldoni et al. [ 23] provides a historical overview
of the relationship between declarative languages and multi-agent systems, with no ambitionof completeness, and no interest in the analysis of technologies. Conversely, this paper aims atunderstanding and representing the current state of the available logic-based technologies forMAS: so, our SLR focuses on those technologies that are actually usable in the engineeringof intelligent systems.
123