Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 33 of 67 1
3.3.3 Semantic web & situated interaction and coordination
LPaaS (2018) & L VLP (2016)
Primary references: [59,60]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [61,274]
URL: http://lpaas.apice.unibo.it
MAS perspective LPaaS [ 60]a n dL V L P[ 59] are two models that—once specialised
in the MAS context [ 274]—answer the need of intelligent environment and situated dis-
tributed cognition. LPaaS allows logic-based services to be embedded in the environmentand made available to agents as a service . LVLP exploits the notion of labelled vari-
able to allow for domain-speciﬁc logic-based computations. Altogether, LPaaS & LVLP
models and architectures—and the corresponding technology—support the distribution of(micro)intelligence in pervasive MAS [ 274].
Logical perspective LPaaS in the MAS context exploits logic programming (and Prolog
in particular) for the distribution of intelligence chunks placed where and when needed tolocally tackle the speciﬁc reasoning needs in complex distributed systems.
Technological notes: The LPaaS technology consists of a web service implemented in Java and requiring
the JVM 8+ platform. Currently, the service is not deployed on a ready-to-use web page. In fact, only thesource code is provided, by means of a GitLab repository. However, the technology can be launched throughthe provided build automation system. We successfully ran the LPaaS service following the instructionsprovided.
4 Analysis
4.1 Cloud of words
Figure 1shows the word cloud generated from all the 271 papers in the survey. In order to
give some meaning to this obviously limited, yet synthetic view of the literature, the ten mostevident words in the cloud could be divided into three subcategories:
–agent ,action ,plan ,goal ,
–model ,logic ,rules ,state ,belief ,
–language ,program/programming .
In short, the picture could be interpreted as suggesting that logic-based technologies in MAS
are mostly exploited to make agents act, plan, and achieve goals based on the expressive powerof logics in modelling knowledge into rules, states, and beliefs, by providing a well-foundedbasis for programming MAS via logic languages.
The cloud also highlights the relatively-high frequency of other words, related to the
model one, such as: semantics ,constraints ,properties ,ontology ,variables ,conditions ,func-
tions —all of them basically reinforcing the (quite obvious) idea that logic can be essential in
formalising MAS and their properties. Further scrutiny reveals that terms time,environment ,
and event also appear quite often. This hints at the close relationship between agents and
environment, and with the events that occur over the time—typically modelled in terms oflogics such as temporal logic.
123