1 Page 10 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
MAS perspective Jason is an interpreter for an extended version of AgentSpeak(L), a
logic-based agent-oriented programming language introduced by Rao [ 294] and based on
the Beliefs-Desires-Intentions (BDI) architecture and logic presented by Rao and Georgeff[295–297]. Through Jason, developers can model and implement autonomous agents in a
goal-oriented way, by writing the plans an agent may choose to adopt when reacting tothe many events steering the dynamics of a MAS. All that Jason agents can do occursdue to events, including perception, belief-base update, and message-passing, as well asgoal instantiation or satisfaction. The extended AgentSpeak(L) language exploited by Jasonessentially provides a practical means of manipulating agent knowledge and activities througha Prolog-like syntax.
Logical perspective The Jason technology is based on the BDI logic. Furthermore, the Jason
interpreter comes with an internal, Prolog-like, logic programming engine implemented inJava—supporting annotated logic terms, among the other features. The Jason operational
semantics has been deﬁned by Vieira et al. [ 343]. Based on the BDI logics, Jason expects
agents to be deﬁned in terms of beliefs—i.e., the knowledge an agent has about the world—, desires—i.e., the states of the world an agent is willing to pursue or maintain—, andintentions—i.e., the actions in which an agent means to be involved in a given moment. Noticethat the Jason technology is aimed neither at formally inspecting MAS nor at automaticallyderiving MAS properties. Conversely, BDI logic is exploited as an effective programminglanguage for AOP.
Technological notes: Jason is an open source technology that requires JVM 8+. It is available under the
GNU Lesser General Purpose license at http://jason.sourceforge.net . It is alive and actively developed, as
highlighted by the intense activity on its ofﬁcial GitHub repository and by the many resources available
on its homepage. It is also available as a Maven artifact, along with its dependencies, thus giving proof ofits maturity as a JVM technology. We tested Jason exploiting the many examples available on the projecthomepage, showing that the technology works even with the most recent versions of JVM.
Golog (1997), ConGolog (2000) & IndiGolog (2009)
Primary references: [113,114,228]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [46,117,245,254,283]
URL: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/cogrobo/main/systems
MAS perspective In Golog-like programming languages, the agent dynamic world can
be modelled by exploiting an explicit representation of the initial state of the system, andthe effect of actions on that world. The representation is characterised by axioms providedby users. Golog-like languages allow the developer to program autonomous agents thatperceive their environment and plan while operate. ConGolog provides support for concurrentprogramming, while IndiGolog specialises in providing agents with the ability to sense theirenvironment and plan accordingly.
Logical perspective Both Golog and its successors extend or are implemented in Prolog
(SWI-Prolog,
4ECLiPSE-Prolog5). The formalism adopted by these languages is rooted in
the Situation Calculus. They consist of Prolog-based meta-interpreters that support a customaction language deﬁned by overriding or deﬁning Prolog operators.
4https://www.swi-prolog.org , last accessed in April 2020.
5https://eclipseclp.org , last accessed in April 2020.
123