1 Page 8 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
the description of individual agents, which motivates the inclusion in this section. These
technologies are listed in the “Programming, reasoning, and planning” sub-category, andinclude languages for agents characterised by beliefs (and, depending on the language,other mentalistic notions such as desires, goals, plans, commitments)—such as ASTRA,AGENT-0, AgentSpeak(L) and its Jason implementation, DyLOG, AFAPL, GOAL, JACK,Jadex, eXAT, Rodin, JADL, 3APL and 2APL, TeleoR and Golog-like languages; languageswhere deliberation is the most characterising feature—such as SHOP, AgentSpeak(ER); lan-guages that extend logic programming with communication, concurrent execution and/or timemanagement—such as CaseLP/DCaseLP, Concurrent MetateM, DALI, Go!, Mozart/Oz. Wealso include in this sub-category RASP, because of its attention to modelling agent knowledgeand reasoning, jDALMAS, which extends the reasoning mechanism with deontic abstrac-tions, and DRAGO, which bases agent knowledge and reasoning on ontologies.
Finally, it is widely acknowledged that many areas of application of MAS clearly require
dependable computational systems—and, in particular, that such systems should be veriﬁ-able. The last sub-category under the agent perspective is hence devoted to technologies forthe (automatic or semi-automatic, static or dynamic) veriﬁcation of agent-based systems. Inthe “Agent reliability & veriﬁcation” sub-category we discuss only one technology, MCAPL,which is more oriented (although not exclusively oriented) towards model checking of indi-vidual agents. More technologies are presented in the societal extension of this category.
From the logic perspective, the technologies in the “Agent” category largely emphasise
the impact of logic programming on agents speciﬁcation. In fact, most of them either extendor rely on LP to describe agents behaviours, beliefs, or semantics. This is unsurprising, asthe connection between agents and LP has been well understood in the literature since thedawn of the agent-oriented programming research. From the seminal works by Kowalski[212], Dell’Acqua et al. [ 116], Kowalski and Sadri [ 213], Bozzano et al. [ 49] up to the recent
work by Calegari et al. [ 61], logic programming is considered by many scientists as quite
a natural choice for specifying, implementing, and verifying rational agents. Among thedozens of surveyed works exploiting LP and its variants, only some of them respect the strictacceptation of (available) technology adopted here.
3.1.1 Programming, reasoning, and planning
AGENT -0 (1991)
Primary references: [318,319]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [180,336,357]
URL: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/ai-repository/ai/areas/agents/aop/0.html
MAS perspective AGENT-0 is a framework for programming MAS. Programming an
agent in AGENT-0 amounts at deﬁning its commitment rules which are decisions to per-form an action, not to pursue a goal. The conditions under which a commitment can bemade are expressed in terms of mental conditions—involving what the agent believes to betrue and which commitments it believes to hold—, and message conditions—namely logicalcombinations of message patterns (From, Type, Content) .T h e r e , Type may be one
among some predeﬁned performatives, as INFORM ,OFFER ,REQUEST . Agents communi-
cate through message passing and an agent capability is a relation between that agent mentalstate and its environment. Complex mental categories like desires, goals, intentions and plansare not supported by the language.
123