Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 45 of 67 1
address coordination issues, as well as reasoning tasks. Other technologies that address agent
societies issues are mostly related to defeasible reasoning and, in particular, argumentation.However, our assessment reveals that most of them are not mature enough for distributed MASenvironments, although exceptions exist—e.g., ASPIC+. This line of research remains highlypromising. It is worth noting that the adoption of a logic-based approach for argumentationpurposes has many advantages, which all lead towards explainable systems.
The environment abstraction is the least affected by logic-based technologies: only few
technologies deal with MAS environment and adopt logic at the same time. In the fewidentiﬁed technologies, logic is often exploited with the purpose of making the environmentintelligent, or, to represent distributed knowledge, possibly exploiting ontologies. However,none of them can be considered actually ready to match the needs of real-world applicationdomains. This is why this research line appears promising and deserves further attention.
Finally, many logic-based formal methods are used for MAS engineering, as well as for
model checking and veriﬁcation [ 355]. The corresponding technologies found in the SLR
are reported under the “MAS/Agent Reliability & Veriﬁcation” column of Table 1.H o w e v e r ,
more often than not, the corresponding technologies appear poorly maintained, thus revealinganother potentially productive area for applied research.
(Q4) Which sorts of logics are actually exploited to frame logic-based MAS technologies?
Most of the selected logic-based MAS technologies are related to logic programming—likelybecause of its wide diffusion, simplicity, and adaptability—or to the BDI logic—both for thecognitive abstractions that straightforwardly match the needs of rational gents, and for thevast amount of contributions and results on the topic by the MAS community. Furthermore,defeasible and deontic logics are exploited for dealing with uncertain or defeasible knowl-edge, as well as to address normative concerns. Finally, description logics are widely usedin order to represent knowledge of the agents and of the whole system. It is worth notingthat some logics, such as fuzzy logic, show great potential for dealing with uncertainty inMAS: nevertheless, none of the research works surveyed actually translate their theoreticalcontributions into some usable technology.
(Q5) Which logic-based technologies for MAS are effectively used in real-world
domains? Among the 47 technologies surveyed, evidences of non-trivial real-world applica-
tions can only be found for IndiGolog, JACK, JIAC, and Agent Factory (AFPL). In particular:(i) IndiGolog has been used for programming robot controller, workﬂow management sys-tems, and web service composition systems [ 46]; (ii) JACK has been used for building
autonomous unmanned air vehicles and manufacturing systems, for simulating the humanbehaviour, or, for implementing decision support systems [ 353]; (iii) JIAC has been used
in a number of projects that span from simulation and service execution to energy controland home automation [ 46]; (iv) AFPL has been used for the development of applications in
various domains, including e-commerce, ubiquitous computing, mobile computing, robotics,wireless sensor networks, and mixed reality [ 46]. However, it is worth recalling that only
JACK and JIAC are still actively maintained, as highlighted in Sect. 4.3.
Nevertheless, we believe that the amount of mature technologies that are potentially ready
to be used in real-world domains is larger than those currently exploited—indeed, the analysisabove is intentionally limited to the real-world applications explicitly described in the articlesincluded in the SLR. By considering as mature technologies all the technologies in Table 2
that (i) have been maintained since at least 2 years, (ii) have a scored of at least 3 in their sourcecode and documentation evaluation, and (iii) are still working, the set of mature technologies
123