1 Page 44 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
logic-based: CArtAgO and Moise are Java-based technologies whose only connection with
logical approaches is via their Jason wrappers. This is why, we choose to include Jasonin our technological overview, while excluding JaCaMo, CArtAgO and Moise, despite the
corresponding technologies are alive and functioning.
Finally, some well-known logic-based technologies are excluded according to criterion
(c), as no actually-downloadable version of the tool could be found—for public link missing,dead link, or no download available. Among the others, technologies such as JASDL, n-Jason (missing link to the corresponding technology) and VerICS and SOCS (dead link) arenotable examples of technologies excluded for that speciﬁc reason. At last, it is worth to bementioned that a number of works concerning social commitments have been excluded aswell, for similar reasons. The Cupid [ 74] model, in particular, is a notable example. Given
their importance, however, a few comments about their absence are due, as it may seemastonishing. In fact, despite these are well-founded and impactful theoretical works, we werenot able to ﬁnd any runnable technology available to date, neither in the corresponding papersnor on the Web. This is the only reason why these models are mentioned in this section.
5 Discussion
The main question behind this work is (G)“What is the role of logic-based technologies in
MAS nowadays?”—as mentioned in Sect. 3. To properly answer this question, we identify
ﬁve more speciﬁc research questions—namely, (Q1) ,(Q2) ,(Q3) ,(Q4) ,a n d (Q5) —, and we
deeply and systematically inspect the literature in order to support a detailed answer foreach of them. In this section we further discuss the contribution from Sect. 3, along with the
tables and data from Sect. 4, so as to summarise a brief and explicit response to each research
question.
Generally speaking, the fundamental role of logic-based technologies in MAS nowadays
is to address the need for intelligence that characterises agent-based abstractions—i.e., thecognitive abilities required by distributed intelligent system components. However, logic-based technologies can seldom be considered to be mature enough to tackle the requirementsof industrial and real-word domains. In the following paragraphs, we deepen the discussionby focusing on the speciﬁc research questions.
(Q1) Which logic-based technologies for MAS are actually available? The available logic-
based technologies for MAS are listed in Table 2. Among the 47 technologies we assess, 21
(i.e., 44.68%) are still alive and working. However, only 12 of them (i.e., 25.53%) show recentupdates (since 2019). Also, in terms of the overall assessment of the technology—based onthe criteria detailed in Sect. 4.3—, one may notice that only a relatively-small number of
them meet basic technological standards.
(Q2) Which aspects of MAS technologies are affected by logic-based technologies, and
to what extent? (Q3) Which MAS abstractions / issues / features are covered by logic-
based technologies? As summarised by Table 1, logic-based technologies cover almost all
the existing MAS abstractions, with a heterogeneous distribution.
In particular, 50% of technologies focus on agent programming, exploiting logic to
describe the agent behaviour (at an adequate level of abstraction), as well as their goalsand knowledge—often expressed through beliefs, desires, and intentions.
With respect to the society abstraction, there are about 10 technologies identiﬁed by this
study. Among them, TuCSoN is arguably the most mature one. In TuCSoN , logic is exploited to
123