1 Page 2 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
1 Introduction
While discussions about the balance between risks and beneﬁts of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
take a signiﬁcant space in public interest, industry seems to have ﬁnally joined (and, maybe,surpassed) academia in valuing AI as one of the pillars of the next industrial revolution. Pub-lic institutions have followed, too: for instance, the European Commission already invested1.5 billion euros in AI for 2018–2020, and many more are planned beyond 2020.
1Further-
more, the “American Artiﬁcial Intelligence Initiative: Year One Annual Report”, deliveredon February 2020 [ 334], witnesses the record amounts of AI research and development
investment, and the same trend is observed in China.
2
When industry, politics, and society focus on new technologies, the promise of a future
astonishing progress is no longer enough, since industry leaders, decision makers, and taxpayers call for immediate and visible beneﬁts. That is why, following the recent success ofdeep learning, and the reviving popularity of many other AI techniques, in the next decadeacademia is going to devote non-negligible research efforts to intelligent systems ,a n di n
particular to intelligent system engineering .
Given the current status of AI technologies—mostly successful in well-delimited appli-
cation scenarios—, a key issue for intelligent system engineering is integration of the
diverse AI techniques: in software engineering terms, not just how to integrate diversetechnologies, but also (perhaps mainly) how to preserve conceptual integrity when highly-
heterogeneous approaches—bringing about manifold abstractions of various nature—are putto work together.
The most straightforward and generally-acknowledged way to address the above issue
is by using agents and multi-agent systems (MAS). In fact, this is the way in which AI
has been taught worldwide in the last decades, based on the most used AI textbook [ 305]:
there, the agent abstraction is adopted as the conceptual architecture to frame the manydifferent AI techniques, and MAS abstractions provide sound foundation for the design ofintelligent systems. Also, the long-term research activity in ﬁelds like agent-oriented com-puting (AOC)—about MAS programming languages and technologies—and agent-orientedsoftware engineering (AOSE)—about MAS methods, tools, and methodologies—actuallymakes agents and MAS the most suitable candidates to work as the sources for well-foundedtechnologies and methodologies for intelligent system engineering.
Nowadays, a clear dichotomy is emerging from within the AI area. Whereas the over-
whelming success of sub-symbolic techniques like deep learning has basically wiped outmost objections against AI, public concern about the forthcoming role of intelligent systemsin human society has raised new issues, such as the need of explaining the behaviour ofintelligent agents, and make it understandable for humans—particularly when AI plays acritical role within human organisations. The fact is, the overall approach to XAI (eXplain-able Artiﬁcial Intelligence [ 28] would seemingly require the extensive adoption of symbolic
techniques (possibly integrated with sub-symbolic and non-symbolic ones) in order to reachits main goals—such as observability, interpretability, explainability, and accountability. Asa result, exactly when the general focus of AI is on sub-symbolic techniques—as those thathave made AI work in real-world applications—, symbolic approaches are beginning to becarefully scrutinised—as those that could make AI also amenable to human understanding.
1https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/artiﬁcial-intelligence , last accessed in April 2020.
2https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/12/05/65019/china-us-ai-military-spending/ , last accessed in
April 2020.
123