1 Page 4 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
deﬁnition of agents and MAS [ 280]: agents are computational abstractions encapsulating
control along with a criterion to drive control (a task, a goal), whereas MAS are collections ofagents interacting (communicating, coordinating, competing, cooperating) in a computationalsystem. Even less problematic is to deﬁne what is logic: dating back to Aristotle—whose logicis the instrument for human knowledge [ 301]—logic studies the way we draw conclusions and
express ourselves, and deals with how to formalise it [ 256]. Since several sorts of logic exists
and are adopted in general in the broad context of computational logic, in the following westick to those logics clearly identiﬁable in the literature, in terms of name, formal deﬁnition,and reference paper(s).
Yet, the main issue here does not concern either MAS or logic. Instead, it comes from
our basic choice to focus on logic-based technologies for MAS, and from its motivation as
well. In fact, a key point is for agent-based technologies to actually work in the engineering
of intelligent systems: correspondingly, in the remainder of this survey we choose to includeonly logic-based MAS technologies that are both scientiﬁcally identiﬁable and technically
available . This means, ﬁrst of all, that there must exist (at least) a scientiﬁc publication that
clearly deﬁnes and describes the technology (and so, covering both its agent- and logic-based aspects); then, that the technology itself should be clearly mentioned in the referencepublication, as well as technically accessible (e.g., from a web site or a public repository) atthe time of the survey.
More precisely, in this paper we consider as logic-based MAS technology any agent-
oriented software architecture, framework, or language that (i) involves some clearly-deﬁnedlogic model, and (ii) comes with some actual technological reiﬁcation. Indeed, we arguethat technological aspects are far from being marginal, as technology is “the application ofscientiﬁc knowledge for practical purposes”,
3and now more than ever the engineering of
intelligent systems is in dire need of dependable technologies. Clearly enough, technologiesmay involve logics at several different levels and in disparate ways, in the same way as theymay address diverse abstractions of MAS. Within the scope of our work, in particular, weare mostly interested in technologies exposing logic and agent-orientation at the application
level—i.e., making logic explicit to their intended users. Consider for instance Jason [ 42],
a well-known MAS specimen of technology inspired by the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI)architecture [ 295–297]—and hence by the BDI logic—, written in Java. There, BDI logic
pervades Jason design, implementation, and API, and is clearly exposed to Jason users.Similarly, Golog [ 228]—a Prolog-based technology for MAS programming—would have
been considered to be a logic-based technology even if it were written in Java, as logic isrequired by users to build MAS through Golog.
Accordingly, in the remainder of this survey we choose to include only those logic-
based technologies for MAS that (i) can be associated with a sound scientiﬁc contributiondescribing some clearly-identiﬁable software system, framework, or toolkit; (ii) are in theform of executable software, which can be actually reached, downloaded, and tested onsome modern execution platform—so that they may actually be used and work in real-worldintelligent systems, at least in principle; (iii) can be found via URLs or references from theirprimary works, or, straightforwardly via web search on the authors’ information—otherwise,any link between the model from the primary work and the technology would be debatable,and possibly arbitrary; (iv) the URL does not belong to some web archive service only—which would clearly witness the fact that the technology is in some state of abandon.
3https://www.oxfordreference.com/page/scienceandtech/science-and-technology , last accessed in July
2020.
123