1 Page 32 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
Logical perspective EMERALD uses OWL as the language to model common knowledge
that agents need to share in order to interoperate.
Technological notes: The EMERALD technology consists of an unmaintained Java project, requiring
JVM 6+ and including no license information. Only pre-compiled binaries are currently available, which
we successfully started and executed against the examples provided along with them.
Onto2JaCaMo, 2017
Primary references: [151]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [152]
URL: http://www.inf.pucrs.br/linatural/wordpress/recursos-e-ferramentas/onto2jacamo
MAS perspective Onto2JaCaMo supports MAS development in compliance with a well-
deﬁned AOSE methodology deﬁned by the authors themselves in Freitas et al. [ 152]. The
tool offers a combined support of forward and reverse engineering, such that changes in oneartefact can always be merged into the other without compromising consistency or losingchanges; this approach is referred to as “round-trip engineering”.
Logical perspective Onto2JaCaMo uses OWL as the language to model common knowl-
edge that agents need to share in order to interoperate.
Technological notes: The Onto2JaCaMo technology consists of a pre-compiled Java archive containing
a plug-in for the Eclipse-IDE (no version speciﬁed), to be manually installed. We assessed the plug-in
against a freshly installed version of the Eclipse IDE. However, the provided plug-in seems incompatible
with the last version of Eclipse. For this reason, we did not assess the technology any further.
3.3.2 Situated interaction & coordination
Situated ReSpecT (2008)
Primary references: [64,65]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [264,265,275]
URL: http://respect.apice.unibo.it
MAS perspective The ReSpecT event model—which already accounts for situatedness
issues by deﬁning an event in terms of its source cause, event target and time at which theevent occurred—has been extended in Situated ReSpecT introducing generic environmental
resources as a new kind of sources / targets of events so as to account for situatedness and tocoordinate a system for sensing and controlling environmental properties.
Logical perspective Situated ReSpecT extends the ReSpecT coordination language for
programming tuple centres to govern interactions between agents and environment.
Technological notes: The Situated ReSpecT technology is currently integrated with the aforementioned
TuCSoN technology.
123