1 Page 46 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
can be extended to include also ASPIC+, ASTRA, GOAL, Jadex, Jason, MCMAS, Mozart,
RML, and TuCSoN .
Final and general remarks This work is motivated by a broader research question—namely:
Given the new challenges that are opening up in the ﬁeld of intelligent systems and AI
for logic-based technologies, do there exist technologies that can be considered readyenough? If not, what is missing?
To answer this question, we should ﬁrst recall that modern intelligent systems:
(i) are deeply intertwined with domains like the Internet of (Intelligent) Things (Io(I)T) and
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS);
(ii) are therefore inherently distributed, thus demanding for robustness, efﬁciency, interop-
erability, portability, standardisation, situatedness, and real-time support;
(iii) need to reconcile and synthesise symbolic and sub-symbolic AI, exploiting the former to
explain the latter so as to overcome fears and ethical issues posed by AI by providing for
explainability, observability, interpretability, responsibility, and trustability—the scopeof XAI.
In the remainder of this section we focus on the issues above, and extract further considerations
from the data collected in Sect. 4.
Applicability to distributed domains such as IoT and CPS Often, the existing agent
solutions applicable to the IoT and CPS are available only for a speciﬁc and limited set ofdevices. For instance, Agent Factory Micro Edition (AFME) [ 262] enables the execution of a
deliberative agent on top of mobile phones with CLDC/MIDP proﬁles and Sun-SPOT sensorby means of TCP/IP and Zigbee protocols.
However, some technologies are, more than others, explicitly designed to support IoT
domains and CPS. For example, the LPaaS architecture is designed to promote distributedintelligence for the IoT world—offering logic programming in terms of service, and explic-itly addressing the requirements and issues of cloud and edge architectures. It exploits theEverything as a Service [ 27] metaphor to maximise availability and interoperability while
promoting context-awareness. From the MAS point of view, LPaaS takes care of distributingknowledge as well as reasoning capabilities placed in the agent environment. Analogously,the situated coordination approach promoted by the TuCSoN /ReSpecT model and technol-
ogy can be explicitly exploited to handle situatedness in MAS as a coordination issue. Also,TuCSoN provides the main abstractions for IoT environments: environmental resources can
be sources of perceptions (like sensors), targets of actions (like actuators), or even both.
Finally, there are technologies that are not explicitly meant to address the IoT and CPS
domains, but still let us suppose they would be easily portable to those domains—because oftheir standard compliance, interoperability, and portability features. Among the many, Jasonsupports interoperability with non-Jason agents via JADE through FIPA-ACL communica-tion. Similarly, there are extensions to JACK that make it work in open systems. Finally,the Teleo-Reactive approach has been often exploited to facilitate the development of theIoT systems as a set of communicating Teleo-Reactive nodes. The software behaviour of thenodes is speciﬁed in terms of goals, perceptions, and actions over the environment, achiev-ing higher abstraction than using general-purpose programming languages and therefore,enhancing the involvement of non-technical users in the speciﬁcation process.
123