Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 13 of 67 1
do. In particular, such sorts of problems can be written in a very concise way in Mozart, letting
its syntax and declarative semantics abstract away the details of search.
Technological notes: Mozart is an actively-maintained project whose sources and releases are available on
GitHub, under the terms of an ad-hoc open source license ( https://mozart2.org/license-info/license.html ,
last accessed in April 2020). It consists of a native application, which supports all major operative systems
(i.e. MacOS, Linux, and Windows). We successfully attempted to install and run the Mozart compiler, aswell as testing how it works with some snippets of Oz code from the Mozart documentation.
GOAL (2000)
Primary references: [183]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [46,111,112,179–181,202,208]
URL: http://goalapl.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/GOAL
MAS perspective GOAL (Goal-Oriented Agent Language) is an agent-oriented program-
ming language inspired by the UNITY concurrent language [ 69]. Like UNITY, a set of actions
which execute in parallel constitutes a program. However, unlike UNITY, which is based onvariables assignment, GOAL incorporates complex notions such as belief, goal, and agentcapabilities which operate on high-level information instead of simple values. GOAL agentsmake decisions based on their beliefs and goals. However, unlike other agent programminglanguages, GOAL focuses on providing a higher level of declarativeness to agents develop-ers. GOAL agent goals describe what an agent wants to achieve, not how to achieve it—thedesire is deliberated via automated reasoning. GOAL supports intra-agent communication,event processing (e.g., perceptions and messages), decision making, symbolic knowledgemanipulation exploiting common knowledge representation technologies such as Prolog andOWL/SPARQL [ 210], in addition to reinforcement learning, and planning. It provides an
IDE fully integrated into Eclipse making common editor features available.
Logical perspective GOAL is based on the BDI logic. However, similarly to other agent
programming languages like Jason, GOAL mostly focuses on effective agent programmingsupported by a sound semantics, rather than exploiting BDI logic for MAS formal analysis.The syntax of the GOAL language is Prolog-inspired, therefore intrinsically logical. However,similarly to AgentSpeak(L), a number of constructs are allowed by the GOAL language,supporting goals, beliefs, rules, actions, and procedural knowledge.
Technological notes: GOAL is an actively-maintained project deeply intertwined with the Eclipse IDE.
Indeed, while the GOAL code base is private, its binaries are only available as part of a plug-in for theEclipse IDE. Apparently, there is no supported way to execute GOAL agents outside the IDE. The GOALplug-in for Eclipse is distributed under the terms of the GNU Public License. The plug-in comes with someexample projects we used for testing GOAL agents, after successfully installing its latest version on a freshEclipse IDE setup. Our tests were successful, thus proving GOAL is a working technology.
JACK Intelligent Agents (2001)
Primary references: [192]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [111,180,246,353]
URL: http://www.agent-software.com.au/products/jack
MAS perspective JACK is a cross-platform environment developed by the AOS Group, an
Australian research oriented company, with the goal of bringing intelligent agents into theindustrial playground. It allows the developers to build, run, and integrate commercial-grademulti-agent systems, where agents are inspired by BDI architecture and logics.
123