1 Page 24 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
MAS perspective TuCSoN is a standard middleware technology based on Java, and on
tuProlog [ 122] engine—that is, a ﬁrst-order logic technology. Thanks to TuCSoN , both
Java and Prolog agents—possibly distributed over the network—can interact via logic tuplecentres . The tuple centre model by Omicini and Denti [ 275] is the core of the TuCSoN coor-
dination infrastructure. Tuple centres are essentially Linda tuple spaces containing logic
tuples, observable through logic templates. However, tuple centres are not mere containers
of tuples. They can be programmed by agents through the ReSpecT language ReSpecT is in
fact a logic-based coordination language aimed at providing for social intelligence in MAS.
TuCSoN supports multiple ReSpecT tuple centres, which can be spatially distributed and
connected via linkability [ 278]. Accordingly, tuple centres can be locally deployed within a
physically-distributed environment as discussed by Casadei and Omicini [ 64], with a possibly
huge number of spatial containers and physical devices. Furthermore, tuple centres embodythe laws for local coordination, ruling the social behaviour of the agents interacting throughthem.
It is worth to be mentioned that the current version of TuCSoN is the result of many years
of active development by many different people pursuing different goals—as demonstratedby the multiple variants of TuCSoN andReSpecT described in this section. Thus, as discussed
in Ciatto et al. [ 79], the TuSoW project [ 78] can be considered a notable rebooting attempt
forTuCSoN , focusing on supporting modern mainstream technologies and platforms.
Logical perspective TuCSoN coordination media are tuple centres based on Prolog. The
logical feature of TuCSoN tuple centres makes it possible to spread intelligence through the
system where needed, for example by exploiting cognitive agents. Coordination media inTuCSoN andReSpecT (and, in particular, situated ReSpecT ) are logic-based tuple centres
powered by tuProlog. They can be adopted both for the communication language (logic
tuples), and for the behaviour speciﬁcation language ( ReSpecT ). Basically, reactions and
resources in ReSpecT are deﬁned as Prolog-like rules.
Technological notes: TuCSoN andReSpecT are part of the same technology. Both their source code and pre-
compiled jars are available on the TuCSoN GitHub page ( https://github.com/TuCSoN-Coord/TuCSoN , last
accessed in April 2020), reachable from the projects home pages. They consist of a Java project requiringJVM 8+, and they are distributed under the terms of the GNU Lesser Public License. We successfullytested TuCSoN andReSpecT against the provided examples.
2CL (2010)
Primary references: [26]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [22,24]
URL: http://www.di.unito.it/~alice/2CL
MAS perspective 2CL is at the same time a methodology for the design of protocols and
a toolkit enabling their engineering. Interactions among agents are represented in 2CL byexploiting commitment-based interaction protocols [ 148], which normally consist of sets of
actions with a shared meaning. From the point of view of an agent, the meaning of an action iscompleted by the context in which it is used. In other words, the context shapes the behaviourof the agent in that the agent decides which actions to take depending on it.
Usually, commitment-based protocols take into account constitutive rules and not regula-
tive ones. 2CL is indeed based on the notion of behaviour-oriented commitment protocols,which account both for the constitutive and the regulative speciﬁcations and that explicitly
123