Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 19 of 67 1
MAS perspective The 3APL language provides programming constructs to implement
individual agents directly in terms of beliefs, goals, plans, actions, and practical reasoningrules. Beliefs, plans, rules for revising plans and declarative goals are the basic buildingblocks of 3APL agents. Declarative goals describe the state an agent wants to reach and canbe used to program pro-active behaviour. Plans form the procedural part of an agent and canbe executed by the agent in order to achieve its goals. Rules enable the generation of planson the basis of goals (and beliefs).
2APL (A Practical Agent Programming Language) is a BDI-based agent-oriented pro-
gramming languages that extends 3APL by Hindriks et al. [ 182]. It integrates declarative
beliefs and goals with events and plans, and provides practical programming constructs toenable the generation, repair, and execution of plans based on beliefs, goals, and events. Theoperational semantics is given via transitions between conﬁgurations. The conﬁguration ofan individual agent consists of its beliefs, goals, events, plans, and practical reasoning rules,while the conﬁguration of a MAS consists of the conﬁgurations of the individual agents, thestate of the external shared environments, and the agents’ access relation to environment.2APL is equipped with an execution platform and an Eclipse plug-in editor. The platformprovides a graphical interface where a user can load, execute, and debug 2APL multi-agentprograms using different execution modes and several debugging/observation tools. The plat-form can be used in the stand-alone mode or in distributed mode using JADE. The adoption ofJADE allows a multi-agent program to be run on different machines connected in a network.
Logical perspective 3APL is a multi-agent programming language that presents a mixture
of logic programming and rule based systems. The main components of a 3APL agent canbe expressed in a declarative way Belief and goal query expressions are either the atomicformulae or a well-formed formulae constructed from atoms and logical connectors.
Conversely, the BDI-oriented multi-agent programming language 2APL enables the
implementation of an agent’s beliefs in terms of logical facts and rules. 2APL, as otherlogic-based agent programming languages, is based on a combination of imperative pro-gramming with logic-based knowledge bases. Goals in 2APL are logical formulae that theagents exploit in the execution of a plan, via logical entailment.
Technological notes: Both 3APL and 2APL technologies are still available on their respective homepages,
although not maintained any more. In both cases the source code is not available, and we could not ﬁnd anylicense-related information, although we were able to access some pre-compiled binaries. They consist ofsome executable jars targetting JVM 6+. Thanks to the availability of both examples and documentation,we were able to test the 2APL technology that still works on JVM 6, 7, and 8. The same is not true for3APL, for which we encountered runtime errors on all version of the JVM ranging from 6 to 13.
jDALMAS (2009)
Primary references: [185]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [184]
URL: http://sourceforge.net/projects/jdalmas
MAS perspective jDALMAS is a general-level Prolog implementation of the abstract
DALMAS—Deontic Action-Logic Multi-Agent System—architecture by Hjelmblom andOdelstad [ 185]. The jDALMAS technology enables the speciﬁcation of agents’ possible
actions in speciﬁc states. There, an action is permissible if it is not prohibited by the DAL-MAS normative system. In the deliberation phase, when an agent needs to choose the nextaction, DALMAS allows it to select an act out of a set of feasible acts. This may lead to anew state, depending on the state of the system when the act is performed. Thus, the choice
123