Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 47 of 67 1
Symbolic and sub-symbolic integration With respect to the second requirement of AI—
i.e., the need to reconcile and integrate symbolic and sub-symbolic techniques—none ofthe selected technologies has been experimented yet. However, we argue that portable andinteroperable technologies might be more suitable for the integration. Anyway, the ﬁeld isstill unexplored and represents a frontier research domain.
Can existing technologies be labelled as ready? If not, what is missing? To recap, the
role of logic-based technologies in MAS nowadays exhibits a huge potential for covering thevast majority of intelligent system abstractions. However, just a few among the technologiessurveyed can be actually labelled as ready-to-go , in particular when considering the new
challenges for symbolic technologies in AI.
In fact, even though 10% of the selected technologies can be considered as mature—
in terms of cross-platform support, code quality, and ease of distribution in heterogeneousenvironments—, they often have not been tested in pervasive and real-world scenarios, yet.This implies, at least, that further research is required to ensure any technological barriers canbe overcome. Furthermore, integration with sub-symbolic techniques remains a nice-to-have
feature, but it is not actually a thing in any MAS technology, for the time being.
Nevertheless, the selected technologies are an excellent starting point for (i) highlighting
the advantages of logic-based technologies, and (ii) broadening the scope of research towardsthe directions envisioned.
6 Conclusion
SLR originated in the medical research ﬁeld [ 176], ﬁrst of all as a tool to make some sense
over the heterogeneity of methodologies, tools, scope, and size, which were severely affectingthe overall coherence of the research results (not just methods) in most areas, there. SLR havespread to other research ﬁelds, too: in the ICT areas, some of the ﬁrst SLR can be found inthe software engineering ﬁeld [ 206], for instance.
Whereas one might argue against the actual need of adopting the SLR approach
everywhere—for instance, in the MAS ﬁeld—yet it should be observed that the ever-growingarticulation of most areas in computer science and AI in the last decade has led to a hugepopularity and diffusion of surveys—on any possible topics, also given the global popularityof AI and CS nowadays. Most of the surveys around, however, while useful and interesting,typically suffer from the authors’ bias [ 206], in particular when large research topics are
addressed: as such, they typically fail in the essential aspects of reproducibility that should
characterise any scientiﬁc work [ 291]. This is where SLR comes at a hand: by providing a
technical tool to produce surveys that can be veriﬁed and reproduced, since it requires tomake the methods used to build the survey explicit and repeatable.
Given the recent popularity of AI, and the potential role that logic-based technologies
for MAS could play in the engineering of complex intelligent systems, we think that a SLRtargeting MAS technologies based on any sort of logic could be of wide interest. Along thisline, this paper presents a SLR on logic-based technologies for MAS.
By logic-based technologies for MAS we mean any agent-oriented software architecture,
framework, or language (i) involving some clearly-deﬁned logic model, and (ii) coming withsome actual technological reiﬁcation.
The paper follows the standard SLR method: we carried out a manual retrieval, ﬁltering,
analysis, and categorisation of huge number of papers, resulting in 271 documents, retrievedby repeating 8 queries on 6 electronic search engines (Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, Sci-
123