Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 31 of 67 1
extended, and it is not just limited to situated action—which motivates the classiﬁcation of
Semantic Web works in the environment abstraction.
Moving from Hendler [ 174], the “Agents in the Semantic Web” sub-category lists
Onto2JaCaMo, AgentOWL, and EMERALD, which exploit semantic web technologies tointeroperate. Another technology in the “Environment” category is situated ReSpecT , a tech-
nologies for “Situated Interaction & Coordination”. It emphasises the situated component ofinteraction, thus related to the environment. Inbetween the two categories lays LPaaS (LogicProgramming as a Service), a framework that supports the distribution of logic knowledge inthe environment, and where artefacts can actively participate in the agent cognitive process.In LPaaS, in fact, artefacts play a supporting role in terms of knowledge repositories (in theform of environment structure and properties) and embed the reasoning process enabled andconstrained by the knowledge they embody.
3.3.1 Agents in the semantic web
AgentOWL (2006)
Primary references: [186]
URL: http://agentowl.sourceforge.net
MAS perspective AgentOWL supports RDF/OWL ontology models in JADE MAS. It uses
Jena15for ontology model manipulation and allows to model the agent knowledge using OWL
and to exchange messages with OWL and SPARQL as content language. Ontologies are mod-elled with Protégé
16following the CommonKADS knowledge and engineering methodology
[310]; the MAS design is based on AUML [ 30] and MAScommonKADS [ 196].
Logical perspective Being the logic underlying the standard languages for the semantic
web—OWL DL, OWL Lite, OWL Full, OWL 2—, description logic underlies, up to someextent, all those technologies used for “agents in the semantic web”. In AgentOWL, OWL ismainly used to represent the knowledge of an individual agent.
Technological notes: The Agent-OWL technology consists of an unmaintained project containing both
Java sources and binaries, requiring the JVM 6+ platform. Its code base includes a GNU Lesser GeneralPublic License. We failed to start the pre-compiled version of Agent-OWL on most JVM versions, namely,version 6, 7, 9, and 10. We succeeded in starting it on other versions of JVM up to version 13, even if a
number of exceptions made us classify Agent-OWL as a non-working technology.
EMERALD (2010)
Primary references: [215]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [216]
URL: http://lpis.csd.auth.gr/systems/emerald
MAS perspective EMERALD is a MAS framework built on top of JADE; it aims at sup-
porting interoperable reasoning among agents in the Semantic Web, by using third-partytrusted reasoning services. In EMERALD, every agent can exchange its position justiﬁcationarguments with any other agent, with no need for all agents to conform to the same kind ofrule paradigm or logic. EMERALD provides a knowledge-based agent module based on Jessby Jess by Hill [ 177].
15https://jena.apache.org/documentation/ontologyd , last accessed in April 2020.
16https://protege.stanford.edu , last accessed in April 2020.
123