Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 17 of 67 1
DRAGO (2005)
Primary references: [312]
URL: http://drago.fbk.eu/index.html
MAS perspective The DRAGO (Distributed Reasoning Architecture for a Galaxy of
Ontologies) technology addresses the problem of reasoning with multiple ontologies inter-connected by semantic mappings. The agent reasoning process results from a combinationof semantic mappings of local reasoning chunks performed in a single OWL ontology [ 33].
Logical perspective DRAGO exploits description logic (DL) [ 15] and semantic tuple
centres. The DRAGO technology is theoretically grounded on the formal framework ofthe distributed description logics [ 47], which extends standard DL with semantic map-
pings, which can be seen as a bridge rule between different ontologies. This enablesthe representation of multiple semantically connected ontologies in which the reasoningprocedure—according to the distributed contextual reasoning paradigm—is based on dis-tributed tableau techniques, an extension of standard DL tableau.
Technological notes: The DRAGO technology consists of a number of unmaintained pre-compiled jars
available on the project home page. They target the JVM 5+ platform, and they are distributed with nolicense information. We successfully tested DRAGO on newer versions of the JVM, and against the providedexample ontologies. Therefore, it can be considered as a working technology.
Jadex (2005)
Primary references: [288]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [111,180,246,248]
URL: http://www.activecomponents.org
https://github.com/actoron/jadex
MAS perspective Jadex is a software framework for the creation of goal oriented agents
following the BDI model. Its main goal is to build up a rational agent layer that sits on top ofthe JADE infrastructure. Jadex enables the construction of intelligent agents leveraging onsound software engineering foundations. Wherever applicable, object-oriented concepts andtechnologies are exploited, supporting the description of beliefs, intentions, desires, and plansboth in Java and XML. Moreover, the Jadex reasoning engine tries to overcome traditionallimitations of BDI systems by introducing explicit goals.
Logical perspective Jadex reasoning engine is based on BDI logic, and combines it with
state-of-the-art software engineering techniques involving XML and Java. The initial stateof an agent is determined among other things by the beliefs, goals, and the library of knownplans. Jadex uses a declarative and a procedural approach to deﬁne the components of anagent. Jadex does not enforce a logic-based representation of beliefs, even if it is a viableoption. Moreover, ordinary Java objects of any kind can be contained in agent belief bases,allowing for instance developers to reuse classes generated by ontology modelling tools ordatabase mapping layers.
A more declarative way of accessing beliefs and belief sets is provided by queries, which
can be speciﬁed in an OQL-like language [ 66]. The beliefs are used as input for the reasoning
engine by specifying certain belief states, e.g. as preconditions for plans or creation conditionsfor goals. The engine monitors the beliefs for relevant changes, and automatically adjustsgoals and plans accordingly.
123