Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 5 of 67 1
2.2 Research questions
Every SLR [ 56,263] is built around some fundamental research question. According to Hig-
gins and Green [ 176], “A systematic review attempts to identify, appraise and synthesise all
the empirical evidence that meets pre-speciﬁed eligibility criteria to answer a given researchquestion. Researchers conducting systematic reviews use explicit methods aimed at min-imising bias, in order to produce more reliable ﬁndings that can be used to inform decisionmaking.”
Our primary research question essentially expresses our main research goal here. In fact,
we are interested in understanding
(G)What is the role played by logic-based technologies in MAS nowadays?
In order to make it possible to conduct a SLR based on this (quite general and possibly
generic) question, it is necessary to re-articulate the research goal in terms of more detailed(secondary) research questions:
(Q1) Which logic-based technologies for MAS are actually available?
(Q2) Which aspects of MAS technologies are affected by logic-based technologies, and to
what extent?
(Q3) Which MAS abstractions/issues/features are covered by logic-based technologies?
(Q4) Which sorts of logics are actually exploited to frame logic-based MAS technologies?
(Q5) Which logic-based technologies for MAS are effectively used in real-world domains?
The above questions drive the process of search, by articulating the way in which papers and
technologies are looked for, examined, and possibly selected for the review.
2.3 Sources
The electronic sources used in the search process are of two sorts: (i) general bibliographic
databases and (ii) speciﬁc sources —such as conferences, symposia, and workshops—on the
core topics. The former are searched intensively via speciﬁc queries, whereas the latter are
explored extensively , year by year, volume by volume, paper by paper. This is because small,
specialised workshops are often missing from the major bibliographic databases used for ourquery-based intensive search; instead, one can typically count on the complete indexing ofmajor conferences and international journals. Accordingly, the extensive scrutiny of all thepapers published in the specialised workshops on topics near to MAS and logic is mostlyintended to complement the intensive search performed throughout the bibliographic engines,
so as to result in the most exhaustive search possible overall.
In particular, in the following we extensively consider all the papers published in
– the International Workshop on Declarative Agent Languages and Technologies (DALT)—
10 events (2003–2012)
– the International Workshop on Engineering Multi-Agent Systems (EMAS)—7 events
(2013–2019), including DALT since 2013
– the International Workshop on Computational Logic in Multi-Agent Systems (CLIMA)—
15 events (2000–2014)
– the Workshop on Logics for Intelligent Agents and Multi-agent Systems (WLIAMAS @
IAT)—3 events (2008–2010)
– the Workshop on Logical Aspects of Multi-Agent Systems (LAMAS)—8 events (2002,
2010–2015, 2017)
123