Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 37 of 67 1
interaction (or MAS in the whole), and (ii) argumentation—the table only reports on the
main “leading technologies” for each argumentation model.
For the former, logic-based techniques are widely recognised to be among the leading
technologies for the veriﬁcation of reactive systems, thanks to properties such as a solid logicground to build upon, the possibility of providing interactions and communication with botha declarative and an operational semantics, and the chance to deﬁne logic-based integrityconstraints. For the latter, as far as argumentation is concerned, although all the approachesimplement defeasible logics (often with deontic extensions), a leading technology providinga shared set of abstractions is still missing, and each solution is instead typically tailoredto a speciﬁc application domain. Generally speaking, the potential of logical approachesin norm-based systems and conﬂict resolution is widely acknowledged—also in terms ofexplainability of complex MAS.
As far as the environment modelling and engineering is concerned, most technologies
target knowledge representation and, in particular, description logics. This is likely due tothe environment being the most proper abstraction to encapsulate stateful (and semantic)information, and to work as a support for agent distributed cognition process in knowledge-intensive systems.
(Subsets of) predicate logic, logic programming, and action languages (e.g., situation
calculus) have been mostly exploited for behavioural aspects of agents—most likely due totheir natural procedural interpretation. On the other side, modal and epistemic logics havebeen mostly adopted in model-checking and veriﬁcation technologies, presumably becausethey make it possible to express meaningful, desired speciﬁcations about what agents orsocieties do or know, while taking time into account.
Also, and quite naturally, one of the most successful logic-based architecture for agents—
the BDI one—has never been exploited outside the boundaries of individual agents. This islikely due to the lack of intuitive interpretation of the desire and intention abstraction forboth environments and societies.
As far as the simulation tools for MAS are concerned, the SLR also points out that they
often do not rely upon a formal logic-based framework: the logic is instead exploited to deﬁnethe operational semantics of the simulation, or, to express temporal/epistemic speciﬁcationsin the case of model-checking joined to the simulation process—as in the case of SALMA.This is why we only included in the SLR the few simulation frameworks with a stronglogical characterisation; other simulation frameworks exist, such as LEADSTO mentionedin Table 4, but an actually-downloadable implementation could not be found for them—and
this was the reason for their exclusion.
The ﬁnal remark is related to the lack of MAS technologies based on fuzzy or probabilistic
logic. This is somehow surprising, given the huge interest of the MAS community towardsBayesian or Markovian approaches. Many theoretical works can be found in this area, yetnone comes with a technology that is actually implemented and alive.
4.3 Technological analysis
In this subsection we deepen the analysis of the technologies selected by our SLR in order toprovide additional insights about research questions (Q1) ,(Q3) ,a n d (Q4) .T a b l e 2provides
an overview of our analysis.
There, we analyse the selected technologies according to a number of technical dimen-
sions, corresponding to the columns of Table 2. In particular: column Fresh. assesses the
freshness of each technology, by indicating—when possible—the year of the visible update;
123