Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1 Page 29 of 67 1
checking of basic fairness conditions are supported, as well as the generation of counterex-
amples and witness executions. MCMAS can be used from a shell or via a graphical interfacebased on Eclipse.
14
Logical perspective MCMAS model checker includes temporal operators, too. MCMAS
supports a rich set of speciﬁcations, including Computation Tree Logic (CTL, [ 85]) operators,
epistemic operators, ATL, and notions pertaining to correct behaviour.
Technological notes: The MCMAS technology is available through the project home page, after providing
personal information. Both the source code and pre-compiled binaries are available, even if they aredistributed with no license information. The code base consists of C++ sources targeting the Linux platform.We were able to successfully test MCMAS against some system descriptions examples contained into the
MCMAS manual.
SCIFF (2005)
Primary references: [3]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [4,9,55,72,73,147,338,341]
URL: http://lia.deis.unibo.it/research/sciff
MAS perspective SCIFF is a model-checker mainly used to verify the compliance of
agents to interaction protocols. SCIFF offers variables (e.g., to model time) and constraintson variables occurring in hypotheses and expectations; social goals, deﬁned as predicates,can express the social aim or outcome of some agent interaction, or can be used to startan abductive derivation in the more classical tradition of abductive logic programming. Theability to generate positive and negative expectations, beside making hypotheses, and theconcepts of fulﬁlment and violation of expectations are the core ingredients of dynamicchecking of protocol compliance.
Logical perspective SCIFF is based on abductive logic programming. It is an abductive
proof procedure mainly used to verify the compliance of agents to interaction protocols. Inorder to allow such application, SCIFF extends IFF by Fung and Kowalski [ 154].
Technological notes: The SCIFF technology currently lays unmaintained on the project home page. It
consists of a number of unlicensed Prolog sources targeting either SICStus- or SWI-Prolog. We succeeded
in loading the SCIFF Prolog modules on a freshly installed SWI-Prolog system, but we did not performany further assessment due to the lack of available examples.
SALMA (2014)
Primary references: [217]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [218]
URL: http://www.salmatoolkit.org
https://github.com/salmatoolkit/salma
MAS perspective SALMA (Simulation and Analysis of Logic-based Multi-Agent models)
is a simulation and statistical model checking tool for MAS. The simulated system can bespeciﬁed exploiting logical axioms based upon the Golog situation calculus. The frameworkfor MAS modelling and veriﬁcation makes it possible to reason about the interaction ofagents with each other and with their (physical) environment.
14A tool variant, MCMAS-SLK, can be downloaded at http://swmath.org/software/24778 , last accessed in
April 2020.
123