1 Page 14 of 67 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (2021) 35 :1
A JACK MAS is implemented in an extended variant of Java. Extensions provide the
means for manipulating agents plans, events, beliefs, interactions, in addition to ordinary Javacomputations. However, the most common way to implement a JACK agent goals and beliefsis to rely on object-oriented technology. In this sense, multiple programming paradigms andstyles are fruitfully harmonised in JACK to create an industry-ready MAS technology.
Logical perspective JACK is inspired by BDI logics. Similarly to Jason and GOAL, how-
ever, the BDI architecture described by Rao [ 294] is used as a basis to design and implement
the JACK computational model. Indeed, in order to facilitate the work of developers—inparticular those with an AI background—JACK also supports logical variables and cursors.These can be used to perform complex queries to an agent belief base. Accordingly, thesemantics of a JACK program has been described as “midway between the semantics oflogic programming (with the addition of type checking in Java style) and embedded SQL”[192].
Technological notes: JACK is closed source, thus we were not able to inspect it from a technological point
of view.
Agent Factory Agent Programming Language (AFAPL, 2002).
Primary references: [87]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [44,46,180,232,257]
URL: http://sourceforge.net/projects/agentfactory/
MAS perspective AFAPL is another BDI agent programming language, aimed at design-
ing and developing intentional agents. Agent Factory is the tool implementing the AFAPLlanguage. The tool supports the many aspects of MAS developments, including distribution—which is supported exploting the JADE platform. Among the peculiarities of AFAPL, thenotion of commitment is the most notable. Agent behaviour is dictated by the goals agentscommit to, therefore the developers plan the behaviour of the agents by declaring the condi-tions for the adoption of the commitments in an explicit way.
Logical perspective AFAPL has been deliberately designed to support “heterogeneous
logic-based agent architectures with the goal of providing a common tool set that can beadapted to different agent models, ranging from custom Java agents, through to reactive agentarchitectures, and ﬁnally to high-level agent programming languages” [ 304]. However, for
what concerns agents execution semantics, AFAPL leverages on the BDI architecture as well.In particular, its computational model is inspired to the AgentSpeak(L) one. AFAPL devel-opers can exploit ﬁrst-order logic expressions to represent both agent beliefs and behaviours.
Technological notes: The AFAPL technology consists of an unmaintained Java project not including license
information. A pre-compiled Java archive is available on the project home page. However, given the lackof any documentation describing how to run the provided binary, we were not able to further asses thetechnology.
DALI (2002)
Primary references: [97]
Other references describing / exploiting the technology: [36,98,99,101]
URL: http://github.com/AAAI-DISIM-UnivAQ/DALI
123