https://www.example.comAd	Disclosure
Data	Collection	and	Training(1)	Page	Segmentation(3)	Action
Classifier
Classifier
Ad
(2)	Classification
Figure 3: The Architecture of a Perceptual Ad-Blocker. In the offline phase, an ad-classifier is trained on web data. In the online
phase, the ad-blocker segments visited pages (1), classifies individual elements (2), and renders the user’s ad-free viewport (3).
range from classical computer vision as in Ad-Highlighter [ 82] to
large ML models as in Sentinel [10].
The classifier may be trained using labeled web data, the type and
amount of which varies by classifier. Due to continuous changes
in web markup, ad-blockers may need regular updates, which can
range from extending existing rules (e.g., for Ad-Highlighter [ 81,
82]) to re-training complex ML models such as Sentinel [10].
When deployed by a user, the ad-blocker analyzes data from vis-
ited pages to detect and block ads in real-time. Ad detection consists
of three main steps. (1) The ad-blocker optionally segments the web
page into smaller chunks. (2) A classifier labels each chunk as ad
or non-ad content. (3) The ad-blocker acts on the underlying web
page based on these predictions (e.g., to remove HTML elements
labeled as ads). For some ad-classifiers, the segmentation step may
be skipped. For example, Sentinel [ 10] uses an object-detection
network that directly processes full web page screenshots.
Ad-Highlighter’s use of behavioral signals (i.e., recognizing ad-
disclosures by the presence of a link to an ad-policy page) can be
seen as a special type of classifier that may interact with segmented
Web elements (e.g., by clicking and following a link).
3.2 Approaches to Ad Detection
When online, a perceptual ad-blocker’s first action is the “Page
Segmentation” step that prepares inputs for the classifier. Figure 4
illustrates different possible segmentations. A cross-origin iframe
(red box 3) displays an ad and an AdChoices icon (purple box 2). An
additional textual ad-disclosure is added by the publisher outside
theiframe (purple box 1). Publishers may use iframes to display
native content such as videos (e.g., red box 4).
We distinguish three main perceptual ad-blocking designs that
vary in the granularity of their segmentation step, and in turn in
the choice of classifier and actions taken to block ads.
•Element-based perceptual ad-blockers , such as Ad-Highlighter,
search a page’s DOM tree for HTML elements that identify ads,
e.g., the AdChoices logo or other ad-disclosures.
•Page-based perceptual ad-blockers , e.g., Sentinel [ 10], ignore the
DOM and classify images of rendered web pages.
•Frame-based perceptual ad-blockers , e.g., Percival [ 84], classify
rendered content but pre-segment pages into smaller frames.
3.2.1 Element-based Perceptual Ad-blocking. These ad-blockers
segment pages into HTML elements that are likely to contain ad-
disclosures. The segmentation can be coarse (e.g., Ad-Highlighterextracts all imgtags from a page) or use custom filters as in Adblock
Plus’ image search [8] or Ublock’s Facebook filters [88].
For textual ad-disclosures (e.g., Facebook’s “Sponsored” tag) the
classification step involves trivial string matching. Facebook is thus
deploying HTML obfuscation that targets an ad-blocker’s ability
to find these tags [ 88]. This ongoing arms race calls for the use of
visual (markup-less) detection techniques. Ad-disclosure logos (e.g.,
the AdChoices icon) can be visually classified using template match-
ing. Yet, due to many small variations in ad-disclosures in use, exact
matching (as in Adblock Plus [ 8]) is likely insufficient [ 81]. Instead,
Ad-Highlighter uses perceptual hashing to match all imgelements
against the AdChoices logo. Ad-Highlighter also uses supervised
ML—namely Optical Character Recognition (OCR)—to detect the
“AdChoices” text [ 82]. Once an ad-disclosure is identified, the asso-
ciated ad is found using custom rules (e.g., when Ad-Highlighter
finds an AdChoices logo, it blocks the parent iframe ).
Storey et al. [ 81] further suggest to detect ads through behavioral
signals that capture the ways in which users can interact with them,
e.g., the presence of a link to an ad-policy page.
3.2.2 Frame-based Perceptual Ad-blocking. The above element-
based approaches require mapping elements in the DOM to ren-
dered content (to ensure that elements are visible, and to map
detected ad-identifiers to ads). As we show in Section 4.4, this step
is non-trivial and exploitable if ad-blockers do not closely emulate
the browser’s DOM rendering, a complex process that varies across
browsers. For instance, image fragmentation or spriting (see Fig-
ure 10) are simple obfuscation techniques that fool Ad-Highlighter,
and would engender another cat and mouse game. To avoid this, ad-
blockers can directly operate on rendered images of a page, which
many browsers (e.g., Chrome and Firefox) make available to exten-
sions. Instead of operating on an entire rendered web page (see
page-based ad-blockers below), DOM features can still be used to
segment a page into regions likely to contain ads. For example, seg-
menting a page into screenshots of each iframe is a good starting
point for detecting ads from external ad networks. The approach
of Percival is also frame-based but directly relies on image frames
produced during the browser’s rendering process [84].
We consider two ways to classify frames. The first searches for ad-
disclosures in rendered ads. Template-matching is insufficient due
to the variability of backgrounds that ad-disclosures are overlaid on.
Instead, we view this as an object-detection problem and address
it with supervised ML. The second approach is to train a visual
classifier to directly detect ad content. Hussain et al. [ 40] report
promising results for this task. Percival also relies on a lightweight
deep learning model to classify frames as ad content [84].