turn, the ad-blocker has to intercept all iframe creations and
re-apply the same changes.
(2)Detecting non-native functions. The toString method is
native (i.e., implemented by the browser). Some properties differ
between native and non-native functions and do not appear
to be mockable (e.g., setting a native function’s arguments
property raises an error whereas this property can be set for
JavaScript functions).8
(3)Timing. If the above attacks are solved by emulating large
portions of native JavaScript, the performance overhead may
lead to a strong timing side-channel.
B TRAINING A PAGE-BASED AD-BLOCKER
As the trained neural network of Sentinel [ 10] is not available for
an evaluation, we trained one for the analysis of Section 4. We used
the same architecture as Sentinel, i.e., YOLO (v3) [70–72].
B.1 Data Collection
YOLO is an object detection network. Given an image, it returns a
set of bounding boxes for each detected object. To train and eval-
uate YOLO, we created a dataset of labeled web page screenshots
where each label encodes coordinates and dimensions of an ad on
the page. We created the dataset with an ad-hoc automated system
that operates in two steps. First, given a URL, it retrieves the web
page and identifies the position of ads in the page using filter lists
of traditional ad-blockers. Then, our system generates a web page
template where ads are replaced with placeholder boxes. The con-
cept of web page templates is convenient as it enables us to create
multiple screenshots from the same web page with different ads, a
form of data-augmentation. Second, from each web page template,
we derive a number of images by placing ads on the template.
Web pages. We acquired web pages by retrieving the URLs of
the top 30 news websites of each of the G20 nations listed in
allyoucanread.com. For each news site, we searched for the RSS
feed URLs and discarded sites with no RSS feeds. The total number
of RSS feed URLs is 143. We visited each RSS feed URL daily and
fetched the URLs to the daily news.
Template generation. Given a URL of a news article, we gener-
ate a page template using a modified HTTP proxy that matches
incoming HTTP requests against traditional ad-blocker filter lists,
i.e., Easylist [ 3] and Ghostery [ 5]. The proxy replaces ad contents
with monochrome boxes using a unique color for each ad. These
boxes are placeholders that we use to insert new ads. We manually
inspected all templates generated during this step to remove pages
with a broken layout (caused by filter lists’ false positives) or pages
whose ads are still visible (caused by filter lists’ false negatives).
Image generation. From each page template, we generate multi-
ple images by replacing placeholder boxes with ads. We select ads
from the dataset of Hussain et al. [ 40]. This dataset contains about
8It might be possible to circumvent this issue with a Proxy. Yet, we found that function
Proxies can be distinguished from native functions in Google Chrome via the error
message of a postMessage call—this might be mockable too, but vastly expands the
portion of the JavaScript API to cover.64K images of ads of variable sizes and ratios. We complemented
the dataset with 136 ads we retrieved online. To insert pictures
inside a template, we follow four strategies:
(1) We directly replace the placeholder with an ad;
(2)We replace the placeholder with an ad, and we also include an
AdChoices logo in the top right corner of the ad;
(3)We augment templates without placeholders by adding a large
ad popup in the page. The page is darkened to highlight the ad;
(4)We insert ads as background of the website, that fully cover the
left- and right-hand margins of the page.
When inserting an ad, we select an image with a similar aspect ratio.
When we cannot find an exact match, we resize the image using
Seam Carving [ 13], a content-aware image resizing algorithm that
minimizes image distortion. To avoid overfitting during training,
we limited the number of times each ad image can be used to 20.
B.2 Evaluation and Results
Datasets. The training set contains 2,901 images, of which 2,600
have ads. 1,600 images with ads were obtained with placeholder
replacement, 800 with placeholder replacements with AdChoices
logos, 100 with background ads, and 100 with interstitials.
The evaluation set contains a total of 2,684 images—2,585 with
ads and 99 without ads. These are 1,595 images with placeholder
replacement, 790 images with placeholder replacement with Ad-
Choices logos, 100 images with background ads, and 100 images
with interstitials. We also compiled a second evaluation set from 10
domains that were not used for training (this set is different from
the one used to evaluate attacks in Section 4). For each domain,
we took a screenshot of the front page and four screenshots of
different subpages, resulting in 50 screenshots overall with a total
of 75 advertisements. We trained using the default configuration of
YOLOv3 [72], adapted for a unary classification task.
Accuracy and performance. We tested our model against both
evaluation sets. The model achieved the best results after 3,600
training iterations. In the first set, our model achieved a mean
average precision of 90.88%, an average intersect of union of 84.23%
and an F1-score of 0.96. On the second set, our model achieved a
mean average precision of 87.28%, an average intersect of union of
77.37%and an F1-score of 0.85. A video demonstrating our model
detecting ads on five never seen websites is available at https://
github.com/ftramer/ad-versarial/blob/master/videos.
We evaluate performance of the model in TensorFlow 1.8.0 with
Intel AVX support. On an Intel Core i7-6700 CPU the prediction for
a single image took 650ms.
Inspecting our model. We conduct a preliminary study of the
inner-workings of our neural network. By inspecting the model’s
activation map on different inputs (see Figure 12), we find that the
model mainly focuses on the layout of ads in a page, rather than
their visual content. This shows that our ad-blocker detects ads
using very different visual signals than humans. This raises an
intriguing question about the Sentinel model of Adblock Plus [ 10],
which was trained solely on Facebook data, where ads are visually