AdVersarial: Perceptual Ad Blocking meets
Adversarial Machine Learning
Florian Tramèr
tramer@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford UniversityPascal Dupré
s9padupr@stud.uni-saarland.de
CISPA Helmholtz Center for
Information SecurityGili Rusak
gili@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Giancarlo Pellegrino
gpellegrino@cispa.saarland
Stanford University, CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information SecurityDan Boneh
dabo@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University
ABSTRACT
Perceptual ad-blocking is a novel approach that detects online ad-
vertisements based on their visual content. Compared to traditional
filter lists, the use of perceptual signals is believed to be less prone
to an arms race with web publishers and ad networks. We demon-
strate that this may not be the case. We describe attacks on multiple
perceptual ad-blocking techniques, and unveil a new arms race that
likely disfavors ad-blockers. Unexpectedly, perceptual ad-blocking
can also introduce new vulnerabilities that let an attacker bypass
web security boundaries and mount DDoS attacks.
We first analyze the design space of perceptual ad-blockers and
present a unified architecture that incorporates prior academic and
commercial work. We then explore a variety of attacks on the ad-
blocker’s detection pipeline, that enable publishers or ad networks
to evade or detect ad-blocking, and at times even abuse its high
privilege level to bypass web security boundaries.
On one hand, we show that perceptual ad-blocking must visually
classify rendered web content to escape an arms race centered on
obfuscation of page markup. On the other, we present a concrete
set of attacks on visual ad-blockers by constructing adversarial
examples in a real web page context. For seven ad-detectors, we
create perturbed ads, ad-disclosure logos, and native web content
that misleads perceptual ad-blocking with 100% success rates. In
one of our attacks, we demonstrate how a malicious user can up-
load adversarial content, such as a perturbed image in a Facebook
post, that fools the ad-blocker into removing another users’ non-ad
content.
Moving beyond the Web and visual domain, we also build adver-
sarial examples for AdblockRadio, an open source radio client that
uses machine learning to detects ads in raw audio streams.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
©2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6747-9/19/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3354222CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Web application security ;•Com-
puting methodologies →Machine learning approaches .
KEYWORDS
Ad Blocking; Machine Learning; Adversarial Examples
ACM Reference Format:
Florian Tramèr, Pascal Dupré, Gili Rusak, Giancarlo Pellegrino, and Dan
Boneh. 2019. AdVersarial: Perceptual Ad Blocking meets Adversarial Ma-
chine Learning. In 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security (CCS ’19), November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3354222
1 INTRODUCTION
Online advertising is a contentious facet of the Web. Online ads
generate over $200 billion in value [ 90], but many Internet users
perceive them as intrusive or malicious [ 46,51,68,93]. The grow-
ing use of ad-blockers such as Adblock Plus and uBlock [ 1,7] has
sparked a fierce arms race with publishers and advertising net-
works. Current ad-blockers maintain large crowdsourced lists of
admetadata —such as page markup and URLs. In turn, publishers
and ad networks (including Facebook [ 9,88] and 30% of the Alexa
top-10K list [ 95]) continuously adapt and deploy small changes to
web page code in an effort to evade, or detect ad-blocking.
Towards visual ad-blocking. This arms race has prompted ad-
blockers to search for more robust signals within ads’ visual content ,
as altering these would affect user experience. One such signal is
the presence of ad-disclosures such as a “Sponsored” caption or
the AdChoices logo [ 24]), which many ad-networks add for trans-
parency [ 24]. Storey et al. [ 81] proposed Ad-Highlighter [ 82], the
first perceptual ad-blocker that detects ad-disclosures by combin-
ing web-filtering rules and computer vision techniques. Motivated
by the alleged superior robustness of perceptual techniques [ 81],
popular ad-blockers now incorporate similar ideas. For example,
Adblock Plus supports image-matching filters [ 1], while uBlock
crawls Facebook posts in search for “Sponsored” captions [7].
However, as proposed perceptual ad-blockers still partially use
markup as a proxy for ads’ visual content, they appear insufficient
to end the ad-blocking arms race. For example, Facebook routinely
evades uBlock Origin using increasingly complex HTML obfuscation
for the “Sponsored” captions (see [ 88]). Ad-Highlighter’s computerarXiv:1811.03194v3  [cs.CR]  26 Aug 2019