Figure 11: Original and Adversarial Audio Waveforms.
Shows a ten second segment of an ad audio waveform (thick
blue) overlaid with its adversarial perturbation (thin red).
become platforms for large-scale targeted advertising, and percep-
tual ad-blockers might emerge in those domains as well.
The threats described in this paper—and adversarial examples in
particular—are likely to also affect perceptual ad-blockers that oper-
ate outside the vision domain. To illustrate, we take a closer look at
AdblockRadio, a radio client that continuously classifies short audio
segments as speech, music or ads based on spectral characteristics.
When ads are detected, the radio lowers the volume or switches
stations. Radio ad-blockers face a different threat model than on
the Web. All content, including ads, is served as raw audio from a
single origin, so filter lists are useless. The publisher cannot run any
client-side code, so ad-block detection is also impossible. Yet, the
threat of adversarial examples does apply. Indeed, we show that by
adding near-inaudible6noise to the ad content in AdblockRadio’s
demo podcast, the perturbed audio stream evades ad detection.
Concretely, AdblockRadio takes as input a raw audio stream,
computes the Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs), and
splits them into non-overlapping windows of 4seconds. Each seg-
ment is fed into a standard feed-forward classifier that predicts
whether the segment corresponds to music, speech, or an ad. A
post-processing phase merges all consecutive segments of a same
class, and removes ad-segments. As the whole prediction pipeline
is differentiable, crafting adversarial examples is straightforward:
we use projected gradient descent (in the l∞-norm) to modify the
raw ad audio segments so as to minimize the classifier’s confidence
in the ad class. The resulting audio stream fully bypasses Adblock-
Radio’s ad detection. An ad segment in the original and adversarial
audio waveforms is displayed in Figure 11.
6 RELATED WORK
Our work bridges two areas of computer security research—studies
of the online ad-ecosystem and associated ad-blocking arms race,
and adversarial examples for ML models.
Behavioral advertising. A 2015 study found that 22%of web users
use ad-blockers, mainly due to intrusive behavior [ 46,68,78,89].
The use of ad-disclosures—which some perceptual ad-blockers rely
on—is rising. On the Alexa top 500, the fraction of ads with an
AdChoices logo has grown from 10%to60%in five years [ 38,81].
Yet, less than 27%of users understand the logo’s meaning [50, 89].
Ad-blocking. Limitations of filter lists are well-studied [ 54,91,
92]. Many new ad-blocker designs (e.g., [ 14,36,43]) replace hard-
coded rules with ML models trained on similar features (e.g.,
6The perturbed audio stream has a signal-to-noise ratio of 37dB.markup [ 23] or URLs [ 47]). Many of these works limit their secu-
rity analysis to non-adaptive attacks. Ours is the first to rigorously
evaluate ML-based ad-blockers.
Ad-block detection has spawned an arms race around anti-ad-
blocking scripts [ 57,58,60]. Iqbal et al. [ 42] and Zhu et al. [ 95] detect
anti-ad-blocking using code analysis and differential-testing. Storey
et al. [ 81] build stealthy ad-blockers that aim to hide from client-side
scripts, a challenging task in current browsers (see Appendix A).
Adversarial examples. Our work is the first to apply adversarial
examples in a real-world web-security context. Prior work attacked
image classifiers [ 17,33,64,83], malware [ 35], speech recogni-
tion [ 18] and others. We make use of white-box attacks on visual
classifiers [ 17,53], sequential models [ 18,79] and object detec-
tors [ 28]. We show that black-box attacks [ 41] are a generic alter-
native to prior attacks on SIFT [39].
Attacking page-based ad-blockers introduce novel challenges.
Perturbing HTML bares similarities to discrete domain attacks, e.g.,
PDF malware detection [ 80]. The ad-blocker’s inputs can also be
controlled by multiple entities, a constraint reminiscent of those
that arise in physical-world attacks [12, 28, 29, 49, 75].
Preventing adversarial examples is an open problem. Adversarial
training is a viable strategy [ 33,49,53,86], but considers a less
stringent threat model than perceptual ad-blockers.
7 CONCLUSION
We have presented a comprehensive security evaluation of per-
ceptual ad-blocking. To understand the design space of these re-
cently deployed systems, we have derived a unified architecture
that incorporates and extends prior work. Our analysis of this ar-
chitecture has revealed multiple vulnerabilities at every stage of
the visual ad-classification pipeline. We have shown that unless
perceptual ad-blockers operate over rendered web content, the
arms race around page markup obfuscation will likely carry on.
Conversely, we have demonstrated that current visual ad-classifiers
are inherently vulnerable to adversarial examples—the first applica-
tion of these attacks to web-security. We have shown how to craft
near-imperceptible perturbation for ads, ad-disclosures, and native
content, in order to evade or detect ad-blocking with seven different
classifiers. Finally, we have discovered a powerful attack on page-
based ad-blockers, wherein a malicious user fools the model into
blocking content supposedly protected by web-security boundaries.
Our aim was to highlight the fundamental vulnerabilities that
perceptual ad-blockers inherit from existing image classifiers. As
long as defenses to adversarial examples are elusive, perceptual ad-
blockers will be dragged into a new arms race in which they start
from a precariously disadvantaged position—given the stringent
threat model that they must survive.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by NSF, ONR, the Simons Foun-
dation, a Google faculty fellowship, the Swiss National Science
Foundation (SNSF project P1SKP2_178149), and the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through funding
for the CISPA-Stanford Center for Cybersecurity (FKZ: 13N1S0762).