SIFT’s output is a variable-sized set of keypoints, where each
keypoint is a vector v∈R132—four positional values, and a 128-
dimensional descriptor [52]. Let tbe a template with keypoint de-
scriptors T. To match an image xagainst t, SIFT computes descriptor
vectors for x, denoted{v1, . . . ,vm}. Then, for each viit finds the
distances di,1,di,2to its two nearest neighbors in T. The keypoint
viis a match if the ratio test di,1/di,2<τholds (where τ=0.6). Let
M(x,t)be the keypoints of xthat match with t. To evade detection,
we minimize the size of Mvia the following proxy loss:
LSIFT(x+δ)BÕ
vi∈Mτ(x,t)di,2/di,1. (1)
MinimizingLincreases d·,1/d·,2for matched keypoints until they
fall below the ratio test. To create false positives, we minimize an
analogous loss that sums over vi<Mτ(x,t)and decreases the ratio.
Scalable attacks with partial input control. When attacking page-
based classifiers, we need to overcome two challenges: (1) the at-
tacker only controls part of the page content and does not know
which content other actors will add; (2) the attacks should be de-
ployable at scale for a variety of web pages and ads. To create
adversarial examples under these novel constraints, we combine
universal [56] and transformation-robust [29, 48, 75] attacks.
To create universal perturbations, we collect additional website
screenshots: Dtrainis a set of 200screenshots of news websites,
andDevalcontains the 20screenshots collected in Section 4.1 (no
website or ad appears in both sets). We also collect Dtrain
BBCandDeval
BBC
with 180and20screenshots from bbc.com/sports. The training sets
are used to create perturbations that work for arbitrary websites or
ads. We measure attacks’ success rates on the evaluation sets.
We craft a perturbation δby minimizingÍ
x∈Dtrain∗L(x⊙δ),
where x⊙δmeans applying the perturbation δto a page x. De-
pending on the attack, the perturbation is added pixel-wise to a
page region that the adversary controls, or replaces that region
withδ. All that remains is the design of a suitable loss function L.
The YOLOv3 model we trained outputs multiple B=10,647
boxes for detected ads, and retains a box bif its confidence—denoted
conf(f(x),b)—is larger than a threshold τ. To cause ads to be un-
detected, we thus minimize the following loss which causes all B
boxes to have confidence below τ−κ, for some slack κ>0:
LFN
YOLO(x⊙δ)BÕ
1≤b≤Bmax(conf(f(x⊙δ),b)−(τ−κ),0),(2)
For false-positives, i.e., a fake object prediction, we instead in-
crease all boxes’ confidence up to τ+κby minimizing:
LFP
YOLO(x⊙δ)BÕ
1≤b≤Bmax(τ+κ−conf(f(x⊙δ),b),0).(3)
4.2.3 Evaluation of Attacks. We now instantiate and evaluate the
attack strategies C1-C4 from Table 2 on our seven ad-classifiers
Attack C1: Evasion with adversarial ad-disclosures. Figure 5 shows
examples of perturbed AdChoices logos that fool all element-based
classifiers. An ad-network can use these to evade ad-blocking.
Average hashing is invariant to small ℓpnoise, but this comes at
the cost of high sensitivity to other perturbations: we evade it by
adding up to 3transparent rows and columns to the logo. When
overlaid on an ad, the rendered content is identical.Original Avg. Hash OCR SIFT
False Positives:
Figure 5: Adversarial Examples for Element-Based Classi-
fiers. These correspond to attacks (C1) and (C4) in Table 2.
Original False Negative False Positive
Figure 6: Adversarial Examples for Frame-based Classifiers.
These are attacks (C2) and (C4) in Table 2. Top: Attacks on
our YOLOv3 model that detects the AdChoices logo. Bottom:
attacks on the ad-classifier from [40] (we crafted similar ad-
versarial examples for the classifier used in Percival [84])
Adversarial examples for OCR bear similarities to CAPTCHAs.
As ML models can solve CAPTCHAs [ 15,94], one may wonder
why transcribing ad disclosures is harder. The difference lies in
the stronger threat model that ad-blockers face. Indeed, CAPTCHA
creators have no access to the ML models they aim to fool, and must
thus craft universally hard perturbations. Attacking an ad-blocker
is much easier as its internal model must be public. Moreover the
ad-blocker must also prevent false positives—which CAPTCHA
solvers do not need to consider—and operate under stricter real-
time constraints on consumer hardware.
Attack C2: Evasion with adversarial ads. Ad networks can di-
rectly perturb the ads they server to evade frame or page-based
ad-blockers. For frame-based classifiers, the attacks are very sim-
ple and succeed with 100% probability (see Figure 6). We verified
that the ad-classifier used by Percival [ 84] is vulnerable to similar
attacks. Specifically, we create a valid HTML page containing two
images—an ad and an opaque white box—which are both misclassi-
fied when the page is rendered in Percival’s modified Chromium
browser (see Figure 13).
For our page-based model, crafting a “doubly-universal” pertur-
bation that works for all ads on all websites is hard (this is due to
the model’s reliance on page layout for detecting ads, see Appen-
dix B for details). Instead, we show that an ad-network can create a
universal perturbation that works with 100% success rate for all ads
that it serves on a specific domain (see Figure 14). For this attack,
we minimized the LFN
YOLOloss over the collected screenshots in
Dtrain
BBC, by applying the same perturbation δover all ad frames.