hashing : for each image, a hash is produced by resizing the
image to a fixed size and setting the ithbit in the hash to 1if
theithpixel is above the mean pixel value. An image matches
the template if their hashes have a small Hamming distance.
A more robust template matching algorithm is the Scale Invari-
ant Feature Transform (SIFT) [ 52], which creates an image hash
from detected “keypoints” (e.g., edges and corners).
•Optical Character Recognition. To detect the rendered text in-
side the AdChoices logo, Ad-Highlighter uses the open-source
Tesseract OCR system [ 6]. Tesseract splits an image into over-
lapping frames and transcribes this sequence using a neural
network. Ad-Highlighter matches images for which the OCR
output has an edit-distance with “AdChoices” below 5.
•Image Classification. Albeit not in an ad-blocking context, Hus-
sain et al. [ 40] have demonstrated that neural networks could be
trained to distinguish images of ads from non-ads (without the
presence of any explicit ad-disclosures). The Percival project
trained a similar neural network to classify image frames in
real-time within Chromium’s rendering pipeline [84].
•Object Detection. Sentinel [ 10] detects ads in rendered web pages
using an object detector network based on YOLOv3 [ 72]. The
network’s output encodes locations of ads in an image. The
YOLOv3 [ 72] model outputs bounding box coordinates and
confidence scores for B=10,647object predictions, and retains
those with confidence above a threshold τ=0.5.
2.3 Threat Model and Adversaries
We adopt the terminology of adversarial ML [ 65], where the de-
fenders are users of a classifier (the ad-blocker) that its adversaries
(e.g., ad networks or publishers) are trying to subvert.
Publishers, ad networks, and advertisers have financial incen-
tives to evade or detect ad-blockers. We assume that publishers
and ad networks are rational attackers that abide by regulations
on online advertising, and also have incentives to avoid actively
harming users or disrupting their browsing experience. As shown
in prior work [ 67,93], this assumption fails to hold for advertisers,
as some have abused ad-networks for distributing malware. We
assume that advertisers and content creators (e.g., a Facebook user)
may try to actively attack ad-block users or other parties.
As ad-blockers are client-side software, adversaries can down-
load and inspect their code offline. However, we assume that adver-
saries do not know a priori whether a user is running an ad-blocker.
Attacking ad-blockers. The primary adversarial goal of publish-
ers, ad-networks and advertisers is to evade the ad-blocker’s detec-
tion and display ads to users. These adversaries may modify the
structure and content of web pages or ads to fool the ad-detector.
Alternatively, the ad-blocker’s adversaries may try to detect its
presence, to display warnings or deny access to the user. A common
strategy (used by 30%of publishers in the Alexa top-10k) adds fake
ad-content (honeypots) to a page and uses JavaScript to check if the
ads were blocked [ 95]. This practice leads to an orthogonal arms
race on ad-block detection [57, 58, 60] (see Appendix A).
Adversaries may also try to abuse ad-blockers’ behaviors to
degrade their usability (e.g., by intentionally causing site-breakage
or slow performance). The viability of such attacks depends on theadversary’s incentives to avoid disrupting ad-block users’ browsing
experience (e.g., Facebook adds honeypots to regular user posts to
cause site-breakage for ad-block users [88]).
Finally, attackers with no ties to the online advertisement ecosys-
tem may try to hijack an ad-blocker’s high privilege-level in other
users’ machines. Such attackers can act as advertisers or content
creators to upload malicious content that exploits an ad-blocker’s
vulnerabilities. Figure 1 shows one example of such an attack, where
a malicious Facebook user uploads content that tricks the ad-blocker
into hiding an honest user’s posts. We will also show how Face-
book users can exploit Ad-Highlighter’s behavioral ad-blocking to
trigger arbitrary web requests in other users’ browsers.
2.4 Adversarial Examples
The attacks presented in this paper combines techniques from Web
security and from adversarial machine learning. In particular, we
leverage adversarial examples [ 83] to fool perceptual ad-classifiers.
An adversarial example for an input xof a model fis an input
ˆx=x+δ, whereδis a “small” perturbation such that ˆxis misclas-
sified with high confidence. We will consider perturbations with
small ℓ2norm (Euclidean) or ℓ∞norm (maximum per-pixel change).
To cause a model fto misclassify x+δwe would minimize the
confidence of f(x+δ)in the true class, while also keeping δsmall.
This is often achieved by minimizing a differentiable loss function
L(x+δ)that acts as a proxy for the adversarial goal.
An effective algorithm for finding adversarial examples is Pro-
jected Gradient Descent (PGD) [ 48,53]. Given an allowable pertur-
bation set (e.g.,||δ||∞≤ϵ), we repeatedly update δin the gradient
direction−∇δL(x+δ)and project back onto the allowable set.
In some cases, we will want perturbations to be re-usable so
that an attack can scale to a large number of websites or ads. A
perturbation that can be re-used for many different inputs is called
auniversal adversarial example [ 56]. It is usually created by jointly
minimizingÍ
iL(x(i)+δ)over many inputs x(i), for a common δ.
3 DESIGNING PERCEPTUAL AD-BLOCKERS
To analyze the security of perceptual ad-blockers, we first pro-
pose a unified architecture that incorporates and extends prior and
concurrent work (e.g., Ad-Highlighter [ 81], visual filter-lists [ 8],
Sentinel [ 10], and the recent Percival patch for Chromium’s ren-
dering engine). We explore different ways in which ad-blockers
can integrate perceptual signals, and identify a variety of computer
vision and ML techniques that can be used to visually identify ads.
To simplify exposition, we restrict our analysis to ad-blockers
that only rely on perceptual signals. In practice, these signals are
likely to be combined with existing filter lists (as in uBlock [ 88] or
Adblock Plus [ 8]) but the details of such integrations are orthogonal
to our work. We note that an ad-blocker that combines perceptual
signals with filter lists inherits the vulnerabilities of both, so our
security analysis applies to these hybrid approaches as well.
3.1 General Architecture
A perceptual ad-blocker is defined by a collection of offline and
online steps, with the goal of creating, maintaining and using a
classifier to detect ads. Figure 3 shows our unified architecture for
perceptual ad-blockers. The ad-blocker’s core visual classifier can