vision pipeline is also vulnerable to markup tricks such as image
fragmentation or spriting (see Figure 10). Escaping the arms race
over markup obfuscation requires perceptual ad-blockers to move
towards operating on rendered web content. This is exemplified in
Adblock Plus’ Sentinel project [ 10], that uses deep learning to detect
ads directly in web page screenshots. On a similar note, Percival [ 84]
is a recently proposed ad-blocker that adds a deep learning ad-
classifier into the rendering pipeline of the Chromium and Brave
browsers. While these approaches might bring an end to the current
markup-level arms race, our paper shows that visual ad-blocking
merely replaces this arms race with a new one, involving powerful
attacks that directly target the ad-blockers’ visual classifier.
A security analysis of perceptual ad-blocking. In this paper, we
present the first comprehensive security analysis of perceptual
ad-blockers, and challenge the belief that perceptual signals will
end the ad-blocking arms race. To provide a principled analysis
of the design space of these nascent ad-blocking techniques, we
first propose a general architecture that incorporates and extends
existing approaches, e.g., Ad-Highlighter [ 81,82], Sentinel [ 10,61]
and Percival [ 84]. We view perceptual ad-blocking as a classification
pipeline, where segmented web data is fed into one of a variety of
possible ad (or ad-disclosure) detectors.
Given this unified view of the design space, we identify and ana-
lyze a variety of attacks that affect each step of the ad-classification
pipeline. Multiple adversaries—publishers, ad networks, advertisers
or content creators—can exploit these vulnerabilities to evade, de-
tect and abuse ad-blockers. Our attacks combine techniques from
Web security and from adversarial machine learning [ 65]. In particu-
lar, we leverage visual adversarial examples [83], slightly perturbed
images that fool state-of-the-art classifiers.
Web attacks on perceptual ad-blockers. First, we show that ad-
blocking approaches that combine traditional markup filters and
visual signals remain vulnerable to the same attacks as current
filter-lists. HTML obfuscation of ad-disclosures is already ob-
served today [ 88], and we demonstrate similar attacks against
Ad-Highlighter’s image-matching pipeline (e.g., by fragmenting im-
ages). Thus, unless ad-blockers move towards relying on rendered
web content (as in Sentinel [ 10]), perceptual signals will not end
the ongoing markup arms race with ad-networks and publishers.
In addition to visual signals, Storey et al. [ 81] suggest to detect
ad-disclosures using behavioral signals such as the presence of a link
to an ad-policy page. We demonstrate that such signals can lead to
serious vulnerabilities (e.g., CSRF, DDoS or click-fraud). Specifically,
we show how a Facebook user can trick Ad-Highlighter into making
arbitrary web requests in other ad-block users’ browsers.
Adversarial examples for ad-classifiers. Ad-blockers can counter
the above attacks by operating on rendered web content. The main
threat to visual ad-blockers are then adversarial examples, which
challenge the core assumption that ML can emulate humans’ visual
ad-detection. To our knowledge, our attacks are the first application
of adversarial examples to a real-world web-security problem.1
1Gilmer et al. [ 31] argue that the threat model of adversarial examples—in particular
the fact that the adversary is restricted to imperceptible perturbations of a given
input—is often unrepresentative of real security threats. Perceptual ad-blocking is
a perfect example where this threat model is entirely appropriate. The ad-blocker’s
adversaries—who have white-box access to its classifier—want to evade it on specific
Figure 1: Ad-Blocker Privilege Hijacking. A malicious user,
Jerry, posts adversarial content to Facebook that fools a per-
ceptual ad-blocker similar to Sentinel [10] into marking
Tom’s benign content as an ad (red box) and blocking it in
every user’s browser.
We rigorously assess the threat of adversarial examples on seven
visual ad-classifiers: Two computer-vision algorithms (perceptual
hashing and OCR) used in Ad-Highlighter [ 81]; the ad-classification
neural networks used by Percival [ 84] and [ 40]; a canonical fea-
ture matching model based on the Scale-Invariant Feature Trans-
form (SIFT) [ 52]; and two object detector networks emulating Sen-
tinel [ 10]. For each model, we create imperceptibly perturbed ads,
ad-disclosure or native content, that either evade the model’s de-
tection or falsely trigger it (as a means of detecting ad-blocking).
Among our contributions is a new evasion attack [ 41,73] on
SIFT [52] that is conceptually simpler than prior work [39].
Attacking perceptual ad-blockers such as Sentinel [ 10] presents
the most interesting challenges. For these, the classifier’s input is
a screenshot of a web page with contents controlled by different
entities (e.g, publishers and ad networks). Adversarial perturbations
must thus be encoded into HTML elements that the adversary
controls, be robust to content changes from other parties, and scale
to thousands of pages and ads. We tackle the adversary’s uncertainty
about other parties’ page contents by adapting techniques used for
creating physical adversarial examples [ 12,75]. We also propose a
novel application of universal adversarial examples [56] to create a
single perturbation that can be applied at scale to all combinations
of websites and ads with near 100% success probability.
We further show that adversarial examples enable new attacks,
wherein malicious content from one user can hijack the ad-blocker’s
high privilege to incorrectly block another user’s content. An ex-
ample is shown in Figure 1. Here Jerry, the adversary, uploads a
perturbed image to Facebook. That image is placed next to Tom’s
post, and confuses the ad-blocker into classifying Tom’s benign
post as an ad, and incorrectly blocking it. Hence, a malicious post
by one user can cause another user’s post to get blocked.
Moving beyond the Web and visual domain, we build imper-
ceptible audio adversarial examples for AdblockRadio [ 2], a radio
ad-blocker that uses ML to detect ads in raw audio streams.
Outlook. While visual ad-classification of rendered web content
is both sufficient and necessary to bring an end to the arms race
around page markup obfuscation, we show that this merely replaces
inputs (e.g., an ad-network cannot “sample” new ads until it finds one that evades the
ad-blocker), with attacks that the user should be oblivious to.