<div id =" overlay "></ div>
#overlay {
background-image :url(" data : image / png ; base64,... ");
width : 100% ; height : 100% ; top: 0; left : 0;
position :fixed ;z-index : 10000 ; pointer-events :none ;
opacity : 0.01 ; }
Figure 7: Code for Attack C4-U. An adversarial mask is tiled
over the full page with a small opacity factor.
Attack C3: Evasion with adversarial content. These attacks ap-
ply to page-based ad-blockers and allow publishers to evade ad-
blocking while only perturbing HTML elements that they control
(which crucially does not include the content of ad-frames). We
show that a publisher can actually perturb the full screenshot image
fed into the classifier using CSS techniques. The HTML perturbation
is anear-transparent mask , that is overlaid on the entire web page
(see Figure 7). The CSS properties z-index andpointer-events
are used to display the mask over all other web content, but allow
underlying elements to still be accessed and clicked normally.
Adding a mask over the full image is prohibitive, as the mask
would be large and tied to a fixed resolution. We thus build a smaller
mask and tileit over the full page. We generate a universal adversar-
ial maskδof20KB by minimizingLFN
YOLOover Dtrain. The overlaid
mask evades detection of all ads in our evaluation set (see Figure 8,
(b)). This attack can be deployed by anypublisher, to evade all ads.
The perturbation mask is robust to scrolling and viewport changes
when tested in Google Chrome.
Figure 8 (c) shows a similar attack that overloads the ad-blocker.
The transparent mask is crafted to minimize LFN
YOLOover Dtrain, and
creates many incorrect predictions that coerce the ad-blocker into
abdicating or breaking the site. On all websites, the mask causes
the model to detect abnormally large ads or fail to detect real ads.
These attacks are powerful and can be re-used by any publisher.
Yet, ad-blockers might try to detect certain CSS tricks and disable
them. We thus also propose stealthier attacks tuned to a single
domain. For pages on BBC.com, we create a small perturbation
(40×1020 px) that is applied to the white background right below
an ad frame (see Figure 14(b)) and that universally applies to all
pages from that publisher that use a similar layout.
Attack C4: Detection with adversarial honeypots. To detect ad-
blocking, publishers can use honeypots that falsely trigger ad-
blockers [ 95]. The false positives in Figures 5-6 are innocuous
elements that are falsely classified as ads or ad-disclosures. For
OCR and the model of Hussain et al. [ 40], generating near-opaque
black elements worked best. As average hashing is invariant to
changes in image intensity, creating false positives for it is trivial.
For page-based ad-blockers, our first attack embeds a perturba-
tion into a small page footer (see Figure 8 (d)). The footer causes
false predictions for 19/20pages in our evaluation set, and is robust
to a user scrolling over the page. Figure 14 (c) shows a stealth-
ier attack—tailored to bbc.com—that hides a honeypot in the page
header and has 100% success rate across pages from that publisher.
4.3 Attacks against Ad-Blocker Actions
Ad-blockers usually run at a higher privilege level than any web
page. They are generally not affected by the same-origin policy and
can read and write any part of any web page that the user visits.The main privileged action taken by an ad-blocker is altering of
web content. Attackers exploit this action when using honeypots
to detect ad-blockers. But triggering ad-blocker actions can have
more pernicious effects. Below, we describe two attacks that can
be deployed by arbitrary content creators (e.g., a Facebook user) to
trigger malicious ad-blocker actions in other users’ browsers.
Attack A1: Cross-boundary blocking. In this attack (see Figure 1)
a malicious user (Jerry) uploads adversarial content that triggers
a Sentinel-like ad-blocker into marking content of another user
(Tom) as and ad. This “cross-boundary blocking attack” hijacks the
ad-blocker’s elevated privilege to bypass web security boundaries.
To mount the attack, we optimally perturb Jerry’s content so
as to maximize the model’s confidence in a box that covers Tom’s
content. The attack works because object-detector models such
as YOLOv3 [ 72] predict bounding boxes by taking into account
thefullinput image—a design feature which increases accuracy
and speed [ 70]. As a result, adversarial content can affect bounding
boxes in arbitrary image regions. Our attack reveals an inherent vul-
nerability of anyobject detector applied to web content—wherein
the model’s segmentation misaligns with web-security boundaries.
Attack A2: Cross-origin web requests. In addition to searching for
the “Sponsored” text on Facebook, Ad-Highlighter [ 82] uses the
fact that the ad-disclosure contains a link to Facebook’s ad-policy
page as an additional signal. Specifically, Ad-Highlighter parses
the DOM in search for links containing the text “Sponsored” and
determines whether the link leads to Facebook’s ad statement page
by simulating a user-click on the link and following any redirects.5
These techniques are dangerous and enable serious vulnerabil-
ities (e.g., CSRF [ 66], DDoS [ 67] or click-fraud [ 22]) with conse-
quences extending beyond ad-blocking. Clicking links on a user’s
behalf is a highly privileged action, which can thus be exploited by
any party that can add links in a page , which can include arbitrary
website users. To illustrate the dangers of behavioral ad-blocking,
we create a regular Facebook post with an URL to a web page with
title “Sponsored”. Facebook converts this URL into a link which
Ad-Highlighter clicks on. Albeit sound, this attack luckily and co-
incidentally fails due to Facebook’s Link Shim , that inspects clicked
links before redirecting the user. Ad-Highlighter fails to follow this
particular redirection thus inadvertently preventing the attack. Yet,
this also means that Facebook could use the same layer of indirec-
tion for their “Sponsored” link. If the behavioral ad-blocking idea
were to be extended to disclosure cues on other websites (e.g., the
AdChoices logo), such attacks would also be easily mounted. Pre-
filtering inputs passed to a behavioral layer does not help. Either the
filter is perfect, in which case no extra step is required—or its false
positives can be exploited to trigger the behavioral component.
4.4 Attacks against Page Segmentation
In this Section, we describe attacks targeting the ad-blocker’s page
segmentation logic, in an effort to evade the ad-blocker or ex-
haust its resources. These attacks use standard Web techniques
5Ad-Highlighter simulates clicks because Facebook used to resolve links server-side
(the ad-disclosure used to link to www.facebook.com/#). Facebook recently changed its
obfuscation of the link in post captions. It now uses an empty <a>tag that is populated
using JavaScript during the click event. This change fools Ad-Highlighter and still
requires an ad-blocker to simulate a potentially dangerous click to uncover the link.