(a) (b) (c)
Figure 2: The AdChoices Logo. AdChoices is a standard for
disclosure of behavioral advertising [24]. Ads are marked by
the icon (a), with optional text (b). Despite creative guide-
lines [25], many variants of the logo are in use (c).
one arms race with a new one centered on adversarial examples.
Our attacks are not just a first step in this new arms race, where
ad-blockers can easily regain the upper hand. Instead, they describe
an inherent difficulty with the perceptual ad-blocking approach, as
ad-blockers operate in essentially the worst threat model for visual
classifiers . Their adversaries prepare (offline) digital attacks to evade
or falsely trigger a known white-box visual classifier running inside
the ad-blocker. In contrast, the ad-blocker must resist these attacks
while operating under strict real-time constraints.
Our study’s goal is not to downplay the merits of ad-blocking, nor
discredit the perceptual ad-blocking philosophy. Indeed, ML might
one day achieve human-level perception. Instead, we highlight
and raise awareness of the inherent vulnerabilities that arise from
instantiating perceptual ad-blockers with existing ML techniques.
Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions:
•We conduct a detailed security analysis of perceptual ad-
blocking;
•We present nine general classes of attacks against the various
components of the perceptual ad-blocking pipeline;
•We evaluate adversarial examples for eight ad classifiers (seven
visual, one audio). We make novel use of transformation-
robust [ 12] and universal adversarial examples [ 56] to create
scalable attacks robust to arbitrary changes in web content.
•We release all our data and classifiers, including a new neural
network that locates ads in web page screenshots, that may
prove useful in non-adversarial settings : https://github.com/
ftramer/ad-versarial
2 PRELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND
2.1 The Online Advertising Ecosystem
Online advertising comprises four actors: users, publishers, ad net-
works, and advertisers. Users browse websites owned or curated
by a publisher. Publishers assigns parts of the site’s layout to ad-
vertisements. Control of these spaces is often outsourced to an ad
network that populates them with advertisers’ contents.
To protect users from deceptive ads, the Federal Trade Com-
mission and similar non-US agencies require ads to be clearly rec-
ognizable [ 26]. These provisions have also spawned industry self-
regulation, such as the AdChoices standard [24] (see Figure 2).
2.2 Perceptual Ad-Blocking
Perceptual ad-blocking aims at identifying ads from their content,
rather than from ad metadata such as URLs and markup. The insight
of Storey et al. [ 81] is that many ads are explicitly marked—e.g., via a
“Sponsored” link or the AdChoices logo—to comply with regulationson deceptive advertising. They developed Ad-Highlighter [ 82], an
ad-blocker that detects ad-disclosures using different perceptual
techniques: (i) textual searches for “Sponsored” tags, (ii) fuzzy image
search and OCR to detect the AdChoices logo, and (iii) “behavioral”
detection of ad-disclosures by identifying links to ad-policy pages.
Ad-blockers that rely on perceptual signals are presumed to be less
prone to an arms race, as altering these signals would affect user
experience or violate ad-disclosure regulations [81].
Perceptual ad-blocking has drawn the attention of major ad-
blockers, that have integrated visual signals into their pipelines. For
example, uBlock blocks Facebook ads by detecting the “Sponsored”
caption. Adblock Plus has added support for image-matching rules,
which are easily extended to fuzzy image search [8].
The above perceptual ad-blocking approaches still rely on some
markup data as a proxy for ads’ visual content. This has prompted
an ongoing arms race between Facebook and uBlock (see [ 88])
where the former continuously obfuscates the HTML tags that ren-
der its “Sponsored” tag—a process that is invisible to the user. This
weakness is fundamental to perceptual approaches that rely on
signals with an indirect correspondence to ads’ rendered content.
This insight led Adblock Plus to announce the ambitious goal of
detecting ads directly from rendered web pages—with no reliance
on markup—by leveraging advances in image classification. Their
Sentinel [ 10] project uses an object-detection neural network to
locate ads in raw Facebook screenshots. The recently released Perci-
val project [ 84] targets a similar goal, by embedding a deep-learning
based ad-blocker directly into Chromium’s rendering engine.
2.2.1 Design and Goals. Ad-blockers are client-side programs run-
ning in browsers at a high privilege level. They can be implemented
as browser extensions or integrated in the browser. We ignore DNS
ad-blockers (e.g., Pi-hole) as these cannot use perceptual signals.2
The goal of ad-blockers is to identify and hide ads, while guard-
ing against website breakage [ 4] resulting from the removal of
functional content. As opposed to network-level filters, perceptual
signals only apply to downloaded Web content and are thus unsuit-
able for some secondary goals of ad-blockers, such as bandwidth
saving or blocking of user tracking and malvertising [ 46,51,68,93].
Ad-blockers may strive to remove ads without being detected
by the publisher. For example, many websites try to detect ad-
blockers [ 58] and take according action (e.g., by asking users to
disable ad-blockers). As perceptual ad-blockers do not interfere with
web requests, they are undetectable by the web-server [ 81]. How-
ever, the publisher’s JavaScript code can try to detect ad-blockers
by observing changes in the DOM page when hiding ads.
Finally, perceptual ad-blockers have strict timing constraints,
and should process a web page and detect ads in close to real-time.
2.2.2 Algorithms for Visual Ad Classification. The identification of
ads or ad-disclosures can be achieved using a variety of computer
vision techniques. Below, we describe existing approaches.
•Template matching. Ad-Highlighter detects the AdChoices logo
by comparing each image in a page to a template using average
2While our work focuses on the desktop browser setting, perceptual ad-blocking
might also prove useful in the mobile domain. Current mobile ad-blockers are often
part of a custom browser, or act as web proxies—an insufficient approach for native
apps that prevent proxying using certificate pinning. Instead, a perceptual ad-blocker
(potentially with root access) could detects ads directly from app screenshots