has to stitch them together to correctly recognize the image (e.g.,
Google’s AdChoices logo consists of two separate SVG tags).
Finally, the rules used by ad-blockers to link ad-disclosures back
to the corresponding ad frame can also be targeted. For example,
on pages with an integrated ad network, such as Facebook, the
publisher could place ad-disclosures (i.e., “Sponsored” links) and
ads at arbitrary places in the DOM and re-position them using CSS.
Frame-based and page-based ad-blockers bypass all these issues
by operating on already-rendered content.
Attack S2: Over-segmentation. Here the publisher injects a large
number of elements into the DOM (say, by generating dummy im-
ages in JavaScript) to overwhelm an ad-blocker’s classifier with
inputs and exhaust its resources. In response, ad-blockers would
have to aggressively filter DOM elements—with the risk of these
filters’ blind spots being exploited to evade or detect ad-blocking.
The viability of this attack may seem unclear, as users might blame
publishers for high page-load latency resulting from an overloaded
ad-blocker. Yet, Facebook’s efforts to cause site-breakage by embed-
ding ad-disclosure honeypots within all regular user posts demon-
strates that some ad networks may result to such tactics.
4.5 Attacks against Training
For classifiers that are trained on labeled images, the data collection
and training phase can be vulnerable to data poisoning attacks (D1)—
especially when crowdsourced as with Sentinel [ 10]. We describe
these attacks for completeness, but refrain from a detailed evalua-
tion as the test-time attacks described in Sections 4.2 through 4.4
are conceptually more interesting and more broadly applicable.
In these attacks, the adversary joins the crowdsourced data col-
lection to submit maliciously crafted images that adversely influ-
ence the training process. For example, malicious training data can
contain visual backdoors [20], which are later used to evade the
ad-blocker. The ad-blocker developer cannot tell if a client is con-
tributing real data for training or malicious samples. Similar attacks
against crowdsourced filter lists such as Easylist are theoretically
possible. A malicious user could propose changes to filter lists that
degrade their utility. However, new filters are easily interpreted and
vetted before inclusion—a property not shared by visual classifiers.
Sentinel’s crowdsourced data collection of users’ Facebook feeds
also raises serious privacy concerns, as a deployed model might
leak parts of its training data [30, 77].
5 DISCUSSION
We have presented multiple attacks to evade, detect and abuse
recently proposed and deployed perceptual ad-blockers. We now
provide an in-depth analysis of our results.
5.1 A New Arms Race
Our results indicate that perceptual ad-blocking will either perpetu-
ate the arms race of filter lists, or replace it with an arms race around
adversarial examples. Where perceptual ad-blockers that rely heav-
ily on page markup (e.g., as in uBlock [ 7] or Ad-Highlighter [ 82])
remain vulnerable to continuous markup obfuscation [ 88], visual
classification of rendered web content (as in Sentinel [ 10] or Perci-
val [84]) inherits a crucial weakness of current visual classifiers—
adversarial examples [33, 83].The past years have seen considerable work towards mitigat-
ing the threat of adversarial examples. Yet, defenses are either
broken by improved attacks [ 11,17], or limited to restricted adver-
saries [ 21,45,53,69,86]. Even if ad-block developers proactively
detect adversarial perturbations and blacklist them (e.g., using ad-
versarial training [ 53,83] to fine-tune their classifier), adversaries
can simply regenerate new attacks (or use slightly different pertur-
bations [76]).
5.2 Strategic Advantage of Adversaries and
Lack of Defenses
Our attacks with adversarial examples are not a quid pro quo step in
this new arms race, but indicate a pessimistic outcome for percep-
tual ad-blocking. Indeed, these ad-blockers operate in essentially
the worst threat model for visual classifiers . Their adversaries have
access to the ad-blockers’ code and prepare offline digital adversar-
ial examples to trigger both false-negatives and false-positives in
the ad-blocker’s online (and time constrained) decision making.
Even if ad-blockers obfuscate their code, black-box attacks [ 41]
or model stealing [ 63,87] still apply. Randomizing predictions or de-
ploying multiple classifiers is also ineffective [ 11,37]. For example,
some of the adversarial examples in Figure 5 work for both OCR
and SIFT despite being targeted at a single one of these classifiers.
The severity of the above threat model is apparent when consid-
ering existing defenses to adversarial examples. For instance, adver-
sarial training [ 53,83] assumes restricted adversaries (e.g., limited
toℓ∞perturbations), and breaks under other attacks [ 27,76,85]. Ro-
bustness to adversarial false positives (or “garbage examples” [ 33])
is even harder. Even if ad-blockers proactively re-train on adversar-
ial examples deployed by publishers and ad-networks, training has
a much higher cost than the attack generation and is unlikely to
generalize well to new perturbations [ 74].Detecting adversarial ex-
amples [ 34,55] (also an unsolved problem [ 16]) is insufficient as Ad-
blockers face both adversarial false-positives and false-negatives,
so merely detecting an attack does not aid in decision-making. A
few recently proposed defenses achieve promising results in some
restricted threat models, e.g., black-box attacks [ 19] or physically-
realizable attacks [ 21]. These defenses are currently inapplicable in
the threat model of perceptual ad-blocking, but might ultimately
reveal new insights for building more robust models.
Our attacks also apply if perceptual ad-blocking is used as a
complement to filter lists rather than as a standalone approach.
Ad-blockers that combine both types of techniques are vulnerable
to attacks targeting either. If perceptual ad-blocking is only used
passively (e.g., to aid in the maintenance of filter lists, by logging
potential ads that filter lists miss), the ad-blocker’s adversaries still
have incentive to attack to delay the detection of new ads.
This stringent threat model above also applies to ML-based ad-
blockers that use URL and DOM features [ 14,36,43], which have
not been evaluated against adaptive white-box attacks.
5.3 Beyond the Web and Vision.
The use of sensory signals for ad-blocking has been considered
outside the Web, e.g., AdblockRadio detects ads in radio streams
using neural networks [ 2]. Emerging technologies such as virtual
reality [ 62], voice assistants [ 44] and smart TVs [ 59] are posited to