Figure 4: Perceptual Ad-Blocking Elements. An ad (box #1) is
displayed in an iframe , that contains an AdChoices icon (box
#2). A custom ad-disclosure from the publisher is outside the
iframe (box #3). Publishers can use iframes to display non-
ad content such as videos (box #4).
3.2.3 Page-based Perceptual Ad-blocking. The core idea of percep-
tual ad-blocking is to emulate the way humans detect ads. Element-
and frame-based approaches embrace this goal to some extent,
but still rely on DOM information that humans are oblivious to.
Recently, Adblock Plus proposed an approach that fully emulates
visual detection of online ads from rendered web content alone [ 10].
In a page-based ad-blocker, segmentation is integrated into the
classifier. Its core task is best viewed as an object-detection problem:
given a web page screenshot, identify the location and dimension
of ads. Adblock Plus trained the YOLOv3 object-detector [ 72] on
screenshots of Facebook with ads labeled using standard filter-lists.
Once ad locations are predicted, the ad-blocker can overlay them
to hide ads, or remove the underlying HTML elements (e.g., by
using the document.elementFromPoint browser API to get the
HTML element rendered at some coordinate).
4 ATTACKS ON PERCEPTUAL AD-BLOCKING
Given the unified architecture from Section 3, we now perform
a comprehensive security analysis of the perceptual ad-blocking
pipeline and describe multiple attacks targeting concrete instantia-
tions of each of the ad-blocker’s components. The primary focus of
our analysis is to evaluate the robustness of the ad-blocker’s core
visual classifier, by instantiating adversarial examples for seven
different and varied approaches to ad-detection (Section 4.2). We
further demonstrate powerful attacks that exploit the ad-blocker’s
high-privilege actions (Section 4.3). We conclude by describing more
classical attacks that affect the segmentation step of current per-
ceptual ad-blockers (Section 4.4), as well as potential attacks on an
ad-blocker’s offline data collection and training phase (Section 4.5).
Our attacks can be mounted by different adversaries (e.g., pub-
lishers, ad-networks, or malicious third parties) to evade or detect
ad-blocking and, at times, abuse the ad-blocker’s high privilege level
to bypass web security boundaries. These attacks, summarized in
Table 2, challenge the belief that perceptual signals can tilt the
arms race with publishers and ad-networks in favor of ad-blockers.
All our data, pre-trained models, and attack code are available at
https://github.com/ftramer/ad-versarial.The attacks described in this section do not violate existing laws
or regulations on deceptive advertising, as the changes to the visual
content of a page are imperceptible to human users.
4.1 Evaluation Setup
4.1.1 Evaluated Approaches. We analyze a variety of techniques
to instantiate the different stages of the perceptual ad-blocking
pipeline. In particular, we evaluate seven distinct approaches to the
ad-blocker’s core visual ad-classification step (see Table 1). Three
are element-based, three frame-based, and one page-based. These
seven classifiers are taken from or inspired by prior work. They are:
Two computer vision algorithms used in Ad-Highlighter [ 81,82]
(average hashing and OCR); two ad classifiers, one from Hus-
sain et al. [ 40] and one used in Percival [ 84]; a robust feature
matcher, SIFT [ 52]; and two object detector networks—with the
same YOLOv3 model [ 72] as Sentinel [ 10,61]—which we trained to
detect either ad-disclosures in frames, or ads in a full web page.
For the two object detector models we built, we explicitly sepa-
rated (i.e., assigned to non-communicating authors) the tasks of (1)
data-collection, design and training; and (2) development of attacks,
to ensure fair evaluation results. Our first (frame-based) model was
trained to detect AdChoices logos that we overlaid in a dataset
of6,320ads collected by Hussain et al. [ 40]. We then classify an
iframe as an ad, if the model detects the AdChoices logo in it.
Our second model emulates the approach of the unreleased Sen-
tinel [ 10,61] and was trained to detect ads in arbitrary news web-
sites. This broadens Sentinel’s original scope (which was limited
to Facebook)—a decision we made due to difficulties in collecting
sufficient training data [ 61]. One author trained YOLOv3 to locate
ads in screenshots of news websites from all G20 nations. To collect
a diverse dataset of labeled ads in web screenshots, we first locates
ads using a web-proxy based on filter lists, and then randomly re-
place ads with a larger variety of examples. More details about this
process, of independent interest, are in Appendix B. A video of our
model in action on five websites not seen during training is available
at https://github.com/ftramer/ad-versarial/blob/master/videos.
4.1.2 Evaluation Data. We use real website data to evaluate the
accuracy and robustness of the above seven ad-classifiers. We built
an evaluation set from the top ten news websites in the Alexa
ranking (see Table 3). For each website, we extract the following
data:
(1)All images smaller than 50KB in the DOM. This data is used to
evaluate element-based techniques. We collect 864images, 41of
which are AdChoices logos ( 17/41logos contain the “AdChoices”
text in addition to the icon).
(2)A screenshot of each iframe in the DOM tree, to evaluate frame-
based models. We collect 59frames. Of these, 39are ads and 29
contain an AdChoices logo. Percival [ 84] only considers images
of dimension at least 100×100px so we limit it to these.3
3Taking a screenshot of an iframe is an approximation of how Chromium’s render-
ing engine segments frames for Percival’s classifier. We verified that our attacks on
Percival’s network work when deployed inside the Chromium browser.