Algorithms 2022 ,15, 122 18 of 21
The approach used in this study follows the ideas of automatic heuristic generation
presented in several studies, such as [ 64–67]. These hyper-heuristics are aimed at designing
solutions for complex problems with heuristic approaches, and one of our previous studies
has shown that it is possible to use genetic programming for the problem of designing
parameter adaptation techniques [ 22]. The hyper-heuristics are important for several
reasons: They not only create a solution to the problem (which could be in the form of an
algorithm, graph or neural network), which could be directly used, but also discover new,
non-trivial ways of solving problems. This is possible due to the fact that the algorithms
are random and are not biased by the human perception of the problem. As an example,
to the best of our knowledge, there are no efﬁcient parameter adaptation techniques for
DE, which would use success ratio values directly, and here, it appeared to be informative
for generating Fand Cr. Moreover, such values as the ratio of an index of an individual in
the population sorted by ﬁtness is an example of an input value, which is quite difﬁcult
to apply for parameter adaptation, simply because its inﬂuence is unclear. However, the
NEAT approach, for example, HA-NEAT-DBM used in this study, is able to make use
of these values and apply them to the samples Fand Cr. Of course, this does not mean
that these values are reliable information sources; however, the analysis of solutions may
help researchers gain insights into how these values could be of use and what the internal
mechanisms could be blocking the algorithm from achieving better search results.
In this manner, applying hyper-heuristic approaches to parameter adaptation in DE
could be considered as a knowledge extraction procedure, or even ’algorithm mining’ (an
analogy for data mining). An important part of this is that the computational experiments
are performed without a high-level theory, which would describe the possible outcomes and
predict the results. Here, the experiment has ’a life of its own’, where massive computation
and application of evolutionary principles lead to automatic knowledge extraction. Such
studies are known to follow the concept of new experimentalism [ 68], which is a part of
any experimental research in the area of evolutionary computation.
Taking into account all of the above, the application of hyper-heuristics to parameter
adaptation is a research direction where new and important results could be found for
the whole evolutionary algorithms area, and the particular learning algorithm used is not
so important: should it be genetic programming, neuroevolution, fuzzy logic system or
something else, while it allows the direct analysis of solutions, it can be considered as a
knowledge extraction method.
5. Conclusions
In this study, the modiﬁcation of neuroevolution of augmented topologies, in partic-
ular, the HA-NEAT-DBM algorithm with heterogeneous activation functions, difference-
based mutation, lexicase selection and behavior-based speciation, was applied to the
problem of designing parameter adaptation techniques. The performed computational
experiments have shown that the proposed approach is able to create efﬁcient adapta-
tion schemes, which behave differently from existing well-known mechanisms, such as
success-history adaptation. The analysis of the best solutions has shown that the designed
heuristics are relatively simple, although they use other information sources compared to
existing state-of-the-art approaches. Further directions of study in the area of generative
hyper-heuristics for parameter adaptation may include training on larger sets of bench-
mark functions, applying them to population size adaptation, and using other mechanisms
than neuroevolution.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V .S. and S.A.; methodology, V .S., S.A. and E.S.; software,
V .S. and E.S.; validation, V .S., S.A. and E.S.; formal analysis, S.A.; investigation, V .S.; resources, E.S.
and V .S.; data curation, E.S.; writing—original draft preparation, V .S. and S.A.; writing—review
and editing, V .S.; visualization, S.A. and V .S.; supervision, E.S.; project administration, E.S. funding
acquisition, S.A. and V .S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.