Algorithms 2022 ,15, 122 12 of 21
The results in Table 2 seem promising, but it should be taken into account that the
HA-NEAT-DBM algorithm used these functions to train and select best solutions here.
Thus, a certain overﬁtting may have occurred here. The results in the 20Dcase could be
considered as testing, but even though the dimension of the problems is different, the
functions have the same structure and similar landscape. To test the efﬁciency of parameter
adaptation the previous year’s benchmark set, CEC 2021 was considered. In CEC 2021,
there are eight different benchmarks, which combine different function alternations, such
as bias, shift and rotation [ 21]. Table 3 contains the aggregated comparison on all eight
benchmarks. Note that in the case of CEC 2021, the statistical tests did not use information
about convergence speed, according to the competition rules.
The numbers in Table 3 are the number of wins, ties and losses over all 8 benchmarks,
each containing 10 test functions. Analyzing the results of CEC 2021, the difference between
different automatically discovered heuristics could be clearly seen. For example, in some
cases, the heuristics are always equal or worse than the NL-SHADE-RSP sparameter
adaptation, and in other cases, the heuristics are usually better. For example, runs 2, 22,
28, 36, 42 and 49 could be considered as relatively successful as they have comparable
or better performance on both 10Dand 20D. However, when compared to the original
NL-SHADE-RSP , the results of the ANNs designed by HA-NEAT-DBM are relatively poor:
Even run 49, which is one of the most successful, has only 13 wins on 10Dand 43 losses.
Such a difference in performance is probably due to the fact that NL-SHADE-RSP was
speciﬁcally designed for the CEC 2021 benchmark, and has special parameter adaptation
mechanisms that allow it to reach high a performance level.
The experiments on the CEC 2021 benchmark also allow the efﬁciency of the designed
heuristics to be determined in solving biased, shifted and rotated problems. To perform the
comparison, the baseline NL-SHADE-RSP swas compared to the heuristic from run 49 on
different benchmarks, and the results are shown in Table 4.
The results of statistical tests in Table 4 show that in the basic scenario, without
bias, shift and rotation of functions, the heuristic from run 49 performs quite well in
the10Dand 20Dcases; however, if the functions are shifted, the results are worse. The
rotation procedure, which signiﬁcantly changes the landscape, does not inﬂuence the
performance of the heuristic compared to NL-SHADE-RSP s. Moreover, in the 20Dcase,
it appears to be better for the Rotation and Bias benchmarks on 4 functions out of 10. In
particular, here the improvements were achieved on F2 (Shifted and Rotated Schwefel’s
function), F3 (Shifted and Rotated Lunacek bi-Rastrigin function), F6 (Hybrid Function 2,
including Expanded Schaffer, HGBat, Rosenbrock’s and Modiﬁed Schwefel’s functions)
and F7 (Hybrid Function 3, including Expanded Schaffer, HGBat, Rosenbrock’s, Modiﬁed
Schwefel’s and High Conditioned Elliptic functions). Therefore, it can be concluded that
the designed parameter adaptation allows rotated problems to be solved more efﬁciently.
For a deeper understanding of how the designed parameter adaptation techniques
operate during the algorithm run, in Figure 1, the graphs of inputs to the neural network
and outputs from it are shown for CEC 2022 test functions, and the solution from run 29
is considered.