Algorithms 2022 ,15, 122 5 of 21
2.2. Neuroevolution
The problem of evolving artiﬁcial neural network topology is one of the most impor-
tant areas of studies because the number of neurons and their connectivity signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences the efﬁciency and complexity of the resulting solutions. Several attempts were
made in combining ANN with evolutionary algorithms, and the Neuroevolution of Aug-
mented Topologies (NEAT) [ 17] remains one of the most promising directions of studies.
The main advantage of NEAT is that it allows both the topology and the weights of an
ANN to be evolved thanks to speciﬁc solution representation and operators. This allows
NEAT to be efﬁcient in solving a variety of problems, such as classiﬁcation, regression and
control, among others [43].
The main features of the NEAT algorithm are the usage of historical markers (or
innovation numbers), speciation mechanism and initialization with minimal structures.
NEAT starts with a population of simple networks, where only inputs and outputs are
connected, and the weights are assigned randomly. The search process consists of adding
new nodes and connections, i.e., augmenting the ANN topology via mutation and crossover
operators. The encoding scheme in NEAT is based on a set of nodes and a set of connections,
with each element in these sets having several properties. In particular, the nodes have
historical markers, a type of node (input, output, hidden) and an activation function, while
connections have historical markers, source and destination nodes numbers, a weight value
and an activation ﬂag.
The historical markers indicate the moment when a certain node or connection was
added. These markers are required to align the corresponding genes during crossover,
which helps to solve the competing conventions problem, which occurs when the encoding
scheme allows several ways of expressing the same solution [17].
The NEAT algorithm follows a general scheme, starting with initialization, followed
by selection, crossover, mutation and speciation. The selection mechanism could be based
on any of the mechanisms widely used in EC, such as rank-based or tournament selection.
The crossover step combines the genetic information of two parents by aligning the genes
having identical innovation numbers. The offspring is composed of the genes, which are
randomly chosen from either the ﬁrst or second parent. As the parents may have different
chromosome lengths, there is a possibility that disjoint genes or excess genes will occur. The
disjoint genes are the ones that are present in one parent, but not in the other, while there is
still a common part after that. The excess genes are the tail genes of the parent individuals,
which are present only in one of the parents, and there is no common part after that. The
disjoint and excess genes are taken from the parent with higher ﬁtness during crossover.
The original NEAT algorithm proposed two mutation schemes: adding a new connec-
tion and adding a node to the connection. When adding a connection, a pair of nodes is
randomly selected, and a new connection gene is created at the end of the chromosome
with a new innovation number. The weight of the newly generated connection is randomly
sampled. When adding a node to the connection, one of the existing connections is ran-
domly chosen and split into two, and a randomly generated hidden node is placed in
between. One of the weights of the two new connections is set to 1, and the other keeps
the previous value. The new historical markers are assigned to both new connections and
the node.
The speciation step implements the innovation protection role in NEAT. When the new
connections or nodes are added to the individual, there is a signiﬁcant chance that they will
decrease the efﬁciency of the solution, but further development of this solution may result
in more promising ones. To avoid deleting new solutions and still keep the population
evolving, the speciation (or niching) procedure is applied, which uses innovation numbers
to determine similarities and differences between individuals and create subgroups within
population. In NEAT, the ﬁrst individual creates the ﬁrst species, and the subsequent
individuals are either added to this species or create their own based on compatibility or
similarity distance. If this distance is smaller than a certain threshold, then an individual
belongs to the species. The distance combines the information about the number of excess