Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Symplectic Recurrent Neural Networks
Zhengdao Chena;c, Jianyu Zhangb;c,
Martin Arjovskya, Léon Bottouc;a
aNew York University, New York, USA
bTianjin University, Tianjin, China
cFacebook AI Research, New York, USA
Abstract
We propose Symplectic Recurrent Neural Networks (SRNNs) as learning
algorithms that capture the dynamics of physical systems from observed
trajectories. An SRNN models the Hamiltonian function of the system by a
neural network and furthermore leverages symplectic integration, multiple-
step training and initial state optimization to address the challenging nu-
merical issues associated with Hamiltonian systems. We show SRNNs suc-
ceedreliablyoncomplexandnoisyHamiltoniansystems. Wealsoshowhow
to augment the SRNN integration scheme in order to handle stiﬀ dynamical
systems such as bouncing billiards.
1 Introduction
Can machines learn physical laws from data? A recent paper (Greydanus et al., 2019),
Hamiltonian Neural Networks (HNN), proposes to do so representing the Hamiltonian func-
tionH(q;p)as a multilayer neural network. The partial derivatives of this network are then
trained to match the time derivatives _pand _qobserved along the trajectories in state space.
The ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) that express Hamiltonian dynamics are famous
for both their mathematical elegance and their challenges to numerical integration tech-
niques. Except maybe for the simplest Hamiltonian systems, discretization errors and mea-
surement noise lead to quickly diverging trajectories. In other words, Hamiltonian systems
can often be stiﬀ, a concept that usually refers to diﬀerential equations where we have to
take very small time-steps of integration so that the numerical solution remain stable (Lam-
bert, 1991). A plethora of numerical integration methods, symplectic integrators , have been
developed to respect the conserved quantities in Hamiltonian systems, thereby usually being
more stable and structure-preserving than non-symplectic ones (Hairer et al., 2002). For
example, the simplest symplectic integrator is the well-known leapfrog method, also known
as the Stömer-Verlet integrator (Leimkuhler and Reich, 2005). However, even the best inte-
grators remain severely challenged by phenomena as intuitive as a mechanical rebound or a
slingshot eﬀect, which are more severe forms of stiﬀness. Such numerical issues are almost
doomed to conﬂict with the inherently approximate nature of a learning algorithm.
In the ﬁrst part of this paper, we propose Symplectic Recurrent Neural Networks (SRNNs),
where (i) the partial derivatives of the neural-network-parametrized Hamiltonian are in-
tegrated with the leapfrog integrator and where ( ii) the loss is back-propagated through
the ODE integration over multiple time steps. We ﬁnd that in the presence of observa-
tion noise, SRNN are far more usable than HNNs. Further improvements are achieved by
simultaneously optimizing the initial state and the Hamiltionian network, presenting an in-
teresting contrast to previous literature on the hardness of general initial state optimization
(Peifer and Timmer, 2007). The optimization can be motivated from a maximum likeli-
hood estimation perspective, and we provide heuristic arguments for why the initial state
optimization is likely convex given the symplecticness of the system. Furthermore, experi-
ments in the three-body problem show that the SRNN-trained Hamiltonian compensates for
discretization errors and can even outperform numerically solving the ODE using the true
Hamiltonian and the same time-step size. This could be of particular interest to researchers
who study the application of machine learning to numerically solving diﬀerential equations.
The second part of this paper focuses on perfect rebound as an example of the more severe
form of stiﬀness. When a point mass rebounds without loss of energy on a perfectly rigid
1arXiv:1909.13334v2  [cs.LG]  25 Apr 2020