Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
0 10 20 30 40 50
time step0246810L2 errorSingle-step E-E O-NET
(HNN) Single-step E-E H-NET
Single-step E-L O-NET
Single-step E-L H-NET
Single-step L-L O-NET
Single-step L-L H-NET
0 20 40 60 80 100
time step4
2
024position(HNN) Single-step E-E H-NET
Single-step E-L H-NET
Single-step L-L H-NET
Observations
Figure 1: Testing results in the noiseless case by single-step methods. Left: Prediction error
of each method over time, measured by the L2 distance between the true and predicted
positions of the 20 masses. Right: Each curve represents the position of one of the masses
(number 5) as a function of time predicted by the three single-step-trained H-NET models.
Plots of the other masses’ positions are provided in Appendix D.1.
4.1 Going symplectic - rescuing HNN with the leapfrog integrator
First, we consider the noiseless case, where the training data consist of exact values of the
positions (q) and momenta ( p) of the masses on the chain at each discrete time point. As
shown in ﬁgure 1, the prediction of a single-step E-E H-NET deviates from the ground truth
quickly and is unable to capture the periodic motion. By comparison, a single-step E-E O-
NET yields predictions that is qualitatively reasonable. This shows that using Hamiltonian
models without paying attention to the integration scheme may not be a good idea.
We then replace Euler’s integrator used during testing by a leapfrog integrator, yielding a
Single-step E-L H-NET. Figure 1 shows that this helps the H-NET produce predictions that
remain stable and periodic over a longer period of time. Since the training process remains
the same, this implies that part of the instability and degeneration of H-NET’s predictions
comes from the nature of Euler’s integrator rather than the lack of proper training.
In contrast, using a leapfrog integrator for both training and testing substantially improve
the performance, as also shown again in ﬁgure 1. This improvement shows the importance
of consistency between the integrators used in training and predicting modes. This can be
understood with the concept of modiﬁed equations (Hairer, 1994): when we use a numerical
integrator to solve an ODE, the numerical solution usually does not strictly follow the
original equation due to discretization, but can be regarded as a solution to a modiﬁed
version of the original equation that depends on the integrator and the time-step size.
Therefore, training and testing with the same numerical integrator and time-step size could
allow the system to learn a modiﬁed Hamiltonian that corrects some of the errors caused
by the discretization scheme.
4.2 Going recurrent - using multi-step training when noise is present
Since noise is prevalent in real-world observations, we also test our models on noisy trajec-
tories. Independent and identically distributed Gaussian noise is added to both the position
and the momentum variables at each time step. Applying the single-step methods described
above yield considerably worse predictions, as shown in Figure 2 (left).
This phenomenon can be controlled by training on multiple steps, eﬀectively arriving at a
type of recurrent neural network: if noise is added independently at each time-step, then
having data from multiple consecutive time steps may allow us to discern the actual noiseless
trajectory, analogous to performing linear regression on multiple (more than 2) noisy data
points. As we see in Figure 2 (left), recurrent training consistently improves the predictions
except for E-E H-NET. The best performing model is the SRNN (recurrent L-L H-Net)
which improves substantially over the single-step L-L H-NET. Interestingly, the recurrent
E-E H-NET does not improve over the single-step E-E H-NET, which means that recurrent
training does not help if one uses a naïve integrator.
4.3 Initial state optimization (ISO)
However, one issue remains to be addressed: in the framework that we have adopted so far,
the initial states p0andq0are treated as the actual initial states from which the system
5