network with a multi-scale graph computational unit where
features are extracted at a single individual scale and then
fused across scales. Differently, we use GCNs at different
scales to extract features for these scales separately.
3. Methodology
Human pose prediction is a task to produce future pose
sequence given the currently observed frames. Supposing
the historical poses are X1:Th= [X1, ..., X Th]∈RJ×D×Th
withThframes, among which Xtdepicts a single 3D hu-
man pose with Jjoints in the D-dimensional space (here
Dis 3) at time t. Similarly, the future pose sequence with
Tfframes is defined as XTh+1:Th+Tf. We need a model
Fpredict (·)to predict the future unknown pose sequence
ˆXTh+1:Th+Tfgiving X1:Ththat approximates the ground
truthXTh+1:Th+Tfas much as possible. We fulfill this task
by proposing a novel Multi-Scale Residual Graph Convolu-
tion Network called MSR-GCN, as illustrated in Figure 3.
In the following, the basic GCN model for pose predic-
tion is introduced firstly, then the multi-scale architecture
used to obtain superior prediction accuracy is shown.
3.1. Basic GCNs
Firstly, we reformulate our prediction objective by re-
arranging the input and output pose sequences. Instead
of performing prediction based on X1:Th, we replicate the
last pose XThforTftimes, obtaining a sequence of length
T=Th+Tf. We then use this sequence as the input to
predict the future pose sequence comprising of ˆX1:Thand
ˆXTh+1:Th+Tf. According to [33], this prediction task can
be translated to compute a residual vector between ˆX1:T
and the ground truth X1:T, which we also find very effec-
tive to improve the prediction accuracy.
For pose prediction, it has been proven very useful to
model the spatial structure of the poses [33, 7]. This is be-
cause the spatial dependencies between human joints ex-
hibit inherent and consistent characteristics over the whole
action period, which is of great importance for human pose
prediction. The dependencies that can be utilized are not
confined to joints with kinematic links such as between el-
bow and wrist, but any pair of joints can affect each other.
For example, when a person walks, the hands vibrate peri-
odically, so it is essential to explore the dependencies of two
hands for their predictions. GCN [22] is good at discovering
these relationships by viewing a pose as a fully-connected
graph with Knodes, where K=J×D, and an adjacency
matrix A∈RK×Kwhich represents the strength of edges
of the graph is learned by the GCN.
A GCN is usually composed of a set of graph convo-
lutional layers that are sequentially stacked together. For-
mally, let Hl∈RK×Flbe the input to a graph convo-
lutional layer, Al∈RK×Kthe adjacency matrix, and
Target 
 Input 
··
·······×6
Start GCN End GCN Residual GCNsGlobal Residual ConnectionFigure 2. The basic GCN model for pose prediction comprising a
start GCN, 6 residual GCNs, and an end GCN. The start GCN
maps the input from pose space to feature space, the residual
GCNs are used to extract features in the feature space, and finally,
the end GCN maps the features back to the poses. A residual con-
nection is added between the input and output poses, making the
whole network learn residuals rather than the target poses directly.
Wl∈RFl×Fl+1the trainable parameters, the output of the
graph convolutional layer is:
Hl+1=σ(AlHlWl), (1)
where Hl+1∈RK×Fl+1, andσ(·)is an activation function.
To map the input pose sequence to the target pose se-
quence, we design one start GCN, one end GCN, and 6
residual GCNs, the architecture of which is shown in Fig-
ure 2. The start GCN has 2 graph convolutional layers, pro-
jecting the input pose sequence from the space of RK×T
toRK×F, with F= 256 in this paper. Following are 6
residual GCNs each containing 2 graph convolutional lay-
ers which accept features in space RK×Fand also output
features in the same space. Finally, the end GCN, also con-
taining 2 graph convolutional layers, projects the features
in space RK×Fto the target pose sequence in space RK×T.
The whole network learns the residual vector between the
input and target pose sequences by adding a global skip con-
nection as shown in Figure 2.
Note that the above pose prediction network with ba-
sic GCNs is similar to the method proposed in [33] ex-
cept for the Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) and inverse
DCT for data representation transformation. In this paper,
we abandon the DCT transformations since directly com-
puting global residuals between padded input poses and the
target poses without translating to DCT coefficients is ef-
fective enough and computationally more efficient. In the
following, we show how the basic architecture in Figure 2
can be further improved by taking advantage of the multi-
scale properties of human pose [27].
3.2. Multi-scale Residual GCNs
Intuitively, a human pose can be simplified step by step
to obtain a set of fine-to-coarse poses. With the increase of
the coarse-scale, the motion of the pose becomes more sta-
11469