D0 DownStart 
GCN×3
D2 Down×3 ×3
…
A0 Up A2
×3 ×3 ×3… A3D3
Up Down Upsample Layer Downsample Layer
Elementwise Adding
Descending Path Ascending PathGCN Block
Up
E0 E2 E3
 …Target
Input
Scale 0 Scale 2 Scale 3
Figure 3. The architecture of the proposed MSR-GCN comprising one start GCN, four descending GCNs (D 0, D1, D2, D3), four as-
cending GCNs (A0, A 1, A2, A3), and four end GCNs (E 0, E1, E2, E3). The start GCN takes the black poses at scale 0 as input. Then
descending and ascending GCNs are stacked sequentially to extract features for each scale twice. The combined features at each scale are
finally fed into the corresponding end GCN for decoding. Residual connections are added after every end GCN that add the ground truth
poses to the output of each GCN, making the network learn residuals rather than the target poses directly.
ble, which usually means the pose prediction in this scale
is easier than a finer scale. This motivates us to propose
a Multi-scale Residual Graph Convolution Network (MSR-
GCN), in which we perform prediction at the coarsest level
firstly, and then go up to higher levels step by step. As
shown in Figure 3, our MSR-GCN is composed of four
kinds of GCNs: one start GCN, a set of descending and
ascending GCN blocks, and a set of end or decoding GCNs.
Before introducing MSR-GCN, let us describe how we
abstract a human pose. As shown in the leftmost picture of
Figure 1, the finest pose has 22 joints. We abstract the finest
pose recursively to obtain 3 poses with 12, 7, and 4 joints
respectively. The subplots in the second row of Figure 1
(from left to right) depict how to combine the joints at the
finer level, while those in the first row show the obtained
poses at the next levels correspondingly. Note that we also
tried other grouping manners, but found this scheme yields
the most stable motion at the coarsest level (see compar-
isons in Section 4.4).
Start GCN is composed of 2 convolutional layers, map-
ping the input poses into the feature space. The pose space
isRK×Tas defined above, and the feature space is RK×F
withF= 256. We use the finest-scale pose sequence as
the input to the start GCN while the pose sequences at other
scales are only used at end GCNs to calculate residuals.Descending and ascending GCN blocks. Since we
have abstracted the human pose in four levels, we use
four descending and four ascending GCN blocks, namely
D0, D1, D2, D3andA3, A 2, A1, A0, to extract features at
the four scales. Each of these blocks loops a residual GCN 6
times, and each GCN has 2 graph convolutional layers. The
eight GCN blocks are sequentially stacked together. Along
the whole descending and ascending path, the feature di-
mension Fis always kept as 256, but the pose dimension K
changes between adjacent descending or ascending blocks.
For example, D0extracts features in space RK0×Fwith
K0= 22×3 = 66, while K1= 36, K2= 21 andK3= 12
forD1,D2andD3. We use a downsampling layer to trans-
form the features outputted by D0into the space of RK1×F.
The descending blocks gradually reduce the pose dimension
which is then gradually increased by the ascending blocks
with upsampling layers. We concatenate the features ex-
tracted by a descending GCN block and the corresponding
ascending GCN block together and deliver them to the end
GCNs for decoding.
End GCNs are used for decoding the concatenated fea-
tures extracted by descending and ascending blocks to
poses. Like start GCN, an end GCN is also composed of
2 graph convolutional layers. But instead of just one start
GCN, we design 4 end GCNs, namely E0, E1, E2, E3, to
11470