GCNs with learnable connectivity and temporal informa-
tion via discrete cosine transformation (DCT) to predict hu-
man motion. Li et al. [27] propose a dynamic multi-scale
graph neural network within an encoder-decoder framework
to extract deep features at multiple scales. Although these
two works exhibit promising results on benchmark datasets,
there is still space to be explored for more high-quality hu-
man motion prediction.
In this paper, we propose a Multi-Scale Residual Graph
Convolution Network (MSR-GCN), as illustrated in Fig-
ure 3, for 3D human motion prediction. By treating a hu-
man pose as a fully connected graph whose vertices are the
pose joints, we employ graph convolution networks to dy-
namically learn the relations between all pairs of joints flex-
ibly regardless of the physical distance between them. But
GCN alone cannot capture the hierarchical structure of hu-
man pose [33]. That is, as shown in Figure 1, one can ab-
stract a human pose by grouping joints in close proximity
together and representing the group by just one joint, yield-
ing a coarser pose. Since a group of joints usually come
from the same body part, gradually abstracting body parts
in this way can significantly stabilize the motion pattern of
the body. We find that the motion in the coarser level is
more stable for which the pose prediction is easier. It is
promising to predict the poses in the coarsest level firstly,
and then go up to finer levels gradually.
Based on the above analysis, we compensate GCN with
the capacity of modeling hierarchical and contextual infor-
mation of human pose by designing multiple GCNs with a
multi-scale architecture. A group of the GCNs forms a de-
scending path to extract features from fine to coarse scale,
followed by another group of GCNs that extract multi-scale
features inversely along an ascending path. Based on these
features, we predict poses at all scales and impose interme-
diate supervision for more representative features. We also
add residual connections between the input and the output
poses as suggested by [33], making the whole framework
learn residuals instead of the target poses directly.
Note that Li et al. [27] have also observed this natural hi-
erarchical structure of human pose, but they aim to extract
rich features with the help of the multi-scale joint abstrac-
tion and then decode the future poses from the multi-scale
features with a recurrent decoder. In contrast, the encoder
and decoder in our method are organized in a U-Net-like
multi-scale manner equipped with intermediate losses, dif-
fering from the multiscale strategy in [27].
In short, our main technical contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel multi-scale residual graph convo-
lution network for human pose prediction in an end-
to-end manner, which consists of multiple GCNs orga-
nized in a multi-scale architecture.
• The well-designed descending and ascending GCNblocks can extract features in both fine-to-coarse and
coarse-to-fine manners.
• The intermediate supervision imposed at each scale
enforces to learn more representative features, bene-
fiting high-quality future prediction.
2. Related work
Human motion prediction. Many deep learning based
methods have been proposed to handle human motion pre-
diction. Existing CNN-based works like [49, 28] treat a
pose sequence as a two-dimensional matrix where one axis
is the spatial axis and another one indicates the tempo-
ral axis, then spatiotemporal convolutional filters can be
used to the pose data like what has been done for an im-
age. However, pose data, in essence, is very different
from images, lacking repeated elements that give a high
response to the same filter, thus reducing the effective-
ness of the convolutions. Although RNN-based methods
like [9, 34,41,42,37,11,5,2] have advantages in deal-
ing with time-related tasks, the discontinuity and error ac-
cumulation problems often happen because of the frame-by-
frame prediction manner. Also, the training of RNN models
is easy to collapse with gradient explosion or disappearing.
What’s more, these networks neglect the inner-frame kine-
matic dependencies between body joints. Generative adver-
sarial networks [53, 10,21,12,6,44,23] are deemed to gen-
erate realistic data whose pattern is similar to the training
data. Nevertheless, they are vulnerable and require skillful
training. Transformer-based networks like [4, 1] are sup-
posed to be capable of capturing long-range temporal de-
pendencies directly but usually have quite high computing
costs.
Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) are suitable for
tasks with non-grid and graph-structural data, e.g., biolog-
ical gene, point cloud, human social network [ 48], and hu-
man motion prediction for the graph-structure nature of the
human skeleton. They have been successfully applied to
many applications like visual recognition [16, 13,15,14,
30,32,31,17], object detection [46, 19], action localiza-
tion [50, 20], trajectory prediction [38], and image caption-
ing [8]. In particular, since graph convolution is more in-
clined to capture spatial information, Si et al. [40] combines
it with LSTM to enhance its capability of modeling tempo-
ral dependencies between human skeleton joints. Works of
[33, 26,7] allow graph convolution network to learn rela-
tions between any pair of human joints. Mao et al . [33]
design a fully connected GCN to adaptively learn the nec-
essary connectivity for the motion prediction task and ap-
ply discrete cosine transformation (DCT) to handle tempo-
ral information. Cui et al. [7] enhance the role of natural
connectivity of human joints among all the edges of the
fully connected graph. Li et al. [27] propose a graph neural
11468