decode combined features at four different scales, respec-
tively. Intermediate supervisions by computing the L2 dis-
tances between the decoded poses and their ground truth at
all scales are used to train the whole network, which is a
commonly adopted strategy in many works [47, 51]. Ab-
lation experiments show that with the intermediate supervi-
sions, better prediction accuracy can be obtained, which we
conjecture is due to the reason that it helps extract more rep-
resentative features in coarser levels and enforce the whole
network to learn the prediction from coarse to fine scale.
The output of “E0” is the predicted target pose sequence.
Residual Connections. Besides the residual connec-
tions in descending and ascending GCNs, we add a residual
connection after each end GCN. That is to say, we add the
input pose sequence (at different scales) to the output of the
end GCN. In this way, the MSR-GCN learns the residual
vector between the input and ground truth at all levels.
3.3. Implementation Details
We choose Adam as the optimizer with the initial learn-
ing rate of 2e-4, which decays by 0.98 every two epochs and
train the network on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU card.
4. Experiments
To verify the effectiveness of MSR-GCN, we run experi-
ments on two standard benchmark motion capture datasets,
including Human3.6M (H3.6M) and CMU Mocap dataset.
Here we first introduce the two datasets, the evaluation met-
ric and the baselines we compare with, then present experi-
mental results and ablation analysis.
4.1. Datasets Setup
TheH3.6M dataset [18] consists of seven subjects S1,
S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, and S11, and each one contains 15 action
categories. We transform the original data from exponential
mapping (expmap) format to the 3D joint coordinate space,
downsample the original pose sequence by 2 along the time
axis, and choose 22body joints from the original 32joints
of a single pose. Like [34, 27, 33], we use the data of S5 and
S11 as test and validation dataset respectively, and the rest
data is used for training. We use four scales in descending
and ascending section, which contains 22, 12, 7, and 4 joints
respectively.
TheCMU Mocap dataset is another commonly used
dataset for human pose prediction, which includes 8 action
categories. A single pose has 38 body joints in the original
dataset, among which we choose 25 and abstract to 12, 7,
and 4 joints. Other details are similar to H3.6M.
4.2. Comparison Settings
Metrics. Mean Per Joint Position Error (MPJPE) in mil-
limeter is the most widely used evaluation metric. Suppos-ing the predicted pose sequence is ˆX1:Tand the correspond-
ing ground truth is X1:T, then the MPJPE loss is
LMPJPE =1
J×TTX
t=1JX
j=1∥ˆpj,t−pj,t∥2, (2)
where ˆpj,t∈R3represents the predicted j-th joint position
in frame t, andpj,tis the corresponding ground truth.
Baselines. We compare our approach with three state-
of-the-art baselines, i.e., denoted as Residual sup. [34],
DMGNN [27], and Traj-GCN [33], respectively. The [34] is
based on RNN, and the rest two are based on GCNs. Specif-
ically, [27] builds a dynamic multi-scale graph convolution
neural network, and [33] transforms the original data from
3D coordinate space to frequency space.
Random test batch vs. full test set. All the compared
three works [34, 27, 33] evaluate their methods on just one
randomly selected single batch data of size 8 for each action
category. We argue that such little test data is not enough to
accurately evaluate the performance of the compared ap-
proaches. This has also been questioned in [35]. To al-
leviate this problem, we modify their published codes and
retrain the networks to use the whole test dataset in 3D co-
ordinate space to evaluate the MPJPE. Experimental results
with the same evaluation manner from prior works can also
be found in the supplemental material.
Unifying input and output length. Methods of [34, 27]
require 50 historical observed poses to predict 25 future
poses, while [33] predicts 25 future poses by just 10 poses.
All the experiments in this paper follow the way of [33].
4.3. Results
To validate the prediction performance of MSR-GCN,
we show the quantitative and qualitative results of MSR-
GCN for 400ms short-term ( i.e., 10 frames) and 1000ms
long-term ( i.e., 25 frames) predictions on H3.6M and CMU
Mocap, and compare MSR-GCN with the state-of-the-art
methods.
Results on H3.6M. The quantitative comparisons for
both short-term and long-term prediction results are pre-
sented in Table 1 and Table 2 respectively. Apparently,
the three GCN-based approaches are much better than the
RNN-based method Residual sup. [34], which validates
the effectiveness of GCNs for human motion prediction.
Among the three GCN-based methods, Traj-GCN is better
than DMGNN, while MSR-GCN is better than Traj-GCN,
overall. For a more intuitive comparison, we plot the av-
erage prediction error over all kinds of actions at different
forecast times in Figure 4, which clearly shows that MSR-
GCN outperforms the compared three methods. Figure 5
shows an example of the predicted poses for different meth-
ods. In this example, with the increase of the forecast time,
the result of MSR-GCN becomes better than those of the
others.
11471