MSR-GCN: Multi-Scale Residual Graph Convolution Networks for Human
Motion Prediction
Lingwei Dang1, Yongwei Nie1*, Chengjiang Long2, Qing Zhang3and Guiqing Li1
1School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2JD Finance America Corporation, USA
3School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Abstract
Human motion prediction is a challenging task due to
the stochasticity and aperiodicity of future poses. Recently,
graph convolutional network has been proven to be very ef-
fective to learn dynamic relations among pose joints, which
is helpful for pose prediction. On the other hand, one can
abstract a human pose recursively to obtain a set of poses at
multiple scales. With the increase of the abstraction level,
the motion of the pose becomes more stable, which benefits
pose prediction too. In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-
Scale Residual Graph Convolution Network (MSR-GCN)
for human pose prediction task in the manner of end-to-end.
The GCNs are used to extract features from fine to coarse
scale and then from coarse to fine scale. The extracted fea-
tures at each scale are then combined and decoded to ob-
tain the residuals between the input and target poses. In-
termediate supervisions are imposed on all the predicted
poses, which enforces the network to learn more represen-
tative features. Our proposed approach is evaluated on two
standard benchmark datasets, i.e., the Human3.6M dataset
and the CMU Mocap dataset. Experimental results demon-
strate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art ap-
proaches. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/Droliven/MSRGCN.
1. Introduction
Human motion prediction plays a critical role in many
fields, such as human-computer interaction, autonomous
driving, and video completion. Simple periodic motion pat-
terns can be tackled by traditional methods such as hid-
den Markov model [3], linear dynamic system [36], re-
stricted Boltzmann machine [43], Gaussian process latent
*Corresponding author: nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn
Figure 1. A human pose can be abstracted step by step to obtain a
series of poses from fine to coarse scale, by grouping joints in close
proximity together and replacing the group with a single joint.
variable models [45] and random forests [24], while more
complex motion is intractable for these methods. The latest
approaches are almost all data-driven methods with deep
learning. However, considering the stochasticity and aperi-
odicity of human motion, it still remains a challenging task
to predict accurate future motion in long term giving ob-
served arbitrary poses. The main difficulty is how to model
the spatiotemporal dependencies of human poses.
Lots of prior efforts with Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [49, 28], Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [9,
34, 41, 42, 37, 11, 5,2], and Generative Adversarial Net-
works (GANs) [53, 10,21,12,6,44,23], have been
made for tackling the challenging task. However, they
neglect the inner-frame kinematic dependencies between
body joints. Although they have achieved success in some
cases, the prediction accuracy depends on the size of con-
volution filters and the stability of the frame-by-frame pre-
diction. Nowadays, Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs)
have been widely used in various fields as well as in the
task of human motion prediction [33, 27,7,25,29,52,39],
which work very well for non-grid graph-structured data es-
pecially for skeleton-based 3D human pose sequences. Re-
cently, Mao et al . [33] jointly model spatial structure by
11467