(a) ResNet-5056×56×256224×224×328×28×51214×14×10247×7×2048
(b) ViT-S/16(14×14)×384Spatial tokens
1×384Class token224×224×3(14×14)×288Spatial tokens
1×144Class token224×224×3(27×27)×144(7×7)×576
1×2881×576PoolingPooling(c) PiT-SFigure 1. Schematic illustration of dimension configurations of networks. We visualize ResNet50 [13], Vision Transformer (ViT) [9],
and our Pooling-based Vision Transformer (PiT); (a) ResNet50 gradually downsamples the features from the input to the output; (b) ViT
does not change the spatial dimensions; (c) PiT involves ResNet style spatial dimension into ViT.
analyze the attention matrix of transformer block with en-
tropy and average distance measure. The analysis shows the
attention patterns inside layers of ViT and PiT, and helps to
understand the inner mechanism of ViT and PiT.
We verify that PiT improves performances over ViT on
various tasks. On ImageNet classification, PiT and outper-
forms ViT at various scales and training environments. Ad-
ditionally, we have compared the performance of PiT with
various convolutional architectures and have specified the
scale at which the transformer architecture outperforms the
CNN. We further measure the performance of PiT as a back-
bone for object detection. ViT- and PiT-based deformable
DETR [44] are trained on the COCO 2017 dataset [24] and
the result shows that PiT is even better than ViT as a back-
bone architecture for a task other than image classification.
Finally, we verify the performance of PiT in various envi-
ronments through the robustness benchmark.
2. Related works
2.1. Dimension configuration of CNN
Dimension conversion can be found in AlexNet [21],
which is one of the earliest convolutional networks in com-
puter vision. AlexNet uses three max-pooling layers. In the
max-pooling layer, the spatial size of the feature is reduced
by half, and the channel size is increased by the convolu-
tion after the max-pooling. VGGnet [30] uses 5 spatial res-
olutions using 5 max-pooling. In the pooling layer, the spa-
tial size is reduced by half and the channel size is doubled.
GoogLeNet [31] also used the pooling layer. ResNet [13]
performed spatial size reduction using the convolution layer
of stride 2 instead of max pooling. It is an improvement
in the spatial reduction method. The convolution layer of
stride 2 is also used as a pooling method in recent archi-
tectures (EfficietNet [32], MobileNet [29, 19]). Pyramid-
Net [11] pointed out that the channel increase occurs only
in the pooling layer and proposed a method to gradually
increase the channel size in layers other than the pooling
layer. ReXNet [12] reported that the channel configuration
of the network has a significant influence on the networkperformance. In summary, most convolution networks use a
dimension configuration with spatial reduction.
2.2. Self-attention mechanism
Transformer architecture [34] significantly increased the
performance of the NLP task with the self-attention mecha-
nism. Funnel Transformer [7] improves the transformer ar-
chitecture by reducing tokens by a pooling layer and skip-
connection. However, because of the basic difference be-
tween the architecture of NLP and computer vision, the
method of applying to pool is different from our method.
Some studies are conducted to utilize the transformer archi-
tecture to the backbone network for computer vision tasks.
Non-local network [37] adds a few self-attention layers to
CNN backbone, and it shows that the self-attention mecha-
nism can be used in CNN. [28] replaced 3×3convolution
of ResNet to local self-attention layer. [36] used an atten-
tion layer for each spatial axis. [2] enables self-attention of
the entire spatial map by reducing the computation of the
attention mechanism. Most of these methods replace 3x3
convolution with self-attention or adds a few self-attention
layers. Therefore, the basic structure of ResNet is inherited,
that is, it has the convolution of stride 2 as ResNet, resulting
in a network having a dimension configuration of ResNet.
Only the vision transformer uses a structure that uses
the same spatial size in all layers. Although ViT did not
follow the conventions of ResNet, it contains many valu-
able new components in the network architecture. In ViT,
layer normalization is applied for each spatial token. There-
fore, layer normalization of ViT is closer to positional nor-
malization [22] than a layer norm of convolutional neural
network [1, 39]. Although it overlaps with the lambda net-
work [2], it is not common to use global attention through
all blocks of the network. The use of class tokens instead
of global average pooling is also new, and it has been re-
ported that separating tokens increases the efficiency of dis-
tillation [33]. In addition, the layer configuration, the skip-
connection position, and the normalization position of the
Transformer are also different from ResNet. Therefore, our
study gives a direction to the new architecture.
11937