(a) Model capability
 (b) Generalization performance
 (c) Model performance
Figure 3. Effects of the spatial dimensions in vision transformer (ViT) [9]. We compare our Pooling-based Vision Transformer (PiT)
with original ViT at various aspects. PiT outperforms ViT in capability, generalization performance, and model performance.
Pooling layerSpatial tokens
Class token(𝑤×ℎ)×𝑑
1×𝑑𝑤×ℎ×𝑑Reshape𝑤2×ℎ2×2𝑑Depth-wiseConvolutionReshapeSpatial tokens(𝑤2×ℎ2)×2𝑑
1×2𝑑Fully-connected layerClass token
Figure 4. Pooling layer of PiT architecture. PiT uses the pooling
layer based on depth-wise convolution to achieve channel multi-
plication and spatial reduction with small parameters.
arate spatial tokens and reshape them into 3D-tensor with
spatial structure. After reshaping, spatial size reduction and
channel increase are performed by depth-wise convolution.
And, the responses are reshaped into a 2D matrix for the
computation of transformer blocks. In ViT, there are parts
that do not correspond to the spatial structure, such as a
class token or distillation token [33]. For these parts, the
pooling layer uses an additional fully-connected layer to ad-
just the channel size to match the spatial tokens. Our pool-
ing layer enables spatial reduction on ViT and is used for
our PiT architecture as shown in Figure 1 (c). PiT includes
two pooling layers which make three spatial scales.
Using PiT architecture, we performed an experiment to
verify the effect of PiT compared to ViT. The experiment
setting is the same as the ResNet experiment. Figure 3 (a)
represents the model capability of ViT and PiT. At the same
computation cost, PiT has a lower train loss than ViT. Us-
ing the spatial reduction layers in ViT also improves the ca-
pability of architecture. The comparison between training
accuracy and validation accuracy shows a significant dif-
ference. As shown in Figure 3 (b), ViT does not improve
validation accuracy even if training accuracy increases. Onthe other hand, in the case of PiT, validation accuracy in-
creases as training accuracy increases. The big difference in
generalization performance causes the performance differ-
ence between PiT and ViT as shown in Figure 3 (c). The
phenomenon that ViT does not increase performance even
when FLOPs increase in ImageNet is reported in ViT pa-
per [9]. In the training data of ImageNet scale, ViT shows
poor generalization performance, and PiT alleviates this.
So, we believe that the spatial reduction layer is also nec-
essary for the generalization of ViT. Using the training trick
is a way to improve the generalization performance of ViT
in ImageNet. The combination of training tricks and PiT is
covered in the experiment section.
3.3. Attention analysis
We analyze the transformer networks with measures on
attention matrix [35]. We denotes αi,jas(i, j)component
of attention matrix A∈RM×N. Note that attention values
after soft-max layer is used, i.e.P
iαi,j= 1. The attention
entropy is defined as
Entropy =−1
NNX
jX
iαi,jlogαi,j. (1)
The entropy shows the spread and concentration degree of
an attention interaction. A small entropy indicates a con-
centrated interaction, and a large entropy indicates a spread
interaction. We also measure an attention distance,
Distance =1
NNX
jX
iαi,j∥pi−pj∥1. (2)
pirepresents relative spatial location of i-th token
(xi/W, y i/H)for feature map F∈RH×W×C. So, the at-
tention distance shows a relative ratio compared to the over-
all feature size, which enables comparison between the dif-
ferent sizes of features. We analyze transformer-based mod-
els (ViT-S [33] and PiT-S) and values are measured over-
all validation images and are averaged over all heads of
11939