arXiv:2003.00104v4  [cs.CL]  7 Mar 2021AraBERT: Transformer-based Model for
Arabic Language Understanding
Wissam Antoun*, Fady Baly*, Hazem Hajj
American University of Beirut
{wfa07, fgb06, hh63 }@aub.edu.lb
Abstract
The Arabic language is a morphologically rich language with relatively few resources and a less explored syntax compare d to English.
Given these limitations, Arabic Natural Language Processi ng (NLP) tasks like Sentiment Analysis (SA), Named Entity Re cognition
(NER), and Question Answering (QA), have proven to be very ch allenging to tackle. Recently, with the surge of transforme rs based
models, language-speciﬁc BERT based models have proven to b e very efﬁcient at language understanding, provided they ar e pre-trained
on a very large corpus. Such models were able to set new standa rds and achieve state-of-the-art results for most NLP tasks . In this paper,
we pre-trained BERT speciﬁcally for the Arabic language in t he pursuit of achieving the same success that BERT did for the English
language. The performance of AraBERT is compared to multili ngual BERT from Google and other state-of-the-art approach es. The re-
sults showed that the newly developed AraBERT achieved stat e-of-the-art performance on most tested Arabic NLP tasks. T he pretrained
araBERT models are publicly available on github.com/aub-m ind/araBERT hoping to encourage research and applications for Arabic NLP.
Keywords: Arabic, transformers, BERT, AraBERT, Language Models
1. Introduction
Pretrained contextualized text representation models hav e
enabled massive advances in Natural Language Under-
standing (NLU) tasks, and achieved state-of-the-art perfo r-
mances in multiple NLP tasks (Howard and Ruder, 2018;
Devlin et al., 2018). Early pretrained text representa-
tion models aimed at representing words by capturing
their distributed syntactic and semantic properties us-
ing techniques like Word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). However, these models
did not incorporate the context in which a word appears
into its embedding. This issue was addressed by gen-
erating contextualized representations using models like
ELMO (Peters et al., 2018)).
Recently, there has been a focus on applying transfer learn-
ing by ﬁne-tuning large pretrained language models for
downstream NLP/NLU tasks with a relatively small num-
ber of examples, resulting in notable performance improve-
ment for these tasks. This approach takes advantage of
the language models that had been pre-trained in an un-
supervised manner (or sometimes called self-supervised).
However, this advantage comes with drawbacks, partic-
ularly the huge corpora needed for pre-training, in addi-
tion to the high computational cost of days needed for
training (latest models required 500+ TPUs or GPUs run-
ning for weeks (Conneau et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019;
Adiwardana et al., 2020)). These drawbacks restricted the
availability of such models to English mainly and a handful
of other languages. To remedy this gap, multilingual mod-
els have been trained to learn representations for +100 lan-
guages simultaneously, but still fall behind single-langu age
models due to little data representation and small language -
speciﬁc vocabulary. While languages with similar struc-
ture and vocabulary can beneﬁt from the shared represen-
tations (Conneau et al., 2019), this is not the case for other
languages, like Arabic, which differ in morphological and
*Equal Contributionsyntactic structure and share very little with other abunda nt
Latin-based languages.
In this paper, we describe the process of pretraining the
BERT transformer model (Devlin et al., 2018) for the Ara-
bic language, and which we name A RABERT. We eval-
uate A RABERT on three Arabic NLU downstream tasks
that are different in nature: ( i) Sentiment Analysis (SA),
(ii) Named Entity Recognition (NER), and ( iii) Ques-
tion Answering (QA). The experiments results show that
ARABERT achieves state-of-the-art performances on most
datasets, compared to several baselines including previou s
multilingual and single-language approaches. The dataset s
that we considered for the downstream tasks contained
both Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) and Dialectal Arabic
(DA).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A methodology to pretrain the BERT model on a
large-scale Arabic corpus.
• Application of A RABERT to three NLU downstream
tasks: Sentiment Analysis, Named Entity Recognition
and Question Answering.
• Publicly releasing A RABERT on popular NLP li-
braries.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2.
provides a concise literature review of previous work on
language representation for English and Arabic. Sec-
tion 3. describes the methodology that was used to develop
ARABERT. Section 4. describes the downstream tasks and
benchmark datasets that are used for evaluation. Section 5.
presents the experimental setup and discusses the results.
Finally, section 6. concludes and points to possible direc-
tions for future work.