2. Related Works
2.1. Evolution of Word Embeddings
The ﬁrst meaningful representations for words started with
the word2vec model developed by (Mikolov et al., 2013).
Since then, research started moving towards variations of
word2vec like of GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) and fast-
Text (Mikolov et al., 2017). While major advances were
achieved with these early models, they still lacked con-
textualized information, which was tackled by ELMO
(Peters et al., 2018). The performance over different tasks
improved noticeably, leading to larger structures that had
superior word and sentence representations. Ever since,
more language understanding models have been devel-
oped such as ULMFit (Howard and Ruder, 2018), BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), XLNet
(Yang et al., 2019), ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019), and T5
(Raffel et al., 2019), which offered improved performance
by exploring different pretraining methods, modiﬁed model
architectures and larger training corpora.
2.2. Non-contextual Representations for Arabic
Following the success of the English word2vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013), the same feat was sought by
NLP researchers to create language speciﬁc em-
beddings. Arabic word2vec was ﬁrst attempted
by (Soliman et al., 2017), and then followed by a
Fasttext model (Bojanowski et al., 2017) trained on
Wikipedia data and showing better performance than
word2vec. To tackle dialectal variations in Ara-
bic (Erdmann et al., 2018) presented techniques for
training multidialectal word embeddings on relatively sma ll
and noisy corpora, while (Abu Farha and Magdy, 2019;
Abdul-Mageed et al., 2018) provided Arabic word embed-
dings trained on ∼250M tweets.
2.3. Contextualized Representations for Arabic
For non-English languages, Google released a multi-
lingual BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) supporting 100+ lan-
guages with solid performance for most languages. How-
ever, pre-training monolingual BERT for non-English
languages proved to provide better performance than
the multilingual BERT such as Italian BERT Al-
berto (Polignano et al., 2019) and other publicly available
BERTs (Martin et al., 2019; de Vries et al., 2019). Ara-
bic speciﬁc contextualized representations models, such a s
hULMonA (ElJundi et al., 2019), used the ULMﬁt struc-
ture, which had a lower performance that BERT on English
NLP Tasks.
3. A RABERT: Methodology
In this paper, we develop an Arabic language representa-
tion model to improve the state-of-the-art in several Ara-
bic NLU tasks. We create A RABERT based on the
BERT model, a stacked Bidirectional Transformer En-
coder (Devlin et al., 2018). This model is widely consid-
ered as the basis for most state-of-the-art results in diffe r-
ent NLP tasks in several languages. We use the BERT-
base conﬁguration that has 12 encoder blocks, 768 hidden
dimensions, 12 attention heads, 512 maximum sequencelength, and a total of ∼110M parameters1. We also in-
troduced additional preprocessing prior to the model’s pre -
training, in order to better ﬁt the Arabic language. Below,
we describe the pre-training setup, the pre-training datas et
for A RABERT, the proposed Arabic-speciﬁc preprocess-
ing, and the ﬁne-tuning process.
3.1. Pre-training Setup
Following the original BERT pre-training objective, we
employ the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) task by
adding whole-word masking where; 15% of the Ninput
tokens are selected for replacement. Those tokens are re-
placed 80% of the times with the [MASK] token, 10% with
a random token, and 10% with the original token. Whole-
word masking improves the pre-training task by forcing the
model to predict the whole word instead of getting hints
from parts of the word. We also employ the Next Sentence
Prediction (NSP) task that helps the model understand the
relationship between two sentences, which can be useful
for many language understanding tasks such as Question
Answering.
3.2. Pre-training Dataset
The original BERT was trained on 3.3B words ex-
tracted from English Wikipedia and the Book Cor-
pus (Zhu et al., 2015). Since the Arabic Wikipedia Dumps
are small compared to the English ones, we manually
scraped Arabic news websites for articles. In addition, we
used two publicly available large Arabic corpora: (1) the
1.5 billion words Arabic Corpus (El-Khair, 2016), which is
a contemporary corpus that includes more than 5 million
articles extracted from ten major news sources covering 8
countries, and (2) OSIAN: the Open Source International
Arabic News Corpus (Zeroual et al., 2019) that consists of
3.5 million articles ( ∼1B tokens) from 31 news sources in
24 Arab countries.
The ﬁnal size of the pre-training dataset, after removing
duplicate sentences, is 70 million sentences, correspondi ng
to∼24GB of text. This dataset covers news from differ-
ent media in different Arab regions, and therefore can be
representative of a wide range of topics discussed in the
Arab world. It is worth mentioning that we preserved words
that include Latin characters, since it is common to mention
named entities, scientiﬁc or technical terms in their origi nal
language, to avoid information loss.
3.3. Sub-Word Units Segmentation
Arabic language is known for its lexical sparsity which
is due to the complex concatenative system of Ara-
bic (Al-Sallab et al., 2017). Words can have different forms
and share the same meaning. For instance, while the deﬁ-
nite article “ /charc8/char40-Al”, which is equivalent to “the” in En-
glish, is always preﬁxed to other words, it is not an intrinsi c
part of that word. Hence, when using a BERT-compatible
tokenization, tokens will appear twice, once with “ Al-” and
1Further details about the transformer architecture can be
found in (Vaswani et al., 2017)