once without it. For instance, both “ /char48/char2e/char41/char10/char4a/charbb-kitAb ” and “
/char48/char2e/char41/char10/char4a/charba/charcb/char40-AlkitAb ” need to be included in the vocabulary,
leading to a signiﬁcant amount of unnecessary redundancy.
To avoid this issue, we ﬁrst segment the words using
Farasa (Abdelali et al., 2016) into stems, preﬁxes and suf-
ﬁxes. For instance, “/char10/chare9/char09/charaa/char0f/charca/charcb/char40-Alloga ” becomes/char10/chare8/char2b/char09/chara9/charcb /char2b/charc8/char40 -
Al+ log +a ”. Then, we trained a SentencePiece (an un-
supervised text tokenizer and detokenizer (Kudo, 2018)),
in unigram mode, on the segmented pre-training dataset to
produce a subword vocabulary of ∼60K tokens. To evalu-
ate the impact of the proposed tokenization, we also trained
SentencePiece on non-segmented text to create a second
version of A RABERT (AraBERTv0.1) that does not re-
quire any segmentation. The ﬁnal size of vocabulary was
64k tokens, which included nearly 4K unused tokens to al-
low further pre-training, if needed.
3.4. Fine-tuning
Sequence Classiﬁcation To ﬁne-tune AraBERT for se-
quence classiﬁcation, we take the ﬁnal hidden state of the
ﬁrst token, which corresponds to the word embedding of
the special “[CLS]” token prepended to the start of each
sentence. We then add a simple feed-forward layer with
standard Softmax to get the probability distribution over
the predicted output classes. During ﬁne-tuning, the class i-
ﬁer and the pre-trained model weights are trained jointly to
maximize the log-probability of the correct class.
Named Entity Recognition For the NER task, each
token in the sentence is labeled with the IOB2 for-
mat (Ratnaparkhi, 1998), where the “B” tag corresponds
to the ﬁrst word of the entity, the “I” tag corresponds to
the rest of the words of the same entity, and the “O” tag
indicates that the tagged word is not a desired named en-
tity. Hence, we treat the system as a multi-class classiﬁca-
tion process, which allows us to use some text classiﬁca-
tion methods to label the tokens. Furthermore, after using
the AraBERT tokenizer, we only input the ﬁrst sub-token
of each word to the model.
Question Answering In the QA, given a question and a
passage containing the answer, the model needs to select
a span of text that contains the answers. This is done by
predicting a “start” token and an “end” token on condition
that the “end” token should appear after the “start” token.
During training, the ﬁnal embedding of every token in the
passage is fed into two classiﬁers, each with a single set of
weights, which are applied to every token. The dot product
of the output embeddings and the classiﬁer is then fed into
a softmax layer to produce a probability distribution over
all the tokens. The token with the highest probability of
being a “start” toke is then selected, and the same process
is repeated for the “end” token.4. Evaluation
We evaluated A RABERT on three Arabic language under-
standing downstream tasks: Sentiment Analysis, Named
Entity Recognition, and Question Answering. As a base-
line, we compared A RABERT to the multilingual version
of BERT, and to other state-of-art results on each task.
4.1. Sentiment Analysis
We evaluated A RABERT on the following Arabic senti-
ment datasets that cover different genres, domains and di-
alects.
•HARD: The Hotel Arabic Reviews
Dataset (Elnagar et al., 2018) contains 93,700
hotel reviews written in both Modern Standard Arabic
(MSA) and in dialectal Arabic. Reviews are split
into positive and negative reviews, where a negative
review has a rating of 1 or 2, a positive review has a
rating of 4 or 5, and neutral reviews with rating of 3
were ignored.
•ASTD: The Arabic Sentiment Twitter
Dataset (Nabil et al., 2015) contains 10,000 tweets
written in both MSA and Egyptian dialect. We tested
on the balanced version of the dataset, referred to as
ASTD-B.
•ArSenTD-Lev: The Arabic Sentiment Twitter
Dataset for LEVantine (Baly et al., 2018) contains
4,000 tweets written in Levantine dialect with annota-
tions for sentiment, topic and sentiment target. This is
a challenging dataset as the collected tweets are from
multiple domains and discuss different topics.
•LABR: The Large-scale Arabic Book Reviews
dataset (Aly and Atiya, 2013) contains 63,000 book
reviews written in Arabic. The reviews are rated be-
tween 1 and 5. We benchmarked our model on the
unbalanced two-class dataset, where reviews with rat-
ings of 1 or 2 are considered negative, while those with
ratings of 4 or 5 are considered positive.
•AJGT: The Arabic Jordanian General Tweets
dataset (Alomari et al., 2017) contains 1,800 tweets
written in Jordanian dialect. The tweets were
manually annotated as either positive or negative.
Baselines: Sentiment Analysis is a popular Arabic
NLP task. Previous approaches relied on sentiment
lexicons such as ArSenL (Badaro et al., 2014), which
is a large-scale lexicon of MSA words that is devel-
oped using the Arabic WordNet in combination with
the English SentiWordNet. Recurrent and recursive
neural networks were explored with different choices
of Arabic-speciﬁc processing (Al Sallab et al., 2015;
Al-Sallab et al., 2017; Baly et al., 2017). Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) were trained with pre-trained
word embeddings (Dahou et al., 2019a). A hybrid model
was proposed by (Abu Farha and Magdy, 2019), where
CNNs were used for feature extraction, and LSTMs
were used for sequence and context understanding.