as ResNet101 [ 11] pre-trained on ImageNet, which are not
tailored for ZSL tasks. In [ 31], it is observed that not all the
dimensions of the extracted visual features are semanticallyrelated to the pre-deﬁned attributes, which triggers the biason learning semantic-visual alignment and causes negative
transfer to unseen classes. Given an example from the AW Adataset shown in Figure 1, despite the features of animals’
ears are visually salient for discriminating image samples, itis ignored in the manually annotated attributes. When gen-eralizing to unseen classes such as cats, it is easy for themto be misclassiﬁed as tigers because the visual features cor-
responding to the concepts “ Big, Strong, Muscle ” are not
highlighted. From this case, we believe that GZSL will ben-eﬁt from using the visual features that can consistently alignwith the respective semantic attributes. We deﬁne this typeof visual features as the semantic-consistent features, whichare agnostic to both seen and unseen classes. In contrast,those visual features that are irrelevant to manually anno-tated attributes are deﬁned as semantic-unrelated.
To unravel semantic-consistent and semantic-unrelated
features from the original visual spaces, we present a novelframework, namely Semantics Disentangling for General-ized Zero-Shot Learning (SDGZSL), as shown in Figure 2.Speciﬁcally, we disentangle the underlying information ofthe extracted visual features into two disjoint latent vec-torsh
sandhn. They are learned in an encoder-decoder
architecture with a relation module and a total correlationpenalty. The encoder network projects the original visualfeatures to h
sandhn. To make hsconsistent with the se-
mantic embeddings, the relation module calculates a com-
patibility score between hsand semantic information to
guide the learning of hs. We further apply the total cor-
relation penalty to enforce the independence between hs
andhn. Afterward, we reconstruct the original visual fea-
tures¯xfrom the two latent representations. This recon-
struction objective ensures the two latent representations to
cover both semantic-consistent and semantic-unrelated in-
formation. The disentangling modules are incorporated intoa conditional variational autoencoder and trained in an end-to-end manner. The proposed framework is evaluated onvarious GZSL benchmarks and achieves better performance
compared to the state-of-the-art methods. The main contri-
butions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel feature disentangling framework,
namely Semantic Disentangling for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (SDGZSL), to disentangle the underly-ing information of visual features into two latent repre-sentations that are semantic-consistent and semantic-unrelated, respectively. Exploiting the semantic-consistent representations can substantially increasethe performance in GZSL comparing to directly using
entangled visual features that are extracted from thepre-trained CNN models.• To facilitate the feature disentanglement of the
semantic-consistent and semantic-unrelated represen-tations, by introducing a total correlation penalty in ourframework we arrive at a more accurate characteriza-tion of the semantically annotated features.
• Extensive experiments conducted on four benchmark
datasets evidence that the proposed method performsbetter than the state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Recent state-of-the-art approaches for GZSL using gen-
erative models have achieved promising performance. Gen-erative models can synthesize an unlimited number of vi-sual features from side information of the unseen classes,e.g., manually annotated attributes. With these synthe-
sized features, ZSL problems become a relatively straight-forward supervised classiﬁcation task. The two most com-
monly used generative models are generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [ 10] and variational autoencoders (V AEs)
[14]. Often, both models are jointly used to form genera-
tive architectures for ZSL tasks. f-CLSWGAN [ 35] lever-
ages Wasserstein GANs (WGAN) [ 3] to synthesize vivid
visual features. CADA-V AE [ 28] leverages two aligned
variational autoencoders to learn the shared latent represen-
tations between different modalities. SE-ZSL [ 18] adopts
an autoencoder followed by an attribute regressor to train amodel with three alignments: visual-to-attribute, attribute-to-visual and visual-to-attribute. E-PGN [ 37] integrates the
meta-learning approach into ZSL by formulating both thevisual prototype generation and the class semantic infer-ence into an adversarial framework. TF-V AEGAN [ 24] pro-
poses a feedback module in a V AE-GAN model to mod-ulate the latent representation of the generator. However,the CNN visual features contain semantic-unrelated infor-mation, e.g., background noise and unannotated character-
istics, which may jeopardise the semantic-visual alignment,we propose to factorize out the semantic-unrelated features
and leverage the remaining semantic-consistent features asthe generation target.
In most literature, disentanglement refers to indepen-
dence among features of one representation [ 4,7,12,5].
Total correlation [ 33] is a measurement of independence
for multiple random variables. In information theory, to-tal correlation is one of many generalizations of mutualinformation to random variables. It has been a key com-ponent in recent methods towards disentanglement. Fac-torV AE [ 16] is proposed to disentangle features by mak-
ing the distribution of representations to be factorial andthus achieves independence across dimensions. Speciﬁ-cally, dimension-wise independence is achieved by apply-ing the total correlation penalty on an original representa-tion and its random permuted representation across dimen-
sions. In contrast, we aim to enforce independence between
8713