Figure 6: Hyper-parameter study w.r.t. latent dimensions l, relation weight λ1, TC weight λ2, and discriminator weight λ3.
(b)  (a)  
Figure 7: t-SNE visualization of different representations
of 50 unseen classes on CUB: (a) semantic-consistent rep-resentations h
s; (b) semantic-unrelated representations hn.
4.5. Model Analysis
Ablation Study . In this ablation study, we evaluate vari-
ous stripped-down versions of our full proposed model tovalidate the contributions of the key disentangling compo-nents of the model. In Table 1, we report the GZSL perfor-
mance of each version on the four benchmark datasets. Thebest performance is achieved when RN and TC are bothapplied. In Figure 3, we show the performance compar-
ison between h
s,hn, and h. From the observations on
all datasets, semantic-unrelated features hnperforms much
worse than the original latent features h, which proofs the
ineffectiveness of hnin GZSL. In contrast, using semantic-
consistent features hscan further improve the performance,
which validates the signiﬁcant impact of hswhen transfer-
ring the connection between semantic to semantic-unrelatedrepresentations from seen to unseen classes in GZSL. It isworth noting that when taking both h
sandhn(i.e.,h)t o
classify test samples, the performance is similar to cV AE.
Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity . There are mainly four
hyper-parameters that control the objective function, in-cluding the number of the disentangled feature dimensionl, the weight of total correlation termλ
1, the weight of loss
in the relation module λ2, and the weight of the discrimi-
nator loss λ3. To better understand the effect of the disen-
tangling components, we report the sensitivity of the fourhyper-parameters in Figure 6.t-SNE Visualization . To further validate the properties
of the disentanglement, we visualize semantic-consistentrepresentations h
sfrom xin Figure 7(a) and semantic-
unrelated representations hnfrom xin (b). We choose all
of 50 unseen classes from CUB dataset that have enoughclasses to show the class-wise comparison. Clearly, aswe expected, the semantic-consistent representations h
sis
much more discriminative than the semantic-unrelated rep-resentations h
n. However, we can still see discriminative
patterns from hnas there are remaining discriminative fea-
tures even if they are semantic-unrelated, e.g., character-
istics that are not annotated in the attributes. We arguethat these discriminative features may help classify betweenthese classes, but as the non-semantic discriminative fea-tures are not annotated in the attributes, it is intuitively im-possible to transfer the semantic-visual relationship fromseen classes to unseen classes.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel semantics disentan-
gling approach for generalized zero-shot learning. Specif-ically, the visual features of an image extracted from pre-trained ResNet101 are further factorized into two inde-pendent representations that are semantic-consistent andsemantic-unrelated. In our approach, an encoder-decoder
architecture is coupled with a relation module to learn the
visual-semantic interaction. Further, we leverage the totalcorrelation term to encourage the disentanglement betweenthe two representations. The disentangling encoder-decodermodel is incorporated into a conditional variational autoen-coder and trained in an end-to-end manner. The genera-
tion ability trained on seen classes is transferred to the un-seen classes and synthesizes the missing visual samples. Weevaluate our proposed method on four image classiﬁcation
datasets. Extensive experiments show that our approachconsistently performs better than other state-of-the-arts.
Acknowledgments: This work was partially sup-
ported by Australian Research Council DP190101985,CE200100025, DE200101610 and Sichuan Science andTechnology Program under Grant 2020YFG0080.
8719