Semantic-consistent Representations .We deﬁne semantic-
consistent representations hsto represent the characteristics
of images annotated with attributes. The visual features ofimages are extracted by a deep model, e.g., ResNet101, pre-
trained on ImageNet. These visual features are not task-speciﬁc for ZSL datasets, in which the classes are usuallyrelated ( e.g., they all correspond to birds). Thus, the ex-
tracted visual features may unexpectedly involve redundantinformation that could compromise the semantic-visual re-lationship learning. The elegant solution to ZSL is attribute-based learning, which consists in introducing the interme-
diate semantic space A. Such a space enables parameter
sharing between classes. Ideally, if the visual features onlycontain information that corresponds to the annotated at-tributes h
s, the visual-semantic relation can be appropri-
ately learned from seen classes and further transferred tounseen classes which could be beneﬁcial to the GZSL task.
Semantic-unrelated Representations .In analogy to h
s,w e
deﬁne semantic-unrelated visual representations hnto rep-
resent the information contained in visual features whichmay help classiﬁcation but not correspond to the annotatedattributes, e.g., in Figure 1the ear shape is an intuitively dis-
criminative characteristic that can help distinguish animalsbut does not appear in the annotated attributes.Independence between h
sandhn.In GZSL, the core mis-
sion is to transfer the semantic-visual relationship from seenclasses to unseen classes. However, as the visual conceptsofh
nare not consistent with the manually annotated se-
mantic information, it is difﬁcult to align the relationshipfrom semantic space to visual space and further transfer
to unseen classes. As in the deﬁnitions of h
sandhn,i n
the setting of GZSL, the visual features can be disentangledinto semantic-consistent h
sand semantic-unrelated hnrep-
resentations. To achieve this, we enforce the independence
between hsandhn. Independence can be measured by the
mutual information, and the total correlation is one of thegeneralizations of the mutual information. Thus, we aimto minimize the entanglement of the visual information inthe two representations by leveraging the total correlationto measure how h
sandhnare independent.
3.2.1 Visual Feature Preservation by Reconstruction
The disentangling modules are developed with an encoder-
decoder architecture, coupled with a total correlationpenalty and a relation module. An encoder E
ψparameter-
ized with ψis adopted to map a visual feature vector xto
a latent representation h,i.e.,Eψ:Rd→Rl+m, wherel
andmare the dimensions of the semantic-consistent and
semantic-unrelated representations. Then, we have:
Eψ(x)=h=[hs,hn]. (1)
In order to preserve the visual features in h, a decoder Dω
is learned to transform hto the original visual feature x,i.e.,Dω:Rl+m→Rd. The reconstruction objective can be
formulated as:
Lrec=/summationdisplay
x∈Xs/bardblx−Dω(hs,hn)/bardbl2, (2)
where we calculate the mean squared error between the
original visual features xand the reconstructed visual fea-
tures¯x=Dω(hs,hn).
3.2.2 Semantic-Visual Relationship Learning
A relation network (RN) [ 30] is adopted to learn the
semantic-consistent representations hsby maximizing the
compatibility score (CS) between a latent representation hs
and the corresponding semantic embeddings as. The re-
lation module Rκlearns the pair-wise relationship between
the latent representations and semantic vectors. The input ofR
κis the pairs of a latent representation hsandNcunique
semantic embeddings Abatch={a(c)}Nc
c=1from a training
batch with Btraining instances. The ground-truth CS of the
matched pairs are set to be 1; the mismatched pairs are 0,which can be formulated as:
CS(h
(t),a(c))=/braceleftBigg
0,y (t)/negationslash=y(c)
1,y (t)=y(c), (3)
wheretandcrefer to the t-th semantic-consistent repre-
sentation and c-th unique semantic embedding in a training
batch,y(t)andy(c)denote the class label of h(t)anda(c).
With the CS deﬁned in Equation 3, we now formulate
the loss function for the semantics embeddings Abatchand
semantic-consistent information. The relation module Rκ
with a Sigmoid activation function outputs the learned com-
patibility score between 0 and 1 for each pair. The lossfunction for optimizing h
scan then be formulated as:
Lhs=B/summationdisplay
t=1Nc/summationdisplay
c=1/bardblRκ(hs(t),a(c))−CS(hs(t),a(c))/bardbl2,(4)
where we calculate the mean squared error between the out-
put compatibility score of each pair of hs(t)anda(c)and the
ground-truth in every single training batch. Normally, wehaveN
c≤Bas one class that may contain many sampled
visual feature vectors in one batch.
3.2.3 Disentanglement by Total Correlation Penalty
To encourage the disentanglement between semantic-
consistent hsand semantic-unrelated hnrepresentations,
we introduce a total correlation penalty in our proposed
method. Within the encoding procedure, the latent rep-resentation h∼γ(h|x)is expected to contain both
the semantic-consistent and the semantic-unrelated infor-mation. Therefore, the disentanglement between these two
8715