Figure 4: Zero-shot image retrieval result comparison be-
tween cV AE and SDGZSL.
posed method consistently performs better than all the com-
pared methods, except on AW A dataset. These methods di-
rectly use the visual features extracted from a pre-trained orﬁne-tuned ResNet101 model, which limits semantic-visualalignment learning. The intuition of this work is in agree-ment with DLFZRL [ 31], we both aim to disentangle more
effective representations from visual features. DLFZRL
proposes to disentangle the discriminative features from vi-
sual features, both semantic and non-semantic. However,we argue that the non-semantic discriminative features can-not be transferred from seen classes to unseen classes. Theconditional generative models learn to project the semanticvectors to the visual space, but intuitively there is no wayto generalize the non-semantic discriminative features fromthe semantic perspective. As can be seen from the perfor-mance comparison, our method surpasses DLFZRL on allthe reported datasets. Our method is also applicable to thegenerative methods mentioned above. It is worth mention-ing that, unlike DFLZRL that is designed in a two-stage
process, we carefully design our framework by incorporat-ing the disentangling modules into the generative model sothat the overall framework can be trained in an end-to-end
manner.
4.3. Conventional Zero-shot Learning Results
We aim to solve the generalized zero-shot learning prob-
lem in this work, but it is necessary to demonstrate thatour approach can also achieve state-of-the-art performanceon conventional zero-shot learning that only aims to clas-sify unseen class samples over unseen classes. The resultsshown in Table 1demonstrate the performance comparison
between our proposed SDGZSL method and existing state-of-the-art models. It can be seen that our method performsbetter than all other methods on CUB and FLO datasets.Even if DLFZRL is slightly higher than our method onaPaY dataset, we can surpass it on all other datasets. Thisis the same case for E-PGN on dataset AW A.
Horse Dolphin Walrus Rat Giraffe
Figure 5: Qualitative results of our approach on AwA,where six random unseen class labels are shown on top. Thetop-3 retrieved images are highlighted in green and the top-
3 retrieved false examples are highlighted in red.
4.4. Zero-shot Retrieval Results
We conduct the image retrieval task to illustrate the qual-
itative results of the proposed framework. Given the seman-tic embeddings of a speciﬁc class, we synthesize a certainnumber of semantic-consistent representations for a speciﬁcclass and compute the centroid point as a retrieval query,which is further used to retrieve the nearest samples. Toevaluate the performance on the retrieved samples, the meanaverage precision (mAP) score is adopted. In Figure 4,w e
compare our proposed SDGZSL method with the base gen-erative model cV AE when retrieving 100%, 50%, and 25%of the images from all the unseen classes on aPaY , AW A,
CUB, and FLO. It can be seen that the disentangling module
can signiﬁcantly boost the retrieval performance among allsettings, which can also demonstrate the effectiveness of thedisentangling modules from the retrieval perspective. Fig-ure5illustrates the retrieved examples on the AW A dataset.
The class name is given on top, following by the top-3 truepositive retrieved images with green boxes and the top-3false-positive retrieved examples with red boxes. It can beseen that all the false-positive images look very similar tothe groundtruth examples. For example, the top-3 failed re-trieved samples for the rat are all bats, as the two specieshave many visual patterns in common. Thus, the nearestneighbor-based retrieval may fail to distinguish the falsepositive cases. The results demonstrate that the synthesizedsemantic-consistent representations are close to the samplesof the same class in the semantic-consistent feature space.
8718