Semantics Disentangling for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Zhi Chen1Yadan Luo1Ruihong Qiu1Sen Wang1Zi Huang1Jingjing Li2Zheng Zhang3
1The University of Queensland, Australia
2University of Electronic Science and Technology of China3Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{zhi.chen,y.luo,r.qiu,sen.wang }@uq.edu.au
huang@itee.uq.edu.au, lijin117@yeah.net, darrenzz219@gmail.com
Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) aims to classify
samples under the assumption that some classes are not ob-servable during training. To bridge the gap between the
seen and unseen classes, most GZSL methods attempt to as-sociate the visual features of seen classes with attributes orto generate unseen samples directly. Nevertheless, the vi-sual features used in the prior approaches do not necessar-
ily encode semantically related information that the sharedattributes refer to, which degrades the model generaliza-
tion to unseen classes. To address this issue, in this paper ,
we propose a novel semantics disentangling framework forthe generalized zero-shot learning task (SDGZSL), wherethe visual features of unseen classes are ﬁrstly estimatedby a conditional VAE and then factorized into semantic-consistent and semantic-unrelated latent vectors. In partic-
ular , a total correlation penalty is applied to guarantee theindependence between the two factorized representations,
and the semantic consistency of which is measured by thederived relation network. Extensive experiments conductedon four GZSL benchmark datasets have evidenced that
the semantic-consistent features disentangled by the pro-
posed SDGZSL are more generalizable in tasks of canon-ical and generalized zero-shot learning. Our source codeis available at https://github.com/uqzhichen/
SDGZSL .
1. Introduction
Human beings have a remarkable ability to learn new no-
tions based on prior experience without seeing them in ad-vance. For example, given the clues that zebras appear likehorses yet with black-and-white stripes, one can quicklyrecognize a zebra if he/she has seen horses before. Nev-ertheless, unlike humans, supervised machine learning al-gorithms can only classify samples belonging to the classesthat have already appeared during the training phase, andthey are not able to handle samples from previously unseen
Semantic-unrelated visual features, e.g., ear shapeStripes 
Big 
Tail 
Muscle Grazer Arctic 
Tree 
Domestic Fields Bush Hunter 
Stalker 
Forager Nocturnal Tusks Strong Ocean 
Vegetation
Longleg 
Furry 
Strainteeth
Smelly
Walks
Fast
Slow
Bipedal
Meat
Active
Pads
Paws
Longneck
HoovesAnnotated attributes
Figure 1: An illustration of the visual features (red boxes)
that are not associated with the annotated attributes. Learn-ing from such visual features that are semantically unrelatedmay jeopardize the model generalization to unseen classes.
categories. This challenge motivates the study of generaliz-
ing models to the unseen classes by transferring knowledgefrom intermediate semantics ( e.g., attributes), which typi-
cally refers to zero-shot learning (ZSL). intro
Particularly, the core idea of ZSL [ 19,34,1,17] lies in
learning to map features between the semantic space and vi-sual space, thereby closing the gap between the seen and un-
seen classes. While effective, conventional ZSL techniquesare built upon the assumption that the test set only containssamples from the unseen classes, which can be easily vio-lated in practice. Hence, it is more reasonable to consider anew protocol called generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL),where seen and unseen images are both to be identiﬁed.
Existing GZSL techniques can be roughly grouped into
two types: embedding-based [ 9,34,22,21,13] and
generative-based [ 38,35,28,24,15] approaches. The for-
mer group learns a projection or an embedding functionto associate the visual features of seen classes with therespective semantic vectors, while the latter one learns a
visual generator for the unseen classes based on the seen
points and semantic representations of both classes. How-ever, most GZSL approaches directly leverage the visualfeatures extracted from the pre-trained deep models, such
8712