IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 21
Luc Le Mero recieved his BSc/MPhys degree in
Physics in 2015 from the University of Warwick. In
2017 he received an MSc in Scientiﬁc Computing
from the University of Warwick. Now he is a PhD
candidate in the Warwick Manufacturing Group,
University of Warwick, UK.
Dewei Yi (M’18) received his B.Eng. degree in 2014
in Software Engineering from Zhejiang University of
Technology, Zhejiang, China. In 2015, he obtained
his M.Sc. degree from the Department of Computer
Science, Loughborough University, Loughborough,
U.K. In 2018, he received a Ph.D degree from the
Department of Aeronautical and Automotive Engi-
neering, Loughborough University, Loughborough,
U.K. In 2019, he was a research fellow with the
Warwick Manufacturing Group (WMG), University
of Warwick, Coventry, U.K. He is currently a lec-
turer in Machine Learning, Department of Computing Science, University of
Aberdeen, U.K. His current research interests include personalised driving
assistance, autonomous vehicle and vehicular network, Advanced Driver As-
sistance Systems (ADASs),Generalised and Sustainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) Systems, and Hybrid Intelligent Systems and Robotics.
Mehrdad Dianati (Senior Member, IEEE) is a
Professor of autonomous and connected vehicles, as
well as, the Head of Intelligent Vehicles Research
Department and the Technical Research Lead in the
area of Networked Intelligent Systems at the War-
wick Manufacturing Group (WMG), the University
of Warwick, UK. The focus of his research is on
the application of Digital Technologies (Information
and Communication Technologies and Artiﬁcial In-
telligent) for the development of future mobility and
transport systems. He has over 29 years of combined
industrial and academic experience, with 20 years in various leadership roles
in multi-disciplinary collaborative R&D projects. He works closely with the
Automotive and ICT industries as the primary application domains of his
research. He is also the Director of Warwick’s Centre for Doctoral Training
on Future Mobility Technologies, training doctoral researchers in the areas of
intelligent and electriﬁed mobility systems in collaboration with the experts
in the ﬁeld of electriﬁcation from the Department of Engineering of the
University of Warwick. In the past, he has served as an Editor for the IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology and several other international journals,
including IET Communications. Currently, he is the Field Chief Editor of
Frontiers in Future Transportation.