IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 6
11604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019
Fig. 4. Architecture of the angle branched network. Firstly, networks fimg ,fmea ,a n d fcom extract features from sequential images, speed and subgoal angle
respectively. Secondly, these features are concatenated (by fcon) and fed into the fusion network fab
fu. Finally, according to the value of the subgoal angle, the
fused features are processed to predict the steering angle and the throttle by the corresponding network.
TABLE I
DETAILS OF DIFFERENT LA Y E R SO FT H E ANGLE BRANCHED NETWORK .W E
USE THE FIRST SEVEN LAY ERS O F VGG11 [25] P RETRAINED ON THE
IMAGE NET.EVERY CONVOLUTION LAYER AND FULLY CONNECTED LAY ER
HAV E A BAT C H NORMALIZA TION LAYER AND A RELU LAY ER BEHIND IT.FOR
ALL OBSERV A TIONS ,THE INPUT SIZEISO F 224×224 P IXELS .FORfpre x,W E
HAV Ex∈(l, s, r )
IV . D ATA COLLECTION AND PREPROCESSING
In this section, we give details about our data collection and
preprocessing.
A. Simulator
Carla [36] is an urban driving simulator, which provides
rich scene information and various sensor information includ-
ing depth, camera, Lidar measurements, etc. The road type is a
two-lane dual carriageway. There are two towns in Carla: one
is for training, the other is for testing. We use Carla’s autopi-
lot to collect the data for observations, measurements and ac-
tions since we ﬁnd it driving more stable and accurate than mosthumans. From above information, we are able to generate the
path and the navigation command.
B. Observation, Measurement, and Action
To ensure that the model can recover from mistakes, we also
set the left and right camera on the ego-vehicle. Cameras are set
on proper positions so that the body of the vehicle is not shown
in images. Depth and semantic images are also captured in our
experiment. Since it is enough to train a good policy by only
using images from the three cameras, we do not use other tricks
like the noise injection in [7].
In addition to images, we also collect vehicle information in-
cluding the position, the speed, the orientation (i.e., the heading
direction), the steering angle and the throttle status, etc. Notice
that in Carla, the steering angle is a ﬂoating-point number be-
tween−1 and 1, so the tanh layer is used after the action layer
of our network architecture. Besides, the throttle status only has
discrete values (i.e., 0.0 and 0.6), which represent brake and
acceleration respectively.
C. Path and Command
To generate paths, we represent the collected trajectory of
the vehicle by uniformly distributed points and ensure that the
distances between adjacent points are at least x=2 meters. As
discussed in Section III-B2, we deﬁne the current subgoal of the
vehicle as the nearest point that is more than d=3 meters away
from the vehicle’s location. Given the current location and the
subgoal, we can calculate the subgoal angle according to (13)
to (16).
D. Episode
To generate different paths, the data are collected in the form
of episode. The frequency of recorded data ranges from 3 to 6 fps.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN. Downloaded on April 07,2021 at 18:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3. The architecture of the angle branched network from [26]. The model takes as input RGB images, speed and the subgoal angle. The image processing
layers are pre trained from VGG11 [27]. A fusion layer is then used to concatenate the three 512-dimensional layers from the images, speed and subgoal
angles into a single layer. The subgoal angle is discretised into 3 distinct set of values representing a separate high-level command; [-180, -10] (turning left),
[-10, 10] (going straight) and [10, 180] (turning right). Similar to CIL architectures, the model contains separate action layers corresponding to each of these
3 commands. Each of these layers is responsible for outputting corresponding control signals for each high-level command.
an LSTM layer to allow temporal information to be utilised.
Both models achieved good performance in urban autonomous
driving. However, the incorporation of temporal information
was found to improve the performance.
Chiet al. [33] also propose a model utilising LSTM archi-
tecture. They incorporate temporal information, modelling the
steering angle as a continuous variable. The LSTM network is
trained to minimise the loss between predicted steering angles
and those of an expert. The network architecture consists
of two individual sub-networks, the ﬁrst a feature-extracting
network to model the visual surroundings and internal status of
the vehicle. The second sub-network is the steering predicting
sub-network, which is responsible for control output.
The feature extracting sub-network performs spatio-
temporal convolution to fully model the sequential learning
problem of autonomous steering. The steering prediction net-
work fuses multiple kinds of temporal information in order
to minimise an overall objective function, outputting steering,
speed and torque predictions.
They utilise the Udacity simulator [34] for training pur-
poses. For performance analysis, the method is compared with
competing algorithms including AlexNet [5] and PilotNet [20],
outperforming them at the task of steering wheel prediction.
Kebria et al . [35] investigate the impacts of the number
of layers, ﬁlers, and ﬁlter size on the performance of end-
to-end models trained to predict steering angles from camera
inputs. They train, evaluate and compare 96 models as well as
proposing a novel ensemble approach. The ensemble model
assigns weights for each model based on their recent loss
values. The Udacity simulator is used for the collection of
a training dataset and model evaluation. Deeper models are
found to outperform shallower ones, with the jump from 9 to
12 layers being the most signiﬁcant. It was also found that 16ﬁlters actually outperformed those that had 32. Models with
a mixture of ﬁlter sizes were found to perform the best. The
proposed ensemble method was compared to bagging [36] and
was found to outperform it.
2)Direct Perception :In this section we will survey works
that perform the direct perception paradigm of autonomous
vehicle design.
Barnes et al . [37] propose utilising monocular cameras as
opposed to purely LiDAR data. The method aims to generate
potential driving paths using input data from the camera. A
deep semantic segmentation network is used, with training data
acquired from the trajectories taken by a test vehicle. Video
odometry is used to measure vehicle motion, whilst obstacle
sensing is performed by using LiDAR. The combination of
this visual and LiDAR data, in conjunction with the known
vehicle trajectory, is then used to segment the input images
into driveable, non-driveable and unknown regions at a pixel
level. The method is evaluated on both the KITTI [38] and
Oxford RobotCar [39] datasets, showing good results for both
the segmentation and path proposals in a variety of conditions.
Caiet al. [40] propose a CIL end-to-end model that receives
camera images, high-level commands and the autonomous
vehicles previous trajectories and learns to output collision-
free trajectories 3 seconds into the future. The model consists
of 3 sub-networks, one for each high-level command. These
sub-networks then feed into an LSTM/FCC network to output
trajectories. The Oxford RobotCar dataset is utilised for train-
ing and evaluation. The model is trained to perform a range of
tasks including lane keeping, overtaking and stopping behind
a parked car, outputting trajectories close to the ground truth
for each task.
Bansal et al . [14] present ChauffeurNet, an end-to-end
model trained to map from birds-eye representations of the