IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 18
They develop the DeepIRL framework, utilising deep learning
in conjunction with inverse reinforcement learning to learn
cost maps of the environment. These cost maps can then be
used to construct paths through the environment, similar to
the behavioural cloning based approach by Caltagirone et al.
Whilst showing potential for this task, the development of
an Inverse Reinforcement Learning based autonomous vehicle
will require signiﬁcantly more development.
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning [72] also shows
a large amount of promise in terms of addressing all 3 of the
primary issues faced by IL. Li et al. [74] develop a Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning based system capable of not
only successfully learning a driving policy but also learning
to distinguish between high-level actions and model latent
variables. Kueﬂer et al . [17] use GAIL to imitate human
level highway driving in simulation, achieving very promising
results compared to BC baselines. These abilities highlight
the potential of GAIL for the ﬁeld of autonomous vehicles.
However as a ﬁeld GAIL is still in its infancy and as such it
may be a matter of time before it is ready to be applied to
real-world autonomous vehicle systems.
B. Open Challenges
1) Behavioural Cloning:
Current datasets are not large or diverse enough for
the training of a fully autonomous vehicle. For safety
critical tasks such as autonomous driving, edge cases
and underrepresented scenarios pose signiﬁcant threats
to performance. More complete and large scale datasets
for BC approaches are needed to address these issues.
Current end-to-end systems fail to account for the safety
critical nature of the task. Improving safety of au-
tonomous systems is crucial, namely via the introduc-
tion of uncertainty modelling or other safety critical
approaches. Deep learning often struggles to generalise
to novel or unseen scenarios that a model may encounter.
This potential drop in performance can be disastrous
for safety critical tasks. Models capable of outputting
associated uncertainty information or performing novelty
detection can address these issues and present a valuable
area for future research.
Current end-to-end approaches fail to effectively model
the temporal dependence of driving decisions. This over-
simpliﬁcation limits their effectiveness in the real-world.
Attempting to train a model to mimic human driving
decision making whilst only allowing it access to a
fraction of the information that humans use will almost
certainly limit performance.
The ﬁeld is lacking a standardised evaluation approach.
The development of a standard evaluation metric or test
bed for the ﬁeld is of paramount importance, to en-
able the comparison and assessment of current methods.
Such evaluation should be rigorous, exposing models
to a range of novel and dangerous scenarios to fully
evaluate not only their driving performance but also
their safety level. Current benchmarks utilise simulation
environments however the construction of a real-world
benchmarking approach would be extremely valuable.2) Direct Policy Learning:
The requirement of having access to human experts is a
costly one, and the study of more query-efﬁcient algo-
rithms is an ongoing challenge. The inclusion of experts
at training time can greatly mitigate the limitations of
BC approaches, but currently struggle to maximise this
potential due to the inefﬁciency of querying the expert.
The use of non-human experts and the development of
models that are very query efﬁcient can minimise this
issue, however further work into such approaches is
needed.
Algorithms that allow the model to reach performance
greater than its experts show promise, but only currently
are viable for very simple expert policies. Expansion of
such approaches to more complex expert policies could
greatly improve model performance.
The majority of Direct Policy Learning approaches have
only been implemented in simulation, expansion to real-
world environments is an open challenge.
3) Inverse Reinforcement Learning:
The majority of current IRL based approaches are
limited to simple simulations. Expansion of IRL
based approaches to more complex, realistic simulation
environments/real-world datasets should be made to allow
the ﬁeld to catch up with Behavioural Cloning based
solutions.
Current leading deep learning based IRL approaches
are focused on direct perception based approach, further
expansion to attempt to utilise such methods to develop
control systems should be made.
The computational complexity of IRL approaches is a
signiﬁcant limitation of the method. More computation-
ally efﬁcient methods of acquiring reward functions are
needed if the approach is to become suitable for real-
world autonomous driving.
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning models are
difﬁcult to train and computationally intensive. They have
been shown to be unstable during training, and for smaller
datasets they can take a long time to converge.
The theoretical background to GAIL is still largely un-
known. For any signiﬁcant progress to be made into
developing the method, more work is needed to ascertain
its theoretical background.
The utilisation of online learning in GAIL based ap-
proaches could signiﬁcantly relieve the issue of sample
inefﬁciency by guiding the learning process.
Studies such as [77] have also shown that GAIL can
fail to generalise to differing environmental dynamics,
and more work is needed to investigate this potentially
signiﬁcant limitation of the approach.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper provides an overview of state-of-the-art Imita-
tion Learning based methods, their applications in the ﬁeld
of autonomous vehicles and discusses open challenges that
still need to be addressed. The ﬁeld is classiﬁed into three
main approaches; Behavioural Cloning, Direct Policy Learning