IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 8
Figure 1: End-to-end Bayesian deep learning architecture. This ﬁgure illustrates our architecture and the key beneﬁt of propagating uncer-
tainty throughout the A V framework. We consider a hypothetical situation where an A V (our blue car) approaches an intersection, where
another car (red) will turn left into our path. We compare a framework built on traditional (non-Bayesian) and Bayesian deep learning. Al-
though both systems use the same initial sensory information, propagating uncertainty through the prediction and decision layers allows the
Bayesian approach to avert disaster. Deep learning methods are required for state-of-the-art performance, hence more traditional Bayesian
methods are not possible.
assured they retain high-level situational control. Compliance
with the law, and the integration of regional regulations into
an A V pipeline, is also a crucial requirement which leads to
problems relating to integrating logical rules into deep learn-
ing systems. Research on such problems is extremely sparse,
and we comment on this below.
In this document we survey technical challenges and sug-
gest important paths for future research in S.I.C. from a ma-
chine learning research perspective. We highlight the need for
concrete evaluation metrics, and suggest new metrics to eval-
uate safety by looking at both model performance and model
uncertainty. We suggest example problems in each of the
S.I.C. themes, and highlight possible solutions.
2 Safety
In A V software, no individual component exists in isola-
tion. Improving safety by reducing individual component
errors is necessary for safe A V software—but not sufﬁcient.
Even if each component satisﬁes acceptable fault tolerances
in isolation, the accumulation of errors can have disastrous
consequences. Instead, an understanding of how errors prop-
agate forwards through a pipeline of components is critical.
For example, in Figure 1, a perception component—which
detects another vehicle’s indicator lights—inﬂuences how a
prediction component anticipates the vehicle’s motion, ulti-
mately inﬂuencing the driving decision. Since misclassiﬁca-
tion by components early in the pipeline affects components
downstream, at the very least, each component should pass
on the limitations and uncertainties of its outputs. Corre-
spondingly, each component should be able to accept as input
the uncertainty of the component preceding it in the pipeline.
Further, these component uncertainties must be assembled in
a principled way to yield a meaningful measure of overall sys-
tem uncertainty, based on which safe decisions can be made.
A principled approach to modelling uncertainty isBayesian probability theory (in fact, it can be shown that a
rational agent must be Bayesian in its beliefs [Berger, 2013 ]).
Bayesian methods use probabilities to represent uncertainty,
and can be used for each individual component to represent its
subjective conﬁdence in its output. This conﬁdence can then
be propagated forward through the pipeline. To do so, each
component must be able to input and output probability dis-
tributions rather than numbers. Together, component outputs
downstream become functions of the uncertainty in predic-
tions made upstream, enabling a decision layer to consider the
consequences of plausible misclassiﬁcations made upstream,
and act accordingly. Other approaches to conveying uncer-
tainty exist in the ﬁeld, including, for example, ensembling
[Gal, 2016 ]. But the uncertainties of such techniques cannot
necessarily be combined together in a meaningful way (a ne-
cessity with a complex software pipeline). Further, the type
of uncertainty captured by these methods is not necessarily
appropriate in safety applications (discussed further in x5).
Traditional A V research has used Bayesian tools to capture
uncertainty in the past [Paden et al., 2016 ]. But the transi-
tion of many such systems to deep learning poses a difﬁculty.
How would deep learning systems capture uncertainty?
While many Bayesian models exist, deep learning models
obtain state-of-the-art perception of ﬁne details and complex
relationships [Kendall and Gal, 2017 ]. Hence we propose the
use of Bayesian Deep Learning (BDL). BDL is an exciting
ﬁeld lying at the forefront of research. It forms the intersec-
tion between deep learning and Bayesian probability theory,
offering principled uncertainty estimates within deep archi-
tectures. These deep architectures can model complex tasks
by leveraging the hierarchical representation power of deep
learning, while also being able to infer complex multi-modal
posterior distributions. Bayesian deep learning models typ-
ically form uncertainty estimates by either placing distribu-Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
4746
Fig. 5. Figure from [46] illustrating potential advantages of Bayesian Deep Learning architecture. The processing pipeline for traditional deep learning models
is shown in the ﬁrst part. The shown vehicle approaches an intersection where the red car will turn into its path. The failures to detect the red light or other
cars indications and intents lead to a deterministic incorrect prediction, causing a collision. In a Bayesian model, despite the light and other vehicle signals
and intentions not being detected, a level of uncertainty is associated with the incorrect detection’s. This uncertainty is then propagated through the model
to provide an uncertainty over the predicted actions. If the level of uncertainty is above a deﬁned threshold then the vehicle will not take the action and the
collision will be avoided.
3)Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation :In this section, we will
focus on works that incorporate some instance of uncertainty
modelling into their end-to-end system.
Richter et al. [47] utilise a pair of neural networks in their
autonomous system to perform collision prediction and novelty
detection simultaneously. The navigation from starting point
to goal is solved using geometric maps of the environment
constructed using SLAM. A CNN is then trained to predict
collision likelihood for a trajectory. An auto-encoder is also
used in the system to perform novelty detection on input
data. This is to overcome the issues with generalisation to
unseen states for deep learning methods. If the auto-encoder
detects that input data is from a novel, unseen scenario it
allows the autonomous agent to revert back to a series of pre-
programmed, ’safe’ behaviours. The auto-encoder is trained
using a dataset of simulated camera images from hallway type
environments. The system is tested both in simulation and in
the real-world using an RC car. Results show that the model
is able to achieve reliable transitions between high performing
trained network and the safe behaviours.
McAllister et al . [46] propose the utilisation of Bayesian
Deep Learning (BDL) in the development of autonomous
driving systems. Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN) move
away from having single-valued tunable parameters (weights,
biases) to having distributions of values for each parameter.
This then naturally leads to the output of such a system being
a distribution. Therefore, it not only can extract the networks’
prediction but also a measure of uncertainty. The main focus
of the work is on the implementation of such an approach
for a prediction module in a modular system, namely such a
systems ability to predict erroneous behaviour of other road
users and dynamic objects as seen in Figure 5. However, the
work also mentions the value of applying such an architecture
to an end-to-end system to produce a similar ability foridentifying scenarios that are either underrepresented or absent
from training data sets (edge-cases).
Michelmore et al . [48] investigate the incorporation of
model uncertainty into an end-to-end system. The challenge
of steering angle prediction is treated as both a regression and
classiﬁcation task, with separate network architectures built for
each approach. Both systems are trained and evaluated in the
Udacity simulator [34]. Uncertainty information is extracted
using 3 separate methods; variation ratios [49], predictive
entropy [50] and mutual information [50]. Uncertainty in-
formation is able to be extracted for each approach in real
time by limiting stochastic forward passes. The utilisation
of uncertainty modelling is not found to improve the pre-
dictive performance of the method. However, the utilisation
of uncertainty in crash prediction is also investigated. Mutual
information was found to be a promising indicator of future
crashes.
Amini et al. [51] utilise spatial dropout in a deep Bayesian
Network for end-to-end autonomous vehicle control. They
approximate Bayesian inference and acquire uncertainty es-
timates on output predictions. Dropout is performed before
every weight layer using 2 approaches; element-wise Bernoulli
Dropout [52] and spatial Bernoulli dropout [53]. Evaluation is
performed in the real-world on a Toyota Prius in a range of
weather conditions and environments. Training is performed
using over 7 hours of driving data, with the network trained
to map from RGB input data directly through to control
signals. Spatial dropout was found to be the most suitable
approach, which is utilised during training as this leads to
faster convergence.
Caiet al. [54] focus on improving the generalisation capa-
bilities of end-to-end models. The authors propose a multi-
perception model, PMP-net, that receives as input LiDAR,
radar and camera data, outputting a trajectory which is used