IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 16
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF AUTONOMOUS DRIVING DATASETS [24]. U - U RBAN , R - R URAL , H - H IGHWAY
Dataset Environment Data Type Scale
(h)Diversity Sensors Advantages Disadvantages
U R H Weather Day Night Video
ImageLiDAR GPS-
IMU
KITTI XXX Real-world 1.4 Single X - X X X -Contains all 3
environments
-Contains
LiDAR data-Small dataset
-Low diversity
Oxford X - - Real-world 214 Multiple X - X - X -Contains range
of weather con-
ditions-Contains few
environments
-No LiDAR
data
BDDV XXX Real-world 10k Multiple X - X - X -Large scale
-Contains
wide range of
environments
and weather-No night data
-No LiDAR
Drive360 X -X Real-world 60 Multiple X - X - X -Contains
multiple
weather
conditions-No night data
-No LiDAR
Comma.ai - -X Real-world 7.25 Single X X X - X -Contains night
driving-Few
environments
-No LiDAR
expert intention from being required.
Chi et al . [33], Haavaldsen et al . [32] and Hawke et
al. [28] primarily focus on overcoming the issue of multi-
modality through the use of temporal information. Modelling
the steering angle as a temporally continuous variable not only
shows potential in alleviating this problem, but also improving
performance compared to competing algorithms. However,
the multi-modality of the solution is not entirely relieved.
High-level intention, driving condition, and many other factors
can also lead to solution ambiguity and combinations of this
information as inputs to the network needs further study.
Direct Perception - Direct perception is an alternate form
of end-to-end model design. Despite the task of outputting
indicators for use by a control module being a slightly more
complex one than control signal prediction, an advantage of
this approach is the ability to train networks to provide long
time horizon planning. This can signiﬁcantly improve the
safety of such systems whilst providing any observers with
information about the systems long term intentions.
The majority of direct perception approaches utilise multi-
modal inputs, straying away from the primarily vehicle-
mounted camera strategies of control prediction systems. Xiao
et al. [30] and Barnes et al. [37] focus on the inclusion of depth
information alongside RGB camera information via LiDAR to
improve their models’ trajectory generation. Xiao et al. inves-
tigate including this additional information at varying stages of
the end-to-end pipeline to generate driving trajectories, whilst
Barnes et al . use this additional information to segment the
camera images for use in trajectory generation. Both works
provide good solutions to the challenge of generations of
trajectory generation models, however access to LiDAR for
autonomous vehicle systems can still be an issue due to
availability and cost.
Works such as Bansal et al. [14] and Chen et al. [15] show
the performance that can be achieved using trajectory planningapproaches when they receive a comprehensive birds-eye view
overview of their environment as an input. These models
successfully produce successful, safe long-horizon trajectories
through complex environments. However, in order to provide
such comprehensive input information outside of simulation
environments requires the development and implementation of
state-of-the-art perception systems.
Xuet al . [24] attempt to overcome the generalisability
issue through the acquisition of a training dataset signiﬁcantly
larger than any other presently available. The collection of
such a dataset signiﬁcantly increases the number and range
of scenarios present for training. However, such an approach
struggles to completely overcome the issue of generalisability,
as a ﬁnite dataset cannot contain all possible driving scenarios.
Beyond this, the utilisation of data from a wide range of
sources, from multiple human drivers, introduces the issue of
differing driving styles between each source. Known as latent
variables , these factors should be modelled which brings a
further challenge.
Caltagirone et al . [41] (driving path estimation), Barnes
et al . [37] (driving path estimation) and Richter et al . [47]
(collision/novelty prediction) all utilise the direct perception
approach to provide a driving controller with navigational in-
formation. For Caltagirone, Barnes, each method is applied to
only a single, speciﬁc part of the autonomous driving decision
making pipeline. A direct perception based fully autonomous
vehicle would require such processing to be conducted on the
entire perception pipeline, which may be unfeasible. Richter et
al. utilise such a system to perform crash prediction to greatly
improve the safety of an autonomous vehicle. Performing
novelty prediction provides a unique method of preventing
system failures due to issues regarding generalisability.
Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation - Michelmore et al . [48],
Amini et al . [51] and Lee et al . [55] utilise uncertainty
information through the training of Bayesian Neural Networks