IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 7
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Fig. 1. CIL branched architect ure: vehicle maneuvers (actions) in the form of the triplet <steering angle, throttle, brake >, depend on a high-level route
navigation command (branch selector) running on {turn-left ,turn-right ,go-straight ,continue }, as well as on the world observations in the form of perception
data ( e.g.a RBG image) and vehicle state measurements ( e.g.speed).
Fig. 2. Network Architectures - we explore RGBD from the perspective of early, mid and late fusion of the RGB and Depth (D) modalities. (1) Early
Fusion: the raw RGB and D channels are the input of the CIL architecture; (2 ) Mid Fusion: intermediate CIL feature layers from RGB and D streams are
fused; (3) Late Fusion: the output (maneuver controls) of the RGB and D CIL st reams are fused to output the ﬁnal values after further neural processing.
We follow the CIL architecture proposed in [39]. Therefore,
pis a RGB image of 200 ×88 pixels and 8 bits at each color
channel, mis a real value with the current speed of the vehicle,
andaconsists of three real-valued signals which set the next
maneuver in terms of steering angle, throttle, and brake. Thus,
the idea is to perform vision-based self-driving, as well astaking into account the vehicle speed to apply higher/lower
throttle and brake for the same perceived trafﬁc situation.
In [39], the focus is on handling intersections, then the consid-ered cvalues are {turn-left, turn-right, go-straight, continue },
where the last refers to just keep driving in the current laneand the others inform about what to do when reaching next
intersection (which is an event detected by the own CNN).
Accordingly, there are four branches A
c. Therefore, if we
term by Fthe end-to-end driver, we have F(p,m,c)=
Ac(J(p,m)). As shown in [39], this manner of explicitly
taking into account high-level navigation commands is moreeffective than other alternatives.
B. Fusion Schemes
Fig. 2 illustrates how we fuse RGB and depth information
following mid, early and late fusion approaches.Early fusion: with respect to the original CIL we only
change the number of channels of pfrom three (RGB) to four
(RGBD). The CIL network only changes the ﬁrst convolutional
layer of P(p)to accommodate for the extra input channel,
the rest of the network is equal to the original.
Mid fusion: we replicate twice th e perception processing
P(p). One of the P(p)blocks processes only RGB images,
the other one only depth images. Then, we build the jointfeature vector <P(RGB),P(D),M(m)> which is fur-
ther processed to obtain J(RGB,D,m). From this point,
the branched part of CIL is the same as in the originalarchitecture.
Late fusion: we replicate twice the full CIL architecture.
Thus, RGB and depth channels are processed separately,but the measurements are shared as input. Hence, we run
A
c(J(RGB, m))andAc(J(D,m)), and their outputs are con-
catenated and further processed by a module of fully connectedlayers, the output of which conveys the ﬁnal action values.
Note that this is a kind of mixture-of-experts approach, where
the two experts are jointly trained.
As is common practice in the literature, we assume a
pixel-level correspondence of all channels and normalize all of
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN. Downloaded on April 07,2021 at 18:38:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 4. Conditional Imitation Learning architecture from [30]. Inputs to the network are video frames ( p), vehicle state measurements ( m) and high-level
command information ( c). The architecture consists of a series of sub networks for each possible high-level command. The input of a particular command
then selects its associated sub-network to produce a given control output. Outputs are in the form of a triplet (steering angle, throttle, brake).
environment to control outputs for an autonomous vehicle. The
dataset is constructed from real-world driving with input data
in the form of birds-eye representations including road masks,
trafﬁc lights, speed limits, route and past agent poses. The
model is then trained to output future trajectories. The authors’
further augment the training data with simulated examples of
collisions and incorrect driving whilst augmenting the loss
functions to discourage such undesirable behaviour. A series of
deﬁned scenarios are used to evaluate performance including
nudging around a parked car, recovering from a trajectory
perturbation and slowing down for a slow car. The model is
found to perform well in a range of evaluation scenarios and
is also demonstrated to be capable of driving an autonomous
vehicle in the real-world.
Caltagirone et al. [41] propose to utilise a direct perception
method taking in LiDAR inputs, past GPS-IMU and driving
directions from google maps and outputting driving paths
through the environment. An FCN architecture is used to allow
for the interpreting of a 3D LiDAR point cloud, with the
GPS-IMU data transformed into a spatial format. The FCN
is trained to predict driveable regions of the point cloud map
for a controller to navigate. The method is evaluated using
the KITTI dataset [38]. Results show that the method outputs
reliable driving paths for relatively short ranges, with the
incorporation of driving intention improving the results further.
Xuet al. [24] propose to utilise a large-scale, uncalibrated,
crowdsourced dataset for the training of autonomous vehicles
in an attempt to address the Cascading Error Problem. To
achieve this, they collect a large-scale (10,000 hours) dataset of
dashcam and GPS-IMU data from internet sources. The larger
scale decreases the number of potentially unseen scenarios that
a vehicle will encounter. Subsequently, they develop a direct
perception based approach for autonomous driving which is
based on a dashcam subset of their Berkeley DeepDrive Video
dataset (BDDV).
To account for the varying position of cameras within the
vehicle, the model is trained to predict ego-motion. The model
also utilises spatial and temporal information to make driving
decisions for modelling the steering angle in a continuousfashion. A novel network architecture, consisting of the fusion
of an FCN visual encoder and LSTM temporal encoder, is
developed to perform this task. The goal of the method is
to learn the feasibility of future actions for use in a control
system.
Evaluation of the model is performed by taking the most
likely action predicted by the system and comparing it to
the ground truth action. Two separate output methods are
considered; discrete and continuous actions. Furthermore, the
use of privileged learning (having access to more information
at the training stage than the evaluation stage) is investigated
which uses semantic segmentation of input images. In both
the discrete and continuous paradigms, the system shows a
promising understanding of human driving behaviour. The in-
corporation of privileged learning also improves the networks
performance.
Chen et al . [4] aim to develop a CNN based neural net-
work to map directly from input images to output affordance
indicators that can be used by a control network to perform
autonomous driving. These affordance indicators include the
angle of the car relative to the road, the distance to lane
markings and distances to surrounding vehicles. The vehicle
controller is trained to use the output indicators to minimise
the gap between the car’s position and the centre of the desired
lane. The used dataset is collected by allowing a human
driver to act in the TORCS simulator [42] for roughly 12
hours, focusing primarily on highway driving. The system
is further tested on car-mounted smartphone videos and the
KITTI dataset [38].
Evaluation of the system in simulation is performed by
comparison with benchmark solutions. These include a be-
haviour reﬂex based CNN method, the Caltech lane detector
algorithm [43] and direct perception with the hand-crafted
GIST descriptor [44]. The method is found to outperform the
alternate methods for the task evaluated. For the real-world
evaluation, the model is compared with other methods on the
KITTI dataset [38]. The comparison is performed with the
state-of-the-art DPM car detector [45]. The proposed method
has comparable performance levels to the DPM method.