IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 11
baselines in a range of metrics and is found to perform much
better over larger horizons ( >3s).
Liet al. [74] propose an extension to Generative Adversarial
Imitation Learning that attempts to model latent variables
in driving datasets. Their method learns a latent variable
generative model of driving trajectories to reproduce expert
behaviour. The proposed extension in which the objective
function is augmented with a mutual information term between
latent variables and observed state-action pairs. The TORCS
simulator [42] is used to evaluate the system. The method
maps from input images to driving actions as well as modelling
and distinguishing between high-level actions taken by the
driver.
III. D ATASETS AND SIMULATORS
The training of neural networks for the control of au-
tonomous vehicles requires the utilisation of large scale
datasets. These datasets should cover a wide range of scenarios
for both real-world and simulation based training. This section
introduces the most commonly used datasets for the training
of autonomous driving systems. A comparison of datasets is
available in Table II. A comparison of simulators is presented
in Table III.
A frequently used dataset is the KITTI dataset [38]. Con-
sisting of 6 hours of driving scenarios, data was recorded using
a Velodyne 3D laser scanner and a high precision GPS/IMU
navigation system. The data consist of stereo colour images
from a variety of scenarios including highway driving, urban
environments and rural areas. The entire dataset is calibrated
and timestamped. However, the dataset contains a limited
range of weather and lighting conditions.
The Oxford Robotcar dataset [39] was collected with an
autonomous vehicle traversing a route through Oxford, Eng-
land twice a week over the course of a year. Containing over
1000km of recorded driving and almost 20 million images, it
is an extensive dataset. Data were collected from 6 mounted
cameras, LiDAR, and a GPS/IMU navigation system. Despite
the lack of variety in the environment, data were collected for
a wide range of lighting/weather conditions including heavy
rain, night, direct sunlight and snow.
The Berkeley DeepDrive Video dataset [24] is a large-
scale uncalibrated dataset, consisting of driving videos and
GPS/IMU data. It is by far the largest dataset available with
over 10,000 hours of driving data. It contains a wide range
of environment and lighting/weather conditions, along with
video sources from multiple different vehicles. However, this
utilisation of multiple sources can lead to challenges regarding
latent variable modelling.
The Drive360 dataset [23] consists of roughly 60 hours
of driving data taken in Switzerland. By utilising 8 distinct
camera inputs, the dataset provides full surround-view video.
The dataset also contains information with regard to steering
angle, vehicle speed and route planning.
Beyond the use of provided datasets, simulation tools also
provide a useful means to synthesise a task-speciﬁc dataset.
These techniques are not only easier for producing datasets,
but a wide range of scenarios and conditions can be incorpo-
rated. The main issue is the difﬁculty in providing a powerfulenough simulation for an agent trained using simulated data
to be able to act in the real-world.
The CARLA simulator [22] is an open source simulation
tool for autonomous driving. Various 3D models are provided
to reproduce a variety of urban scenarios and the simulator
allows for the addition of various lighting and weather con-
ditions, the capability of producing maps of the environment
and the ability to replicate trafﬁc scenarios. The virtual sensor
suite contains multiple camera types and LiDAR models.
An alternate simulation tool is the TORCS simulator [42].
TORCS is an open source car racing simulator. It contains
multiple tracks, a sophisticated physics model and the ability
to implement multiple vehicle scenarios. The simulator also
includes an extensive tool suite alongside a large range of
user created content.
The Udacity simulator [34] is another open source, free
driving simulator. Users can build their own tracks to evaluate
models in the simulator. Training data can be collected through
human control and used to train an autonomous agent. The
base simulator allows the training of models that utilise camera
data as inputs. Models can be evaluated for a range of
environments and weather/lighting conditions.
Sim4CV [64] is a photo-realistic simulation tool constructed
in the Unreal Engine [75]. The simulator has full physics
modelling for cars, unmanned aerial vehicles and human actors
in a range of urban environments. The simulator comes with
a benchmarking tool and a TensorFlow-based deep learning
interface. Data including RGB images, depth, image segmen-
tation and ground truth labelling. The simulation environment
is also highly customisable, with a number of pre-built assets
that the user can manually place in the scene.
GTA V is a video game, containing a wide range of driving
environments and weather/lighting conditions. Beyond this,
the game has the ability to simulate large scale AI controlled
trafﬁc and pedestrians.
The rFpro simulator [76] is a powerful, high-level simula-
tion suite capable of providing an extensive range of large-
scale environments with a range of weather/lighting condi-
tions. A deep range of sensors are available, including camera,
LiDAR etc.
IV. D ISCUSSION
A. Summary and Limitations
1)Behavioural Cloning :The majority of works under-
taken in the ﬁeld of end-to-end learning utilise Behavioural
Cloning. Although simpler than alternate approaches, chal-
lenges such as the cascading error problem and generalisability
of solution need to be overcome for such a system to be
successfully applied in practice. In this work, we divide BC
based approaches into 3 subgroups; control prediction, direct
perception and uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Control prediction - These approaches train a model to
output steering and/or throttle control signals directly from
input data. This method is the simplest to develop, with large
scale datasets of input-control pairs easily attained with very
little pre-processing. However, a limitation of these approaches
comes with this individual outputting of control signals with
models performance decreasing over longer time horizons.