IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 9
by a PID controller to generate a control signal. The trajectory
is acquired through probabilistic motion planning, where a
Gaussian Mixture Model is used to output a distribution
of possible trajectories. A decision on the ﬁnal trajectory
is then made by evaluating the statistical properties of this
distribution. This also allows a level of uncertainty on any
trajectory to be attained.
A large scale dataset is collected in the CARLA simulator,
focusing on the inclusion of complex environments and road
agents. The authors create and utilise the DeepTest bench-
mark for model evaluation. The benchmark, constructed in
the CARLA simulator, focuses on the inclusion of a range
of weather conditions and complex multi-agent scenarios. It
also has a zero tolerance for collision events, unlike other
CARLA based benchmarks. The author’s model was found
to achieve excellent driving and generalisation performance in
the DeepTest benchmark.
Chen et al. [15] utilise birds-eye view maps of the vehicle’s
environment to train an end-to-end model consisting of a
trajectory planner alongside a safety and tracking controller.
The HD map inputs to the network include routing, trafﬁc
light, detected objects and historical ego-vehicle states. The
model is then trained to output planned trajectories through
its environment. Each trajectory is used by the network to
output desired speed and steering parameters, which are passed
to the safety enhancement module. This model component is
based on the safe set algorithm [16] and is used to ensure that
outputted control signals maintain vehicle safety. The CARLA
simulator is used to collect data and evaluate the model, and is
found to outperform similar approaches in a range of complex
environments.
Lee et al . [55] train a Bayesian Neural Network using
dropout to perform end-to-end autonomous driving whilst
allowing for real-time uncertainty estimates on model outputs.
When the uncertainty of an output is higher than a deﬁned
threshold, the handling of the autonomous vehicle is handed
to a predictive controller or expert. The AutoRally simulator
[56] is used to evaluate the model, with the network being
successfully trained to steer the vehicle and hand over control
in the presence of novel scenarios.
D. Direct Policy Learning
Direct policy learning builds on Behavioural Cloning by
attempting to leverage a given expert at training time to
overcome BCs limitations. Initially the approach is identical
to BC, with the gathering of a dataset of expert i.i.d state-
action pairs which is then used to train a policy. The Direct
Policy Learning algorithm then queries a given expert to
evaluate the policy at run-time in order to attain further training
data, typically in the form of under represented scenarios in
which the initial policy fails. In this way, DPL addresses the
limitations of BC, however the requirement of an expert at
training time is an expensive one. In this section, we will
present a review of a range of DPL algorithms.
Ross et al . [57] propose the DAgger algorithm, an online
Imitation Learning method. A primary policy trained through
Imitation Learning simultaneously collects further training
examples whilst running a reference policy.Initially, an expert dataset is used in conjunction with
Imitation Learning to train an autonomous agent. Subsequent
iterations then involve allowing the trained policy to acquire
further trajectories which are added to the dataset. For iteration
n, the next policy pn+1is the policy that best imitates the expert
on the entire dataset. For certain iterations, a modiﬁed policy is
used which allows for queries to the expert (allows the expert
to control for a fraction of the time). This allows the expert to
recover mistakes, particularly for early iterations where the
frequency of mistakes may be very high. This continuous
addition of examples of incorrect trajectories increases the
number of observed trajectories in the data and demonstrates
recovery methods. Such an approach can address the cascading
error problem. The algorithm is tested in simulation on Super
Tux Cart, a 3D racing game. Results indicate a sharp increase
in driving performance as DAgger is run.
Building on the DAgger algorithm, Zhang et al . [58]
propose the SafeDAgger algorithm. The algorithm is con-
structed to minimise the number of expert queries required
when running the DAgger algorithm, as this can be costly.
It introduces an additional safety policy which takes both the
observation of a state and the primary policy’s output as inputs.
This safety policy is trained to output the likelihood of the
primary policy deviating from an expert trajectory. This allows
the system to only query the expert driver when necessary,
minimising the number of training examples collected. The
method is evaluated using the TORCS simulator. Compared
to the DAgger approach, the SafeDAgger algorithm is able to
improve the learning rate of the vehicle and minimise expert
queries.
Panet al. [59] propose an Imitation Learning based network
for off-road driving. The aim of the work is to develop an
autonomous agent that only requires access to low-cost, on-
board sensors. They perform training with an expert that is
assumed to have access to much higher quality sensing equip-
ment than equipped on the test vehicle. The work makes use
of a model-predictive control (MPC) expert [60] as opposed to
a human driver. An MPC expert based on incremental Sparse
Spectrum Gaussian Process (SSGP) dynamics model [61] and
an iSAM2 state estimator [62] was used to generate expert
actions. For the training stage, Imitation Learning is used to
train an initial controller from MPC generated expert data.
During testing phase, the online Imitation Learning DAgger
algorithm is used to further improve performance.
The testing is performed on an elliptical, real-world track,
with the goal of minimising the accumulated cost function
over one minute of continuous driving. Results are evaluated
in a comparative method between a network trained with
batch Imitation Learning and a network trained using the
DAgger online Imitation Learning algorithm. In general, the
policies trained with online Imitation Learning outperform
those trained with batch methods.
Liet al . [63] propose a novel training algorithm for end-
to-end systems; Observational Imitation Learning (OIL). OIL
is an online learning algorithm that aims to train a model
to learn to imitate only the best behaviours of several sub-
optimal teachers. Multiple simple PID controllers are used as
the teachers. At each training iteration, a value function of