IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 1
A Survey on Imitation Learning Techniques for
End-to-End Autonomous Vehicles
Luc Le Mero, Dewei Yi, Member, IEEE , Mehrdad Dianati, Senior Member, IEEE and Alexandros Mouzakitis
Abstract —The state-of-the-art decision and planning ap-
proaches for autonomous vehicles have moved away from manu-
ally designed systems, instead focusing on the utilisation of large-
scale datasets of expert demonstration via Imitation Learning
(IL). In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of IL
approaches, primarily for the paradigm of end-to-end based
systems in autonomous vehicles. We classify the literature into
three distinct categories: 1) Behavioural Cloning (BC), 2) Direct
Policy Learning (DPL) and 3) Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL). For each of these categories, the current state-of-the-
art literature is comprehensively reviewed and summarised,
with future directions of research identiﬁed to facilitate the
development of imitation learning based systems for end-to-end
autonomous vehicles. Due to the data-intensive nature of deep
learning techniques, currently available datasets and simulators
for end-to-end autonomous driving are also reviewed.
I. INTRODUCTION
THEautonomous vehicle industry is growing rapidly. The
Boston Consulting Group estimates that the industry
will be worth $77 billion by 2035 [1]. Predictions from the
Brookings Institution [2] and IHS [3] assert that autonomous
vehicles will make up 25% of road users by 2040 and almost
all users by 2050, respectively. With these predictions driving
research and competition between companies and researchers,
a race is on to develop the ﬁrst fully autonomous vehicle.
The current state-of-the-art autonomous vehicles utilise a
modular paradigm of system design. Such a system involves
the design of an autonomous vehicle such that it contains
multiple unique and distinct modules, each responsible for
an individual task of autonomous driving (perception, path
planning, control etc.)
However, there is growing interest in an alternate paradigm,
end-to-end autonomous driving systems, also referred to as
thebehaviour reﬂex approach. These systems involve the
design of an autonomous vehicle as a single distinct module,
responsible for directly mapping from a raw sensory input
(camera, LiDAR etc.) into a control signal (steering, braking
etc.).
Lying in between these two approaches is another growing
ﬁeld, ﬁrst suggested by Chen et al . [4], referred to as direct
perception . Such methods perform the perception and path
This work was supported by Jaguar Land Rover and the U.K. EPSRC grant
EP/N01300X/1 as part of the jointly funded Towards Autonomy: Smart and
Connected Control(TASCC) Programme. L. H. Le Mero and M. Dianati are
with the Warwick Manufacturing Group, University of Warwick, Coventry
CV4 7AL, U.K. Dewei Yi is with the Department of Computing Science,
University of Aberdeen AB24 3UE, Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail:l.h.le-mero,
m.dianati@warwick.ac.uk, dewei.yi@abdn.ac.uk).
Alexandros Mouzakitis is with Jaguar Land Rover, Ltd, Coventry, CV4
7HS, UK.planning tasks in an end-to-end fashion. The outputs of this
module are then utilised to make control decisions. Although
not strictly end-to-end, such systems still output trajectories
that can be implemented by simple control schemes and are
included in this work.
Modular systems offer an attractive level of veriﬁability,
with each module having distinct outputs that can be indi-
vidually evaluated. However, this comes at the cost of com-
putational efﬁciency. Each individual module in the pipeline
is not ’aware’ of the high-level task required, and so wasted
computation may occur, for example the identiﬁcation of
objects by the feature detecting module that are unrelated to
the autonomous driving task. This problem can be mitigated
through careful design of such modules, however this requires
prior knowledge of the task at hand.
End-to-end systems are self-optimising; they learn to be
computationally efﬁcient, and require no prior knowledge of
the task. This improvement comes at the cost of veriﬁability
due to the black-box nature of deep learning. However, with
the complexity of the task of autonomous driving, this com-
putational efﬁciency is a highly desirable trait.
The construction of a single module capable of performing
the complex task of autonomous driving typically utilises the
processing ability of Deep Learning techniques. The training
of such systems is primarily performed through Imitation
Learning .
Imitation Learning utilises datasets of expert demonstration
(typically human) to train a system to imitate the given expert
for the range of scenarios presented. Alternate deep learning
methods, such as deep reinforcement learning approaches,
have been applied to the problem. However, these methods
are limited due to the complexity and safety critical nature
of the driving task. Imitation learning allows the leveraging
of widely available, easily captured large-scale datasets of
human driving to be used to train deep learning approaches
to near human standard. Such large-scale datasets of human
driving are readily available and are reviewed in Section IV .
To this end, the majority of the literature focuses primarily on
Imitation Learning.
Deep learning techniques have shown great promise in
a wide variety of ﬁelds from image classiﬁcation [5], [6]
to playing Atari games [7]. However, such techniques have
had limited success for complex tasks such as autonomous
driving. An autonomous vehicle should be able to reliably
and safely act in a wide range of environments, weather
and lighting conditions. For the Imitation Learning based
solutions considered in this paper, these challenges include
being able to accurately replicate human driving behaviour and
model external factors that can affect human driving actions