IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 4
time the vehicle remained autonomous is used for evaluating
autonomous driving performance.
One major criticism of end-to-end systems is their lack of
interpretability. A further paper, from Bojarski et al . [20],
attempts to understand the decision making process of the net-
work from [13]. The main focus of the paper is on identifying
thesalient objects , or the regions of the input images that are
most salient to the network in determining steering angles.
Results show that the salient objects used by the network are
extremely similar to those used by humans, as shown in Figure
1.
Cultrera et al. [21] also seek to increase the explainability
of end-to-end models by training an IL agent equipped with an
attention model. They train a model to receive an input image
alongside a high-level command and output steering angles.
The ﬁrst part of the model consists of a feature extracting CNN
which feeds into a Regions of Interest (RoI) pooling layer to
extract descriptors of varying size for the image. The model
is constructed to receive one of four high-level commands:
follow the lane, go straight, turn left or turn right. For each
of these commands a separate predictive section of network
is used, consisting of an attention layer and FCN to output
steering commands. The attention layers are trained to weight
regions of the input images given outputs from the RoI layer.
The model is trained in the CARLA simulator [22], and
evaluated using the CARLA benchmark. The authors’ model
is found to achieve state-of-the-art performance in the New
weather setting, whilst also providing explainability of solu-
tion through the output of the model’s attention layer as seen
in Figure 2.
Hecker et al . [23] argue that human drivers typically have
access to more data than provided to autonomous vehicles.
They propose providing end-to-end systems with input infor-
mation regarding their entire surroundings. A system consist-
ing of 8 cameras is used alongside a route planner to provide
high-level action information. A new dataset was created, the
Drive360 dataset, covering a wide range of driving scenarios
and weather/lighting conditions. Training is only undertaken
using four cameras. Each camera is fed to a network consisting
of multiple CNN and LSTM sub-networks. Subsequently, an
FCN then fuses all information from the cameras and the map
to provide future speed and steering predictions. The inclusion
of additional information leads to a signiﬁcant increase in
the performance, as measured using the Mean Squared Error
between predicted signals and ground truths. The system is
compared to [24] and [13], retrained on the Drive360 dataset,
outperforming both.
Codevilla et al . [25] claim that the assumption made in
Imitation Learning that an expert’s actions can be fully ex-
plained by a single observation does not hold for complex
tasks, such as autonomous driving. They propose an extension
of Imitation Learning, Conditional Imitation Learning (CIL).
In this approach, a trained network is not only fed an input
observation but also a representation of the expert agent’s
intention. This allows the network to be given high-level
intention information at test time as a secondary input.
The work adopts the three-camera system from DA VE-
2 [13] in order to recover from perturbations. Examples ofexpert recovery are included in the dataset to improve system
robustness to the cascading error problem. The dataset is also
augmented with a random set of transformations of contrast,
brightness, tone and Gaussian blur. The system is evaluated
both in simulation and in the real-world on a 1/5th scale truck.
A dataset of input images, steering commands and driver intent
is collected in the CARLA simulator [22] as well as in the
real-world for training purposes.
A set of four commands is used to guide the vehicle;
continue (follow the road), turn left, turn right and go straight
(at a junction). These commands are used during training
as inputs to the network. Following successful completion
of courses in simulation, the system is evaluated in the
real-world on pedestrian walkways and completed all routes.
Evaluation metrics include the number of missed turnings,
human interventions and time taken to complete a course.
Hawke et al . [28] use CIL to train an end-to-end system
capable of performing both steering and speed control in
complex urban environments. The model takes monocular
camera images alongside a high-level route command as inputs
and outputs vehicle control signals. Despite training the model
in an end-to-end fashion, they visualise the network as con-
sisting of 3 individual components: perception, sensor fusion
and control. The perception part of the model consists of a
network pre-trained on several large research vision datasets
and is trained to receive an image and reconstruct RGB,
depth and segmentation. Temporal information is encoded
using an optical ﬂow model similar to [29]. The sensor fusion
component aggregates information for the 3 models studied,
processing the information into a single representation. Single
camera, multi-camera and optical ﬂow models are studied. The
control component then produces control signals.
Multiple variations of their models are evaluated, including
using only a fraction of the training data, and comparing
the performance of pre-trained and non-pre-trained perception
components. The models were evaluated in 34.4km of real-
world autonomous driving. A range of metrics are used for
evaluation including intervention rate and manoeuvre success
rate. The utilisation of temporal information into the CIL
system alongside the addition of pre-trained perception com-
ponents was found to improve model performance, with the
addition of multiple cameras providing a further boost, but at
the expense of model complexity.
Xiao et al. [30] construct an end-to-end autonomous vehicle
control system utilising both input RGB images as well as
depth information from on-board LiDAR sensors, referred to
as RGB-D information. The inclusion of this depth information
at varying stages of a CIL based system pipeline (early, mid
and late) is investigated (Figure 4).
Early inclusion involves increasing the number of channels
at the ﬁrst convolutional layer P. Mid fusion requires the entire
perception phase at Pto be executed twice, once for RGB
input and once for depth. Late fusion involves twice replicating
the entire CIL architecture, once for RGB input and once for
depth, with the results shared. Data is collected from 2 maps in
the CARLA simulator; one for the collection and the use of a
training dataset and the other for testing and validation. RGB-
D based systems are found to outperform pure RGB based