IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 2
beyond environmental observations. The generalisability of
these solutions also presents a signiﬁcant challenge. Models
trained using Imitation Learning struggle to generalise to states
that differ signiﬁcantly from those present in the training
dataset. A single and ﬁnite dataset cannot realistically contain
all possible driving scenarios and so it is crucial to enhance
the generalisability of these models.
In previous work, Hussein et al . [8] review Imitation
Learning in depth, discussing design options for each stage
in the Imitation Learning process. Tai et al . [9] provide a
comprehensive overview of deep learning techniques for con-
trol applications. Janai et al. [10] review the current state-of-
the-art computer vision algorithms for autonomous vehicles,
with some focuses given to end-to-end paradigms. To the
best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to
provide a comprehensive overview of Imitation Learning based
techniques for end-to-end based autonomous vehicle systems.
We have broken the literature into 3 primary sub-ﬁelds;
Behavioural Cloning, Direct Policy Learning and Inverse
Reinforcement Learning. This classiﬁcation has been done
based on the underlying algorithms of each approach. Be-
havioural Cloning utilises large-scale datasets to train end-
to-end systems ofﬂine to mimic human driving. Alongside
this, Direct Policy approaches utilise iterative online train-
ing to continuously improve end-to-end systems. Finally, In-
verse Reinforcement Learning attempts to leverage large-scale
datasets to learn an underlying reward function of the task of
autonomous driving that is then used to train an agent. These
three approaches are distinct sub-ﬁelds of IL, all utilising
expert demonstration in different ways, and as such have been
individually reviewed in Section II.
The main contributions of the work are as follows:
The ﬁeld of Imitation Learning is categorised into three
primary sub-ﬁelds; Behavioural Cloning, Direct Policy
Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning. The state-
of-the-art works in each of these sub-ﬁelds is presented
and reviewed.
A comparative evaluation of the currently available
datasets is presented for end-to-end autonomous driving
systems alongside simulation tools and their potential
applications.
Open challenges in the ﬁeld of autonomous driving are
presented to inspire future research.
We brieﬂy introduce the history of end-to-end driving sys-
tems in section II. In section III, the state-of-the-art works in
the sub-ﬁelds of Behavioural Cloning, Direct Policy Learning
and Inverse Reinforcement Learning are presented. Section IV
gives an introduction and overview of various datasets and
simulation tools used in the training of networks. Section V
discusses the current state of the literature and section VI
concludes the work.
II. I MITATION LEARNING
Imitation Learning for autonomous vehicles can be cat-
egorised into three main approaches: Behavioural Cloning
(BC), Direct Policy Learning (DPL) and Inverse Reinforce-
ment Learning (IRL). An overview of each of these approachesalongside a review of the literature that utilises them will be
presented in this section.
A. History
The ﬁrst implementation of Imitation Learning for an end-
to-end autonomous vehicle system was the development of
ALVINN by Pomerleau et al. [11] in 1989.
ALVINN was trained in an online fashion, with training data
captured in real time from a human driver and used to train
the network sequentially to output steering angles for lane
following. Alongside this, an algorithm to generate realistic
road images was used to create an augmented dataset for
further training.
Once fully trained, ALVINN was capable of driving the
original test vehicle at speeds of up to 55mph. The early
success of ALVINN paved the way for the development of
the more complex and successful end-to-end driving systems
that will be reviewed in the following paper.
This lane following behaviour was expanded on by [12] who
trained a small vehicle, DA VE, to perform obstacle avoidance.
The system utilised 2 front-facing cameras, enabling the
system to extract distance information and learn to steer the
vehicle in an end-to-end fashion.
Bojarski et al [13] expanded upon the DA VE system,
training a 3 camera model to perform steering control of
a vehicle in a range of real-world driving scenarios. It was
arguably this work that brought end-to-end systems into the
forefront of autonomous vehicle research. In addition, key
studies and milestone work on safety-critical imitation learning
[14–17] will be reviewed in the following sections.
B. Problem Formulation
Given a dataset Dof expert state-action pairs (s;a)gener-
ated by an expert policy , the general goal of IL is to train
a policy(s)that maps any given state sto a corresponding
actionaas closely to the given expert as possible according
to:
argminEsP(sj)L((s);(s)) (1)
whereP(sj)is the state distribution of the trained policy
.
Behavioural Cloning involves the reduction of the IL task
to that of supervised learning. Deﬁning P(sj)as the state
distribution of the expert policy, the objective of BC is to treat
each state-action pair in this distribution as an i.i.d example
and minimise imitation loss for the trained policy according
to:
argminE(s;a)PL(a;(s)) (2)
where the state distribution encountered, (s;a)P, is
now provided solely by the expert policy, and is assumed to
be drawn i.i.d from P.
In Direct Policy Learning, we utilise a sequence of dis-
tributions attained through querying a given expert (typically
human) to train an optimal policy. In general, a policy is
trained and rolled out in the environment to attain a state