IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 17
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF AUTONOMOUS DRIVING SIMULATORS . U- U RBAN , R - R ACING , H - H IGHWAY
Dataset Environment Diversity Sensors Advantages Disadvantages
U R H Weather Lighting Multi-
AgentVideo
ImageLiDAR Depth
Camera
CARLA X -XX X X X X X -Can utilise custom
built scenarios
-Multi-agent
capabilities-No racing track
environments
-Complex
simulation suite
TORCS -X -X X - X X X -Complex physics
engine
-Advanced racing
simulator
-Number of user
made tracks/content
available-No multi-agent
simulation
-No urban/highway
driving
Udacity XXX - - - X - - -Large number of
user created tracks
-Easy to use-Does not allow
LiDAR simulation
-No multi-agent
simulation
GTA V XXXX X X X - - -Complex
multi-agent
trafﬁc/pedestrian
behaviour
-Wide range of
environments and
weather conditions-Only camera inputs
available
-Need software
to interact with
videogame
rFpro XXXX X X X X X -Complex trafﬁc
scenarios
-Human users can
be part of testing
scenarios-Simulator is not
free
to improve the safety assurances of their model. Their models
perform to state-of-the-art standards whilst allowing for the
extraction of model uncertainty. Michelmore et al. utilise the
uncertainties to predict future crashes, however uncertainty
information has many potential applications in such a system,
such as modelling road user behaviour, identiﬁcation of edge
cases etc. The work presents a novel, safety driven approach to
autonomous vehicle development which is much needed in the
ﬁeld. Whilst the system itself solely generates steering angles,
the further development of such a system is of importance.
However, the training of BNN’s is a challenging task. The
approaches approximate BNN using dropout and as such re-
quire multiple passes over the network for each input to attain
the distribution of values, which can be a computationally
expensive task and limit the models’ abilities to act in real-
time.
2)Direct Policy Learning :Direct Policy Learning ap-
proaches attempt to expand upon BC in order to overcome
some of its limitations. The DAgger [57] algorithm provides
a very strong framework for overcoming the issues of cas-
cading errors and enhancing generalisability. Online Imitation
Learning algorithms inherently provide a level of robustness
to these challenges due to their aggregation of data. The main
limitation of this approach is the requirement of constant
access to an expert during the training process, which is
demanding and limits the applicability of the approach. The
SafeDAgger [58] and HG-DAgger [65] algorithms mitigate
this issue through the efﬁciency of expert queries, however
access to human experts at training time is still required.
Liet al. [74] attempt to alleviate some of the challenges ofrequiring access to an expert through the development of the
Observational Imitation Learning algorithm. This algorithm
utilises a large number of experts, provided through the use of
a number of simple PID controllers. This is a much cheaper
expert to provide than a human. The use of OIL ﬁnds the
best expert at each iteration and over a number of iterations
allows multiple experts to train the network. This has the
effect of allowing the network to reach superior performance
to any individual expert, a very promising result. The main
drawback of the work is that it only uses simple PID controller,
and ﬁnding a suitable expert that could be used on mass for
complex, real-world driving may be a challenge.
3)Inverse Reinforcement Learning :Inverse Reinforce-
ment Learning attempts to infer the reward function of driving,
to allow the training of a system that can fully generalise
to any unseen scenario. However, it is a challenging task,
primarily due to the computational complexity of learning a
reward function for highly complex tasks. Beyond this, there
exist further challenges namely reward function ambiguity. A
dataset can be explained by multiple reward functions, only
one of which may be the desired one.
Abbeel et al. [67] and Ziebart et al. [69] apply the method
successfully to the task of highway driving human reward
function, learning differing driving styles. However, these
methods are only applied in simple top-down simulations and
further work to apply them to more complex simulations or
real-world data is required if such approaches are to catch up
to the level of behavioural cloning based approaches.
The most advanced and promising application of Inverse
Reinforcement Learning is undertaken by Wulfmeier et al .