IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 3
distribution Pm. For any given state in Pmthe expert can
then be queried for an optimal solution. This new distribution
of state action pairs, ((s)js), can then be used to further
train the policy . A single iteration of this method reduces
to BC.
The aim of Inverse Reinforcement Learning is to infer the
reward function from expert demonstration [18]. This reward
function is then utilised in training a policy.
To give context to this method, we will introduce the idea
of Markov Decision Processes (MDP’s). An MDP is deﬁned
as a tuple:
(S;A;T;
;R )
where, Sis a ﬁnite set of states, Ais a set of possible actions,
Tis a set of state transition probabilities, gis a discount factor
andRis the reward function. The discount factor is used to
deﬁne whether the reward evaluation should be short or far
sighted. A policy pmaps from states to actions.
Given a dataset Dof expert state-action pairs (s;a)gener-
ated by an expert policy , IRL attempts to learn a reward
functionrsuch that:
=argmaxE [r(s;a)] (3)
C. Behavioural Cloning
By far, the most researched implementation of Imitation
Learning for autonomous vehicles is Behavioural Cloning
(BC), a supervised method of approaching the task. However,
Behavioural Cloning’s use of expert demonstration to guide the
training process separates it from classical supervised learning
techniques.
In a classical, purely supervised learning approach, the as-
sumption is made that the outputs of the learning agent do not
affect the environment. Therefore, learning errors are assumed
to be independent for each sample. However, this assumption
does not hold true for driving-related tasks, where predictions
can be temporally related. More speciﬁcally, network outputs
are not independent of each other. For such tasks, errors made
in the learning for an image input will be compounded which
leads to the Cascading Error Problem [19].
Further to this, classical approaches are typically step-
wise methods, with each prediction being independent of any
previous predictions. This assumption does not hold true for
real-world driving either. Steering control of a vehicle is a
continuous action. If a vehicle is in full right-hand turn in one
frame of a video, it cannot then turn left in an immediately
subsequent frame and vice-versa. Such a relationship should
be modelled by an end-to-end driving system.
Behavioural Cloning trains a model to map directly from
input to output data pairs in a training dataset. This method
therefore assumes that such a mapping exists, i.e.that an
expert’s actions can be fully explained by an observation. In
reality a human driver’s decisions are affected by a number of
latent variables . Such variables include intended destination,
expert driving style, the vehicle used in the dataset, etc. A
successful driving system should effectively model these latent
variables.
Figure 3: Left: Averaged feature maps for each level of the network. Right: Intermediate visual-
ization mask for each level of the network.
Figure 4: Examples of salient objects for various image inputs.
5Fig. 1. Visualisation of Internal State of End-to-End System from [20]. Salient
parts of input images were recovered using visual backpropagation. Green
areas are highlighting these salient regions. As can be seen from the image, the
model clearly learns to place high importance on relevant regions of images
such as curbs and other vehicles.
We further categorise Behavioural Cloning into 3
paradigms; end-to-end control prediction, direct perception
and uncertainty quantiﬁcation. End-to-end control prediction
algorithms train a model to directly output steering and/or
acceleration commands. Direct perception models are trained
to output information that can then be used by a simple control
module to perform vehicle control. This information may
include trajectories, possible future actions or environmental
cost maps. Uncertainty quantiﬁcation approaches attempt to
train a model to output uncertainty information to improve
the safety of end-to-end systems.
1)End-to-End Control Prediction :In this section we will
present works that train a model to map directly from input
data to autonomous vehicle control signals, such as steering
angle, throttle etc., in an end-to-end fashion.
Bojarski et al . [13], a team from NVidia, propose the
utilisation of 3 onboard cameras as inputs to an Imitation
Learning end-to-end driving model. They construct an end-
to-end, CNN based model (DA VE-2) utilising these inputs to
generate steering control signals. The left and right cameras
provide off-centre shifted viewpoints which are used to correct
any drift the car encounters. The network is trained in a
supervised manner to minimise the mean squared error be-
tween the networks’ steering command and the command from
either the expert (human) driver or corresponding shifted (off-
centre) viewpoint. Evaluation is performed in both simulation
and on-road testing. The number of human interventions
required is used as an evaluation metric. Once the network has
demonstrated good performance in simulation, it is evaluated
in a roughly 12 mile on-road test. A metric of the percentage of