IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, MONTH YEAR 5
Figure 5: Each row shows attention patterns on the same scene with different high level commands: Follow Lane (green),
Turn Left (red), Turn Right (cyan), Go Straight (yellow).
Task All No BIGHNoBIGVNoMEDIUM NoSMALL Independent RoIs
Straight 100 100 95 95 100 100
One turn 97 92 95 90 95 47
Navigation 91 86 84 83 86 45
Nav. Dynamic 91 88 81 83 88 39
Table 4: Ablation study selectively removing a box type.
Box types refer to the regions depicted in Figure 3: BIGH
(Green), BIGV(Red), MEDIUM (Yellow), SMALL (Blue).
We also evaluate our model with attention scores generated
independently for each RoI.
a limitation of our architecture, restricting its ﬂexibility.
Whereas to some extent this is certainly true, designing an
attention layer with a variable grid, i.e. with boxes that
change in number and shape, is not trivial. Generating a
variable amount of boxes, e.g. using a region proposal [34],
would require to process each box independently, depriving
the attention layer of a global overview of the scene. The
main issue lays in the lack of spatial information about each
box: the model is indeed able to observe elements such as
vehicles, trafﬁc lights or lanes, but does not know where
they belong in the image without this position being explic-
itly speciﬁed.
To demonstrate the inability of the model to work with-
out a ﬁxed grid, we modiﬁed our attention layer to emit
attention scores for each RoI-pooled feature independently.This means that instead of concatenating all features and
feeding them to a single dense layer, we adopt a smaller
dense layer, shared across all RoIs, to predict a single at-
tention logit. All logits are then concatenated and jointly
normalized with a softmax to obtain the attention vector α.
We show the results obtained by this model in Table 4.
The only task that this architecture is able to successfully
address is Straight . As soon as the model is required to take
a turn, it is unable to perform the maneuver and reach its
destination. On the other hand, using a ﬁxed grid, allows
the model to learn a correlation between what is observed
and where it appears in the image and jointly generating
attention scores for each box. A ﬂexible grid with variable
boxes is currently an open issue and we plan to address it in
future work.
6. Acknowledgements
We thank NVIDIA for the Titan XP GPU used for this research.
7. Conclusions
In this paper we have presented an autonomous driving sys-
tem based on imitation learning. Our approach is equipped with
a visual attention layer that weighs image regions and allows pre-
dictions to be explained. Moreover we have shown how adopting
attention, the model improves its driving capabilities, obtaining
state of the art results.
Fig. 2. Examples of attention maps for each high-level command from [21]. Commands are Follow lane (Green), Turn Left (red), Turn right (cyan) and Go
Straight (Yellow). The various regions of input images that are learnt by the model to be important for each command are highlighted in the images and can
be output as shown to provide a level of explainability for the networks decisions.
systems in several speciﬁc testing scenarios.
Wang et al. [26] propose to utilise the current position and
the desired vehicle path for generating a subgoal angle which
is fed to the network. The desired vehicle path is divided
into a set of uniformly distributed points, with the current
subgoal angle being the angle between the vehicles current
pose and the direction to the nearest of these points. The
authors propose a new network architecture, shown in Figure
3, which they refer to as an Angle Branched Network . Inputs to
the network are sequential images, the speed and the subgoal
angle. The ﬁrst seven layers of the network are pre-trained on
the ImageNet dataset. Independent feature extraction networks
extract features from input images, vehicle speed and the
subgoal angle. These features are then concatenated together
to predict steering angles and throttle. The network is trained
in the CARLA simulator, with scene information extracted
to generate the subgoal angles. The use of the subgoal angle
is found to greatly increase performance while the utilisation
of depth information reduced the number of collisions. The
subgoal angle was found to be an effective high-level navi-
gational command. The angle-branched network is compared
to the network in [25], and experimental results indicated
improvement of performance.
Further to their previous work, Codevilla et al. [31] propose
a new benchmark, the NoCrash Benchmark. Constructed in
the CARLA simulator, NoCrash is designed to evaluate the
performance of autonomous vehicle systems against complex
events created by trafﬁc conditions and other road agents.The benchmark consists of 3 tasks: an empty town, regular
trafﬁc and dense trafﬁc. Each task consists of a range of goal
directed episodes, where an agent starts at a random position
and follows high-level commands to reach a goal position.
A range of weather conditions are also used. An episode is
considered to be successfully completed if the model reaches
the goal point without collisions bigger than a ﬁxed magnitude
in a deﬁned time limit. Alongside this, trafﬁc rule violations
are recorded.
A range of models are evaluated on both the previous
CARLA benchmark and on NoCrash. Models were trained
using CIL to receive camera inputs and high-level commands
and output steering and throttle control signals. A new model,
CILRS, is also presented, utilising a deep pre-trained percep-
tion model. The proposed model was found to outperform
previous models and the state-of-the-art on both benchmarks.
Results for all models are found to be worse on NoCrash,
indicating the benchmarks ability to more completely explore
the limitations of driving models.
Haavaldsen et al . [32] investigate the incorporation of
recurrent layers into end-to-end models. They train a tradi-
tional CNN based end-to-end model alongside another model
consisting of a CNN with a recurrent layer. They use the
CARLA simulator to train and evaluate the models. A 3
camera system was used to gather training data, with the
model being trained to receive input images, trafﬁc signals
and a high-level command and subsequently output steering
and speed control signals. A second model is constructed with