SoftTriple Loss: Deep Metric Learning Without Triplet Sampling
Qi Qian1Lei Shang2Baigui Sun2Juhua Hu3Hao Li2Rong Jin1
1Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
2Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3School of Engineering and Technology
University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, 98402, USA
{qi.qian, sl172005, baigui.sbg, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr }@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu
Abstract
Distance metric learning (DML) is to learn the embed-
dings where examples from the same class are closer than
examples from different classes. It can be cast as an opti-
mization problem with triplet constraints. Due to the vast
number of triplet constraints, a sampling strategy is essen-
tial for DML. With the tremendous success of deep learning
in classiﬁcations, it has been applied for DML. When learn-
ing embeddings with deep neural networks (DNNs), only a
mini-batch of data is available at each iteration. The set of
triplet constraints has to be sampled within the mini-batch.
Since a mini-batch cannot capture the neighbors in the orig-
inal set well, it makes the learned embeddings sub-optimal.
On the contrary, optimizing SoftMax loss, which is a clas-
siﬁcation loss, with DNN shows a superior performance in
certain DML tasks. It inspires us to investigate the formu-
lation of SoftMax. Our analysis shows that SoftMax loss is
equivalent to a smoothed triplet loss where each class has
a single center. In real-world data, one class can contain
several local clusters rather than a single one, e.g., birds
of different poses. Therefore, we propose the SoftTriple loss
to extend the SoftMax loss with multiple centers for each
class. Compared with conventional deep metric learning
algorithms, optimizing SoftTriple loss can learn the embed-
dings without the sampling phase by mildly increasing the
size of the last fully connected layer. Experiments on the
benchmark ﬁne-grained data sets demonstrate the effective-
ness of the proposed loss function.
1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) has been extensively
studied in the past decades due to its broad range of ap-
plications, e.g., k-nearest neighbor classiﬁcation [ 29], im-
age retrieval [ 24] and clustering [ 31]. With an appropriate
distance metric, examples from the same class should be
FC in SoftMax FC in SoftTriple
Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed SoftTriple loss. In conven-
tional SoftMax loss, each class has a representative center in the
last fully connected layer. Examples in the same class will be col-
lapsed to the same center. It may be inappropriate for the real-
world data as illustrated. In contrast, SoftTriple loss keeps multi-
ple centers (e.g., 2 centers per class in this example) in the fully
connected layer and each image will be assigned to one of them.
It is more ﬂexible for modeling intra-class variance in real-world
data sets.
closer than examples from different classes. Many algo-
rithms have been proposed to learn a good distance met-
ric [15,16,21,29].
In most of conventional DML methods, examples are
represented by hand-crafted features, and DML is to learn a
feature mapping to project examples from the original fea-
ture space to a new space. The distance can be computed as
the Mahalanobis distance [ 11]
distM(xi,xj) = (xi−xj)⊤M(xi−xj)
whereMis the learned distance metric. With this formula-
tion, the main challenge of DML is from the dimensionality
of input space. As a metric, the learned matrix Mhas to be
positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD) while the cost of keeping the
matrix PSD can be up to O(d3), wheredis the dimensional-
ity of original features. The early work directly applies PCA
to shrink the original space [ 29]. Later, various strategies
are developed to reduce the computational cost [ 16,17].
Those approaches can obtain the good metric from the
1
6450