input features, but the hand-crafted features are task in-
dependent and may cause the loss of information, which
limits the performance of DML. With the success of deep
neural networks in classiﬁcation [ 7], researchers consider
to learn the embeddings directly from deep neural net-
works [ 15,21]. Without the explicit feature extraction,
deep metric learning boosts the performance by a large mar-
gin [ 21]. In deep metric learning, the dimensionality of in-
put features is no longer a challenge since neural networks
can learn low-dimensional features directly from raw mate-
rials, e.g., images, documents, etc. In contrast, generating
appropriate constraints for optimization becomes challeng-
ing for deep metric learning.
It is because most of deep neural networks are trained
with the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm and
only a mini-batch of examples are available at each itera-
tion. Since embeddings are optimized with the loss deﬁned
on an anchor example and its neighbors (e.g., the active
set of pairwise [ 31] or triplet [ 29] constraints), the exam-
ples in a mini-batch may not be able to capture the overall
neighborhood well, especially for relatively large data sets.
Moreover, a mini-batch contains O(m2)pairs and O(m3)
triplets, where mis the size of the mini-batch. An effective
sampling strategy over the mini-batch is essential even for
a small batch (e.g., 32) to learn the embeddings efﬁciently.
Many efforts have been devoted to studying sampling an in-
formative mini-batch [ 19,21] and sampling triplets within
a mini-batch [ 12,24]. Some work also tried to reduce the
total number of triplets with proxies [ 14,18]. The sampling
phase for the mini-batch and constraints not only loses the
information but also makes the optimization complicated.
In this work, we consider to learn embeddings without con-
straints sampling.
Recently, researches have shown that embeddings ob-
tained directly from optimizing SoftMax loss, which is pro-
posed for classiﬁcation, perform well on the simple distance
based tasks [ 22,30] and face recognition [ 2,9,10,27,28].
It inspires us to investigate the formulation of SoftMax loss.
Our Analysis demonstrates that SoftMax loss is equivalent
to a smoothed triplet loss. By providing a single center for
each class in the last fully connected layer, the triplet con-
straint derived by SoftMax loss can be deﬁned on an orig-
inal example, its corresponding center and a center from
a different class. Therefore, embeddings obtained by op-
timizing SoftMax loss can work well as a distance metric.
However, a class in real-world data can consist of multi-
ple local clusters as illustrated in Fig. 1and a single center
is insufﬁcient to capture the inherent structure of the data.
Consequently, embeddings learned from SoftMax loss can
fail in the complex scenario [ 22].
In this work, we propose to improve SoftMax loss by
introducing multiple centers for each class and the novel
loss is denoted as SoftTriple loss. Compared with a singlecenter, multiple ones can capture the hidden distribution of
the data better due to the fact that they help to reduce the
intra-class variance. This property is also crucial to reserve
the triplet constraints over original examples while training
with multiple centers. Compared with existing deep DML
methods, the number of triplets in SoftTriple is linear in
the number of original examples. Since the centers are en-
coded in the last fully connected layer, SoftTriple loss can
be optimized without sampling triplets. Fig. 1illustrates the
proposed SoftTriple loss. Apparently, SoftTriple loss has to
determine the number of centers for each class. To allevi-
ate this issue, we develop a strategy that sets a sufﬁciently
large number of centers for each class at the beginning and
then applies L2,1norm to obtain a compact set of centers.
We demonstrate the proposed loss on the ﬁne-grained vi-
sual categorization tasks, where capturing local clusters is
essential for good performance [ 17].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2reviews the related work of conventional distance metric
learning and deep metric learning. Section 3analyzes the
SoftMax loss and proposes the SoftTriple loss accordingly.
Section 4conducts comparisons on benchmark data sets.
Finally, Section 5concludes this work and discusses future
directions.
2. Related Work
Distance metric learning Many DML methods have
been developed when input features are provided [ 29,31].
The dimensionality of input features is a critical challenge
for those methods due to the PSD projection, and many
strategies have been proposed to alleviate it. The most
straightforward way is to reduce the dimension of input
space by PCA [ 29]. However, PCA is task independent and
may hurt the performance of learned embeddings. Some
works try to reduce the number of valid parameters with
the low-rank assumption [ 8]. [16] decreases the computa-
tional cost by reducing the number of PSD projections. [ 17]
proposes to learn the dual variables in the low-dimensional
space introduced by random projections and then recover
the metric in the original space. After addressing the chal-
lenge from the dimensionality, the hand-crafted features be-
come the bottleneck of performance improvement.
The forms of constraints for metric learning are also de-
veloped in these methods. Early work focuses on optimiz-
ing pairwise constraints, which require the distances be-
tween examples from the same class small while those from
different classes large [ 31]. Later, [ 29] develops the triplet
constraints, where given an anchor example, the distance
between the anchor point and a similar example should be
smaller than that between the anchor point and a dissimi-
lar example by a large margin. It is obvious that the num-
ber of pairwise constraints is O(n2)while that of triplet
constraints can be up to O(n3), wherenis the number of
6451