5001000150020001015202530u nexperienceds
tate spacep
rediction errorvideo startBuffer (s)L
ast bitrate (kbps) student 
teacherv
ideo endFigure 3: Without imitation learning, one wrong prediction
may drive the student off teacher’s trajectory in the state
space.
18Bufferupdated
decisionsChunk ݊, 
Quality ݍ
video 
chunksVideo Player 
End UsersDT‐based ABR
ControllerInternet
Leaf Node
Adjuster
statisticsstreaming
ሺܽ,ݏሻ	pairsVideo playback path
DT update path
Implement
states, actions
decision treevirtual 
playernetwork traces
video manifestABR 
algorithmcorrect
& retrainsimulatevideo chunks
Optimum
Estimatorstatistics implement onto video clients
Figure 4: PiTree Overview.
players are fast and efficient since they only calculate chunk-level
information. We then collect the state-action pairs during simula-
tions, which are unbiased, since they are generated with real-world
traces.
However, faithfully converting ABR algorithms into decision
trees with trace-based simulations is also challenging. Due to the
cascading effect of ABR algorithms in the video client, even when
the prediction is accurate, performance of the converted decision
tree might still be low. As shown in Figure 3, a wrong decision may
bring the decision tree into a region of unexperienced state space.
The decision tree might thus make more mistakes since it has no
knowledge about that region of state space. This will further drive
the decision tree off the trajectory and worsen the performance.
To address this challenge, inspired by recent advances in imitation
learning [ 52],PiTree continuously simulates the decision tree, and
lets the original ABR algorithm (teacher) correct the wrong deci-
sions made by that decision tree (student). The decision tree will
gradually learn how to make decisions in the whole state space.
3.2 Decision Tree Generation
The overview of PiTree is presented in Figure 4. To convert so-
phisticated ABR algorithms into decision trees, PiTree uses a vir-
tual player [14,47,55] to efficiently simulate the dynamics of a
real video player and employs imitation learning [ 16,35] to im-
prove the faithfulness of the decision tree. With imitation learning,
PiTree continuously simulates the performance of the decision tree,
and corrects the errors made by the decision tree according to the
results of the original ABR algorithm. As shown in Algorithm 1, the
imitation learning-based decision tree training algorithm contains
the following steps:
Step 1: Initialization. For each ABR algorithm π∗,PiTree first sim-
ulates the algorithm in a virtual player to collect initial state-action
pairs(S,A)for decision tree training (line 1). The virtual player is
a trace-based chunk-level simulator that could precisely mimic theAlgorithm 1 :PiTree training based on imitation learning.
Input : ABR Algorithm π∗.
Output : Decision Tree πM.
(S,A)←VirtualPlay( π∗) 1
foreach i∈[1,···,M]do 2
πi←TrainDT( S,A) 3
(Si,Ai)←VirtualPlay( πi) 4
A∗
i←Predict(π∗,Si) 5
Aggregate S←S∪Si,A←A∪A∗
i6
behaviors of an actual video player with traces and video manifests.
For a certain ABR algorithm π∗, the virtual player simulates the
algorithm with network traces and video manifests as input. In
reality, content providers could use public network traces [ 10,51]
or collected historical traces [ 14] for simulation. Moreover, our
evaluation shows that PiTree has strong generalization ability if the
network traces used at the training phase are statistically different
from those in the test environment [§4.4.4].
Specifically, when the ABR algorithm generates a bitrate decision
of the following chunk according to current states, the virtual player
calculates the states ( e.g., rebuffer, download time, etc.) at the time
of that chunk has been downloaded. The ABR algorithm then takes
those states, generates the bitrate decision (action) for the next
chunk, and sends the action back to the virtual player. Those state-
action pairs are initialized as (S,A).
Step 2: TrainDT. After initialization, PiTree goes into the imitation
learning loop (line 2-6). At the i-th iteration, we first train a decision
treeπ(student) with current state-action pairs (samples) (S,A)us-
ing Classification and Regression Tree (CART) [ 28], a well-adopted
decision tree training algorithm (line 3). The decision tree takes
exactly the same inputs as the original ABR algorithms. Instead of
using the 0-1 loss for prediction accuracy (Equation 1), we employ
the normalized square loss as the training loss during decision tree
generation:
ℓ(r;r0)=(r−r0)2
(Rmax−Rmin)2,Rmin⩽r⩽Rmax (2)
where r=π(s),r0=π∗(s).sis the current state as introduced
in Equation 1. Rmax andRmin are the maximum and minimum
bitrates. The intuition behind using the square loss is to penalize
student’s bitrates that are far from those of the teacher since they
have more influence on the playback buffer, etc. We also discuss
other properties of square-loss function in §3.3. The CART algo-
rithm then greedily splits the samples into leaf nodes to minimize
the loss function until either the number of leaf nodes of the deci-
sion tree reaches the maximum threshold set by network operators,
or all samples have been completely split.
Step 3: VirtualPlay. PiTree then simulates the decision tree πiin
the virtual player and collects a series of new state-action pairs
(Si,Ai)(line 4). At this time, although student πihas already known
how to make decisions when facing with the states fed in training,
independently simulating πimight lead to poor performance. As
illustrated in Figure 3, due to the cascading effect, many states
inSiexperienced by student πiin the simulation might not be