a solution table for online lookup. FastMPC, however, is a case-
specific method for RobustMPC and actually drastically degrades
the performance below many strawman baselines [ 65]. 2)Offloading
computation to remote ABR servers . Pensieve [ 47] and HotDASH [ 53]
suggest offloading the heavyweight computation to remote ABR
servers, requiring video clients to send requests to the ABR servers
when they need to make decisions. The content providers, however,
have to introduce and maintain additional servers to specifically
provide ABR optimization services. The operating expenses (OPEX)
will be significantly increased. Such solutions cannot scale to real-
world large-scale deployment.
Inspired by recent advances in interpreting complicated mod-
els [16,46,50,66], we could implement sophisticated algorithms
in practice by converting them into other faithful but lightweight
representations. Our key observation is that some representations
of algorithms ( e.g., decision tree) have similar expressiveness but
are more lightweight and efficient compared to those sophisticated
representations [15, 16].
Based on this observation, we propose PiTree , ageneral ,high-
performance , and scalable framework to bridge the gap between
offline design and online implementation of ABR algorithms using
decision trees . The key idea of PiTree is to faithfully convert sophis-
ticated algorithms into lightweight decision trees to simultaneously
achieve high performance and implementation scalability. Due to
the high dimension of the decision space of ABR algorithms [§3.1]
and the cascading effects between actions [ 47], however, we are
challenged to faithfully and efficiently convert sophisticated ABR
algorithms into decision trees. In response, PiTree innovatively
adopts imitation learning [35] to faithfully convert ABR algorithms
to decision trees and employs a virtual player to efficiently collect
unbiased data. The original ABR algorithm acts like a teacher who
continuously corrects the actions of the decision tree (student).
We also provide a theoretical analysis of the upper bound of the
optimization loss when implementing the decision tree to process
online videos.
This paper makes the following contributions:
•We illustrate the problem of practically implementing sophis-
ticated ABR algorithms for content providers [§2.2]. We then
propose PiTree , a general, high-performance, and scalable frame-
work for practical implementation of ABR algorithms using
decision trees [§3].
•We present an imitation learning-based decision tree training
algorithm [§3.2] and provide a theoretical analysis on the upper
bound the average optimization loss of PiTree [§3.3].
•We evaluate PiTree with both simulations and real-world im-
plementations. Results show that PiTree could convert state-
of-the-art ABR algorithms into lightweight decision trees with
negligible performance degradation and little overhead, thus
save millions of dollars for content providers [§4].
To the best of our knowledge, PiTree is the first general frame-
work to make it practical to implement state-of-the-art sophisti-
cated ABR algorithms on client-side video players. PiTree is avail-
able at https://transys.io/pitree. We believe that PiTree will accel-
erate the deployment of new sophisticated ABR algorithms with
higher performance.2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
2.1 ABR Streaming
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH) [ 57] is the pre-
dominant streaming video delivery method today. In DASH sys-
tems, each video is partitioned into chunks ( e.g., 4-second blocks),
where each chunk is encoded in multiple bitrates. A higher bitrate
indicates higher video quality. When a user plays a video on the
client-side player, the ABR algorithm decides the appropriate bitrate
to download for the next chunk and downloads the video chunk
into the playback buffer on video clients. As shown in Table 1,
ABR algorithms can be categorized into rate-based methods, which
make decisions with network throughput information, buffer-based
methods, which make decisions based on video player buffer, and
hybrid methods, utilizing information from network and buffer.
It is well-established that higher QoE follows from 1) higher
average video bitrate, 2) fewer rebuffering events, and 3) higher
video bitrate smoothness [ 47,53,64]. These factors, however, are
often conflicting with each other in the real world. For example,
in a network with highly fluctuating throughput, a conservative
policy to minimize rebuffering events may lead to lower average
bitrate. Meanwhile, the instability of network conditions makes a
precise prediction for future bandwidths challenging. Moreover,
bitrate selection for a single chunk will affect the future states
of video players, which is known as the cascading effect of ABR
systems [ 47]. All these factors make the optimization of QoE ex-
ceptionally challenging. Existing solutions have already achieved
significant improvements in addressing conflicts above. However,
since there still exists a gap between current ABR algorithms and
offline optimal [ 14,47], further evolvement of ABR algorithms are
still needed for better performance [24].
2.2 Motivation
With the increase of algorithm complexity, sophisticated ABR al-
gorithms are difficult to be deployed into client-side video players
in practice. First, loading heavyweight computation models ( e.g.,
neural networks [ 32,45,47,53]) will drastically increase the page
load time by tens of seconds [§4.3.1], which might make impatient
users leave the page [ 41]. Second, solving complex optimizations
on end devices with constrained computation resources will in-
troduce excessive decision latency by up to 1000x [§4.3.2], which
might exceed the video chunk lengths (often 2 to 4 seconds [ 38])
and severely degrade the QoE of the videos [ 65]. Finally, additional
software plugins ( e.g.,CPLEX [2], TensorFlow [ 13]) might be re-
quired on video clients, which further poses significant barriers
for large-scale deployments [30]. The implementation practicality
of ABR algorithms severely hinders the exploration of better ABR
algorithms.
In response, two categories of possible solutions have been pro-
posed by recent efforts [ 47,53,56,65]. Nevertheless, these re-
searches fail to achieve high performance and scalability at the
same time.
Compromising performance to reduce overhead. Robust-MPC [ 65]
proposed to pre-compute solutions for all network states, construct
results into a table, and look up the table when running online.
This technique is known as FastMPC. However, the performance
degradation brought by the simplification is also drastic. FastMPC