Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664 2655
Table 1 Summarizing the models for diabetic retinopathy with features and challenges
Author [citation] Adopted scheme Features Challenges
Kumar et al. [ 21] Neural network (1) Increased accuracy. (2) Better
speciﬁcityRequires implementation on multi
class DR classiﬁcation
Thomas et al. [ 28] Fundus images based screening (1) Improved photographic
outcome. (2) Better accuracyStrict when evaluated over clinical
setting requirements
Gupta et al. [ 29] Random forest approach (1) High sensitivity. (2) Improved
speciﬁcityRequires analysis on large systems
for DR grading
Georgios et al. [ 35] Random forest approach (1) Improved discriminative
probability 2. Better reliabilityNo contemplation on additional
data
Manuel et al. [ 36] CAD (1) Improved sensitivity. (2) Better
speciﬁcityOccurrence of false negatives in
mild cases
Welikala et al. [ 40] Multi layered perceptron network (1) CHT and CLAHE methods for
preprocessing 2.used SVMClassiﬁerTakes more time if the dataset is
large
Shanthi and Sabeenian [ 45] Convolutional neural network (1) Better sensitivity. (2) Improved
accuracyAnalysis can be extended using
large sized datasets
Wan et al. [ 46] Convolutional neural network (1) Enhanced efﬁciency. (2) Better
accuracyIncreased overhead
Partovi et al. [ 47] Residual networks (1) BM3D ﬁlter for removal of
noise. (2) Dividing the 3D blocksinto 2D blocks for processingDeciding the kernel size
Zago et al. [ 48] Convolutional neural network (1) Improved sensitivity. (2) Better
precisionNeed to consider clinical data
to the received recognizing strategy were implemented and
the upgraded results were achieved for sensitivity and pre-
cision. Table 1demonstrates the summary of the discussed
literature.
To summarize, all the works done so far make use of the
image processing techniques or convolution neural network
(CNN) for detection purpose. But with the use pooling layerin CNN is a drawback which may not identify the retinopa-thy problems in diabetes people at early stages or with high
accuracy. Hence, the objective of this article is detecting
the diabetic retinopathy at early stages with high accuracyusing a capsule network model. Due to pooling layer is not
used in capsule networks, chances of missing the features of
the image is less. Hence,the accuracy of the prediction mayincreases.
Materials and methods
Dataset description
Messidor [ 49] dataset comprises 1200 RGB fundus images
with observations in an Excel ﬁle. The images were assimi-
lated by 3 ophthalmologic departments. Images were takenwith 8 bits per color and having the resolutions of 1440
×960, 2240 ×1488, or 2304 ×1536 pixels. Among the
1200 images, 800 images were attained with pupil dila-tion and the remaining 400 images without dilation. All theimages are segregated as 3 sets, one for each ophthalmologic
department. Each set comprises of four parts, with each part
containing 100 images in TIFF format and for every image
medical details are also available. For every image, two diag-noses were made available by medical experts which are
retinopathy grade and macular edema risk. For the evalua-
tion proposed methodology retinopathy grade is considered.The dataset has four grades 0, 1, 2, and 3 where 0 indicatesnormal or no diabetic retinopathy, and the remaining three
grades indicate diabetic retinopathy. Grades 1, 2, and 3 indi-
cate the severity levels with 1 as minimum and 3 as maximum.The grades are described based on the existence of microa-
neurysms and hemorrhages in the images.The images of four
grades are shown in Fig. 2.
Method proposed
The proposed method in this paper aims to check the patients
whether they are suffering from diabetic retinopathy or notand if they are having the diabetic retinopathy in which stage
it is. Because most diabetic people are suffering from this and
may also lead to loss of vision. Due to this reason, it is highlyrequired to classify the persons in a short time with high
accuracy. To get highly accurate results, capsule networks are
trained for classifying the diabetic retinopathy by consideringthe fundus images as input.
123