2656 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664
Fig. 2 Images of Messidor dataset agrade 0 bgrade 1 cgrade 2 d
grade 3
Preprocessing
The accuracy or quality of the classiﬁcation model depends
on the quality of the input used model training. Hence, the
training data in the datasets are applied to preprocessingbefore considering them as inputs. The retinal images avail-
able in the datasets are of different sizes. As a ﬁrst step of
preprocessing, all the images are scaled to the size 512 ×512.
As the second step of preprocessing, the process has appliedto the input images to increase the image contrast. The fundus
images are generally available as RGB color images. Among
the three red, blue, and green channels of the given image,only the green channel of the image is extracted initially in
preprocessing. In general, the retinal fundus images are low
in contrast. The microaneurysms which play a vital role inclassifying diabetic retinopathy are visible more clearly in
the green channel image because of the reason of high con-
trast in that channel image when compared to other channelsof red and blue. Further preprocessing has been done forimproving the green channel image contrast. The process of
contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE)
was implemented on the green channel image to enhance thecontrast of the image at the tile level. Histogram equaliza-
tion of CLAHE makes the images equalized all over the basis
which improves the contrast of the images further. Later thenoise in the images is removed using Gaussian ﬁltering. As
a result of the two-step preprocessing, the input images are
converted to equally sized and illuminated with improvedcontrast.Capsule networks
Convolution neural network has the great ability to auto-
matically identify the feature maps in the given images. A
wide variety of tasks that are related to images irrespectiveof whether the task is classiﬁcation or detection are solvedwith CNN. The convolution layer of CNN performs the task
of detecting the features from the pixels of the image. Deeper
layers perceive the features like edges and color. The architec-ture of CNN has some drawbacks. As quoted by Hinton [ 37],
the usage of the pooling layer in CNN is a big mistake, and
the statement that it works so well is a disaster. Using poolinglayers in CNN makes to lose some information related to the
images. Another problem in CNN is training requires a huge
amount of data. The output of CNN is independent of thesmall changes to the input image. To avoid these problemsof the CNN, Capsule networks are designed.
Capsule networks (CapsNet) are proﬁcient in retrieving
the spatial information as well as more signiﬁcant featureswithout losing any information. Capsules are designed with
a set of neurons that works totally with vectors. The neurons
of a capsule are designed to work individually for differentproperties of an object, like position, size, and hue, etc. With
this property, capsules are to study the characteristics of an
image along with its deformations and viewing conditions.This characteristic has the beneﬁt of identifying the wholeentity by identifying the parts initially. The features extracted
from the convolution layer are taken as input to a capsule.
Depending on the type of the capsule the features given asinput to the capsule processed. The output of the capsule
is represented as the probability of presenting that feature
as a set of vector values named instantiation parameters. Inthe literature, the implementation of capsules was planned
in three ways which are transforming auto-encoders [ 50],
vector capsules based on dynamic routing [ 51], and matrix
capsules based on expectation-maximization routing [ 52].
The proposed method for diabetic retinopathy of this paper is
based on the second method which is capsules with dynamic
routing. CapsNet consists of three layers named convolutionlayer, primary capsule layer, and Class capsule layer. The
Primary capsule layer consists of many capsule layers till
the last capsule layer also termed the Class capsule layer.The major components of CapsNet are Matrix Multiplication,
Scalar Weighting of the Input vector values, dynamic routing,
and Squashing Function. The squashing function converts theinformation into a vector and also the direction of the vectoris maintained.
Proposed CapsNet architecture
Figure 3portrays the Reformed CapsNet architecture for
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy byconsidering fundus images as input. The operations con-
123