Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-021-00318-9
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Diabetic retinopathy detection and classiﬁcation using capsule
networks
G. Kalyani1·B. Janakiramaiah2·A. Karuna3·L. V. Narasimha Prasad4
Received: 14 November 2020 / Accepted: 1 March 2021 / Published online: 17 March 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Nowadays, diabetic retinopathy is a prominent reason for blindness among the people who suffer from diabetes. Early and
timely detection of this problem is critical for a good prognosis. An automated system for this purpose contains several phases
like identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of lesions in fundus images. Machine learning techniques based on manual extraction offeatures and automatic extraction of features with convolution neural network have been presented for diabetic retinopathy
detection. The recent developments like capsule networks in deep learning and their signiﬁcant success over traditional machine
learning methods for a variety of applications inspired the researchers to apply them for diabetic retinopathy diagnosis. Inthis paper, a reformed capsule network is developed for the detection and classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy. Using the
convolution and primary capsule layer, the features are extracted from the fundus images and then using the class capsule
layer and softmax layer the probability that the image belongs to a speciﬁc class is estimated. The efﬁciency of the proposedreformed network is validated concerning four performance measures by considering the Messidor dataset. The constructedcapsule network attains an accuracy of 97.98%, 97.65%, 97.65%, and 98.64% on the healthy retina, stage 1, stage 2, and
stage 3 fundus images.
Keywords Diabetic retinopathy ·Deep learning ·Capsule networks ·Classiﬁcation
Introduction
Diabetes is a ailment that weakens the ability of the human
body to regulate blood sugar. The International Diabetes
B G. Kalyani
kalyanichandrak@gmail.com
B. Janakiramaiah
bjanakiramaiah@gmail.com
A. Karuna
karunagouthana@gmail.com
L. V . Narasimha Prasad
lvnprasad@iare.ac.in
1V elagapudi Ramakrishna Siddhartha Engineering College,Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India
2Prasad V . Potluri Siddhartha Institute of Technology,Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India
3University College of Engineering Kakinada(A), JawaharlalNehru Technological University Kakinada, Kakinada, Andhra
Pradesh, India
4Institute of Aeronautical Engineering, Hyderabad, Telangana,
IndiaFederation (IDF) have assessed that worldwide 451 million
people suffers with diabetes in 2017 and they estimated thatit increase to 693 million by 2045 [ 1]. A higher level of blood
sugar damages the organs and tissues in the body. The higher
the value of sugar and the duration of having diabetes, themore prominent is the danger for intricacies. Diabetes can
lead to risky complications like a coronary episode, issues
with neuropathy and nephropathy, vision misfortune, mis-ery, and dementia.
Based on the parts that are inﬂuenced by high blood sugar
levels the health issues are termed as diabetic nephropa-thy (problems identiﬁed with kidneys), diabetic neuropathy(problems identiﬁed with nerves), and diabetic retinopathy
(problems in vision). Diabetic retinopathy is one of the major
problems in the diabetic people. In earlier days, diabetes isthe problem which attacks only elder people. But, in today’s
world, diabetic is the issue with which most of the people are
exposed irrespective of their age and for those people as con-sequence problems may arise related to retinopathy. 8.5% of
adults who have 18 years and more have reported diabetes
in the year 2014. In 2016, diabetes was the direct cause ofthe fatality of 1.6 million and for 2.2 million people in 2012.
123