Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664 2653
identify and categorize the lesions [ 19]. In the paper [ 20], the
author’s Shahin et al. built up a framework to automaticallycategorize retinal fundus pictures as having and not having
diabetic retinopathy. The authors considered morphological
dispensation to retrieve necessary features like the area ofthe blood vessels and exudates region along with entropyand homogeneity indexes. Later the extracted features are
given as inputs to the deep neural network and they recorded
the performance parameters as 88% and 100% for sensitivityand speciﬁcity, respectively.
The authors Kumar et al. [ 21] have presented an improved
methodology for hemorrhage recognition andmicroaneurysms that contributed to the improvement when
compared to the existed methodology for identiﬁcation of
DR. In the methodology, an upgraded segmentation strategywas introduced for separating the blood veins and optic disc.Consequently, the task of classiﬁcation was done based on
a neural network system that was trained by considering the
features of microaneurysms. Toward the end, the results haveexhibited the advancement of the considered methodology
with accuracy as the performance measure.
In the article [ 22], author Jaafar et al., projected an
algorithm for automatic identiﬁcation which comprises of
majorly two sections: the top-down approach to divide the
exudates region and a coordinate system focused at thefovea to review the seriousness of rigid exudates. The authortested it on a dataset of 236 fundus pictures and obtained
93.2% sensitivity. The author Casanova et al., in the paper
[23] presented an algorithm based on random forest tech-
nique to categorize the individuals without and with diabetic
retinopathy and got an accuracy of over 90%. The author has
evaluated the chance of diabetic retinopathy based on fun-damental information and reviewed fundus photos. But, the
projected methodology relies upon clinical applicable fac-
tors, for example, count of microaneurysms and variationfrom the normal representation in the reviewed retinal pic-tures marked by human specialists.
The majority of the works discussed above either depend
on the factors physically estimated by specialists or put a lotof exertion into separating the required highlights using the
techniques related to image processing which adds additional
time complexity. Hence, there is a need to have deep learn-ing strategies with the capacity to gain necessary highlights
reasonably from the fundus pictures that have excited the
consideration of researchers in the latest years. The authorQuellec et al. [ 24] developed a framework to recognize
diabetic retinopathy by utilizing a convolutional neural sys-
tem (CNN) which automatically categorizes the injuries by
making heatmaps which have the indications for the possi-bility to ﬁnd novel biomarkers in the fundus pictures. They
trained CNN with a collaborative learning strategy which is
positioned second place in Kaggle competition on DiabeticRetinopathy [ 25] and acquired an outcome with the zone of
0.954 under the ROC curve on the Kaggle dataset.
In the article [ 26], the author Gulshan et al. used a CNN
model called Inception-V3 to recognize referable diabetic
retinopathy given a dataset that comprises over 128,000 fun-dus pictures. Because of huge training data and a very wellseparation of fundus pictures, the model accomplished a good
performance with a metric area under curve as 0.991 and
0.990 and 97.5% and 96.1% sensitivity on two distinctivetest sets correspondingly. The authors Gargeya and Leng
[27] projected a technique that integrates deep CNN with
customary algorithms of machine learning. In the projectedtechnique, after the preprocessing of the fundus images, they
are considered as inputs to a residual network. To the result of
the fundus images from the last pooling layer, a few metadatafactors are added and are considered as input to a classiﬁernamed decision tree classiﬁer to have the separation among
normal fundus images and a fundus image with Diabetic
retinopathy. The technique accomplishes 0.94 as AUC, 0.93as sensitivity, and 0.87 as speciﬁcity on a test set taken from
the public.
Thomas et al. [ 28] have built up a system that resolute
the achievement pace of creating gradable pictures for rec-
ognizing DR in kids age below 18 years. They considered
the pictures for screening DR which was illuminating theunpretentious varieties like microaneurysms. The implemen-tation results demonstrate that just 6of the underlying DR
acknowledgment was ineffectual, accordingly uncovering its
advancement in treating DR in youngsters. Gupta et al. [ 29]
have presented a methodology by identifying the basic dis-
similarities in vessel designs to achieve better scores. This
forecast leads to the identiﬁcation of the absence or presenceof DR. The technique of random forest was considered to
handle the issues related to dimensionality. The introduced
methodology was assessed by considering both clinic andpublic datasets with measures sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
In the article [ 30], the authors introduced a methodology
that considers several features, for example, occupied area
by veins, foveal zone inconsistencies, and microaneurysms.The introduced strategy uses curvelet coefﬁcients of fundus
picture and angiograms. The categorization of images is per-
formed in three categories as Normal, Mild NPDR, and PDR.The authors performed the study on 70 patients and got the
sensitivity as 100%. The authors of [ 5] have grouped DR
pictures based on the existence of microaneurysms. Theyextracted and considered the features such as circularityand zone of microaneurysms. The implementation has done
by considering the datasets DRIVE [ 31], and DIARETDB1
[32]. The methodology introduced by the authors achieves
94.44% of sensitivity and 87.5% of speciﬁcity. The projected
strategy utilizes principal component analysis to isolate the
picture of the optic plate from the fundus picture. BY utiliz-
ing an enhanced MDD classiﬁer, they have accomplished a
123