2660 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664
Hence, the total trainable parameters are
=420 ,525 ,636+13,456 ,874 ,032
=13,877 ,399 ,668 .
SoftMax layer
Softmax is included generally as the output layer. The nodes
in the softmax layer is same as the output labels. Hence, in
the proposed method, the numbers of nodes in the softmax
layer are taken as ﬁve nodes. The softmax is implementedas full softmax which indicates the calculation of probabilityfor every possible class.
Performance metrics
When constructing a classiﬁcation model, estimating howprecisely it predicts the correct result is signiﬁcant. But,this estimation alone is not sufﬁcient as it conveys delud-
ing results in some cases. That is the situation where the
additional measures become an integral factor to concludethe more signiﬁcant estimations of the constructed model.
Confusion Matrix
Estimating the efﬁciency of the model developed for classiﬁ-
cation depends on the number of test records accurately and
erroneously anticipated by the model. A confusion matrixis a way of presenting counts of the records correctly and
wrongly estimated in the form of a table. The value in the
confusion matrix indicates the number of estimations givenby the model which includes the predictions done accuratelyor mistakenly. The entries of the confusion matrix are gen-
erally termed as True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN),
False Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN). TP indicatesthe count of the records for which the model properly predicts
the positive class as positive. TN indicates the count of the
records for which the model properly identiﬁes the negativeclass as negative. FP indicates the count of the records for
which the model erroneously estimates the negative class as
positive. FN indicates the count of the records for which themodel erroneously estimates the positive class as negative.In general, the confusion matrix is used in the case of binary
classiﬁcation. Due to the application of this paper is a mul-
ticlass classiﬁcation problem, the concept of a binary classconfusion matrix is also extended to the multiclass classiﬁca-
tion task. In diabetic retinopathy mostly the datasets contain
either 4 or 5 classes. Hence, we are demonstrating the con-fusion matrix with 5 classes here. Table 2shows a confusion
matrix for the ﬁve-class classiﬁcation model.
In multi-class classiﬁcation problems TP , TN, FP , and
FN are evaluated for each category of class separately. ForTable 2 Confusion matrix for multi-class classiﬁcation
Actual class
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5
Predicted class C1 a b c d e
C 2 f ghi jC3 k l m n oC 4 pqr s tC 5 uvw xy
example, the estimation of TP , TN, FP , and FN for class
C1 is demonstrated here based on the confusion matrix
in Table 2. The TP of class C1 is ’a’ because that is
the count of the records for which the actual class is C1and the predicted class is also C1. The TN of class C1
is ’(g+h+i+j+l+m+n+o+q+r+s+t+v+w+x+y)’ because that is
the count of records which belongs to non C1 class and pre-dicted also as non C1 class. The FP of class C1 is ‘(b+c+d+e)’because for these records the predicted class is C1 whereas
the actual class is non C1. The FN is ‘(f+k+p+u)’ because
for these records the predicted class is non C1 but the actualclass is C1. Similarly, TP , TN, FP , and FN can be estimated
for the other classes also based on the confusion matrix. The
performance outcomes that can be evaluated based on theconfusion matrix are accuracy, precision, speciﬁcity, recall
or sensitivity, and F1-score. For every class, the measures are
evaluated separately. The average of all classes is consideredas the ﬁnal value for that measure.
Measures based on confusion matrix
Accuracy is an essential metric for classiﬁcation models. It
is easy to understand and simple to apply for binary andalso for multiclass classiﬁcation problems. Accuracy indi-
cates the proportion of true results in the total number of
records tested. Accuracy is effective for assessing the classi-ﬁcation model which is constructed from balanced datasets
only. Accuracy may interpret wrong results if the given
dataset for classiﬁcation is skewed or imbalance. Precisionindicates the proportion of the true positives in predicted pos-itives. Another important measure is recall which conveys
more information in case if capturing all possible positives
is important. Recall indicates the fraction of total positivesamples were correctly predicted as positive. The recall is 1
if all positive samples are predicted as positive. If an optimal
blend of precision and recall is required then these two mea-sures can be combined as a new measure called F1 score. F1
score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall which
lies in the range of 0 and 1. The formulas to evaluate all thesemeasures are shown in Eqs. ( 1)–(4).
123