Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664 2657
Fig. 3 Proposed architecture of the modiﬁed CapsNet for classifying diabetic retinopathy
voluted in the implementation of the reformed CapsNet
architecture are as follows:
•Convolution layer for feature extraction from the input
image
•Primary capsule layer to process the extracted features
•Class capsule layer on which dynamic routing has been
performed to process the features for classiﬁcation
•Softmax layer to convert class capsule layer result in
probabilities corresponding to each class related to dia-
betic retinopathy
The fundus images are considered as the input image and
the process of preprocessing which is mentioned in “Pre-
processing” has been applied to elevate the contrast of the
picture and to remove the noise in the images for more accu-rate results. The result of the preprocessing, which is 512 ×
512 high-contrast smooth images are taken as input to the
CapsNet architecture.
Convolution layer
The ﬁrst layer in CapsNet is the convolution layer, in which
every neuron is associated with a speciﬁc region of the area
related to the input called a receptive ﬁeld. The main objective
of the convolution layer is to take out the features from thegiven image. The outcome of every convolution layer is a
set of feature maps, created by a solitary kernel ﬁlter of the
convolution layer. These maps can characterize as input tothe following layer.
A convolution is an algebraic operation that slides a func-
tion over other space and measures the essentials of their
location-based multiplication of value-wise. It has profoundassociations with the Fourier and Laplace transforms and is
intensely utilized in processing the signals. Convolution lay-
ers utilize cross-relationships, which are fundamentally thesame as convolutions. In terms of mathematics, convolution
is an operation with two functions that deliver another func-
tion that is, the convoluted form of one of the input functions.The generated function gives integral of the value-wise prod-uct of the two given functions as an element of the sum that
one of the given input functions deciphered.
The design of the convolution layer enables to focus on
low-level highlights in the ﬁrst, and afterwards collect them
into more signiﬁcant level highlights in the following lay-ers. This type of various level structure is regular in natural
pictures. A convolution layer in Keras is with the following
syntax.
Conv2D (ﬁlters, kernel size, strides, padding, activa-
tion=’relu’, input shape)
Arguments in the above syntax have the implications as
follows:
•Filters: number of ﬁlters to be used.
•Kernel size: Size stipulating both the height and width of
the convolution window. Additional optional arguments
might also be tuned here.
•Strides: stride of the convolution. If the user does not
specify anything, it is set to one.
•Padding: This is either valid or the same. If the user does
not stipulate anything, it is set to valid.
•Activation: This is usually ReLu. If the user does not
stipulate anything, no activation is used. It is intensely
encouraged to add ReLu activation in convolution layers.
It is possible to denote both kernel size and stride as a num-
ber or a tuple. When using the convolution layer as a ﬁrst layer
(placed after the input layer) in a model, additional argumentinput shape. It is a tuple specifying the height, width, anddepth of the input. Please make sure that the input shape
argument is not included if the convolution layer is not the
ﬁrst layer in the network. The behavior of the convolutionlayer is controlled by specifying the number of ﬁlters and
dimensions of each ﬁlter. Dimensions of the ﬁlters are to be
enhanced to enlarge the size of the pattern. There are also afew other hyperparameters that can be tuned. One of them is
the stride of the convolution. Stride is the amount by which
the ﬁlter slides over the image. The stride of 1 moves theﬁlter by 1 pixel horizontally and vertically.
123