2652 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2651–2664
As indicated by the International Diabetes Federation, 463
million individuals have diabetes on the planet and 88 mil-lion individuals in the Southeast Asia area in 2020. Among
88 million individuals, 77 million people are from India. The
quantity of individuals with diabetes in India has expandedfrom 26 million to 65 million in 1990 and 2016, respectively[2]. Most of the diabetes cases are of type-2 diabetes [ 3]. In
2010, the Government of India started National Program for
Preclusion and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, CardiovascularDiseases, and Stroke (NPCDCS) [ 4]. The goal of NPCDCS
is to organize outside camps for deft testing at all levels in the
medicinal services conveyance framework for early identiﬁ-cation of diabetes, among different ailments [ 5]. Hence, in
this paper, we are proposing a methodology for early detec-
tion of the vision problems arises with diabetes which can betreated without any loss of vision.
Individuals with diabetes in the long haul can suffer from
problems related to vision. Eye issues that can happen with
diabetes incorporate cataracts, glaucoma, and retinopathy.Among the three, the retinopathy issue that emerges because
of diabetes is named diabetic retinopathy. It arises if high
sugar levels ruin the blood veins in the retina. The veins cangrow and spill or may be closed, stopping the ﬂow of blood. In
other cases, new blood veins may grow on the retina. These
developments can cause problems for the vision. Figure 1
shows the retinal pictures of healthy and diabetic retinopathy.
In general, diabetic retinopathy is examined in four
stages. Mild non-proliferative retinopathy is the early stage
among the four stages. In this stage, microaneurysms willbe formed. Microaneurysms are little regions of balloon-like
growth in the retina’s small veins. The subsequent stage to
mild non-proliferative retinopathy is termed moderate non-proliferative retinopathy. V eins that support the retina are
obstructed at this stage. The next stage is named as severe
non-proliferative retinopathy. More veins are obstructed atthis stage, denying a few regions of the retina with the bloodgracefully. These zones of the retina impart signs to the
body to develop fresh blood vessels for sustenance. The last
phase is Proliferative Retinopathy. Here, the signs given bythe retina for sustenance activate the development of a fresh
artery. The arteries are anomalous and delicate. They develop
beside the retina and outside of the reasonable, vitreous gelthat ﬁlls within the eye. Without anyone else, these veins
do not cause manifestations or vision misfortune because
they have slim, delicate walls. In those blood vessels releaseblood, then serious vision misfortune and visual deﬁciencycan occur.
As speciﬁed by the 2019 National Diabetes and Diabetic
Retinopathy Survey report, the frequency of occurrence wasseen as 11.8% in individuals beyond 50 years old [ 6]. The
pervasiveness was the same in male and female populaces. It
was higher in urban territories [ 7]. When studied for diabetic
retinopathy, which compromises visual perception, 16.9% of
Fig. 1 Retinal images. aHealthy retina; bdiabetic retinopathy
the diabetic populace up to 50 years were seen as inﬂuenced.
As per the report, diabetic retinopathy in the 60- to 69-year
age range was 18.6%, and in the 70- to 79-year age range was
18.3%, and for more than 80 years old, it was 18.4%. A lowerpervasiveness of 14.3% was perceived in the 50- to 59-yearage range [ 6]. High prevalence of diabetes is observed in eco-
nomically and epidemiologically boosted states, like, Tamil
Nadu and Kerala, in which many research centers are carriedout their research on occurrence frequency are additionally
present [ 4].
Review of literature
Diabetic retinopathy is the most noticeable problem in dia-
betic patients which leads to loss of vision which can be
avoided if the problem is identiﬁed and treated at a prior
stage. When the problem has been diagnosed, the patientmust be checked at regular intervals to know the advance-ment of the ailment [ 8]. An efﬁcient mechanism for detecting
the problem based on the patient’s reports will be useful for
the ophthalmologist to avoid the loss of vision due to dia-betes. Researchers have designed various algorithms for the
investigation of scan reports thereby to do the exact diagno-
sis of diabetic retinopathy [ 9–11]. The human eye consists
of optic nerves and discs. So the eye images are to be seg-
mented into parts for identiﬁcation and categorization of DR.
It can also be possible by inspecting the fundus images for theexistence of hemorrhages, injuries, smaller scale aneurysms,exudates, and so forth. Deep learning plays a vital role in
making the scenarios smart, i.e., making the environment
smart with automation [ 12] and making the medical domain
also as smart with automated disease detection [ 13–15].
In the recent decade, number of automated systems have
been created for the diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy [ 16–
18]. Generally, in the manual diagnosis, the specialists will
concentrate on lesions like microaneurysms, exudates, and
hemorrhages in examining the fundus pictures. Hence, themajority of the researchers concentrated on automatically
123