Figure 2: Illustration of our proposed approach. The policy network is trained to output routing decisions (ﬁne-tune or
freeze parameters) for each block in a ResNet pre-trained on the source dataset. During learning, the ﬁne-tune vs. freeze
decisions are generated based on a Gumbel Softmax distribution, which allows us to optimize the policy network using
backpropagation. At test time, given an input image, for each residual block the computation is routed so that either the
ﬁne-tuned path or the frozen path is activated.
A random variable Gis said to have a standard Gumbel
distribution if G=−log(−log(U))withUsampled from
a uniform distribution, i.e. U∼Unif[0,1]. Based on the
Gumbel-Max trick [30], we can draw samples from a dis-
crete distribution parameterized by αiin the following way:
we ﬁrst draw i.i.d samples Gi,...,GzfromGumbel(0,1)
and then generate the discrete sample as follows:
X= argmax
i[logαi+Gi]. (3)
Theargmax operation in Equation 3 is non-differentiable.
However, we can use the Gumbel Softmax distribution
[30, 18], which adopts softmax as a continuous relaxation
toargmax . We represent Xas a one-hot vector where the
index of the non-zero entry of the vector is equal to X, and
relax the one-hot encoding of Xto az-dimensional real-
valued vector Yusing softmax:
Yi=exp((log αi+Gi)/τ)/summationtextz
j=1exp((log αj+Gj)/τ)fori= 1,..,z (4)
whereτis a temperature parameter, which controls the dis-
creteness of the output vector Y. Whenτbecomes closer
to 0, the samples from the Gumbel Softmax distribution be-
come indistinguishable from the discrete distribution (i.e,
almost the same as the one-hot vector).
Sampling our ﬁne-tuning policy Il(x)from a Gumbel
Softmax distribution parameterized by the output of a pol-
icy network allows us to backpropagate from the discrete
freeze/ﬁne-tune decision samples to the policy network, as
the Gumbel Softmax distribution is smooth for τ >0and
therefore has well-deﬁned gradients with respect to the pa-
rameters αi. By using a standard classiﬁcation loss lcforthe target task, the policy network is jointly trained with the
pre-trained model to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁne-tuning strategy
that maximizes the accuracy of the target task.
Similar to [49], we generate all freeze/ﬁne-tune deci-
sions for all residual blocks at once, instead of relying
on features of intermediate layers of the pre-trained model
to obtain the ﬁne-tuning policy. More speciﬁcally, sup-
pose there are Lresidual blocks in the pre-trained model.
The output of the policy network is a two-dimensional ma-
trixβ∈RL×2. Each row of βrepresents the logits of
a Gumbel-Softmax Distribution with two categories, i.e,
βl,0= logα1andβl,1= logα2. After obtaining β, we
use the straight-through version of the Gumbel-Softmax es-
timator [18]. During the forward pass, we sample the ﬁne-
tuning policy Il(x)using Equation 3 for the l-th residual
block. During the backward pass, we approximate the gra-
dient of the discrete samples by computing the gradient of
the continuous softmax relaxation in Equation 4. This pro-
cess is illustrated in Figure 2.
3.3. Compact Global Policy Variant
In this section, we consider a simple extension of the
image-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning policy, which constrains all the
images to ﬁne-tune the same kblocks that can be distributed
anywhere in the ResNet. This variant reduces both the
memory footprint and computational costs, as kcan be set
to a small number so most blocks are shared with the source
task, and at test time the policy network is not needed.
Consider a pre-trained ResNet model with Lresidual
blocks. For the l-th block, we can obtain the number of im-
ages that use the ﬁne-tuned block and the pre-trained block
4808