ual design choice which can be inefﬁcient to optimize for,
especially for networks with hundreds or thousands of lay-
ers. Further, it has been empirically observed that current
successful multi-path deep architectures such as ResNets
[15] behave like ensembles of shallow networks [47]. It is
not clear if restricting the ﬁne-tuning to the last contiguous
layers is the best option, as the ensemble effect diminishes
the assumption that early or middle layers should be shared
with common low-level or mid-level features.
Current methods also employ a global ﬁne-tuning strat-
egy, i.e., the same decision of which parameters to freeze
vs. ﬁne-tune is taken for all the examples in the target task.
The assumption is that such a decision is optimal for the
entire target data distribution, which may not be true, par-
ticularly in the case of insufﬁcient target training data. For
example, certain classes in the target task might have higher
similarity with the source task, and routing these target ex-
amples through the source pre-trained parameters (during
inference) might be a better choice in terms of accuracy.
Ideally, we would like these decisions to be made individ-
ually for each layer ( i.e., whether to use pre-trained param-
eters or ﬁne-tuned parameters for that layer), per input ex-
ample, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose SpotTune , an approach to learn
a decision policy for input-dependent ﬁne-tuning. The pol-
icy is sampled from a discrete distribution parameterized by
the output of a lightweight neural network, which decides
which layers of a pre-trained model should be ﬁne-tuned or
have their parameters frozen, on a per instance basis. As
these decision functions are discrete and non-differentiable,
we rely on a recent Gumbel Softmax sampling approach
[30, 18] to train the policy network. At test time, the policy
decides whether the features coming out of a layer go into
the next layer with the source pre-trained parameters or the
ﬁne-tuned parameters.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
•We propose an input-dependent ﬁne-tuning approach
that automatically determines which layers to ﬁne-tune
per target instance. This is in contrast to current ﬁne-
tuning methods which are mostly ad-hoc in terms of
determining where to ﬁne-tune in a deep neural net-
work ( e.g., ﬁne-tuning last klayers).
•We also propose a global variant of our approach that
constrains all the input examples to ﬁne-tune the same
set ofklayers which can be distributed anywhere in
the network. This variant results in fewer parameters in
the ﬁnal model as the corresponding set of pre-trained
layers can be discarded.
•We conduct extensive empirical evaluation of the pro-
posed approach, comparing it with several competitive
baselines. The proposed approach outperforms stan-
dard ﬁne-tuning on 12 out of 14 datasets. Moreover,we show the effectiveness of SpotTune compared to
other state-of-the-art ﬁne-tuning strategies. On the Vi-
sual Decathlon Challenge [37], which is a competi-
tive benchmark for testing the performance of multi-
domain learning algorithms with a total of 10 datasets,
the proposed approach achieves the highest score com-
pared with the state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Transfer Learning. There is a long history of transfer
learning and domain adaptation methods in computer vision
[8, 35]. Recently, transfer learning based on deep neural
networks has received signiﬁcant attention in the commu-
nity [12, 6, 7, 24, 13]. Fine-tuning a pre-trained network
model such as ImageNet on a new dataset is the most com-
mon strategy for knowledge transfer in the context of deep
learning. Methods have been proposed to ﬁne-tune all net-
work parameters [14], only the parameters of the last few
layers [28], or to just use the pre-trained model as a ﬁxed
feature extractor with a classiﬁer such as SVM on top [42].
Kornblith et al. [20] studied several of these options to ad-
dress the question of whether better ImageNet models trans-
fer better. Yosinski et al. [51] conducted a study on the im-
pact of transferability of features from the bottom, middle,
or top of the network with early models, but it is not clear
whether their conclusions hold for modern multi-path ar-
chitectures such as Residual Networks [15] or DenseNets
[16]. Yang et al. [50] have recently proposed to learn re-
lational graphs as transferable representations, instead of
unary features. Closely related to our work, Li et al. [25]
investigated several regularization schemes that explicitly
promote the similarity of the ﬁne-tuned model with the orig-
inal pre-trained model. Different from all these methods,
our proposed approach automatically decides the optimal
set of layers to ﬁne-tune in a pre-trained model on a new
task. In addition, we make this decision on a per-instance
basis.
Feature Sharing Across Tasks. In the multi-task set-
ting, knowing which tasks or parameters are shareable is
a longstanding challenge [19, 23, 45, 29]. Early methods
were designed for shallow classiﬁcation models [52, 17,
36], while more recent approaches address the problem of
“with whom” each task should share features using deep
neural networks [29, 32]. Cross-stitching networks [33] and
Progressive Networks [40] have been recently proposed to
learn an optimal combination of shared and task-speciﬁc
representations for joint multi-task optimization and life-
long learning, respectively. These methods rely on per-layer
inter-column adapters, which requires more memory and
leads to more computational cost. In addition, they learn
global feature adapters per task , whereas SpotTune adap-
tively routes computation per input example , which is im-
portant to boost accuracy.
4806