Dynamic Routing. Our proposed approach is related
toconditional computation methods [4, 27, 11], which aim
to dynamically route information in neural networks with
the goal of improving computational efﬁciency. Bengio
et al. [2] used sparse activation policies to selectively ex-
ecute neural network units on a per-example basis. Shazeer
et al. [43] introduced a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts
layer, where a trainable gating network determines a sparse
combination of sub-networks (experts) to use for each ex-
ample. Wu, Nagarajan et al. proposed BlockDrop [49], a
method that uses reinforcement learning to dynamically se-
lect which layers of a Residual Network to execute, exploit-
ing the fact that ResNets are resilient to layer dropping [47].
Veit and Belongie [46] investigated the same idea using
Gumbel Softmax [18] for on-the-ﬂy selection of residual
blocks. Our work also explores dynamic routing based on
theGumbel trick . However, unlike previous methods, our
goal is to determine the parameters in a neural network that
should be frozen or ﬁne-tuned during learning to improve
accuracy, instead of dropping layers to improve efﬁciency.
3. Proposed Approach
Given a pre-trained network model on a source task (e.g.,
ImageNet pre-trained model), and a set of training exam-
ples with associated labels in the target domain, our goal
is to create an adaptive ﬁne-tuning strategy that decides,
per training example, which layers of the pre-trained model
should be ﬁne-tuned (adapted to the target task) and which
layers should have their parameters frozen (shared with the
source task) during training, in order to improve the accu-
racy of the model in the target domain. To this end, we ﬁrst
present an overview of our approach in Section 3.1. Then,
we show how we learn our adaptive ﬁne-tuning policy using
Gumbel Softmax sampling in Section 3.2. Finally, in Sec-
tion 3.3, we present a global policy variant of our proposed
image-dependent ﬁne-tuning method, which constrains all
the images to follow a single ﬁne-tuning policy.
3.1. SpotTune Overview
Although our approach could be applied to different deep
neural network architectures, in the following we focus
on a Residual Network model (ResNet) [15]. Recently, it
has been shown that ResNets behave as ensembles of shal-
low classiﬁers and are resilient to residual block swapping
[47]. This is a desirable property for our approach, as later
we show that SpotTune dynamically swaps pre-trained and
ﬁne-tuned blocks to improve performance.
Consider the l-th residual block in a pre-trained ResNet
model:
xl=Fl(xl−1)+xl−1. (1)
In order to decide whether or not to ﬁne-tune a residual
block during training, we freeze the original block Flandcreate a new trainable blockˆFl, which is initialized with the
parameters of Fl. With the additional block ˆFl, the output
of thel-th residual block in SpotTune is computed as below:
xl=Il(x)ˆFl(xl−1)+(1−Il(x))Fl(xl−1)+xl−1(2)
whereIl(x)is a binary random variable that indicates
whether the residual block should be frozen or ﬁne-tuned,
conditioned on the input image. During training, given an
input image x, the frozen blockFltrained on the source
task is left unchanged and the replicated block ˆFl, which
is initialized from Fl, can be optimized towards the tar-
get dataset. Hence, the given image xcan either share the
frozen blockFl, which allows the features computed on the
source task to be reused, or ﬁne-tune the block ˆFl, which
allowsxto use the adapted features. Il(x)is sampled from
a discrete distribution with two categories (freeze or ﬁne-
tune), which is parameterized by the output of a lightweight
policy network. More speciﬁcally, if Il(x)= 0, then the l-
th frozen block is re-used. Otherwise, if Il(x)= 1 thel-th
residual block is ﬁne-tuned by optimizing ˆFl.
Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of our proposed Spot-
Tune method, which allows each training image to have its
own ﬁne-tuning policy. During training, the policy network
is jointly trained with the target classiﬁcation task using
Gumbel Softmax sampling, as we will describe next. At
test time, an input image is ﬁrst fed into a policy network,
whose output is sampled to produce routing decisions on
whether to pass the image through the ﬁne-tuned or pre-
trained residual blocks. The image is then routed through
the corresponding residual blocks to produce the ﬁnal clas-
siﬁcation prediction. Note that the effective number of exe-
cuted residual blocks is the same as the original pre-trained
model. The only additional computational cost is incurred
by the policy network, which is designed to be lightweight
(only a few residual blocks) in comparison to the original
pre-trained model.
3.2. Training with the Gumbel Softmax Policy
SpotTune makes decisions as to whether or not to freeze
or ﬁne-tune each residual block per training example. How-
ever, the fact that the policy Il(x)is discrete makes the net-
work non-differentiable and therefore difﬁcult to be opti-
mized with backpropagation. There are several ways that
allow us to “back-propagate” through the discrete nodes [4].
In this paper, we use a recently proposed Gumbel Softmax
sampling approach [30, 18] to circumvent this problem.
The Gumbel-Max trick [30] is a simple and effective way
to draw samples from a categorical distribution parameter-
ized by{α1,α2,...,αz}, whereαiare scalars not conﬁned
to the simplex, and zis the number of categories. In our
work, we consider two categories (freeze or ﬁne-tune), so
z= 2, and for each residual block, α1andα2are scalars
corresponding to the output of a policy network.
4807