SpotTune: Transfer Learning through Adaptive Fine-tuning
Yunhui Guo∗1,2, Honghui Shi1, Abhishek Kumar†, Kristen Grauman3, Tajana Rosing2, Rogerio Feris1
1IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab ,2University of California, San Diego ,3The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
Transfer learning, which allows a source task to affect
the inductive bias of the target task, is widely used in com-
puter vision. The typical way of conducting transfer learn-
ing with deep neural networks is to ﬁne-tune a model pre-
trained on the source task using data from the target task.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive ﬁne-tuning approach,
called SpotTune, which ﬁnds the optimal ﬁne-tuning strat-
egyper instance for the target data. In SpotTune, given
an image from the target task, a policy network is used
to make routing decisions on whether to pass the image
through the ﬁne-tuned layers or the pre-trained layers. We
conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effective-
ness of the proposed approach. Our method outperforms
the traditional ﬁne-tuning approach on 12 out of 14 stan-
dard datasets. We also compare SpotTune with other state-
of-the-art ﬁne-tuning strategies, showing superior perfor-
mance. On the Visual Decathlon datasets, our method
achieves the highest score across the board without bells
and whistles.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown remarkable success in many
computer vision tasks, but current methods often rely on
large amounts of labeled training data [22, 15, 16]. Trans-
fer learning , where the goal is to transfer knowledge from
a related source task , is commonly used to compensate for
the lack of sufﬁcient training data in the target task [35, 3].
Fine-tuning is arguably the most widely used approach for
transfer learning when working with deep learning mod-
els. It starts with a pre-trained model on the source task
and trains it further on the target task. For computer vision
tasks, it is a common practice to work with ImageNet pre-
trained models for ﬁne-tuning [20]. Compared with training
from scratch, ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained convolutional neural
network on a target dataset can signiﬁcantly improve per-
formance, while reducing the target labeled data require-
ments [14, 51, 44, 20].
∗This work was done when Yunhui Guo was an intern at IBM Research.
†Abhishek Kumar is now with Google Brain. The work was done when he
was at IBM Research.
Figure 1: Given a deep neural network pre-trained on a
source task, we address the question of where to ﬁne-tune
its parameters with examples of the target task. We propose
a novel method that decides, per training example, which
layers of the pre-trained model should have their parame-
ters ﬁxed, i.e., shared with the source task, and which layers
should be ﬁne-tuned to improve the accuracy of the model
in the target domain.
There are several choices when it comes to realizing the
idea of ﬁne-tuning of deep networks in practice. A natural
approach is to optimize allthe parameters of the deep net-
work using the target training data (after initializing them
with the parameters of the pre-trained model). However, if
the target dataset is small and the number of parameters is
huge, ﬁne-tuning the whole network may result in overﬁt-
ting [51]. Alternatively, the last few layers of the deep net-
work can be ﬁne-tuned while freezing the parameters of the
remaining initial layers to their pre-trained values [44, 1].
This is driven by a combination of limited training data in
the target task and the empirical evidence that initial layers
learn low-level features that can be directly shared across
various computer vision tasks. However, the number of ini-
tial layers to freeze during ﬁne-tuning still remains a man-
4805