greater depth, grouping our analysis into the three forces (technological, socioeconomic and geopolitical) listed above. The orga-
nization of the paper and a summary of some of its main implications are shown in Table 2 .
1.2. Technological trends
The key long-term trends are a) the increasing capability of the ﬁrm to communicate with customers, b) the increasing capa-
bility of the ﬁrm to collect and store information about customers, and c) the increasing capability of the ﬁrm to analyze customer
information ( Rust & Huang, 2014 ).
Today in the 21st century, we have a tendency to think only the latest iPhone is relevant to communication, but we often for-
get that the widespread adoption of the original landline telephone greatly improved the ability of the company and the customer
to communicate with each other. The advent of the Internet created another leap forward, as the amount of information able to be
communicated increased tremendously. The smart phone took this to the next level, as every customer now has the Internet in
his/her pocket. The expansion of networks, as typi ﬁed by developments such as social media, further supercharged communica-
tion, and facilitated customer –customer interaction as well as customer –company interaction. A natural result was the increase
in the importance of word-of-mouth.Table 1
Visions of marketing's future.
Authors Publication Primary conclusions
Capon & Glazer JM, 1987 Technology as a central factor in determining marketing strategy
Bass JMR, 1993 Marketing as a science producing generalizable results
Krugman & Rust JAR, 1993 Predicts decline of TV network viewing share as cable TV expands
Blattberg, Glazer,
LittleBook, 1994 Information technology's increasing impact on marketing
Rust & Oliver JSM, 1994 Pre-dating the ﬁrst web browser, this paper describes the marketing use of an electronic network that resembles the
modern Internet
Krugman & Rust JA, 1994 Predicts the relative decline of mass media advertising, as a result of new technologies that enable personalization
Rust Mktg. Mgmt.,
1997Predicts that the advancement of AI will lead to computers being customers
Rust, Zeithaml,
LemonBook, 2000 Proposes managing marketing based on customer equity
Leeﬂang & Wittink IJRM, 2000 Describes how technological advances lead to more marketing modeling opportunities
Winer CMR, 2001 Focuses on how the Internet enhances CRM capabilities
Rust, Moorman,
BhallaHBR, 2010 Proposes a truly customer-centered view of marketing, due to technology
Rust & Huang Mktg. Sci. , 2014 Explains how information technology grows the service economy
Table 2
Summary of principal trends and their implications.
Trend Implications for practice Implications for education Implications for research
2. Technological trends
2.1 Expansion of
relationships and
serviceOrganize around customers Increased emphasis on relationships
and serviceResearch on how IT improvements drive deeper
customer relationships
2.2 Arti ﬁcial intelligence Manage AI and HI as a team More emphasis on people skills, less
on analyticsNew algorithms to serve customers better
2.3 Big data Personalize, while protecting privacy Train data users, not data creators Adaptive personalization systems, customer
reactions to privacy
2.4 Networks Use networks to scale up learning Classes on complex systems Agent-based models for dynamic systems
3. Socioeconomic trends
3.1 Discrimination Adopt “group-blind ”policies Differentiate discrimination from
bigotryDynamic models of discrimination effects
3.2 Inequality of wealth Luxury marketing, marketing to
“bottom of pyramid ”Importance of heterogeneity of
wealth, not just GDPEffects of wealth on consumption
4. Geopolitical threats
4.1 Free trade vs.
protectionismCoping with an uncertain
international trading environmentHistorical study about tariffs How planned economies compete long-term
against free-trading economies
4.2 Seeking the past Move from manufacturing to service Historical study about the shift away
from manufacturingEffect of “propping up ”manufacturing
4.3 Innovation vs. patent
trollsLobby to create barriers to patent
trollsStudy barriers to innovation Optimal government regulation to encourage
innovation & discourage trolls
4.4 Climate change Prepare for massive climate
disruptionsRequired courses on climate Changing geographic consumption patterns2 R.T. Rust / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: R.T. Rust, The future of marketing, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.08.002