1.3. Socioeconomic trends
The key factors here are inequality of income and wealth, as well as geographic mobility. As has been true throughout history,
economic development produces winners and losers, both within countries and between countries. Inequality of income and
wealth produces market segmentation opportunities, but it also causes discrimination ( Oliver & Shapiro, 2006 ;Ukanwa & Rust,
2019 ). As people become more geographically mobile, they seek better economic opportunity for themselves, which results in im-
migration from the poorer countries to the richer countries ( Greenwood & McDowell, 1991 ). This immigration results in problems
and opportunities related to diversity and inclusion ( Saﬁ, 2010 ).
1.4. Geopolitical trends
Increased transportation capability, along with the expansion of the service sector (which I will discuss in the next section) re-
sult in easier international trade, which again results in winners and losers. Free trade tends to help the highly-skilled countries
(and regions within countries) and hurt the lower-skilled ones, which can lead to a temptation to adopt protectionist policies,
which can be exacerbated by politicians' reluctance to let go of declining (low-skilled) industries and their obsolescent workers
(Jensen, Quinn, & Weymouth, 2017 ). Intellectual property theft is another geopolitical risk that sti ﬂes innovation ( Posner,
2005 ), as are patent trolls ( Chien, 2014 ). Climate change is another global issue that will have a tremendous impact on business,
as traditional ways of doing things are challenged or made impossible ( Kolk & Pinkse, 2005 ).
The remainder of the paper goes into more depth about the key trends and their implications for the future of marketing, and
notes the most likely academic research opportunities. In Part 2, I discuss how technological trends are leading to the deepening of
customer relationships and the expansion of the service sector. Part 3 discusses the rise of arti ﬁcial intelligence, and how that will
transform business. Part 4 discusses big data and the resulting con ﬂict between personalization and privacy. Part 5 discusses how
the increasingly networked economy changes things, from the Internet to the Internet of Things, to the Internet of Brains, and why
complex systems are the right way to model this. Part 6 focuses on the socioeconomic issues of diversity and inclusion, and part 7
discusses some important geopolitical threats. The paper concludes with part 8, in which I summarize the implications for market-
ing managers, marketing education, and academic research in marketing.
2. Technological trends
2.1. The expansion of relationships and service
One very long-term trend that will continue to shape the future of marketing is the expansion of the service sector ( Rust &
Chung, 2006 ). The service sector has expanded as a percent of the economy, in every developed nation of the world, continuously
since about 1900. Currently about 85% of the economy is the service sector, and that doesn't include the degree to which service
also permeates the goods economy. It should be noted that the trend toward relationships and service is even stronger in the B2B
world, with the result that the impact on B2B will be profound, and B2B research will continue to be a lively area of research
(Lilien, 2016 ). It is similarly the case that B2G, which also focuses on long-term relationships, will also be disproportionately af-
fected by technological trends, with strong performance implications for companies with a heavy B2G portfolio ( Josephson, Lee,
Mariadoss, & Johnson, 2019 ).
2.1.1. The rise of service
The underlying reason for the expansion of the service economy is the deepening of customer relationships due to the increas-
ing capabilities of information and communication technologies ( Rust & Huang, 2014 ). Advancements in technology have ex-
panded businesses' ability to communicate with customers, store customer information, and analyze customer information.
Because relationships are typically central in the service economy, deeper customer relationships create opportunities to expand
service, more than the opportunities to expand the goods economy.
2.1.2. Marketing products vs. cultivating customers
With service now being dominant in the economy ( Vargo & Lusch, 2004 ), even in the goods sector, it is reasonable and timely
to consider the implicit assumptions embodied in the term, “marketing. ”It is clear, for example, that marketing implies marketing
something, and implies that it is actually about selling something, as opposed to the broader de ﬁnition of marketing's activities
(e.g., including such things as product decisions, customer relationship management, and word-of-mouth effects). In its purest
form, the term “marketing ”implies promotion and sales transactions of physical goods, implicitly ignoring long-term relationships
and post-sales service.
It has been argued that the marketing department should give way to a customer department, and that the emphasis should
move from marketing products to cultivating customers ( Rust et al., 2010 ). In fact, it has been shown that it is the customer con-
nection function that is central to the effectiveness of the marketing (or customer) department ( Moorman & Rust, 1999 ).
2.1.3. Research opportunities
Let us examine a few potential research ideas that stem from the expansion of the service sector, the deepening of customer
relationships, and an increasing focus on cultivating customers.3 R.T. Rust / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: R.T. Rust, The future of marketing, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.08.002