Full Length Article
The future of marketing
Roland T. Rust1
Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, 3451 Van Munching Hall, College Park, MD 20742, United States of America
article info
Article history:
First received on June 5, 2019 and Guest
Editor: Gary L. Lilien .
Available online xxxx
Guest Editor: Gary L. Lilien .The main thesis of this article is that several long-term trends are reshaping marketing and
forcing marketing managers to change radically to keep up. These long-term trends are techno-
logical, socioeconomic and geopolitical. Advances in technology, in particular, are having a pro-
found impact on marketing, resulting in the deepening of customer relationships and the
continuous expansion of the service economy. Arti ﬁcial intelligence, big data, the Internet,
and the expansion of networks are creating a revolution in marketing that makes the 1960s-
style 4 Ps increasingly obsolete. Compounding the problem for marketers are the socioeco-
nomic factors of diversity and inclusion, as well as major geopolitical threats. I explore the na-
ture of change, extrapolate marketing practice into the future, and examine the implications for
marketing managers, marketing education and academic research in marketing.
© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
There are three major forces that are changing marketing. These are 1) technological trends, 2) socioeconomic trends, and 3)
geopolitical trends. The selection of trends was done on the basis of my experience and judgment as a senior scholar in marketing
with a track record of successful prognostication. Of greatest importance, the effects of these trends on marketing are predictable,
and point the direction to how marketing must transform itself.
1.1. A history of the future
This is not the ﬁrst attempt to look into the future of marketing. Let us ﬁrst examine a few notable papers that have helped set
the stage for our current conceptualization, especially with respect to the impact of technology ( Table 1 ).Capon and Glazer (1987)
noted the impact of technology on marketing strategy, which was explored further by Blattberg, Glazer, and Little (1994) .A tt h e
same time, the increasing amount of data made possible by technology resulted in the capability to build mathematical models of
marketing phenomena, and catalog empirical generalizations ( Bass, 1993 ;Leeﬂang & Wittink, 2000 ). Technology has completely
transformed media over the last few decades, as cable TV ( Krugman & Rust, 1993 ) and other personalized technologies led to a
relative decline of big media (Krugman & Rust, 1994). The Internet brought the next big change, with many of its profound
changes predicted even before the advent of the ﬁrst web browser ( Rust & Oliver, 1994 ). In particular, the Internet and other mod-
ern information technologies resulted in deeper customer relationships, facilitating more effective CRM ( Winer, 2001 )a n de x p a n -
sion of the service sector ( Rust & Huang, 2014 ). A truly customer-centered view of marketing ( Rust, Moorman, & Bhalla, 2010 )i s
the natural result of technology, based on customer equity ( Rust, Zeithaml, & Lemon, 2000 ). I next explore many of these ideas inInternational Journal of Research in Marketing xxx (xxxx) xxx
E-mail address: .
1Distinguished University Professor and David Bruce Smith Chair in Marketing, and Executive Director of the Center for Excellence in Service.IJRM-01318; No of Pages 12
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.08.002
0167-8116/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
IJRM
International Journal of Research in Marketing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijresmar
Please cite this article as: R.T. Rust, The future of marketing, International Journal of Research in Marketing, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.08.002