2
Fig. 1: A high level research landscape of data collection for machine learning. The topics that are at least partially
contributed by the data management community are highlighted using blue italic text. Hence, to fully understand the
research landscape, one needs to look at the literature from the viewpoints of both the machine learning and data
management communities.
the research landscape where the topics that have contribu-
tions from the data management community are highlighted
with blue italic text. Traditionally, labeling data has been a
natural focus of research for machine learning tasks. For
example, semi-supervised learning is a classical problem
where model training is done on a small amount of labeled
data and a larger amount of unlabeled data. However, as
machine learning needs to be performed on large amounts
of training data, data management issues including how
to acquire large datasets, how to perform data labeling at
scale, and how to improve the quality of large amounts
of existing data become more relevant. Hence, to fully
understand the research landscape of data collection, one
needs to understand the literature from both the machine
learning and data management communities.
While there are many surveys on data collection that
are either limited to one discipline or a class of techniques,
to our knowledge, this survey is the ﬁrst to bridge the
machine learning (including natural language processing
and computer vision) and data management disciplines.
We contend that a machine learning user needs to know
the techniques on all sides to make informed decisions on
which techniques to use when. In fact, data management
plays a role in almost all aspects of machine learning [4], [5].
We note that many sub-topics including semi-supervised
learning, active learning, and transfer learning are large
enough to have their own surveys. The goal of this sur-
vey is not to go into all the depths of these sub-topics,
but to focus on breadth and identify what data collection
techniques are relevant for machine learning purposes and
what research challenges exist. Hence, we will only cover
the most representative work of the sub-topics, which areeither the best-performing or most recent ones. The key
audience of this survey can be researchers or practitioners
that are starting to use data collection for machine learning
and need an overall landscape introduction. Since the data
collection techniques come from different disciplines, some
may involve relational data while others non-relational data
(e.g., images and text). Sometimes the boundary between
operations (e.g., data acquisition and data labeling) is not
clear cut. In those cases, we will clarify that the techniques
are relevant in multiple operations.
Motivating Example To motivate the need to explore the
techniques in Figure 1, we present a running example on
data collection based on our experience with collaborating
with the industry on a smart factory application. Suppose
that Sally is a data scientist who works on product quality
for a smart factory. The factory may produce manufacturing
components like gears where it is important for them not to
have scratches, dents, or any foreign substance. Sally may
want to train a model on images of the components, which
can be used to automatically classify whether each product
has defects or not. This application scenario is depicted
in Figure 3. A general decision ﬂow chart of the data
collection techniques that Sally can use is shown in Figure 2.
Although the chart may look complicated at ﬁrst glance, we
contend that it is necessary to understand the entire research
landscape to make informed decisions for data collection.
In comparison, recent commercial tools [6]–[8] only cover a
subset of all the possible data collection techniques. When
using the chart, one can quickly narrow down the options
in two steps by deciding whether to perform one of data
acquisition, data labeling, or existing data improvements,