11
committee’s predictions is the largest. This approach is said
to work well when the bias of the models is small. Also, this
approach is said to be robust to overspeciﬁcation, which
reduces the chance of overﬁtting.
Self and Active Learning Combined The data labeling tech-
niques we consider are complementary to each other and
can be used together. In fact, semi-supervised learning and
active learning have a history of being used together [111]–
[114], [148]. A key observation is that the two techniques
solve opposite problems where semi-supervised learning
ﬁnds the predictions with the highest conﬁdence and adds
them to the labeled examples while active learning ﬁnds
the predictions with the lowest conﬁdence (using uncer-
tainty sampling, query-by-committee, or density-weighted
method) and sends them for manual labeling.
There are various ways semi-supervised learning can
be used with active learning. McCallum and Nigam [111]
improves the Query-By-Committee (QBC) technique and
combines it with Expectation-Maximization (EM), which
effectively performs semi-supervised learning. Given a set
of documents for training data, active learning is done
by selecting the documents that are closer to others (and
thus representative), but have committee disagreement, for
labeling. In addition, the EM algorithm is used to further
infer the rest of the labels. The active learning and EM
can either be done separately or interleaved. Tomanek
and Hahn [112] propose semi-supervised active learning
(SeSAL) for sequence labeling tasks, which include POS
tagging, chunking, or named entity recognition (NER). Here
the examples are sequences of text. The idea is to use
active learning for the subsequences that have the highest
training utility within the selected sentences and use semi-
supervised learning to automatically label the rest of the
subsequences. The utility of a subsequence is highest when
the current model is least conﬁdent about the labeling.
Zhou et al. [113] proposes the semi-supervised active
image retrieval (SSAIR) approach where the focus is on
image retrieval. SSAIR is inspired by the co-training method
where initially two classiﬁers are trained from the labeled
data. Then each learner passes the most relevant/irrelevant
images to the other classiﬁer. The classiﬁers are then re-
trained with the additional labels, and their results are
combined. The images that still have low conﬁdence are
selected to be labeled by humans.
Zhu et al. [114] combines semi-supervised and active
learning under a Gaussian random ﬁeld model. The labeled
and unlabeled examples are represented as vertices in a
graph where edges are weighted by similarities between
examples. This framework enables one to compute the next
question that minimizes the expected generalization error
efﬁciently for active learning. Once the new labels are added
to the labeled data, semi-supervised learning is performed
using harmonic functions.
3.2.2 Crowdsourcing
In comparison to active learning, the crowdsourcing tech-
niques here are more focused on running tasks with many
workers who are not necessarily labeling experts. As a
result, workers may make mistakes, and there is a heavy
literature [81]–[84], [115], [149], [150] on improving theinteraction with workers, evaluating workers so they are
reliable, reducing any bias that the workers may have,
and aggregating the labeling results while resolving any
ambiguities among them.
User Interaction A major challenge in user interaction is
to effectively provide instructions to workers on how to
perform the labeling. The traditional approach is to provide
some guidelines for labeling to the workers up front and
then let them make a best effort to follow them. However,
the guidelines are often incomplete and do not cover all
possible scenarios, leaving the workers in the dark. Re-
volt [115] is a system that attempts to ﬁx this problem
through collaborative crowdsourcing. Here workers work in
three steps: Voting where workers vote just like in traditional
labeling, Explaining where workers justify their rational for
labeling, and Categorize where workers review explanations
from other workers and tag any conﬂicting labels. This
information can then be used to make post-hoc judgements
of the label decision boundaries. Another approach is to pro-
vide better tools to assist workers to organize their concepts,
which may evolve as more examples are labeled [117].
In addition, providing the right labeling interface is
critical for workers to perform well. The challenge is that
each application may have a different interface that works
best. We will not cover all the possible applications, but
instead illustrate a line of research for the problem of entity
resolution where the goal is to ﬁnd records in a database
that refer to the same real-world entity. Here the label is
whether two (or more) records are the same or not. Just
for this problem, there is a line of research on providing
the best interface for comparisons. CrowdER [118] provides
two types of interfaces to compare records: pair-based and
cluster-based. Qurk [50] uses a mapping interface where
multiple records on one side are matched with records on
the other side. Qurk uses a combination of comparison or
rating tasks to accelerate labeling.
Quality control Controlling the quality of data labeling by
the crowd is important because the workers may vary sig-
niﬁcantly in their abilities to provide labels. A simple way to
ensure quality is to repeatedly label the same example using
multiple workers and perhaps take a majority voting at the
end. However, there are more sophisticated approaches as
well. Get another label [119] and Crowdscreen [120] actively
solicit labels while Karger et al. [121] passively collects
data and runs the expectation maximization algorithm. Vox
Populi [122] proposes techniques for pruning low-quality
workers that can achieve better labeling quality without
having to repeatedly label examples.
Scalability Scaling up crowdsourced labeling is another
important challenge. While traditional active learning tech-
niques were proposed for this purpose, more recently the
data management community has started to apply sys-
tems techniques for further scaling the algorithms to large
datasets. In particular, Mozafari et al. [116] proposes active
learning algorithms that can run in parallel. One algorithm
(called Uncertainty ) selects examples that the current classi-
ﬁer is most uncertain about. A more sophisticated algorithm
(called MinExpError ) combines the current model’s accuracy
with the uncertainty. A key idea is the use of bootstrap the-