10
image is labeled as a dog, then similar images down the
graph can also be labeled as dogs with some probability.
The further the distance, the lower the probability of label
propagation. Graph-based label propagation has applica-
tions in computer vision, information retrieval, social net-
works, and natural language processing. Zhu et al. [101]
proposed a semi-supervised learning based on a Gaussian
random ﬁeld model where the unlabeled and labeled ex-
amples form a weighted graph. The mean of the ﬁeld is
characterized in terms of harmonic functions and can be
efﬁciently computed using matrix methods or belief prop-
agation. The MAD-Sketch algorithm [102] was proposed to
further reduce the space and time complexities of graph-
based SSL algorithms using count-min sketching. In partic-
ular, the space complexity per node is reduced from O(m)to
O(logm)under certain conditions where mis the number
of distinct labels, and a similar improvement is achieved for
the time complexity. Recently, a family of algorithms called
EXPANDER [100] were proposed to further reduce the space
complexity per node to O(1)and compute the MAD-Sketch
algorithm in a distributed fashion.
3.2 Crowd-based techniques
The most accurate way to label examples is to do it manu-
ally. A well known use case is the ImageNet image classiﬁ-
cation dataset [146] where tens of millions of images were
organized according to a semantic hierarchy by WordNet
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. However, ImageNet is an
ambitious project that took years to complete, which most
machine learning users cannot afford for their own applica-
tions. Traditionally, active learning has been a key technique
in the machine learning community for carefully choosing
the right examples to label and thus minimize cost. More
recently, crowdsourcing techniques for labeling have been
proposed where there can be many workers who are not
necessarily experts in labeling. Hence, there is more empha-
sis on how to assign tasks to workers, what interfaces to use,
and how to ensure high quality labels. Recent commercial
tools vary in what services they provide for labeling. For
example, Amazon SageMaker [8] supports labeling based
on active learning, Google Cloud AutoML [6] provides a
manual labeling service, and Microsoft Custom Vision [7]
requires labels from the user. While crowdsourcing data
labeling is closely related to crowdsourcing data acquisition,
the individual techniques are different.
3.2.1 Active Learning
Active learning focuses on selecting the most “interesting”
unlabeled examples to give to the crowd for labeling. The
workers are expected to be very accurate, so there is less
emphasis on how to interact with those with less expertise.
While some references view active learning as a special case
of semi-supervised learning, the key difference is that there
is a human-in-the-loop. The key challenge is choosing the
right examples to ask given a limited budget. One downside
of active learning is that the examples are biased to the
training algorithm and cannot be reused. Active learning
is covered extensively in other surveys [105], [147], and we
only cover the most prominent techniques here.Uncertain Examples Uncertainty Sampling [103] is the sim-
plest in active learning and chooses the next unlabeled
example that the model prediction is most uncertain. For
example, if the model is a binary classiﬁer, uncertainty
sampling chooses the example whose probability is nearest
to 0.5. If there are more than three class labels, we could
choose the example whose prediction is the least conﬁdent.
The downside of this approach is that it throws away the
information of all the other possible labels. So an improved
version called margin sampling is to choose the example
whose probability difference between the most and second-
most probable labels is the largest. This method can be fur-
ther generalized using entropy as the uncertainty measure
where entropy is an information-theoretic measure for the
amount of information to encode a distribution.
Query-by-Committee [104] extends uncertainty sam-
pling by training a committee of models on the same labeled
data. Each model can vote when labeling each example,
and the most informative example is considered to be
the one where the most models disagree with each other.
More formally, this approach minimizes the version space ,
which is the space of all possible classiﬁers that give the
same classiﬁcation results as (and are thus consistent with)
the labeled data. The challenge is to train models that
represent different regions of the version space and have
some amount of disagreement. Various methods have been
proposed [105], but there does not seem to be a clear winner.
One general method is called query-by-bagging [106], which
uses bagging as an ensemble learning algorithm and trains
models on bootstrap samples. There is no general agreement
on the best number of models to train, which is application-
speciﬁc.
Both uncertainty sampling and query-by-committee fo-
cus on individual examples instead of the entire set of ex-
amples, they run into the danger of choosing examples that
are outliers according to the example distribution. Density
weighting [107] is a way to improve the above techniques by
choosing instances that are not only uncertain or disagree-
ing, but also representative of the example distribution.
Decision Theoretic Approaches Another line of active learning
performs decision-theoretic approaches. Decision theory is
a framework for making decision under uncertainty using
states and actions to optimize some objective function. In
the context of active learning, the objective could be to
choose an example that maximizes the estimated model
accuracy [108]. Another possible objective is reducing gen-
eralization error [109], which is estimated as follows: if the
measure is log loss, then the entropy of the predicted class
distribution is considered the error rate; if the measure is 0-
1 loss, the maximum probability among all classes is the
error rate. Each example to label is chosen by taking a
sample of the unlabeled data and choosing the example that
minimizes the estimated error rate.
Regression Active learning techniques can also be extended
to regression problems. For uncertainty sampling, instead of
computing the entropy of classes, one can compute the out-
put variance of the predictions and select the examples with
the highest variance. Query-by-committee can also be ex-
tended to regression [110] by training a committee of models
and selecting the examples where the variance among the