3
Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Have 
enough 
data? 
No
Are there 
external 
datasets? Discover or 
augment data 
Generate data NoYesYes
Use crowdsourcing Use self learning 
Use weak supervision No 
No YesEnough 
labels for 
self learning? 
Enough 
crowd 
budget? Add labels 
YesImprove 
data/model 
Use weak 
labels? YesYesHave data 
generation 
method? Improve 
data and 
labels 
Improve 
model NoYes
YesExisting data and labels are 
noisy and biased 
Existing 
model is 
inaccurate Star t 
Improve existing data/model 
or add labels? 
Fig. 2: A decision ﬂow chart for data collection. From the top left, Sally can start by asking whether she has enough data.
The following questions lead to speciﬁc techniques that can be used for acquiring data, labeling data, or improving existing
data or models. This ﬂow chart does not cover all the details in this survey. For example, data labeling techniques like self
learning and crowdsourcing can be performed together as described in Section 3.2.1. Also, some questions (e.g., “Enough
labels for self learning?”) are not easy to answer and may require an in-depth understanding of the application and data.
There are also techniques speciﬁc to the data type (images and text), which we detail in the body of the paper.
Data 
Collection 
Model Smart 
Factory 
Defect OK
Fig. 3: A running example for data collection. A smart
factory may produce various images of product compo-
nents, which are classiﬁed as normal or defective by a
convolutional neural network model. Unfortunately, with
an application this speciﬁc, it is often difﬁcult to ﬁnd enough
data for training the model.
and then choosing the speciﬁc technique to use for each
operation. For example, if there is no data, then Sally could
generate a dataset by installing camera equipment. Then if
she has enough budget for human computation, she can use
crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk to
label the product images for defects. We will discuss more
details of the ﬂow chart in the following sections.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
We review the data acquisition literature, which can
be categorized into data discovery, data augmenta-
tion, and data generation. Many of the techniques
require scalable solutions and have thus been studied
by the data management community (Section 2).
We review the data labeling literature and group the
techniques into three approaches: utilizing existing
labels, using crowdsourcing techniques, and usingweak supervision. While data labeling is tradition-
ally a machine learning topic, it is also studied in the
data management community as scalability becomes
an issue (Section 3).
We review techniques for improving existing data
or models when acquiring and labeling new data is
not the best option. Improving data quality through
cleaning is a traditional data management topic
where recent techniques are increasingly focusing on
machine learning applications (Section 4).
We put all the techniques together and provide
guidelines on how to decide which data collection
techniques to use when (Section 5).
Based on the current research landscape, we identify
interesting future research challenges (Section 6).
2 D ATAACQUISITION
The goal of data acquisition is to ﬁnd datasets that can be
used to train machine learning models. There are largely
three approaches in the literature: data discovery, data aug-
mentation, and data generation. Data discovery is necessary
when one wants to share or search for new datasets and
has become important as more datasets are available on the
Web and corporate data lakes [19], [75]. Data augmentation
complements data discovery where existing datasets are
enhanced by adding more external data. Data generation
can be used when there is no available external dataset,
but it is possible to generate crowdsourced or synthetic
datasets instead. The following sections will cover the three
operations in more detail. The individual techniques are
classiﬁed in Table 1.