15
be a set of university webpages to categorize. Transductive
transfer learning is used when the source and target tasks are
the same, but the domains are different. Unsupervised transfer
learning is similar to inductive transfer learning where the
source and target tasks are different, but uses unsupervised
learning tasks like clustering and dimensionality reduction.
The three approaches above can also be divided based
on what to transfer. Instance-based transfer learning assumes
that the examples of the source can be re-used in the target
by re-weighting them. Feature-representation transfer learning
assumes that the features that represent the data of the
source task can be used to represent the data of the target
task. Parameter transfer learning assumes that the source and
target tasks share some parameters or prior distributions
that can be re-used. Relational knowledge transfer learning
assumes that certain relationships within the data of the
source task can be re-used in the target task.
More recent surveys [173], [178] classify most of the tra-
ditional transfer learning techniques as homogeneous transfer
learning where the feature spaces of the source and tar-
get tasks are the same. In addition, the surveys identify
a relatively new class of techniques called heterogeneous
transfer learning where the feature spaces are different, but
the source and target examples are extracted from the same
domain. Heterogeneous transfer learning largely falls into
two categories: asymmetric and symmetric transformation.
In an asymmetric approach, features of the source task
are transformed to the features of the target task. In a
symmetric approach, the assumption is that there is a com-
mon latent feature space that uniﬁes the source and target
features. Transfer learning has been successfully used in
many applications including text sentiment analysis, image
classiﬁcation, human activity classiﬁcation, software defect
detection, and multi-language text classiﬁcation.
5 P UTTING EVERYTHING TOGETHER
We now return to Sally’s scenario and provide an end-
to-end guideline for data collection (summarized as the
workﬂow in Figure 2). If there is no or little data to start with
then Sally would need to acquire datasets. She can either
search for relevant datasets either on the Web or within the
company data lake, or decide to generate a dataset herself
by installing camera equipment for taking photos of the
products within the factory. If the products also had some
metadata, Sally could also augment that data with external
information about the product.
Once the data is available, then Sally can choose among
the labeling techniques using the categories discussed in
Section 3. If there are enough existing labels, then self label-
ing using semi-supervised learning is an attractive option.
There are many variants of self labeling depending on the
assumptions on the model training as we studied. If there
are not enough labels, Sally can decide to generate some us-
ing the crowd-based techniques using a budget. If there are
only a few experts available for labeling, active learning may
be the right choice, assuming that the important examples
that inﬂuence the model can be narrowed down. If there
are many workers who do not necessarily have expertise,
general crowdsourcing methods can be used. If Sally does
not have enough budget for crowd-based methods or if itis simply not worth the cost, and if the model training can
tolerate weak labels, then weak supervision techniques like
data programming and label propagation can be used.
If Sally has existing labels, she may also want to make
sure whether they can be improved in quality. If the data is
noisy or biased, then the various data cleaning techniques
can be used. If there are existing models for product quality
through tools like TensorFlow Hub [174], they can be used
to further improve the model using transfer learning.
Through our experience, we also realize that it is not
always easy to determine if there is enough data and labels.
For example, even if the dataset is small or there are few
labels, as long as the distribution of data is easy to learn,
then automatic approaches like semi-supervised learning
will do the job better than manual approaches like active
learning. Another hard-to-measure factor is the amount
of human effort needed. When comparing active learning
versus data programming, we need to compare the tasks
of labeling examples and implementing labeling functions,
which are quite different. Depending on the application,
implementing a program on examples can range from trivial
(e.g., look for certain keywords) to almost impossible (e.g.,
general object detection). Hence, even if data programming
is an attractive option, one must determine the actual effort
of programming, which cannot be determined with a few
yes or no questions.
Another thing to keep in mind is how the labeling
techniques tradeoff accuracy and scalability. Manual la-
beling is obviously the most accurate, but least scalable.
Active learning scales better than the manual approach,
but is still limited to how fast humans can label. Data
programming produces weak labels, which tend to have
lower accuracy than manual labels. On the other hand, data
programming can scale better than active learning assuming
that the initial cost of implementing labeling functions and
debugging them is reasonable. Semi-supervised learning ob-
viously scales the best with automatic labeling. The labeling
accuracy depends on the accuracy of the model trained on
existing labels. Combining self labeling with active learning
is a good example of taking the best of both worlds.
6 F UTURE RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Although data collection was traditionally a topic in the ma-
chine learning, as the amount of training data is increasing,
data management research is becoming just as relevant, and
we are observing a convergence of the two disciplines. As
such, there needs to be more awareness on how the research
landscape will evolve for both communities and more effort
to better integrate the techniques.
Data Evaluation An open question is how to evaluate
whether the right data was collected with sufﬁcient quantity.
First, it may not be clear if we have found the best datasets
for a machine learning task and whether the amount of
data is enough to train a model with sufﬁcient accuracy.
In some cases, there may be too many datasets, and simply
collecting and integrating all of them may have a negative
affect on model training. As a result, selecting the right
datasets becomes an important problem. Moreover, if the
datasets are dynamic (e.g., they are streams of signals from
sensors) and change in quality, then the choice of datasets