8
frames. Text within images is another application where one
can vary the fonts, sizes, and colors of the text to generate
large amounts of synthetic text images [68], [69].
An alternative approach to generating image datasets
is to start from a large set of noisy images and select the
clean ones. Xia et al. [70] searches the Web for images with
noise and then uses a density-based measure to cluster the
images and remove outliers. Bai et al. [71] exploits large
click-through logs, which contains queries of users and the
images that were clicked by those users. A deep neural
network is used to learn representations of the words and
images and compute word-word and image-word similar-
ities. The noisy images that have low similarities to their
categories are then removed.
Generating synthetic text data has also been studied
in the natural language processing community. Paraphras-
ing [72] is a classical problem of generating alternative
expressions that have the same semantic meaning. For ex-
ample “What does Xdo for a living?” is a paraphrase of
“What is X’s job?”. We brieﬂy cover two recent methods
– one is syntax-based and the other semantics-based – that
uses paraphrasing to generate large amounts of synthetic
text data. Syntactically controlled paraphrase networks [73]
(SCPNs) can be trained to produce paraphrases of a sentence
with different sentence structures. Semantically equivalent
adversarial rules for text [74] (SEARs) have been proposed
for perturbing input text while preserving its semantics.
SEARs can be used to debug a model by applying them
on training data and seeing if the re-trained model changes
its predictions. In addition, there are many paraphrasing
techniques that are not covered in this survey.
3 D ATALABELING
Once enough data has been acquired, the next step is to label
individual examples. For instance, given an image dataset
of industrial components in a smart factory application,
workers can start annotating if there are any defects in
the components. In many cases, data acquisition is done
along with data labeling. When extracting facts from the
Web and constructing a knowledge base, then each fact is
assumed to be correct and thus implicitly labeled as true.
When discussing the data labeling literature, it is easier to
separate it from data acquisition as the techniques can be
quite different.
We believe the following categories provide a reasonable
view of understanding the data labeling landscape:
Use existing labels: An early idea of data labeling
is to exploit any labels that already exist. There is
an extensive literature on semi-supervised learning
where the idea is to learn from the labels to predict
the rest of the labels.
Crowd-based: The next set of techniques are based on
crowdsourcing. A simple approach is to label indi-
vidual examples. A more advanced technique is to
use active learning where questions to ask are more
carefully selected. More recently, many crowdsourc-
ing techniques have been proposed to help workers
become more effective in labeling.
Weak labels: While it is desirable to generate correct
labels all the time, this process may be too expensive.An alternative approach is to newly generate less
than perfect labels (i.e., weak labels), but in large
quantities to compensate for the lower quality. Re-
cently, the latter approach is gaining more popularity
as labeled data is scarce in many new applications.
Table 2 shows where different labeling approaches ﬁt
into the categories. In addition, each labeling approach can
be further categorized as follows:
Machine learning task: In supervised learning, the
two categories are classiﬁcation (e.g., determining
whether a piece of text has a positive sentiment) and
regression (e.g., estimating the salary of a person).
Most of the data labeling research has been focused
on classiﬁcation problems rather than regression
problems, possibly because data labeling is simpler
in a classiﬁcation setting.
Data type: Depending on the data type (e.g., text,
images, and graphs) the data labeling techniques
differ signiﬁcantly. For example, fact extraction from
text is very different from object detection on images.
3.1 Utilizing existing labels
A common setting in machine learning is to have a small
amount of labeled data, which is expensive to produce
with humans, along with a much larger amount of unla-
beled data. Semi-supervised learning techniques [143] ex-
ploit both labeled and unlabeled data to make predictions.
In a transductive learning setting, the entire unlabeled data
is available while in an inductive learning setting, some
unlabeled data is available, but the predictions must be on
unseen data. Semi-supervised learning is a broad topic, and
we focus on a smaller branch of research called self-labeled
techniques [96] where the goal is to generate more labels by
trusting one’s own predictions. Since the details are in the
survey, we only provide a summary here. In addition to the
general techniques, there are graph-based label propagation
techniques that are specialized for graph data.
3.1.1 Classiﬁcation
For semi-supervised learning techniques for classiﬁcation,
the goal is to train a model that returns one of multiple
possible classes for each example using labeled and unla-
beled datasets. We consider the best-performing techniques
in a survey that focuses on labeling data [96], which are
summarized in Figure 4. The performance results are similar
regardless of using transductive or inductive learning.
The simplest class of semi-supervised learning tech-
niques train one model using one learning algorithm on one
set of features. For example, Self-training [92] initially trains
a model on the labeled examples. The model is then applied
to all the unlabeled data where the examples are ranked
by the conﬁdences in their predictions. The most conﬁdent
predictions are then added into the labeled examples. This
process repeats until all the unlabeled examples are labeled.
The next class trains multiple classiﬁers by sampling
the training data several times and training a model for
each sample. For example, Tri-training [93] initially trains
three models on the labeled examples using Bagging for the
ensemble learning algorithm. Then each model is updated