6
word vectors: Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) and Skip-
gram. While CBOW predicts a word based on its surround-
ing words, Skip-gram does the opposite and predicts the
surrounding words based on a given word. As a result, two
words that occur in similar contexts tend to have similar
word vectors. A fascinating application of word vectors is
performing arithmetic operations on the word vectors. For
example, the result of subtracting the word vector of “king”
by that of “queen” is similar to the result of subtracting the
word vector of “man” by that of “woman”. Since word2vec
was proposed, there have been many extensions including
GloVe [36], which improves word vectors by also taking into
account global corpus statistics, and Doc2Vec [80], which
generates representations of documents.
Another technique for deriving latent semantics is la-
tent topic modeling. For example, Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion [37] (LDA) is a generative model that can be used
to explain why certain parts of the data are similar using
unobserved groups.
2.2.2 Entity Augmentation
In many cases, datasets are incomplete and need to be ﬁlled
in by gathering more information. The missing information
can either be values or entire features. An early system
called Octopus [30] composes Web search queries using
keys of the table containing the entities. Then all the Web
tables in the resulting Web pages are clustered by schema,
and the tables in the most relevant cluster are joined with
the entity table. More recently, InfoGather [31] takes a
holistic approach using Web tables on the Web. The entity
augmentation is performed by ﬁlling in missing values of
attributes in some or all of the entities by matching multiple
Web tables using schema matching. To help the user decide
which attributes to ﬁll in, InfoGather identiﬁes synonymous
attributes in the Web tables.
2.2.3 Data Integration
Data integration can also be considered as data augmenta-
tion, especially if we are extending existing data sets with
other acquired ones. Since this discipline is well established,
we point the readers to some excellent surveys [40], [41].
More recently, an interesting line of work relevant to ma-
chine learning [42]–[44] observes that in practice, many
companies use relational databases where the training data
is divided into smaller tables. However, most machine learn-
ing toolkits assume that a training dataset is a single ﬁle
and ignore the fact that there are typically multiple tables
in a database due to normalization. The key question is
whether joining the tables and augmenting the information
is useful for model training. The Hamlet system [38] and
its subsequent Hamlet++ systems [39] address this problem
by determining if key-foreign key (KFK) joins are necessary
for improving the model accuracy for various classiﬁers
(linear, decision trees, non-linear SVMs, and artiﬁcial neural
networks) and propose decision rules to predict when it is
safe to avoid joins and, as a result, signiﬁcantly reduce the
total runtime. A surprising result is that joins can often be
avoided without negatively inﬂuencing the model’s accu-
racy. Intuitively, a foreign key determines the entire record
of the joining table, so the features brought in by a join do
not add a lot more information.2.3 Data Generation
If there are no existing datasets that can be used for training,
then another option is to generate the datasets either manu-
ally or automatically. For manual construction, crowdsourc-
ing is the standard method where human workers are given
tasks to gather the necessary bits of data that collectively
become the generated dataset. Alternatively, automatic tech-
niques can be used to generate synthetic datasets. Note that
data generation can also be viewed as data augmentation if
there is existing data where some missing parts needs to be
ﬁlled in.
2.3.1 Crowdsourcing
Crowdsourcing is used to solve a wide range of problems,
and there are many surveys as well [81]–[84]. One of the
earliest and most popular platforms is Amazon Mechanical
Turk [85] where tasks (called HITs ) are assigned to human
workers, and workers are compensated for ﬁnishing the
tasks. Since then, many other crowdsourcing platforms have
been developed, and research on crowdsourcing has ﬂour-
ished in the areas of data management, machine learning,
and human computer interaction. There is a wide range of
crowdsourcing tasks from simple ones like labeling images
up to complex ones like collaboratively writing that involve
multiple steps [86], [87]. Another important usage of crowd-
sourcing is data labeling (e.g., the ImageNet project), which
we discuss in Section 3.2.
In this section, we narrow the scope and focus on crowd-
sourcing techniques that are speciﬁc to data generation
tasks. A recent survey [88] provides an extensive discus-
sion on the challenges for data crowdsourcing. Another
survey [89] touches on the theoretical foundations of data
crowdsourcing. According to both surveys, data generation
using crowdsourcing can be divided into two steps: gather-
ingdata and preprocessing data.
Gathering data One way to categorize data gathering tech-
niques is whether the tasks are procedural or declarative.
A procedural task is where the task creator deﬁnes explicit
steps and assigns them to workers. For example, one may
write a computer program that issues tasks to workers.
TurKit [45] allows users to write scripts that include HITs us-
ing a crash-and-return programming model where a script
can be re-executed without re-running costly functions with
side effects. A UTO MAN[46] is a domain-speciﬁc language
embedded in Scala where crowdsourcing tasks can be in-
voked like conventional functions. D OG [47] is a high-
level programming language that compiles into MapReduce
tasks that can be performed by humans or machines. A
declarative task is when the task creator speciﬁes high-
level data requirements, and the workers provide the data
that satisfy them. For example, a database users may pose
an SQL query like “SELECT title, director, genre, rating
FROM MOVIES WHERE genre = ’action”’ to gather movie
ratings data for a recommendation system. D ECO [48] uses
a simple extension of SQL and deﬁnes precise semantics for
arbitrary queries on stored data and data collected by the
crowd. CrowdDB [49] focuses on the systems aspect of using
crowdsourcing to answer queries that cannot be answered
automatically.