5
processed for searching after they are created, and no effort
is required on the dataset owner’s side.
As an early solution for data lakes, IBM proposed a
system [19] that enables datasets to be curated and then
searched. IBM estimates that 70% of the time spent on an-
alytic projects is concerned with discovering, cleaning, and
integrating datasets that are scattered among many business
applications. Thus, IBM takes the stance of creating, ﬁlling,
maintaining, and governing the data lake where these pro-
cesses are collectively called data wrangling . When analyzing
data, users do not perform the analytics directly on the
data lake, but extract data sets and store them separately.
Before this step, the users can do a preliminary exploration
of datasets, e.g., visualizing them to determine if the dataset
is useful and does not contain anomalies that need further
investigation. While supporting data curation in the data
lake saves users from processing raw data, it does limit the
scalability of how many datasets can be indexed.
More recently, scalability has become a pressing issue
for handling data lakes that consists of most datasets in a
large company. Google Data Search (G OODS ) [20] is a system
that catalogues the metadata of tens of billions of datasets
from various storage systems within Google. G OODS infers
various metadata including owner information and prove-
nance information (by looking up job logs), analyzes the
contents of the datasets, and collects input from users. At
the core is a central catalog, which contains the metadata
and is indexed for data searching. Due to Google’s scale,
there are many technical challenges including scaling to the
number of datasets, supporting a variety of data formats
where the costs for extracting metadata may differ, updating
the catalog entries due to the frequent churn of datasets,
dealing with uncertainty in metadata discovery, comput-
ing dataset importance for search ranking, and recovering
dataset semantics that are missing. To ﬁnd datasets, users
can use keywords queries on the G OODS frontend and view
proﬁle pages of the datasets that appear in the search results.
In addition, users can track the provenance of a dataset to
see which datasets were used to create the given dataset and
those that rely on it.
Finally, expressive queries are also important for search-
ing a data lake. While G OODS scales, one downside is that
it only supports simple keyword queries. This approach is
similar to keyword search in databases [76], [77], but the
purpose is to ﬁnd datasets instead of tuples. The D ATA
CIVILIZER system [21], [22] complements G OODS by focus-
ing more on the discovery aspect of datasets. Speciﬁcally,
DATA CIVILIZER consists of a module for building a linkage
graph of data. Assuming that datasets have schema, the
nodes in the linkage graph are columns of tables while
edges are relationships like primary key-foreign key (PK-
FK) relationships. A data discovery module then supports
a rich set of discovery queries on the linkage graph, which
can help users more easily discover the relevant datasets.
DATARAMAN [23] specializes in extracting structured data
from semi-structured log datasets in data lakes automati-
cally by learning patterns. A URUM [78], [79] supports data
discovery queries on semantically-linked datasets.
Web As the Web contains large numbers of structured
datasets, there have been signiﬁcant efforts to automati-cally extract the useful ones [32]–[34]. One of the most
successful systems is WebTables [24], [25], which automat-
ically extracts structured data that is published online in
the form of HTML tables. For example, WebTables extracts
all Wikipedia infoboxes. Initially, about 14.1 billion HTML
tables are collected from the Google search web crawl. Then
a classiﬁer is applied to determine which tables can be
viewed as relational database tables. Each relational table
consists of a schema that describes the columns and a set
of tuples. In comparison to the above data lake systems,
WebTables collects structured data from the Web.
As Web data tends to be much more diverse than say
those in a corporate environment, the table extraction tech-
niques have been extended in multiple ways as well. One
direction is to extend table extraction beyond identifying
HTML tags by extracting relational data in the form of ver-
tical tables and lists and leveraging knowledge bases [27],
[28]. Table searching also evolved where, in addition to key-
word searching, row-subset queries, entity-attribute queries,
and column search were introduced [29]. Finally, techniques
for enhancing the tables [30], [31] were proposed where
entities or attribute values are added to make the tables
more complete.
Recently, a service called Google Dataset Search [26]
was launched for searching repositories of datasets on the
Web. The motivation is that there are thousands of data
repositories on the Web that contain millions of datasets that
are not easy to search. Dataset Search lets dataset providers
describe their datasets using various metadata (e.g., author,
publication date, how the data was collected, and terms
for using the data) so that they become more searcheable.
In comparison to the fully-automatic WebTables, dataset
providers may need to do some manual work, but have
the opportunity to make their datasets more searcheable.
In comparison to G OODS , Dataset Search targets the Web
instead of a data lake.
2.2 Data Augmentation
Another approach to acquiring data is to augment exist-
ing datasets with external data. In the machine learning
community, adding pre-trained embeddings is a common
way to increase the features to train on. In the data man-
agement community, entity augmentation techniques have
been proposed to further enrich existing entity information.
Data integration is a broad topic and can be considered
as data augmentation if we are extending existing datasets
with newly-acquired ones.
2.2.1 Deriving Latent Semantics
A common data augmentation is to derive latent semantics
from data. A popular technique is to generate and use
embeddings that represent words, entities, or knowledge. In
particular, word embeddings have been successfully used to
solve many problems in natural language processing (NLP).
Word2vec [35] is a seminal work where, given a text corpus,
a word is represented by a vector of real numbers that
captures the linguistic context of the word in the corpus. The
word vectors can be generated by training a shallow two-
layer neural network to reconstruct the surrounding words
in the corpus. There are two possible models for training