13
can be used as seed labels for distant supervision [156]
when generating weak labels. It is worth mentioning that
fact extraction roots from the broader topic of informa-
tion extraction where the goal is to extract structured data
from the Web [157]. Early work include RoadRunner [139],
which compares HTML pages to generates wrappers and
KnowItAll [140], which uses extraction rules and a search
engine to identify and rank facts. Since then, the subsequent
works have become more sophisticated and also attempt to
organize the extract facts into knowledge bases.
We now focus on fact extraction techniques for knowl-
edge bases. If precision is critically important, then manual
curation should be part of the knowledge base construc-
tion as in Freebase [131] and Google Knowledge Graph.
Otherwise, the extraction techniques depend on the data
source. YAGO [132], [133] extracts facts from Wikipedia
using classes in WordNet. Ollie [134], ReVerb [135], and
ReNoun [136] and open information extraction systems
that apply patterns to Web text. Knowledge Vault [137]
also extracts from Web content, but combines facts from
text, tabular data, page structure, and human annotations.
Biperpedia [138] extracts the attributes of entities from a
query stream and Web text.
The Never-Ending Language Learner (NELL) sys-
tem [141], [142] continuously extracts structured in-
formation from the unstructured Web and constructs
a knowledge base that consists of entities and re-
lationships. Initially, NELL starts with a seed on-
tology, which contains entities of classes (e.g., per-
son, fruit, and emotion) and relationships among
the entities (e.g., playsOnTeam (athlete; sportsTeam )
andplaysInstrument (musician; instrument )). NELL an-
alyzes hundreds of millions of Web pages and identiﬁes
new entities in the given classes as well as entity pairs of
the relationships by matching patterns on their surrounding
phrases. The resulting entities and relationships can then be
used as the next training data for constructing even more
patterns. NELL has been collecting facts continuously since
2010. The extraction techniques can be viewed as distant
supervision generating weak labels.
4 U SING EXISTING DATA AND MODELS
An alternative approach to acquiring new data and labeling
it is to improve the labeling of any existing datasets or
improving the model training. This approach makes sense
for a number of scenarios. First, it may be difﬁcult to
ﬁnd new datasets because the application is too novel or
non-trivial for others to have produced datasets. Second,
simply adding more data may not signiﬁcantly improve
the model’s accuracy anymore. In this case, re-labeling or
cleaning the existing data may be the faster way to increase
the accuracy. Alternatively, the model training can be made
more robust to noise and bias, or the model can be trained
from an existing model using transfer learning techniques.
In the following sections, we explore techniques for im-
proving existing labels and improving existing models. The
techniques are summarized in Table 3.Task Techniques
Improve DataData Cleaning [158]–[166]
Re-labeling [119]
Improve ModelRobust Against Noise [167]–[171]
Transfer Learning [172]–[178]
TABLE 3: A classiﬁcation of techniques for improving exist-
ing data and models.
4.1 Improving Existing Data
A major problem in machine learning is that the data
can be noisy and the labels incorrect. This problem occurs
frequently in practice, so production machine learning plat-
forms like TensorFlow Extended (TFX) [179] have separate
components [180] to reduce data errors as much as possible
though analysis and validation. In case the labels are also
noisy, re-labeling the examples becomes necessary as well.
We explore recent advances in data cleaning with a focus on
machine learning and then techniques for re-labeling.
4.1.1 Data Cleaning
It is common for the data itself to be noisy. For example,
some values may be out of range (e.g., a latitude value is
beyond [-90, 90]) or use different units by mistake (e.g., some
intervals are in hours while other are in minutes). There
is a heavy literature on various integrity constraints (e.g.,
domain constraints, referential integrity constraints, and
functional dependencies) that can improve data quality as
well. HoloClean [158] is a state-of-art data cleaning system
that uses quality rules, value correlations, and reference data
to build a probabilistic model that captures how the data
was generated. HoloClean then generates a probabilistic
program for repairing the data. In addition, various inter-
active data cleaning tools [162]–[165] have been proposed to
convert data into a better form for machine learning.
An interesting line of recent work is cleaning techniques
with the explicit intention of improving machine learning
results. ActiveClean [159] is a model training framework
that iteratively suggests samples of data to clean based
on how much the cleaning improves the model accuracy
and the likelihood that the data is dirty. An analyst can
then perform transformations and ﬁltering to clean each
sample. ActiveClean treats the training and cleaning as a
form of stochastic gradiant descent and uses convex-loss
models (SVMs, linear and logistic regression) to guarantee
global solutions for clean models. BoostClean [160] solves an
important class of inconsistencies where an attribute value
is outside an allowed domain. BoostClean takes as input
a dataset and a set of functions that can detect these errors
and repair functions that can ﬁx them. Each pair of detection
and repair functions can produce a new model trained
on the cleaned data. BoostClean uses statistical boosting
to ﬁnd the best ensemble of pairs that maximize the ﬁnal
model’s accuracy. Recently, TARS [161] was proposed to
solve the problem of cleaning crowdsourced labels using
oracles. TARS provides two pieces of advice. First, given
test data with noisy labels, it uses an estimation technique to
predict how well the model may perform on the true labels.
The estimation is shown to be unbiased, and conﬁdence
intervals are computed to bound the error. Second, given