1
A Survey on Data Collection for
Machine Learning
A Big Data - AI Integration Perspective
Yuji Roh, Geon Heo, Steven Euijong Whang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Data collection is a major bottleneck in machine learning and an active research topic in multiple communities. There are
largely two reasons data collection has recently become a critical issue. First, as machine learning is becoming more widely-used, we
are seeing new applications that do not necessarily have enough labeled data. Second, unlike traditional machine learning, deep
learning techniques automatically generate features, which saves feature engineering costs, but in return may require larger amounts
of labeled data. Interestingly, recent research in data collection comes not only from the machine learning, natural language, and
computer vision communities, but also from the data management community due to the importance of handling large amounts of data.
In this survey, we perform a comprehensive study of data collection from a data management point of view. Data collection largely
consists of data acquisition, data labeling, and improvement of existing data or models. We provide a research landscape of these
operations, provide guidelines on which technique to use when, and identify interesting research challenges. The integration of
machine learning and data management for data collection is part of a larger trend of Big data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) integration
and opens many opportunities for new research.
Index Terms —data collection, data acquisition, data labeling, machine learning
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
WEare living in exciting times where machine learning
is having a profound inﬂuence on a wide range of
applications from text understanding, image and speech
recognition, to health care and genomics. As a striking
example, deep learning techniques are known to perform
on par with ophthalmologists on identifying diabetic eye
diseases in images [1]. Much of the recent success is due
to better computation infrastructure and large amounts of
training data.
Among the many challenges in machine learning, data
collection is becoming one of the critical bottlenecks. It
is known that the majority of the time for running ma-
chine learning end-to-end is spent on preparing the data,
which includes collecting, cleaning, analyzing, visualizing,
and feature engineering. While all of these steps are time-
consuming, data collection has recently become a challenge
due to the following reasons.
First, as machine learning is used in new applications,
it is usually the case that there is not enough training
data. Traditional applications like machine translation or
object detection enjoy massive amounts of training data that
have been accumulated for decades. On the other hand,
more recent applications have little or no training data. As
an illustration, smart factories are increasingly becoming
automated where product quality control is performed with
machine learning. Whenever there is a new product or a
new defect to detect, there is little or no training data to
start with. The na ¨ıve approach of manual labeling may not
be feasible because it is expensive and requires domain
Y. Roh, G. Heo, and S. E. Whang are with the School of Electrical
Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
E-mail:fyuji.roh, geon.heo, swhang g@kaist.ac.kr
Corresponding author: S. E. Whangexpertise. This problem applies to any novel application that
beneﬁts from machine learning.
Moreover, as deep learning [2] becomes popular, there
is even more need for training data. In traditional machine
learning, feature engineering is one of the most challenging
steps where the user needs to understand the application
and provide features used for training models. Deep learn-
ing, on the other hand, can automatically generate features,
which saves us of feature engineering, which is a signiﬁcant
part of data preparation. However, in return, deep learning
may require larger amounts of training data to perform
well [3].
As a result, there is a pressing need of accurate and
scalable data collection techniques in the era of Big data,
which motivates us to conduct a comprehensive survey
of the data collection literature from a data management
point of view. There are largely three methods for data
collection. First, if the goal is to share and search new
datasets, then data acquisition techniques can be used to
discover, augment, or generate datasets. Second, once the
datasets are available, various data labeling techniques can
be used to label the individual examples. Finally, instead of
labeling new datasets, it may be better to improve existing
data or train on top of trained models. These three methods
are not necessarily distinct and can be used together. For
example, one could search and label more datasets while
improving existing ones.
An interesting observation is that the data collection
techniques come not only from the machine learning com-
munity (including natural language processing and com-
puter vision, which traditionally use machine learning heav-
ily), but have also been studied for decades by the data
management community, mainly under the names of data
science and data analytics. Figure 1 shows an overview ofarXiv:1811.03402v2  [cs.LG]  12 Aug 2019