14
training data with noisy labels, TARS determines which
examples to send to an oracle in order to maximize the
expected model improvement of cleaning each noisy label.
More recently, MLC LEAN [166] has been proposed to inte-
grate three data operations: traditional data cleaning, model
unfairness mitigation where the goal is to remove data bias
that causes model fairness, and data sanitization where the
goal is to remove data poisoning.
4.1.2 Re-labeling
Trained models are only as good as their training data, and
it is important to obtain high quality data labels. Simply
labeling more data may not improve the model accuracy
further. Indeed, Sheng et al. [119] shows that, if the labels
are noisy, then the model accuracy plateaus from some point
and does not increase further, no matter how many more
labeling is done. The solution is to improve the quality of
existing labels. The authors show that repeated labeling us-
ing workers of certain individual qualities can signiﬁcantly
improve model accuracy where a straightforward round
robin approach already give substantial improvements, and
being more selective in labeling gives even better results.
4.2 Improving Models
In addition to improving the data, there are also ways
to improve the model training itself. Making the model
training more robust against noise or bias is an active area
of research. Another popular approach is to use transfer
learning where previously-trained models are used as a
starting point to train the current model.
4.2.1 Robust Against Noise and Bias
A common scenario in machine learning is that there is
a large number of noisy or even adversarial labels and
a relatively smaller number of clean labels. Simply dis-
carding the noisy labels will result in reduced training
data, which is not desirable for complex models. Hence,
there has been extensive research (see the survey [181])
on how to make the model training still use noisy labels
by becoming more robust. For speciﬁc techniques, Xiao et
al. [167] propose a general framework for training convolu-
tional neural networks on images with a small number of
clean labels and many noisy labels. The idea is to model
the relationships between images, class labels, and label
noises with a probabilistic graphical model and integrate
it into the model training. Label noise is categorized into
two types: confusing noise, which is caused by confusing
content in the images, and pure random noise, which is
caused by technical bugs like mismatches between images
and their surrounding text. The true labels and noise types
are treated as latent variables, and an EM algorithm is used
for inference. Webly supervised learning [168] is a technique
for training a convolutional neural network on clean and
noisy images on the Web. First, the model is trained on top-
ranked images from search engines, which tend to be clean
because they are highly-ranked, but also biased in the sense
that objects tends to be centered in the image with a clean
background. Then relationships are discovered among the
clean images, which are then used to adapt the model to
more noisier images that are harder to classify. This methodsuggests that it is worth training on easy and hard data
separately.
Goodfellow et al. [171] take a different approach where
they explain why machine learning models including neu-
ral networks may misclassify adversarial examples. While
previous research attempts to explain this phenomenon by
focusing on nonlinearity and overﬁtting, the authors show
that it is the model’s linear behavior in high-dimensional
spaces that makes it vulnerable. That is, making many small
changes on the features of an example can result in a large
change to the output prediction. As a result, generating
large amounts of adversarial examples becomes easier using
linear perturbation.
Even if the labels themselves are clean, it may be the
case that the labels are imbalanced. SMOTE [170] performs
over-sampling for minority classes that need more exam-
ples. Simply replicating examples may lead to overﬁtting, so
the over-sampling is done by generating synthetic examples
using the minority examples and their nearest neighbors.
He and Garcia [169] provide a comprehensive survey on
learning from imbalanced data.
4.2.2 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a popular approach for training models
when there is not enough training data or time to train from
scratch. A common technique is to start from an existing
model that is well trained (also called a source task ), one
can incrementally train a new model (a target task ) that
already performs well. For example, a convolutional neural
networks like AlexNet [182] and VGGNet [183] can be used
to train a model for a different, but related vision problem.
Recently, Google announced TensorFlow Hub [174], which
enables users to easily re-use an existing model to train an
accurate model, even with a small dataset. Also, Google
Cloud AutoML [6] provides transfer learning as a service.
From a data management perspective, an interesting ques-
tion is how these existing tools can be extended to index the
metadata of models and provide search as a service, just like
for datasets. The metadata for models may be quite different
than metadata for data because one needs to determine if
a model can be used for transfer learning in her own ap-
plication. In addition to using pre-trained models, another
popular technique mainly used in Computer Vision is few-
shot learning [175] where the goal is to extend existing
models to handle new classes using zero or more examples.
Since transfer learning is primarily a machine learning topic
that does not signiﬁcantly involve data management, we
only summarize the high-level ideas based on surveys [172],
[173]. There are studies of transfer learning techniques in
the context of NLP [176], Computer Vision [177], and deep
learning [184] as well.
An early survey of transfer learning [172] identiﬁes three
main research issues in transfer learning: what to transfer,
how to transfer, and when to transfer. That is, we need to
decide what part of knowledge can be transferred, what
methods should be used to transfer the knowledge, and
whether transferring this knowledge is appropriate and
does not have any negative effect. Inductive transfer learning
is used when the source task and target task are different
while the two domains may or may not be the same. Here a
task can be categorizing a document while a domain could