16
may have to change dynamically as well. Second, many
data discovery tools rely on dataset owners to annotate their
datasets for better discovery, but more automatic techniques
for understanding and extracting metadata from the data
are needed.
While most of the data collection work assumes that the
model training comes after the data collection, another im-
portant avenue is to augment or improve the data based on
how the model performs. While there is a heavy literature
on model interpretation [185], [186], it is not clear how to
address feedback on the data level. In the model fairness
literature [187], one approach to reducing unfairness is to ﬁx
the data. In data cleaning, ActiveClean and BoostClean are
interesting approaches for ﬁxing the data to improve model
accuracy. A key challenge is analyzing the model, which
becomes harder as models become more complicated.
Performance Tradeoff While traditional labeling techniques
focus on accuracy, there is a recent push towards gen-
erating large amounts of weak labels. We need to better
understand the tradeoffs of accuracy versus scalability to
make informed decisions on which approach to use when.
For example, simply having more weak labels does not
necessarily mean the model’s accuracy will eventually reach
a perfect accuracy. At some point, it may be worth investing
in humans or using transfer learning to make additional
improvements. Such decisions can be made through some
trial and error, but an interesting question is whether there
is a more systematic way to do such evaluations.
Crowdsourcing Despite the many efforts in crowdsourcing,
leveraging humans is still a non-trivial task. Dealing with
humans involves designing the right tasks and interfaces,
ensuring that the worker quality is good enough, and setting
the right price for tasks. The recent data programming
paradigm introduces a new set of challenges where work-
ers now have to implement labeling functions instead of
providing labels themselves. One idea is to improve the
quality of such collaborative programming by making the
programming of labeling functions drastically easier, say by
introducing libraries or templates for programming.
Empirical comparison of techniques Although we showed a
ﬂowchart on when to use which techniques, it is far from
complete, as many factors are application-speciﬁc and can
only be determined by looking at the data and application.
For example, if the model training can be done with a small
number of labels, then we may not have to perform data
labeling using crowdsourcing. In addition, the estimated
human efforts in labeling and data programming may not
follow any theoretical model in practice. For example, hu-
mans may ﬁnd programming for certain applications much
more difﬁcult and time-consuming than other applications
depending on their expertise. Hence, there needs to be more
empirical research on the effectiveness of the techniques.
Generalizing and integrating techniques We observed that
many data collection techniques were application or data
type speciﬁc and were often small parts of a larger research.
As machine learning becomes widely used in just about any
application, there needs to be more effort in generalizing
the techniques to other problems. In data labeling, most ofthe research effort has been focused on classiﬁcation tasks
and much less on regression tasks. An interesting question
is which classiﬁcation techniques can also be extended to
regression. It is also worth exploring if application-speciﬁc
techniques can be generalized further. For example, the
NELL system continuously extracts facts from the Web in-
deﬁnitely. This idea can possibly be applied to collecting any
type of data from any source, although the technical details
may differ. Finally, given the variety of techniques for data
collection, there needs to be more research on end-to-end
solutions that combine techniques for data acquisition, data
labeling, and improvements of existing data and models.
7 C ONCLUSION
As machine learning becomes more widely used, it becomes
more important to acquire large amounts of data and label
data, especially for state-of-the-art neural networks. Tradi-
tionally, the machine learning, natural language processing,
and computer vision communities has contributed to this
problem – primarily on data labeling techniques including
semi-supervised learning and active learning. Recently, in
the era of Big data, the data management community is also
contributing to numerous subproblems in data acquisition,
data labeling, and improvement of existing data. In this
survey, we have investigated the research landscape of how
all these technique complement each other and have pro-
vided guidelines on deciding which technique can be used
when. Finally, we have discussed interesting data collection
challenges that remain to be addressed. In the future, we
expect the integration of Big data and AI to happen not only
in data collection, but in all aspects of machine learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Engineering Research
Center Program through the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean Government MSIT
(NRF-2018R1A5A1059921), by SK Telecom, and by a Google
AI Focused Research Award.
REFERENCES
[1] “Deep learning for detection of diabetic eye disease,”
https://research.googleblog.com/2016/11/deep-learning-
for-detection-of-diabetic.html.
[2] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning . The
MIT Press, 2016.
[3] S. H. Bach, B. D. He, A. Ratner, and C. R ´e, “Learning the structure
of generative models without labeled data,” in ICML , 2017, pp.
273–282.
[4] N. Polyzotis, S. Roy, S. E. Whang, and M. Zinkevich, “Data
lifecycle challenges in production machine learning: A survey,”
SIGMOD Rec. , vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 17–28, Jun. 2018.
[5] ——, “Data management challenges in production machine
learning,” in SIGMOD , 2017, pp. 1723–1726.
[6] “Google cloud automl,” https://cloud.google.com/automl/.
[7] “Microsoft custom vision,” https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
services/cognitive-services/custom-vision-service/.
[8] “Amazon sagemaker,” https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/.
[9] A. Bhardwaj, A. Deshpande, A. J. Elmore, D. Karger, S. Madden,
A. Parameswaran, H. Subramanyam, E. Wu, and R. Zhang, “Col-
laborative data analytics with datahub,” PVLDB , vol. 8, no. 12,
pp. 1916–1919, Aug. 2015.