12
ory, which makes the algorithms applicable to any classiﬁer
and also enables embarassingly-parallel processing.
Regression In comparison to crowdsourcing research for
classiﬁcation tasks, less attention has been given to regres-
sion tasks. Marcus et al. [123] solves the problem of selec-
tivity estimation in a crowdsourced database. The goal is to
estimate the fraction of records that satisfy some property
by asking workers questions.
3.3 Weak supervision
As machine learning is used in a wider range of applica-
tions, it is mostly the case that there is not enough labeled
data. For example, in a smart factory setting, any new
product will have no labels for training a model for quality
control. As a result, weak supervision techniques [151]–
[153] have become increasingly popular where the idea is
to semi-automatically generate large quantities of labels that
are not as accurate as manual labels, but good enough for
the trained model to obtain a reasonably-high accuracy.
This approach is especially useful when there are large
amounts of data, and manual labeling becomes infeasible.
In the next sections, we discuss the recently proposed data
programming paradigm and fact extraction techniques.
3.3.1 Data Programming
As data labeling at scale becomes more important especially
for deep learning applications, data programming [126] has
been proposed as a solution for generating large amounts
of weak labels using multiple labeling functions instead of
individual labeling. Figure 5 illustrates how data program-
ming can be used for Sally’s smart factory application. A
labeling function can be any computer program that either
generates a label for an example or refrains to do so. For
example, a labeling function that checks if a tweet has a
positive sentiment may check if certain positive words ap-
pear in the text. Since a single labeling function by itself may
not be accurate enough or not be able to generate labels for
all examples, multiple labeling functions are implemented
and combined into a generative model, which is then used
to generate large amounts of weak labels with reasonable
quality. Alternatively, voting methods like majority voting
can be used to combine the labeling functions. Finally, a
noise-aware discriminative model is trained on the weak
labels. Data programming has been implemented in the
state-of-the-art Snorkel system [127], which is becoming
increasingly popular in the industry [128], [129].
Data programming has advantages both in terms of
model accuracy and usability. A key observation for gener-
ating weak labels is that training a discriminative model on
large amounts of weak labels may result in higher accuracy
than training with fewer manual labels. In terms of usability,
implementing labeling functions can be an intuitive process
for humans compared to feature engineering in traditional
machine learning [154].
What makes data programming effective is the way it
combines multiple labeling functions into the generative
model by ﬁtting a probabilistic graphical model. A na ¨ıve
approach to combine labeling functions is to take a majority
vote. However, this approach cannot handle pathological
cases where many labeling functions are near identical,
def lf1(x): ... 
def lf2(x): ... 
def lf3(x): ... <Label Function Generation> 
Generative 
Model 
Majority 
Voting Weak 
Labels <Crowd> 
Discriminative 
Model Fig. 5: A workﬂow of using data programming for a smart
factory application. In this scenario, Sally is using crowd-
sourcing to annotate defects on component images. Next,
the annotations can be automatically converted to labeling
functions. Then the labeling functions are combined either
into a generative model or using majority voting. Finally,
the combined model generates weak labels that are used to
train a discriminative model.
which defeats the purpose of majority voting. Instead, la-
beling functions that are more correlated with each other
will have less inﬂuence on the predicted label. In addition,
labeling functions that are outliers are also trained to have
less inﬂuence in order to cancel out the noise. Theoretical
analysis [3] shows that, if the labeling functions are reason-
ably accurate, then the predictions made by the generative
model becomes arbitrarily close to the true labels.
Several systems have been developed for data program-
ming. DeepDive [124] is a precursor of data programming
and supports fast knowledge base construction on dark
data using information extraction. DeepDive effectively uses
humans to extract features, implement supervision rules
using a declarative language (similar to labeling func-
tions), and supports incremental maintenance of inference.
DDLite [125] is the ﬁrst system to use data program-
ming and supports rapid prototyping of labeling functions
through an interactive interface. The primary application
is information extraction, and DDLite has been used to
extract chemicals, diseases, and anatomical named entities.
Compared to DeepDive, it has a simpler Python syntax
and does not require complex setup involving databases.
Snorkel [127], [155] is the most recent system for data pro-
gramming. Compared to DDLite, Snorkel is a full-ﬂedged
product that is widely used in the industry. Snorkel en-
ables users to use weak labels from all available weak
label sources, supports any type of classiﬁer, and provides
rapid results in response to the user’s input. More recently,
Snorkel has been extended to solve massively multi-task
learning [130].
Data programming is designed for classiﬁcation and
does not readily support regression. To make an extension to
regression, the labeling functions must return real numbers
instead of discrete values. In addition, the probabilistic
graphical model used for training generative models must
be able to return a continuous distribution of possible values
for labels.
3.3.2 Fact Extraction
Another way to generate weak labels is use fact extraction.
Knowledge bases contain facts that are extracted from var-
ious sources including the Web. A fact could describe an
attribute of an entity (e.g., hGermany, capital , Berlini). The
facts can be considered positively-labeled examples, which