12 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
The CNN approaches for medical image classification 
discussed above are summarized in Table  10.
5  CNN applications in medical image 
segmentation
CNNs have been applied to implement efficient segmen-
tation of images of brain tumors, hearts, breasts, retina, 
fetal abdomen, stromal and epithelial tissues.
5.1  Brain tumors
MRI is used to obtain detailed images of the brain to diag -
nose tumors. Automatic segmentation of a brain tumor 
is very challenging because it involves the extraction of 
high level features.
5.1.1  Small kernel CNN
Patch-wise training and use of small filter sizes ( 3×3 ) 
was proposed for segmentation of gliomas in [54]. This 
provided an advantage of deep architecture, while retain-
ing the same receptive fields. Two separate models were 
trained for high and low gliomas. High glioma model 
consisted of eight conv layers and three dense layers. 
Low glioma model contained four conv layers and three 
dense layers. Maxpooling was used along with dropout for 
dense layers. It ranked fourth in the BRATS-2015 chal-
lenge. Data augmentation was achieved by rotation which 
enhanced the performance of segmentation of gliomas.5.1.2  Fully blown CNN
Fully blown MRI two-dimensional images enhances perfor -
mance of segmentation of sub-cortical human brain struc-
ture. This was shown in [66]. The proposed model applied 
Markov random field on CNN output to impose volumetric 
homogeneity to the final results. It outperformed several 
state-of-the-art methods.
5.1.3  Multipath CNN
Two pathways, one for convolution and the other for decon-
volution, enhances segmentation output was shown in [8 ]. 
The model was used for automatic MS lesions segmenta-
tion. The model had convolutional pathway consisting of 
alternating conv, pool layers, and a deconvolutional pathway 
consisting of alternate deconv layer and unpooling layer. 
The pretraining was performed by convolutional RBMs 
(convRBM). Both pretraining and fine training were per -
formed on a highly optimized GPU-accelerated implemen-
tation of three-dimensional convRBMs and convolutional 
encoder networks (CEN). It was compared with five publicly 
available methods and established as comparison reference 
points. The model performance was evaluated using evalu-
ation metrics DSC, TPR and FPR. TPR and FPR achieved 
were comparatively better than the previous models devel-
oped. However, it achieved lesser DSC in comparison to 
other methods.
5.1.4  Cascaded CNN
In case of imbalanced label distributions, two phase training 
could be used. Global contextual features and local detailed 
features can be learned simultaneously by two-pathway 
Table 10  A summary of CNN applications in medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Organ Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Performance metric
[19] Brain Geometric normalization 
of CT imagesConv ×5 , (conv + drop-
out)  ×3 , fusion with 
3-D convoluted data3-D datasets from 282 
subjects (51 with AD, 
118 with lesions, 117 
normal)Accuracy 86.7%, 78.9%  and 
95.6%  for AD, lesion and 
normal class
[63] Brain Motion correction, 
skull stripping, spatial 
smoothingLeNet ADNI dataset Accuracy 96.86%
[62] Brain Data augmentation Input cascaded CNN for 
segmentation, VGG-19 
with transfer learningRadiopedia and brain 
tumorAccuracy 94.58%  , sensitiv -
ity 88.41%  , specificity 
96.58%
[57] Eye, retinopathy Color normalization, 
image size reduced to 
512Conv ×10 , FC ×3 with 
softmax classifierKaggle Specificity 95% but less 
sensitivity 30%
[82] Digestive organs (Conv, maxpool) ×3 , FC 
×2 , mini batch stochastic 
gradient descentReal clinical data of wire-
less capsule endoscopy 
imagesAccuracy 95%