4 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
as miss. The sum of correct and incorrect predictions is rep-
resented as T and expressed as in (5 ).
Performance metrics can be determined with the help of 
confusion matrix and are given in Table  2.
3  A brief introduction to CNNs
Image understanding by animals is a very fascinating pro-
cess, and a very simple task for them. But for a machine, to 
understand an image, there are lot of hidden complexities 
during the process. What animals feel is the eyes capturing (5) T=TP+TN+FP+FN.the image, which is processed by the neurons and sent to the 
brain for interpretation. CNN is a deep learning algorithm 
inspired by the visual cortex of animal brain [30] and aims 
to imitate the visual machinery of animals. CNNs repre-
sents a quantum leap in the field of image understanding, 
involving image classification, segmentation, localization, 
detection etc. The efficacy of CNNs in image understanding 
is the main reason of its abundant use. CNNs are made of 
convolutions having learnable weights and biases similar to 
neurons (nerve cells) of the animal. Convolutional layers, 
activation functions, pooling and fully-connected layers are 
the core building blocks of CNNs, as depicted in Fig.  1. Very 
brief introduction to CNNs has been presented in this paper. 
Detailed discussions on CNNs are presented in [9 , 41].
3.1  Convolution layers (Conv layers)
The visual cortex of the animal brain is made of neuronal 
cells which extract features of the images. Each neuronal 
cell extracts different features, which help in image under -
standing. The conv layer is modeled over the neuronal cells 
and its objective is to extract features, such as edges, colors, Table 1  Confusion matrix
Total test samples Predicted positive Predicted negative
Actual positive True positives ( TP) False negatives ( FN)
Actual negative False positives ( FP) True negatives ( TN)
Table 2  Performance evaluation metrics for image processing
Evaluation metric To determine Formula Preferred value
Accuracy Overall how often the result is trueTP+TN
THigh (≈1)
Misclassification result (error rate) Overall how often the result is falseFP−FN
TLow (≈0)
True positive rate ( TPR ) (recall or sensitivity) When it is actually true, how often does it predict trueTP
FN+TPHigh (≈1)
False positive rate ( FPR) When its actually false, how often does it predict trueFP
FP+TNLow (≈0)
False negative rate ( FNR)FN
FN+TPLow (≈0)
Specificity When its actually false, how often does it predict falseTN
FP+TNHigh (≈1)
Precision (positive predictive value ( PPV)) When it predicts true, how often is it correct?TP
FP+TPHigh (≈1)
F-Score (Dice similarity coefficient) Harmonic mean of recall and precision. 2×PPV×TPR
PPV+TPRHigh (≈1)
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) Commonly used graph to summarizes the perfor -
mance of a classifier over all possible thresholds.Plot of recall verses FPR High (≈1)
Area under ROC (AUC) The area under ROC Plots TPR versus FPR High (≈1)
Fig. 1  Building blocks of a 
CNN