9 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
4.3.1  CUDA ConvNet CNN
Preprocessing using histogram equalization and zero-mean 
with unit variance increases classification accuracy by an 
additional 10% with augmentation was proposed in [7 ]. The 
experiments also demonstrate that pretraining, followed by 
fine tuning boosts performance. It achieved an average clas-
sification accuracy of 80.3%  which was greater than the pre-
vious best of 75.6%  . The authors used Caffe library [33] and 
CUDA ConvNet model architecture to extract CNN-based 
features for classification of HEp-2 cells.
4.3.2  Six‑layer CNN
Preprocessing and augmentation enhanced the mean clas-
sification accuracy of HEp-2 cell images and was shown 
in [21]. The framework consisted of three stages of image 
preprocessing, network training and feature extraction with 
classification. Mean classification accuracy of 96.7%  on 
ICPR-2012 dataset was obtained. The CNN approaches for 
HEp-2 cell classification are summarized in Table  6.
4.4  Breast tumors
Breast cancer is the most common cancer that affects women 
across the world. It can be detected by the analysis of mam-
mographs. Two radiologists independently reading the 
same mammogram has been advocated to overcome any 
misjudgement.
4.4.1  Stopping monitoring CNN
Stopping monitoring to reduce the computation time is 
proposed in [ 52]. Stopping monitoring was performed 
using AUC on validation set. The model extracted region 
of interest (ROI) by cropping. The images were augmented 
to increase the number of samples and also to prevent over -
fitting. The CNN model proposed was for classification of 
breast tumors. The result was compared against the state-
of-the-art image descriptors HOG and HOG divergence. The proposed method resulted in AUC of 82.2%  compared 
to 78.7%  for other methods.
4.4.2  Ensemble CNN
Fine tuning enhanced the performance in the case of lim-
ited dataset was proposed in [34]. The proposed model 
was similar to AlexNet and was pretrained on imagenet, 
followed by fine tuning on breast images due to short-
age of breast images. The middle and high level features 
were extracted from different layers of the network and fed 
into SVM classifiers for training. The model classified the 
breast masses into malignant and benign. Due to extrac-
tion of efficient features by deep network, simple classifier 
also resulted in accuracy of 96.7%  . The proposed method 
was compared against bag-of-words, HOG and SIFT and 
it outperformed all of them.
4.4.3  Semi‑supervised CNN
CNN can also be used in scenarios involving sparse 
labeled data and abundant unlabeled data. To overcome 
the sparse labeled data problem, a new graph based semi 
supervised learning techniques for breast cancer diagno-
sis was proposed in [73]. For removal of redundancies 
and feature correlations, dimensionality reduction was 
employed. The method used four modules, feature extrac-
tion to extract 21 features from breast masses, data weigh-
ing to minimize the influence of noisy data and division of 
co-training data labeling followed by the CNN. It involved 
sub patches extraction of ROIs which were input to three 
pairs of conv layers, maxpooling and FC layer. Three mod-
els CNN, SVM and ANN are compared. The AUC for 
CNN for mixture of labeled and unlabeled data was 88% 
compared to 85% of SVM and 84% of ANN and accuracy 
for CNN with mixed data was 82% compared to 80% for 
SVM and 80% for ANN. The CNN approaches for breast 
tumor classification are summarized in Table  7.
Table 6  A summary of CNN applications in HEp-2 cell classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Perfromance metric
[7] Augmented by affine transform 
and intensity variations, 
green channel images usedConv, maxpool, ReLU, conv, 
avgpool, ReLU, conv, 
avgpool, FC with dropout, 
weight decay, softmax with 
multinomial logistic regres-
sionICPR 2014 ICPR 2012 benchmark and 
winners modelAverage classifica-
tion accuracy 81%
[21] Normalized using zero mean 
and unit variance, and 
rotated(Conv, tanh, maxpool)  ×3 , 
FC ×2 , softmax regression, 
outputs six classesICPR 2014 ICPR 2012 classification 
contestantsAccuracy 96.17%