11 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
4.7  Colon cancer
4.7.1  Ensemble CNN
Usage of small patches increased the amount of training 
data and localized the analysis to small nuclei in images. 
This enhanced the performance of detecting and classify -
ing nuclei in H&E stained histopathology images of colo-
rectal adenocarcinoma. This was proposed in [71]. The 
model also demonstrated locality sensitive deep learning 
approach with neighboring ensemble predictor (NEP) in 
conjunction with a standard softmax CNN and eliminated 
need of segmentation. The model used dropout to avoid 
overfitting. The model obtained an AUC of 91.7%  and 
F-score of 78.4%
The CNN approaches for colon cancer classification 
are summarized in Table  9.
4.8  Brain disorders
Alzheimer’s disease causes the destruction of brain cells 
leading to memory loss. Classification of Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) has been challenging since it involves selec-
tion of discriminative features.4.8.1  Fused CNN
Fusion of two-dimensional CNN and three-dimensional 
CNN achieves better accuracy was demonstrated in [19]. 
Information along Z direction acts very crucial for analy -
sis of brain images and three-dimensional CNN was used 
to retain this information. Since the thickness of brain CT 
images is thicker than MRI images, geometric normalization 
of CT images were performed. Output of the last conv layer 
of two-dimensional CNN was fused with three-dimensional 
convoluted data to get three classes (Alzheimer’s, lesions, 
and healthy data). It was compared with two hand-crafted 
approaches SIFT and KAZE for accuracy and achieved bet-
ter accuracy of 86.7%, 78.9%  and 95.6%  for AD, lesion and 
normal class, respectively.
4.8.2  Input cascaded CNN
Lack of training data can be overcome by extensive aug-
mentation and fine tuning was proposed in [62]. Multi-grade 
brain tumor classification was performed by segmenting 
the tumor regions from an MR image using input cascaded 
CNN, extensive augmentation and then fine-tuned using data 
augmented. The performance was compared against state-of-
art methods. It resulted in an accuracy of 94.58%  , sensitivity 
of 88.41%  and specificity of 96.58% .Table 8  A summary of CNN applications in heart classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[40] ECG signals filtered using 
bandpass filter at 0.1-100 
Hz and digitized at 360 
Hz.One-dimensional CNN 
with conv ×3 , FC ×2MIT/BIH arrhythmia 
databaseOther existing methods Accuracy, sensitiv -
ity, specificity
[20] Image resized to 
175×200×26Two path CNN of seven 
layers (conv, ReLU, 
maxpool)  ×2 , (conv, 
ReLU)  ×2 , (conv, ReLU, 
maxpool), (conv, drop-
out) ×2Tsinghua University 
Hospital, Beijing and 
Fuzhou University Hos-
pital, ChinaSIFT, KAZE Accuracy 92.1%
Table 9  A summary of CNN applications in colon medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Comparison against Performance metric
[71] Augmented using small patches NEP with standard softmax 
CNN, ReLU, dropoutAUC 91.7%  , F-score 78.4% .
[78] Image subdivided into 80×80 
using sliding window, and 
border padding to prevent 
artifacts(Conv, maxpool) ×2 , FC ×2 , 
softmaxLinder, Bianconi, DCNN-SW-
SVM, DCNN-SW-SMCROC, AUC, accuracy
[61] Normalized by subtracting 
mean, dividing by standard 
deviation, augmented by 
flipping(Conv, pool)  ×2 , conv, FC with 
dropout, softmaxBFD, SSF, DT-CTW, MB-LBP, 
SIFTAccuracy 90.96%