13 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
architecture for brain segmentation and was proposed in 
[25]. The advantage of two-pathway was, it could recognize 
fine details of the tumor at a local scale and correct labels 
at a global scale to yield a better segmentation. Slice-by-
slice segmentation from the axial view due to less resolution 
in the third dimension was performed. The cascaded CNN 
achieved better rank than two-pathway CNN and was ranked 
second at the MICCAI BRATS-2013 challenge. The evalua-
tion metrics used were DSC, specificity and sensitivity and 
the obtained values were 79%, 81%  and 79% . The time taken 
for segmentation was between 25 s and 3 min.
5.1.5  Multiscale CNN
In case of brain tumor segmentation, a multiscale CNN 
architecture for extracting both local and global features at 
different scales was proposed in [80]. The model performed 
better due to different features extracted at various resolu-
tion. The computation time was reduced by exploiting a 
two-dimensional CNN instead of a three-dimensional CNN. 
Three patch sizes 48×48 , 28×28 and 12×12 were input to 
three CNNs for feature extraction. All the features extracted 
were input to the FC layer. Evaluation of the model was by 
DSC and accuracy. The model performance was almost as 
stable as the best method with an accuracy of nearly 90%.
5.1.6  Multipath and multiscale CNN
Twopath and multiscale architecture were also explored 
for brain lesion segmentation by [37]. The model exploited 
smaller kernels to get local neighbour information and 
employed parallel convolutional pathways for multiscale 
processing. It achieved highest accuracy when applied on 
patients with severe traumatic brain injuries. It could also 
segment small and diffused pathologies. Three-dimensional 
CNN produced accurate segmentation borders. FC three-
dimensional CRF imposed regularization constraints on 
CNN output and produced final hard segmentation labels. 
Also, due to its generic nature, it cold be applied to dif -
ferent lesion segmentation tasks with slight modifications. 
It was ranked first in the stroke lesions ISLES-SISS-2015 
challenge.
Advantages of multipath and multiscale CNN was 
exploited for automatic segmentation of analytical brain 
images in [49]. The bigger kernel was used for spatial 
information. A separate network branch was used for each 
patch size, and only the output layer was shared. Mini batch 
learning and RMSprop were used to train the network with 
ReLU and cross entropy as the cost function. Automatic 
segmentation was evaluated using the DSC and mean sur -
face distance between manual and automatic segmentation. 
It achieved accurate segmentation in terms of DSC for all tissue classes. The CNN approaches for brain segmentation 
discussed above are summarized in Table  11.
5.2  Breast cancer
Breast cancers can be predicted by automatically segmenting 
breast density and by characterizing mammographic textural 
patterns.
5.2.1  FCNN
Redundant computations in conv and max pool layers can 
be avoided by using ROI segmentation in a fast scanning 
deep CNN (FCNN). The above technique was applied for 
segmentation of histopathological breast cancer images and 
was proposed in [72]. The proposed work was compared 
against three texture classification methods namely raw pixel 
patch with large scale SVM, local binary pattern feature with 
large scale SVM and texton histogram with logistic booting. 
The evaluation metrics used were accuracy, efficiency and 
scalability. Ihe proposed method was robust to intra-class 
variance. It achieved an F-score of 85% , whereas the other 
methods delivered the maximum F-score of 75% . It took 
only 2.3 s to segment image of resolution of 1000×1000 .
5.2.2  Probability map CNN
Probability maps were explored for iterative region merg-
ing for shape initialization along with compact nucleus 
shape repository with selection-based dictionary learning 
algorithm in [ 77]. The model resulted in better automatic 
nucleus segmentation using CNN. The framework was 
tested on three types of histopathology images namely, brain 
tumor, pancreatic neuro endocrine tumor and breast cancer. 
The parameters for comparison were precision, recall and 
F-score. It achieved better performance when compared to 
SVM, RF and DBN, especially for breast cancer images. 
Pixel-wise segmentation accuracy measured using DSC, HD 
and MAD resulted in superior performance when compared 
to other methods.
5.2.3  Patch CNN
Advantages of patch-based CNN was exploited in [ 78]. The 
method also exploited super pixel method to over segment 
breast cancer H&E images into atomic images. The result was 
natural boundaries with errors being subtle and less egregious, 
whereas sliding window methods resulted in zigzag bounda-
ries. Both patch-based CNN and superpixel techniques were 
combined for segmenting and classifying the stromal and 
epithelial regions in histopathological images for detection 
of breast and colorectal cancer. The proposed model outper -
formed CNN with SVM. The comparison was done against