14 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
methods using handcrafted features. It achieved 100%  accuracy 
and Deep CNN-Ncut-SVM had better AUC than other CNN.
5.3  Eye diseases
5.3.1  Greedy CNN
The architecture of conventional CNNs was tweaked by mak -
ing the filters of the CNN learn sequentially using a greedy 
approach of boosting instead of backpropagation. Boosting 
was applied to learn diverse filters to minimize weighted clas-
sification error. The ensembling learning was proposed for 
the automatic segmentation of optic cup and optic disc from 
retinal fundus images to detect glaucoma in [81]. The model 
performed entropy sampling to identify informative points 
on landmarks such as edges, blood vessels. etc. The weight 
updates were done considering final classification error instead 
of back propagation error. The method operated on patches of 
image taken around a point. A F-score of 97.3%  was obtained 
which was comparatively better to normal CNN whose best 
F-score was 96.7% .
5.3.2  Multi label inference CNN
Retinal blood vessel segmentation was dealt as multi-label 
inference problem and solved using CNN in [16]. The model 
extracted green channel from RGB fundus image, as blood 
vessels manifest high contrast in green channel. The model 
was upsampled at the sixth layer to increase spatial dimension 
for structured output. The output of CNN model was mod-
eled as vector instead of a scalar, due to multiple labels. It 
achieved precision of 84.98%  , sensitivity of 76.91%  , specificity 
of 98.01%  , accuracy of 95.33%  and AUC of 97.44% .
5.4  Lung
5.4.1  U net
Lung segmentation and bone shadow exclusion techniques for 
analysis of lung cancer using U-net architecture is proposed in 
[23]. The images were preprocessed to eliminate bone shadow 
and a simple U-net architecture was used to segment the lung 
ROI. The results obtained were very promising and showed a 
good speed and precise segmentation. The CNN approaches 
for medical image segmentation discussed above are summa-
rized in Table  12.Table 11  A summary of CNN applications in brain medical image segmentation surveyed in Sect. 5
References Preprocessing Architecture Performance metric
[55] N4ITK bias field correction, Nyul’s intensity normalization Seven layers with conv and ReLU at 1, 3, 5, 6 and maxpool at 2 
and 4, layer seven was FC with softmaxPrecision 98.3%  and accuracy 97%
[66] Augmented by flipping and translation Shallow network, (conv, max pool layers)  ×5 . First two layer 
outputs are subsampled, five output classesDSC, Haudsroff distance, contour mean distance
[25] Removed 1% higher and 1% lower intensity, normalization Two path CNN with cascaded architecture with maxout, fol-
lowed by maxpool, softmax. optimization using stochastic 
gradient descent, regularization using L1, L2 and dropout.DSC 79% , sensitivity 79% and specificity 81%
[37] 2 pathway, 11 layers architecture called deep medic, with three-
dimensional CNN, FC three-dimensional CRF and smaller 
kernelsDSC, precision and sensitivity
[49] Classified brain tissue pixels into classes, using different kernel 
sizesSeparate network branch was used for each patch size, and only 
output layer was shared. Mini batch learning and RMSprop 
to train the network with ReLU and cross entropy as the cost 
function.DSC and mean surface distance between manual 
and automatic segmentation