15 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
6  CNN applications in medical image 
detection
6.1  Breast tumors
A Camelyon grand challenge for automatic detection of met -
astatic breast cancer in digital whole slide images of sentinel 
lymph node biopsies is organised by the International Sym-
posium of Biomedical Imaging.
6.1.1  GoogLeNet CNN
The award-winning system with performance very closer 
to human accuracy was proposed in [76]. The computation 
time was reduced by first excluding the white background of 
digital images using Otsu’s algorithm. The method exploited 
advantages of patch-based classification to obtain better 
results. Also the model trained extensively on misclassified 
image patches, to decrease classification error. The results of 
the patches were embedded on heatmap image and heatmaps 
were used to compute evaluation scores. AUC of 92.5%  was 
obtained, and was the top performer in the challenge. In case 
of lesion based detection, the system achieved the sensitivity 
of 70.51%  , whereas the second ranking score was 57.61% .
6.2  Eye diseases
6.2.1  Dynamic CNN
Random assignment of weights, speeds up the training and 
improves the performance. This was proposed for hem-
orrhage detection in fundus eye images in [75]. Also the 
samples were dynamically selected at every training epoch 
from a large pool of medical images. Pre-processing was 
performed using image contrast using gaussian filters. To 
prevent overfitting, the images were augmented. For correct classification of hemorrhage, the result was convolved with 
gaussian filter to smoothen the values. It achieved sensitivity, 
specificity and ROC of 93% , 91.5%  and 98% , whereas non 
selective sampling obtains sensitivity, specificity and ROC 
of 93%, 93%  and 96.6%  for Messidor dataset. AUC was used 
to monitor overfitting during training and when AUC value 
reached a stable maximum, the CNN training was stopped.
6.2.2  Ensemble CNN
An ensemble performs better than a single CNN and can be 
used to achieve higher performance. The ensemble model 
for detection of retinal vessels in fundus images is proposed 
in [46]. The model was an ensemble of twelve CNNs. Each 
CNN’s output probability was averaged to get the final ves-
sel’s probability of each pixel. The probability was used to 
discriminate between vessel pixels from non-vessel ones for 
detection. The performance measures, accuracy and Kappa 
score were compared with existing state of the art methods. 
It stood second in terms of accuracy as well as in kappa 
score. The model obtained a FROC score of 0.928.
6.3  Cell division
6.3.1  LeNet CNN
Augmentation and shifting the centroid of the object 
enhanced the performance, and was proposed in [69]. The 
model was for automatic detection of mitosis (cell divisions) 
and quantification of mitosis occurring during scratch assay. 
The positive example training samples was augmented by 
mirroring and rotating by 45◦ and centering by shifting the 
centroid of the object to the patch center. A random addi-
tional sampling of negative samples was added in the same 
amount as positive examples. The performance param-
eters used were sensitivity, specificity, AUC and F-score Table 12  A summary of CNN applications in medical image segmentation surveyed in Sect. 5
References Organ Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[8] MS lesion ISBI 2015 and MICCAI 2008 
datasetsFive publicly available methods DSC, TPR and FPR. Achieved better 
TPR and FPR, but less DSC values
[36] Breast Dutch breast cancer screening 
datasetState of the art methods AUC 
[72] Breast The Cancer Genome Atlas breast 
cancer datasetThree texture classification methods 
namely RPLSVM, LBPLSVM and 
THLBAccuracy, efficiency and scalability 
and F-score of 85%
[77] Nucleus Brain tumor, pancreatic NET and 
breast cancerSVM, RF and DBN Precision, recall and F-score
[83] Heart CCTA scans of 60 patients Manual segmentation Sensitivity 95% and specificity 96.6%  
DSC 85% and mean absolute sur -
face distance 85%
[81] Eye glaucoma DRISHTI-GS, Messidor Manual Precision, recall, F-score