10 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
4.5  Heart diseases
Electrocardiogram (ECG) is used for the assessment of the 
electrical activity of the heart to detect anomalies in the 
heart.
4.5.1  One‑dimensional CNN
ECG classification using CNN model demonstrates supe -
rior performance with classification accuracy of 95% was 
proposed in [40]. The model comprised of one-dimensional 
CNN with three conv layers and two FC layers that fused 
feature extraction and classification into a single learning 
body. Once the dedicated CNN was trained for a particular 
patient, it could be solely used to classify ECG records in a 
fast and accurate manner.
4.5.2  Fused CNN
Classification of echocardiography videos require both 
spatial and temporal data. Fused CNN architecture using 
both spatial and temporal data was proposed in [20]. It used 
a two-path CNN, one along the spatial direction and the 
other along temporal direction. Each individual CNN path 
executed individually and was fused only after obtaining the 
final classification scores. The spatial CNN learnt the spa-
tial information automatically from the original normalised 
echo video images. Temporal CNN learnt from acceleration 
images along the time direction of the echo videos. The out-
puts of both CNNs were fused and applied to softmax classi -
fier for the final classification. The proposed model achieved 
an average accuracy of 92% compared to 89.5%  for single 
path CNN, 87.9%  for three-dimensional KAZE, 73.8%  for 
three-dimensional SIFT. The long time required for initial training was the disadvantage of this approach. The CNN 
approaches to heart classification are summarized in Table  8.
4.6  Eye diseases
4.6.1  Gaussian initialized CNN
Initial training time can be reduced by Gaussian initiali-
zation, and overfitting can be avoided by weighted class 
weights. This was proposed for classifying diabetic retinopa-
thy (DR) in fundus imagery in [57]. The performance was 
compared with SVM and other methods that required feature 
extraction prior to classification. The method achieved 95% 
specificity but less sensitivity of 30% . The trained CNN did 
a quick diagnosis and gave an immediate response to the 
patient during screening.
4.6.2  Hyper parameter tuning inception‑v4
Automated hyper parameter tuning inception-v4 (HPTI-
v4) model for DR in color fundus images classification and 
detection is proposed in [67]. The images are preprocessed 
using CLAHE to enhance contrast level, segmented using 
histogram based segmentation model. Hyper parameter tun-
ing is done using Bayesian optimization method, as Bayesian 
model has the ability to analyze the previous validation out-
come, to create a probabilistic model. Classification is done 
using HPTI-v4 model followed by multi layer perceptron. 
The classification is applied on MESSIDOR DR dataset. 
The CNN model performance was extraordinary with the 
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of 99.49%  , 98.83%  , and 
99.68%  respectively.Table 7  A summary of CNN applications in breast medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Comparison against Performance metric
[34] Normalized by subtracting 
mean, dividing by standard 
deviation, augmented by 
flipping(Conv, ReLU, maxpool)  ×5 , 
(FC + ReLU)  ×2 + FC, sto-
chastic gradient descentBOW, HOG, SIFT, VGGNet ROC and accuracy 96.7%
[52] Crop, augmentation by flipping 
and rotating, global contrast 
normalization, local contrast 
normalization(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 + 
FCHOG, HGD AUC 82.2%
[73] Feature extraction, data weigh-
ing, data labeling(Conv, maxpool)  ×3 , FC SVM, ANN, labeled data, unla-
beled data and mixed dataAccuracy 82.43%  , AUC 88.18%
[78] Image oversegmented into 
atomic regions using super -
pixel based scheme(Conv, maxpool) ×2 , FC ×2 , 
softmax classifierLinder, Bianconi, 
DCNN-Ncut + SVM, 
DCNN-Ncut + SMC, 
DCNN-Ncut + SVM, 
DCNN-SLIC-SVM, DCNN-
SLIC-SMCROC, AUC, accuracy