5 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
texture and gradient orientation. Conv layers are made of 
learnable filters called convolutional filters, or kernels, of 
size n×m×d , where d is the depth of the image. During the 
forward pass, the kernels are convolved across the width and 
height of input volume and dot product is computed between 
the entries of the filter and the input. Intuitively, the CNN 
learns filters that gets activated when they come across edge, 
colors, texture etc. The output of the conv layer is fed into an 
activation function layer.
3.2  Activation functions or nonlinear functions
Since data in real world is mostly nonlinear, activation func-
tions are used for nonlinear transformation of the data. It is 
used to ensure that the representation in the input space is 
mapped to a different output space as per the requirements. 
The different activation functions are discussed in Sects. 
3.2.1– 3.2.3.
3.2.1  Sigmoid
It takes a real-valued number x  and squashes it into range 
between 0 and 1. In particular, large negative and positive 
inputs are placed very close to 0 and unity, respectively. It 
is expressed as in (6 ).
3.2.2  Tan hyperbolic
It takes a real valued number x  and squashes it between −1 
to 1 as expressed in (7 ).
3.2.3  Rectified linear unit (ReLU)
This nonlinear function takes a real valued number x  and 
converts x to 0 if x  is negative. ReLU is the most often used 
nonlinear function for CNN, takes less computation time 
and hence faster compared to the other two and is expressed 
in (8).
3.3  Pooling
Pooling layer performs a nonlinear down sampling of 
convolved feature. It decreases the computational power 
required to process the data through dimensionality (6) f(x)=1
1+e−x.
(7) f(x)=1−e−2x
1+e−2x.
(8) f(x)=max(0, x).reduction. It reduces the spatial size by aggregating data 
over space or feature type, controls overfitting and over -
comes translation and rotational variance of images. Pool-
ing operation results in partitioning of its input into a set 
of rectangle patches. Each patch gets replaced by a single 
value depending on the type of pooling selected. The dif-
ferent types are maximum pooling and average pooling.
3.4  Fully connected (FC) layer
FC layer is similar to artificial neural network, where each 
node has incoming connections from all the inputs and all 
the connections have weights associated with them. The 
output is sum of all the inputs multiplied by the corre-
sponding weights. FC layer is followed by sigmoid activa-
tion function and performs the classifier job.
3.5  Data preprocessing and augmentation
The raw images obtained from imaging modalities need to 
be preprocessed and augmented before sending to CNN. 
The raw image data might be skewed, altered by bias dis-
tortion [55], having intensity inhomogeneity during cap-
ture, and hence needs to be preprocessed. Multiple data 
preprocessing methods exist and the preferred methods 
are mean subtraction and normalization. CNN needs to be 
trained on a larger dataset to achieve the best performance. 
Data augmentation increases the existing set of images by 
horizontal and vertical flips, transformations, scaling, ran-
dom cropping, color jittering and intensity variations. The 
preprocessed, augmented image data is then fed into CNN.
3.6  CNN architectures and frameworks
Many CNN architectures have been proposed by research-
ers depending on kind of task to be performed. A few 
award-winning architectures are listed in Table  3. CNN 
frameworks (toolkits) enable the efficient development 
and implementation of deep learning methods. Various 
frameworks used by researchers and developers is listed 
in Table  4.
Table 3  Various award winning CNN architectures
Architecture References Architecture References
LeNet-5 [43] VGGNet [70]
AlexNet [41] GoogLeNet [3]
Overfeat [65] ResNet [26]
ZFNet [79] Xception [12]