16 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
and compared with SVM. The results indicated significant 
increase in F-score (for SVM 78% , for CNN 89% ). The 
model concluded that both positive and negative samples 
are needed for better performance. The CNN applications 
in medical image detection reviewed in this paper are sum-
marized in Table  13.
7  CNN applications in medical image 
localization
7.1  Breast tumors
7.1.1  Semi‑supervised deep CNN
To overcome challenges of sparsely labeled data, a model 
was proposed in [73]. The unlabeled data was first auto-
matically labeled using labeled data. Newly labeled data and 
initial labeled data were used to train the deep CNN. The 
method used semi-supervised deep CNN for breast cancer 
diagnosis. The performance of CNN was compared with 
SVM and ANN using different numbers of labeled data like 
40, 70 and 100. The model produced comparable results 
even with sparse labeled data with accuracy of 83% and 
AUC of 88%.
7.2  Heart diseases
7.2.1  Pyramid of scales localization
Pyramid of scales (PoS) localization leads to better perfor -
mance, specially in cases, where the size of the organ varies 
between the patients. The size of the heart is not consistent 
among human, and hence PoS was proposed for localiza-
tion of left ventricle (LV) in cardiac MRI images in [17]. The model also exploited patch based training. Evaluation 
metrics used were accuracy, sensitivity and specificity and 
were respectively 98.6%, 83.9%  and 99.1%  . The limitation of 
the approach was the computing time of 10 s/image.
7.3  Fetal abnormalities
7.3.1  Transfer learning CNN
Transfer learning uses the knowledge of low layers of a base 
CNN trained on a large cross domain of dataset of images. 
Transfer learning advantages include saving of training time, 
and need of less data for training. This reduces overfitting 
and enhances the classification performance. Domain trans-
ferred deep CNN for fetal abdominal standard plane (FASP) 
localization in fetal ultrasound scanning was proposed in 
[10]. The base CNN was trained on 2014 ImageNet detection 
dataset. The metrics accuracy, precision, recall and F-score 
were the highest when compared to R-CNN and RVD. The 
drawback of the system was that it took more time to locate 
FASP from one ultra sound video. The CNN methods for 
image localization previewed in this paper are summarized 
in Table  14.
The papers reviewed for medical image understanding are 
summarized in Table  15.
8  Critical review and conclusion
CNNs have been successfully applied in the areas of medi-
cal image understanding and this section provides a critical 
review of applications of CNNs in medical image under -
standing. Firstly, the literature contains a vast number of 
CNN architectures. It is difficult to select the best architec-
ture for a specific task due to high diversity in architectures. 
Table 13  A summary of CNN applications in medical image detection surveyed in Sect. 6
References  Organ Preprocessing Architecture Performance metric
[76] Breast Threshold tissue from white 
background and patch-based clas-
sificationGoogLeNet AUC for slide based classification 
92.5%  , lesion based detection 
sensitivity 70.5%
[50] Skin (melanoma) Illumination correction step, 
removal of noise using gaussian 
filters(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 , FC, 
softmaxSensitivity, specificity, true positive, 
false positive and accuracy
[75] Hemorrhage (eye) Image contrast using gaussian 
filters, augment using vertical, 
horizontal flips(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×5 , FC, 
softmaxSensitivity, specificity and ROC
[46] Eye retina Ensemble of twelve CNN having 
(conv, ReLU) ×3 , (FC, dropout) 
×2Accuracy, FROC of 0.928
[69] Cell Extraction of grayscale patches, 
segmentation and binarizationLeNet Sensitivity, specificity, AUC and 
F-score. F-score (SVM 78% , CNN 
89%)