6 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
4  CNN applications in medical image 
classification
4.1  Lung diseases
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is the disorder of lung paren-
chyma in which lung tissues get scarred leading to res-
piratory difficulty. High resolution computed tomography 
(HRCT) imaging is used to differentiate between different 
types of ILDs. HRCT images have a high visual variation 
between different classes and high visual similarity within 
the same class. Therefore, accurate classification is quite 
challenging.
4.1.1  Ensemble CNN
Ensemble of rf and overfeat for classification of pulmo-
nary peri fissural nodules of lungs was proposed in [ 14]. 
The complexity of the input was reduced by extracting two-
dimensional views from three-dimensional volume. The 
performance was enhanced by using a combination of over -
feat followed by rf. The bagging technique of rf boosted the 
performance of the model. The proposed model obtained 
an AUC of 86.8% .
4.1.2  Small‑kernel CNN
Low level textual information and more non linear activa-
tions enhances performance of classification was empha -
sized by [4 ]. The authors shrinked the kernel size to 2×2 
to involve more non linear activations. The receptive fields 
were kept smaller to capture low level textual information. 
Also, to handle increasing complexity of the structures, the 
number of kernels were made proportional to the number 
of receptive field of its neurons. The model classified the 
lung tissue image into seven classes (a healthy tissue and six 
different ILD patterns). The results were compared against 
AlexNet and VGGNet and the ROC curves. The structure 
took only 20 s to classify the whole lung area in 30 slices of 
an average size HRCT scan image. AlexNet and VGG-Net 
took 136 s and 160 s for classification. The model delivered 
a classification accuracy of 85% , while the traditional meth -
ods delivered an accuracy of 78%.
4.1.3  Whole image CNN
Smaller image patches to prevent loss of spatial information 
and different attenuation ranges to enhance better visibil-
ity was proposed in [18]. Since the images were RGB, the 
proposed CNN model used three lung attenuation ranges 
namely, lower attenuation, normal attenuation and higher attenuation. To avoid overfitting, the images were augmented 
by jitter and cropping. A simple Alexnet model with the 
above variations was implemented and compared against 
other CNN models implemented to work on image patches. 
The performance metrics were accuracy and F-score. The 
model obtained an F-score of 100%  and the average accuracy 
of 87.9% .
4.1.4  Multicrop pooling CNN
Limitation of reduced training samples can be overcome by 
extraction of salient multi scale features. The features were 
extracted using multicrop pooling for automatic lung nod-
ule malignancy suspicious classification in [68]. The model 
was a simple 3 layered CNN architecture but with multicrop 
pooling and randomized leaky ReLu as activation. The pro-
posed method obtained accuracy and AUC of 87.4%  and 
93% . Fivefold cross validation was used for evaluation.
The CNN applications in lung classification is summa -
rized in Table  5.
4.2  Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19)
COVID-19 is a global pandemic disease spreading rapidly 
around the world. Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (RT-PCR) is a commonly employed test for detec-
tion of COVID-19 infection. RT-PCR testing is the gold 
standard for COVID-19 testing, RT-PCR is very compli -
cated, time-consuming and labor-intensive process, sparse 
availability and not very accurate. Chest X-ray could be used 
for the initial screening of the COVID-19 in places having 
shortage of RT-PCR kits and is more accurate at diagnosis. 
Many researchers have used deep learning to classify if the 
chest infection is due to COVID-19 or other ailments.
4.2.1  Customized CNN
One of the initial model proposed for detection of COVID-
19 was a simple pretrained AlexNet model proposed in [45] 
and fine tuned on chest X-ray images. The results were very 
promising with accuracy of classifying positive and nega-
tive patients of around 95% . Use of pretrained with trans-
fer learning ResNet and InceptionNet CNN models were 
also proposed. These models demonstrated that the transfer 
learning models were also efficient and achieved a test accu-
racy of 93%.
4.2.2  Bayesian CNN
Uncertainty was explored to enhance the diagnostic per -
formance of classification of COVID-19 datasets in [22]. 
The primary aim of proposed method was to avoid COVID-
19 misdiagnoses. The method explored Monte-Carlo