Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-020-00540-3
REVIEW ARTICLE
Convolutional neural networks in medical image understanding: 
a survey
D. R. Sarvamangala1  · Raghavendra V. Kulkarni2
Received: 25 March 2020 / Revised: 5 October 2020 / Accepted: 22 November 2020 / Published online: 3 January 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Imaging techniques are used to capture anomalies of the human body. The captured images must be understood for diag-
nosis, prognosis and treatment planning of the anomalies. Medical image understanding is generally performed by skilled 
medical professionals. However, the scarce availability of human experts and the fatigue and rough estimate procedures 
involved with them limit the effectiveness of image understanding performed by skilled medical professionals. Convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs) are effective tools for image understanding. They have outperformed human experts in many 
image understanding tasks. This article aims to provide a comprehensive survey of applications of CNNs in medical image 
understanding. The underlying objective is to motivate medical image understanding researchers to extensively apply CNNs 
in their research and diagnosis. A brief introduction to CNNs has been presented. A discussion on CNN and its various 
award-winning frameworks have been presented. The major medical image understanding tasks, namely image classification, 
segmentation, localization and detection have been introduced. Applications of CNN in medical image understanding of the 
ailments of brain, breast, lung and other organs have been surveyed critically and comprehensively. A critical discussion on 
some of the challenges is also presented.
Keywords Classification · Convolutional neural networks · Detection · Image understanding · Localization · Segmentation
1 Introduction
Loss of human lives can be prevented or the medical trauma 
experienced in an injury or a disease can be reduced through 
the timely diagnosis of medical anomalies. Medical anoma-
lies include glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, tumors [34], 
interstitial lung diseases [44], heart diseases and tubercu-
losis. Diagnosis and prognosis involve the understanding 
of the images of the affected area obtained using X-ray, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography 
(CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon 
emission computed tomography or ultrasound scanning. 
Image understanding involves the detection of anomalies, 
ascertaining their locations and borders, and estimating their sizes and severity. The scarce availability of human experts 
and their fatigue, high consultation charges and rough esti-
mate procedures limit the effectiveness of image understand-
ing. Further, shapes, locations and structures of the medical 
anomalies are highly variable [55]. This makes diagnosis dif-
ficult even for specialized physicians [4 ]. Therefore, human 
experts often feel a need for support tools to aid in precise 
understanding of medical images. This is the motivation for 
intelligent image understanding systems.
Image understanding systems that exploit machine learn-
ing (ML) techniques are fast evolving in recent years. ML 
techniques include decision tree learning [35], clustering, 
support vector machines (SVMs) [47], k-means nearest 
neighbor (K-NN), restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) 
[42] and random forests (RFs) [28]. The pre-requisite for 
ML techniques to work efficiently is the extraction of discri-
minant features. And these features are generally unknown 
and is also a very challenging task especially for applica-
tions involving image understanding and is still a topic of 
research. A logical step to overcome was to create intelli-
gent machines which could learn features needed for image 
understanding and extract it on its own. One such intelligent  * D. R. Sarvamangala 
 sarvamangala.dr@reva.edu.in
 Raghavendra V. Kulkarni 
 arvie@ieee.org
1 REVA University, Bengaluru, India
2 Ramaiah University of Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, India