19 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
also not included since it is an ocean and the focus in the 
paper is only on a few important techniques involved.
9  Conclusion
The heterogeneous nature of medical anomalies in terms 
of shape, size, appearance, location and symptoms poses 
challenges for medical anomaly diagnosis and prognosis. 
Traditional methods of using human specialists involve 
fatigue, oversight and high cost and also sparse availability. 
ML-based healthcare systems need efficient feature extrac-
tion methods. But efficient features are still unknown and 
also, the methods available for feature extraction are not very 
efficient. This calls for intelligent healthcare systems that 
automatically extract efficient features for medical image 
understanding that aids diagnosis and prognosis. CNN is a 
popular technique for solving medical image understand-
ing challenges due to its highly efficient methods of feature 
extraction and learning low level, mid level and high level 
discriminant features of an input medical image.
The literature reviewed in this paper underscores that 
researchers have focused their attention on the use of CNN 
to overcome many challenges in medical image under -
standing. Many have accomplished the task successfully. 
The CNN methods discussed in this paper have been found 
to either outperform or compliment the existing traditional 
and ML approaches in terms of accuracy, sensitivity, AUC, 
DSC, time taken etc. However, their performance is often 
not the best due to a few factors. A snapshot summary of 
the quantum of research articles surveyed in this article is 
presented in the Fig.  2.
The challenges in image understanding with respect 
to medical imaging have been discussed in this paper. 
Various image understanding tasks have been introduced. 
In addition, CNN and its various components have been outlined briefly. The approaches used by the researchers 
to address the various challenges in medical image under -
standing have been surveyed.
CNN models have been described as black boxes and 
there is a lot of research happening in terms of analyzing 
and understanding output at every layer. Since medical 
images are involved, we need an accountable and efficient 
prediction system which should also be able to articulate 
about a decision taken. Researchers are also working on 
image captioning (textual representations of the image) 
[29]. This will enable physicians to understand the per -
ception of the network at both output layer and intermedi-
ate levels. Researchers have tried Bayesian deep learning 
models which calculates the uncertainty estimates [38]. 
This would help physicians assess the model. All these 
could further accelerate medical image understanding 
using CNNs among physicians.
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge with gratitude the sup-
port received from REVA University, Bengaluru, and M. S. Ramaiah 
University of Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, India.
Compliance with ethical standards  
 Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
References
 1. Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P (2016) Tensorflow: large-scale 
machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems. CoRR 
Arxiv  : 1603.04467  
 2. Akkus Z, Galimzianova A, Hoogi A, Rubin DL, Erickson BJ 
(2017) Deep learning for brain MRI segmentation: state of the 
art and future directions. J Digit Imaging 30(4):449–459
 3. Al-Rfou R, Alain G, Almahairi A, Angermueller C, Bahdanau 
D, Ballas N, Bengio Y (2016) Theano: a python framework for 
fastcomputation of mathematical expressions. arXiv  :1605.02688  Fig. 2  Bar chart summarizing 
the number of papers surveyed