8 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
Dropweights Bayesian CNN to estimate uncertainty in 
deep learning, to better the diagnostic performance of 
human-machine decisions. The method showed that there 
is a strong correlation between classification accuracy and 
estimated uncertainty in predictions. The proposed method 
used ResNet50v2 model. The softmax layer was preceded by 
dropweights. Dropweights were applied as an approximation 
to the Gaussian Process, which was used to estimate mean-
ingful model uncertainty. The softmax layer finally outputs 
each possible class label’s probability distribution.
4.2.3  PDCOVIDNET
Use of dilation to detect dominant features in the image 
was explored in [13]. The authors proposed parallel dilated 
CNN model. The dilated module involved skipping of pix-
els during convolution process. Parallel CNN branches are 
proposed with different dilation rates. The features obtained 
from parallel branches were concatenated and input to the 
next convolution layer. Concatenation-convolution operation 
was used to explore feature relationship of dilated convo-
lutions so as to detect dominant features for classification. 
The model also used Grad-CAM and Grad-CAM++ to high-
light the regions of class-discriminative saliency maps. The 
performance metrics used were accuracy, precision, recall, 
F1-score with ROC/AUC and are 96.58%, 95%, 91%, 93%  
and 0.991 respectively.
4.2.4  CVR‑Net
To prevent degrading of final prediction and to compensate 
for lesser number of datasets, multi scale multi encoder 
ensemble CNN model for classification of COVID-19 was 
proposed in [24]. The proposed model ensembled feature 
maps at different scales obtained from different encoders. 
To avoid overfitting, geometry based image augmenta-
tions and transfer learning was proposed. To overcome vanishing gradients, each encoder consisted of residual 
and convolutional blocks to allow gradients to pass, like in 
resNet architecture. Moreover Depth-wise separable con-
volution was used to create a light weight network. The 
depth information of feature map was enhanced by con-
catenating different 2D feature maps of different encoders 
in channel-wise. The performance metrics for classifying 
images into positive and negative were recall, precision, 
f1-score and accuracy. The model showed a very efficient 
performance with score of nearly 98% for all the metrics.
4.2.5  Twice transfer learning CNN
A denseNet model trained twice using transfer learning 
approach was proposed in [6 ]. The denseNet201 model 
was trained initially on imageNet dataset , followed by 
chest X-ray 14 dataset and then fine tuned on COVID-
19 dataset. Various combinations of training the model 
first with single transfer learning, twice transfer learn-
ing, twice transfer learning with output neuron keeping 
were experimented. The model with twice transfer learn-
ing with output neuron keeping achieved the best perfor -
mance accuracy of 98.9%  over the other models. Transfer 
learning on chest X-ray 14 dataset enhanced the result, as 
the model had learnt most of the features related to chest 
abnormalities.
4.3  Immune response abnormalities
Autoimmune diseases result from an abnormal immune 
response to a normal body part. The immune system of 
the body attacks the healthy cells in such diseases. Indirect 
immunofluorescence (IIF) on human epithelial-2 (HEp-2) 
cells is used to diagnose an autoimmune disease. Manual 
identification of these patterns is a time-consuming process.Table 5  A summary of CNN applications in ILD image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[44] Normalized with unit 
variance and zero-
meanConv, ReLU, maxpool, 
FC ×3 , backpropaga-
tion, batch processing, 
dropout of 0.6ILD SIFT, LBP, unsuper -
vised feature learning 
using RBMRecall, precision
[4] Augmentation by rotat-
ing(Conv, Leaky ReLU, 
avgpool) ×5 , three FC, 
softmax classifierILD from University 
of Geneva and Bern 
University hospitalAlexNet, VGGNet Time, ROC, AUC 
[18] Augmentation by adding 
jitter and croppingAlexNet architecture Public ILD database CNN patch based 
methodsAccuracy 87.9%  com-
pared to 86.1%  using 
patch based methods
[68] Augmentation (Conv, ReLU, maxpool 
with multicrop) ×3 + 
FC, softmaxLIDC-IDRI dataset HOG, LBP Accuracy 87.4%  and AUC 
93%