2 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
and successful model is the convolutional neural network 
(CNN) model, which automatically learns the needed fea-
tures and extracts it for medical image understanding. The 
CNN model is made of convolutional filters whose primary 
function is to learn and extract necessary features for effi-
cient medical image understanding. CNN started gaining 
popularity in the year 2012, due to AlexNet [41], a CNN 
model, which defeated all the others models with a record 
accuracy and low error rate in imageNet challenge 2012. 
CNN has been used by corporate giants for providing inter -
net services, automatic tagging in images, product recom-
mendations, home feed personalization and autonomous cars 
[59]. The major applications of the CNN are in image and 
signal processing, natural language processing and data ana-
lytics. The CNN had a major breakthrough when GoogleNet 
used it to detect cancer at an accuracy of 89% while human 
pathologists could achieve the accuracy of only 70% [3 ].
1.1  Motivation and purpose
CNNs have contributed significantly in the areas of image 
understanding. CNN-based approaches are placed in the 
leader board of the many image understanding challenges, 
such as Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted 
Intervention (MICCAI) biomedical challenge, Brain Tumor 
segmentation (BRATS) Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmen-
tation challenge [48], Imagenet classification challenge, 
challenges of International Conference on Pattern Recogni-
tion (ICPR) [31] and Ischemic Stroke Lesion Segmentation 
(ISLES) challenge [32]. CNN has become a powerful choice 
as a technique for medical image understanding. Researchers 
have successfully applied CNNs for many medical image 
understanding applications like detection of tumors and their 
classification into benign and malignant [52], detection of 
skin lesions [ 50], detection of optical coherence tomography 
images [39], detection of colon cancer [71], blood cancer, 
anomalies of the heart [40], breast [36], chest, eye etc. Also 
CNN-based models like CheXNet [56, 58], used for classify -
ing 14 different ailments of the chest achieved better results 
compared to the average performance of human experts.
CNNs have also dominated the area of COVID-19 detec-
tion using chest X-rays/CT scans. Research involving CNNs 
is now a dominant topic at major conferences. In addition, 
there are special issues reserved in reputed journals for 
solving challenges using deep learning models. The vast 
amount of literature available on CNNs is the testimonial 
of their efficiency and the widespread use. However, vari-
ous research communities are developing these applications 
concurrently and the dissemination results are scattered in 
a wide and diverse range of conference proceedings and 
journals.
A large number of surveys on deep learning have been 
published recently. A review of deep learning techniques applied in medical imaging, bioinformatics and pervasive 
sensing has been presented in [60]. A thorough review of 
deep learning techniques for segmentation of MRI images 
of brain has been presented in [2 ]. Survey of deep learning 
techniques for medical image segmentation, their achieve -
ments and challenges involved in medical image segmenta-
tion has been presented in [27] Though literature is replete 
with many survey papers, most of them concentrate on deep 
learning models which include CNN, recurrent neural net -
work, generative adversial network or on a particular appli-
cation. There is also no coverage of the application of CNN 
in early detection of COVID-19 as well as many other areas.
The survey includes research papers on various applica-
tions of CNNs in medical image understanding. The papers 
for the survey are queried from various journal websites. 
Additionally, arxiv, conference proceedings of various medi-
cal image challenges are also included in the survey. Also 
the references of these papers are checked. The query used 
are: “CNN” or “deep learning” or “convolutional neural 
network” or terms related to medical image understanding. 
These terms had to be present either in title or abstract to 
be considered.
The objective of this survey is to offer a comprehensive 
overview of applications and methodology of CNNs and 
its variants, in the fields of medical image understanding 
including the detection of latest global pandemic COVID-
19. The survey includes overview tables which can be used 
for quick reference. The authors leverage experiences of 
their own and that of the research fraternity on the applica-
tions of CNNs to provide an insight into various state of 
the art CNN models, challenges involved in designing CNN 
model, overview of research trends in the field, and to moti-
vate medical image understanding researchers and medical 
professionals to extensively apply CNNs in their research 
and diagnosis, respectively.
1.2  Contributions and the structure
Primary contributions of this article are as follows: 
1. To briefly introduce medical image understanding and 
CNN.
2. To convey that CNN has percolated in the field of medi-
cal image understanding.
3. To identify the various challenges in medical image 
understanding.
4. To highlight contributions of CNN to overcome those 
challenges
The remainder of this article has been organized as follows: 
Medical image understanding has been briefly introduced 
in Sect.  2. A brief introduction of CNN and its architecture 
has been presented in Sect.  3. The applications of CNN in