UNDER REVIEW 21
Ravi Krishna is currently an undergraduate student
at the University of California, Berkeley, USA. His
research interests include recommendation systems
and natural language processing.
Joseph E. Gonzalez received the Ph.D. degree
from Carnegie Mellon University, USA, in 2012.
He is currently an assistant professor in the EECS
department at UC Berkeley and a founding member
of the new UC Berkeley RISE Lab. His research
interests are at the intersection of machine learning
and data systems.
Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli (F’83) is the
Edgar L. and Harold H. Buttner Chair at the Elec-
trical Engineering and Computer Science Depart-
ment, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, USA, where he has been a member of the
faculty since 1976. He helped founding Cadence
and Synopsys, the two leading companies in EDA.
He is on the Board of Directors of Cadence, KPIT
Technologies, Sonics, Expert Systems, and Cogisen.
He is a member of the Investment Committee of
Atlante Venture, the advisory board of Walden In-
ternational and Xseed, and of the Executive Committee of the Italian Institute
of Technology. He was the President of the Strategic Committee of the Italian
Strategic Fund. He consulted for companies such as Intel, HP, Bell Labs, IBM,
Samsung, UTC, Lutron, Camozzi Group, Kawasaki Steel, Fujitsu, Telecom
Italia, Pirelli, GM, BMW, Mercedes, Magneti Marelli, ST Microelectronics,
ELT, Unipol and UniCredit. He authored over 950 papers, 17 books, and two
patents.
Dr. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli is a Fellow of the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM), a member of the National Academy of Engineering, and
holds two honorary Doctorates from Aalborg University (Denmark) and KTH
(Sweden). He earned the IEEE/RSE Maxwell Award for groundbreaking
contributions that have had an exceptional impact on the development of
electronics and electrical engineering, the Kaufmann Award for seminal con-
tributions to EDA, the EDAA lifetime Achievement Award, the IEEE/ACM R.
Newton Impact Award, the University of California Distinguished Teaching
Award, the IEEE Technical Committee on Cyberâ ˘A¸ SPhysical Systems (TC-
CPS) Technical Achievement Award for pioneering contributions and lead-
ership in cyberâ ˘A¸ Sphysical systems and design automation, the International
Symposium on Physical Design (ISPD) lifetime achievement award, intended
for individuals who have made outstanding contributions to the ﬁeld of
physical design automation over multiple decades and the IEEE Graduate
Teaching Award for inspirational teaching of graduate students.
Sanjit A. Seshia (F’18) received the B.Tech. degree
in computer science and engineering from the Indian
Institute of Technology, Bombay, India, in 1998 and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science
from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, in 2000 and 2005, respectively. He is currently
a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Sciences, University of California
at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. His research inter-
ests are in dependable computing and computational
logic, with a current focus on applying automated
formal methods to problems in embedded and cyberâ ˘A¸ Sphysical systems,
electronic design automation, computer security, and artiﬁcial intelligence.
His Ph.D. thesis work on the UCLID veriﬁer and decision procedure helped
pioneer the area of satisﬁability modulo theories (SMT) and SMT-based
veriﬁcation. He is co-author of a widely used textbook on embedded systems.
He led the offering of a massive open online course on cyber-physical systems
for which his group developed novel virtual lab auto-grading technology based
on formal methods.
Prof. Seshia has served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSAC-
TIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
AND SYSTEMS, and as Co-Chair of the Program Committee of the In-
ternational Conference on Computer-Aided Veriﬁcation (CA V) in 2012. His
awards and honors include a Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists
and Engineers (PECASE) from the White House, an Alfred P. Sloan Research
Fellowship, the Frederick Emmons Terman Award for engineering education,
and the School of Computer Science Distinguished Dissertation Award at
Carnegie Mellon University.
Kurt Keutzer (F’96) received his Ph.D. degree
in Computer Science from Indiana University in
1984 and then joined the research division of AT&T
Bell Laboratories. In 1991 he joined Synopsys, Inc.
where he ultimately became Chief Technical Ofﬁcer
and Senior Vice-President of Research. In 1998,
Kurt became Professor of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at the University of California at
Berkeley. Kurt’s research group is currently focused
on using parallelism to accelerate the training and
deployment of Deep Neural Networks for appli-
cations in computer vision, speech recognition, multi-media analysis, and
computational ﬁnance. Kurt has published six books, over 250 refereed
articles, and is among the most highly cited authors in Hardware and Design
Automation. Kurt is a Fellow of the IEEE.