UNDER REVIEW 6
of single-source DUDA. Finally, we compare the advantages
and disadvantages of these methods.
A. Theory Brief
Many methods in the domain of machine learning are based
on empirical evidence rather than well-founded theory. The
ones that have solid theory background use statistics profusely.
Domain adaptation is no exception. However, upper bounds
on the generalization target error by learning from the source
data have been obtained. In a seminal paper, (author?) [173]
provided a bound for domain adaptation on the target risk that
generalizes the standard bound on the source risk. Informally,
the theory says that if there exists a common hypothesis
(classiﬁer) that generalizes well on both the source and the
target domains, the performance difference of any classiﬁer on
these two domains could be bounded by the distance between
the data distributions of the two domains. The authors pro-
posedH-divergence, a parametric pseudo-metric to measure
the distance between two domains. Using this this pseudo-
metric, two domains are considered close if there exists a
binary classiﬁer (a discriminator) that, upon seeing data from
the two domains, can distinguish which domain the data comes
from. This work formalizes the intuitive notion that reducing
the two distributions while ensuring a low error on the source
domain, yields accurate results in the target domain. Further,
the theory justiﬁes the basis of many recent DA algorithms that
learn domain-invariant representations, using either domain
adversarial classiﬁer or discrepancy-based approaches.
(author?) [174] introduced a new divergence measure: the
discrepancy distance, which was used to provide a gener-
alization guarantee for the target domain. Compared with
theH-divergence that can only be used in the setting of
binary classiﬁcation, the discrepancy distance could be used to
achieve a generalization bound for target domain in regression
setting as well. In a later work, (author?) [175] derived
generalization bounds on the target error by making use of
the robustness properties introduced in [176]. Extensions of
the above theory to multi-source domain adaptation for both
classiﬁcation and regression problems also exist [146, 177].
B. Discrepancy-based Methods (Table III)
Discrepancy-based methods explicitly measure the discrep-
ancy between the source and target domains on corresponding
activation layers of the two network streams. Long et al. [46]
designed a Deep Adaptation Network, where the discrepancy
is deﬁned as the sum of the multiple kernel variant of
maximum mean discrepancies (MK-MMD) between the fully
connected (FC) layers. Sun et al. [47] proposed correlation
alignment (CORAL) to minimize domain shift by aligning
the second-order statistics of the source and target features
of the last FL layer. Apart from the CORAL loss on the
last FL layer, Zhuo et al. [36] also incorporated the CORAL
loss on the last convolutional (conv) layer. To deal with the
high dimension of convolutional layer activations, activation-
based attention mapping is employed to distill it into low
dimensional representations. The CORAL losses on both the
last convolutional layer and the last FC layer are combined.TABLE III
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT DISCREPANCY -BASED METHODS ,WHERE
‘DISCREPANCY ’INDICATES THE DISCREPANCY LOSS , ‘L OSS LEVEL ’
INDICATES WHAT LEVEL THE LOSS IS APPLIED TO , ‘L AYER ’REPRESENTS
THE LAYERS THAT THE LOSS FUNCTIONS ON , ‘W EIGHT ’INDICATES
WHETHER THE WEIGHTS OF THE TWO NETWORKS ARE SHARED OR NOT ,
‘DISTRIBUTION ’INDICATES WHAT TYPE OF DISTRIBUTION IS ALIGNED .
Ref Discrepancy Loss level Layer Weight Distribution
[46] MK-MMD domain FL shared marginal
[47] CORAL domain last FL shared marginal
[36] CORAL domain last (conv, FL) shared marginal
[48] weight, MMD domain all linear marginal
[49] CMD domain all shared marginal
[50] HoMM domain FL shared marginal
[51] CDD class all except BN shared marginal
[69] RKHS class all shared marginal
[44] Geodesic domain all shared marginal
[52] JMMD domain FL shared joint
[53] Implicit domain BN shared marginal
[54] Implicit domain weighted BN shared marginal
[55] SWD domain all shared marginal
[56] MEC domain DWT layer shared marginal
Wu et al. [44] studied the UDA problem for 3D LiDAR point
cloud segmentation from synthetic data to real world data.
At every batch of training, in addition to the focal loss to
learn semantics from the point cloud on the synthetic batch,
they employed the geodesic distance to penalize discrepancies
between batch statistics from two domains. In recent papers,
Zellinger et al. [49] proposed to match the higher order central
moments of probability distributions by means of order-wise
moment differences. They utilized the equivalent representa-
tion of probability distributions by moment sequences to deﬁne
a new distance function, called Central Moment Discrepancy
(CMD). Chen et al. [50] explored the beneﬁts of using higher-
order statistics (in this case mainly third-order and fourth-order
statistics) for domain matching. They proposed a Higher-order
Moment Matching (HoMM) method, and further extended
the HoMM into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS).
Some other types of divergence are also designed to align
the source and target domains. Lee et al. [55] designed sliced
Wasserstein discrepancy (SWD) to capture the natural notion
of dissimilarity between the outputs of task-speciﬁc classiﬁers.
It provides a geometrically meaningful guidance to detect
target samples that are far from the support of the source
and enables efﬁcient distribution alignment in an end-to-end
trainable fashion. Roy et al. [56] proposed domain alignment
layers which implement feature whitening for the purpose of
matching source and target feature distributions. Additionally,
they leveraged the unlabeled target data by proposing the
Min-Entropy Consensus loss, which regularizes training while
avoiding the adoption of many user-deﬁned hyper-parameters.
Instead of explicitly modeling the discrepancy between the
source and the target domains, some papers implicitly mini-
mize domain discrepancy by aligning the Batch Normalization
(BN) statistics. Li et al. [53] proposed to adopt domain speciﬁc
normalization for different domains. The proposed Adaptive
BN (AdaBN) replaces the moving average mean and variance
of all BN layers in the task network trained on the source
domain with the mean and variance estimated from the target
mini-batches. AdaBN [53] and other DUDA methods deﬁne
a prior on which layers should be adapted. Instead, Cariucci