UNDER REVIEW 3
than the mIoU 62.6% of the model trained on real Cityscapes.
c) Focus of this Survey and Comparison with Other
Surveys: There are many different domain adaptation settings
(see Section II for details). Our survey focuses on the most
prevalent one: single-source, single-target, homogeneous, and
closed set adaptation without target labels. In this setting, there
is one fully labeled source domain and one unlabeled target
domain within the same modality, and the source and target
domains share the same label set.
The early unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
were mainly non-deep approaches, which aimed to match
the feature distributions between the source domain and the
target domain. Single-source UDA methods can be divided
into two categories [26, 27]: sample re-weighting [28, 29] and
intermediate subspace transformation [30–34].
With the advent of deep learning, the emphasis has shifted
to end-to-end learning domain-invariant features. Typically,
for single-source deep UDA (DUDA) [8, 35], a conjoined
architecture with two streams is employed to represent the
models for the source and target domains, respectively [36].
Besides the traditional task loss, such as cross-entropy loss
for classiﬁcation, based on the labeled source data, DUDA
models are usually trained jointly with another loss to deal
with domain shift, such as a discrepancy loss, adversarial loss,
or self-supervision loss. The single-source DUDA methods are
divided into four categories based on domain shift loss and
generative/discriminative settings, as shown in Figure 2.
There have been several surveys on domain adaptation and
transfer learning. In particular: [9] covers different transfer
learning paradigms, such as self-taught learning and multi-task
learning, but the domain adaptation part is not comprehensive;
[26] deals for the most part with early methods with little
discussion devoted to recent deep learning-based methods;
[27] covers almost all categories of domain adaptation methods
brieﬂy but comparisons are scant; [37, 38] focus on shal-
low methods and only a few deep methods are reviewed;
[39, 40] analyze multi-source domain adaptation respectively
focusing on shallow and deep methods. Similar to [41–43],
we focus on deep domain adaptation, but use a different
taxonomy that provides different insights. There are also some
blogs summarizing recent papers on different transfer learning
methods5and domain adaptation6strategies. Compared to
existing surveys and blogs, our survey has the following
advantages/contributions: (1) we cover and compare the latest
methods on deep unsupervised domain adaptation; (2) we
provide an analysis that includes advantages/disadvantages of
different categories and differences/connections among differ-
ent methods in each category with summarizing tables; (3) we
give suggestions and prospects for future directions to explore;
(4) we systematically compare the results of existing methods
on popular benchmark datasets; and (5) we discuss some
important aspects that are overlooked in previous surveys, such
as label shift and theory.
d) Organization of This Survey: In this survey, we re-
view recent progress on visual domain adaptation, comparing
5https://github.com/jindongwang/transferlearning
6https://github.com/zhaoxin94/awesome-domain-adaptationadvantages and disadvantages of different approaches in this
class, and discussing future directions.
In particular: First, we deﬁne different DA strategies in Sec-
tion II. Second, we summarize the available datasets for per-
forming DA evaluation focusing on computer vision tasks in
Section III. And then, we brieﬂy introduce the theoretical view
in Section IV-A, summarize and compare the representative
approaches on different single-source DUDA categories, in-
cluding discrepancy-based methods (Section IV-B), adversarial
discriminative methods (Section IV-C), adversarial genera-
tive methods (Section IV-D), self-supervision-based methods
(Section IV-E), and combinations and others (Section IV-F),
followed by both qualitative and quantitative comparisons of
different categories in Section IV-G and Section IV-H. Finally,
we discuss potential future research directions in Section V.
II. D OMAIN ADAPTATION TAXONOMY
We introduce a standard deﬁnition of the variables and
models to enable effective comparisons and classiﬁcation. Let
xandy7respectively denote the input data and output label,
drawn from a speciﬁc domain probability distribution P(x; y).
In typical domain adaptation, there is one source domain and
one target domain. Suppose the source data and corresponding
labels drawn from the source distribution PS(x; y)areXSand
YSrespectively, and the target data and corresponding labels
drawn from the target distribution PT(x; y)areXTandYT
respectively. The corresponding marginal distributions include
PS(x),PS(y),PT(x),PT(y), and conditional distributions
include PS(xjy),PS(yjx),PT(xjy),PT(yjx). Three typical
sources of variation between the two domains considered in
the literature include:
1) covariate shift, where PS(yjx) =PT(yjx)for all x,
butPS(x)6=PT(x);
2) label shift, where PS(xjy) =PT(xjy)for all y, but
PS(y)6=PT(y);
3) concept drift, where PS(x; y)6=PT(x; y).
In addition, the source dataset is DS=fXS; YSg=
f(xi
S; yi
S)gNS
i=1, the target dataset is DT=fXT; YTg=
f(xj
T; yj
T)gNT
j=1, where NSandNTare the number of source
samples and target samples respectively, xi
S2RdSand
xj
T2RdTare referred as observations in the source domain
and the target domain, and yi
Sandyj
Tare the corresponding
class labels.
Suppose the number of labeled target samples is NTL; then,
the DA problem can be classiﬁed into different categories:
unsupervised DA , when NTL= 0;
fully supervised DA , when NTL=NT;
semi-supervised DA , otherwise.
Suppose the number of labeled source samples is NSL; then,
DA can be classiﬁed into:
strongly supervised DA , when NSL=NS;
weakly supervised DA , otherwise.
Based on the representations, dSanddT, of the source and
target domains ( e.g.images vs. text), we can classify DA into:
7In this paper we assume xis an image and ycould be any label type ( e.g.
object classes, bounding boxes, semantic segmentation, etc).