UNDER REVIEW 15
adversarial methods, imposing multi-level constraints jointly
in the adaptation, such as low-level appearances, mid-level
features, and high-level semantics, can better preserve the
structure and attributes of the source data and thus perform
better. Designing an effective and direct metric to evaluate the
quality of adaptation, instead of testing the performance on the
target domain, would accelerate the training process of GANs.
Meta Learning Across Domains. Meta learning algorithms
provides a learning to learn paradigm that is effective at learn-
ing meta models with the capability of solving new tasks in
a fast manner. However, they require sufﬁcient tasks for meta
model training and the optimized model can only solve new
tasks similar to the training ones. These limitations make them
suffer from performance decline in presence of insufﬁciency
of training tasks in the target domains and task heterogeneity,
where the source tasks present different characteristics from
the target tasks [191]. Besides the above challenge, there
may be data distribution shift between the source tasks and
target tasks, exposing more severe challenges to existing meta
learning algorithms. Cross-domain meta learning provides
promising solutions to address these challenges by essentially
learning more transferable representations [153, 192].
Contrastive Learning for DA. DUDA methods [193, 194]
are recently focusing on the disentanglement [195] of the fea-
tures into domain-invariant and domain-speciﬁc ones based on
data variations. Domain-invariant features play an important
part in reducing the noisy information from each domain,
thus making learned features discriminative of the category.
Current approaches of contrastive learning for domain adap-
tation are highly dependent on the design of speciﬁc tasks.
For example, different DA tasks may rely on different pretext
tasks. Therefore, a potential research direction is to design
a common pretext task. These methods are often criticized
for their computational cost since a large number of negative
samples have to be selected for comparison with every single
positive sample. Thus, an approach to decrease computational
complexity is needed.
B. More Practical Settings of DA
Multi-modal DA. The labeled source domains may contain
multi-modal data. For example, synthetic data generated by
simulators (CARLA and GTA-V , etc.) may be of different
modalities, such as LiDAR, RaDAR, and image. Other exam-
ples include the audio channel and visual channel of videos
and the textual and visual information of social posts. Similar
to multi-modal recognition [196, 197] and feature-level fusion
in image classiﬁcation and retrieval [198, 199], we believe that
jointly combining and fusing different modalities to explore
the combinations would boost the performance of DA. Another
advantage of multi-modal DA is that even if some modalities
are missing, the DA system can still work by leveraging
information from other available modalities. For example,
while the cameras for autonomous driving cannot capture
images well at night, the LiDAR scanners are robust under
almost all lighting conditions [4]. How to design effective
fusion strategies is the main challenge. The simplest ways
are to directly employ early fusion at the feature level orlate fusion at the decision level. But to deal well with the
incomplete data issue, fusion at the model-level, such as graph
convolutional network [200], is probably a better choice.
Multi-task DA. To the best of our knowledge, all the
domain adaptation methods proposed so far only focus on
a single task ( e.g. semantic segmentation, robotic grasping,
image classiﬁcation) with single-modal input ( e.g. images).
However, in many scenarios, several tasks need to be per-
formed on the same data simultaneously ( e.g.semantic seg-
mentation and trafﬁc sign identiﬁcation for a driving image).
Separately adapting each task would be redundant in terms
of computation, since the networks for both models may
rely on the same set of features. So how to adapt multiple
tasks simultaneously and efﬁciently is a promising direction
to explore. One straightforward solution is to ﬁnd a common
feature representation that is beneﬁcial for all the tasks. In
order to guide learning towards an optimal shared feature
space, methods based on adversarial learning may be used
with novel designs.
Continual Learning and Adaptation. Many machine
learning models ( e.g. semantic segmentation models) are
trained on a ﬁxed dataset and then deployed onto a real system,
with the assumption that the data at test time has a similar
distribution as the training data. However, this is often not
the case. Imagine a segmentation model trained on images
taken in the US with mostly sunny weather conditions. The
cars with the trained model are sold all over the world, and
different cars will be running under different domains ( e.g.
different cities, weathers, time of day, etc.). In order for
the network to perform well all the time, continual learning
and adaptation needs to be performed. Basically, the network
is expected to have the ability to learn continually from a
steam of experiential data, building on what has been learned
previously, and adapting to varying new domains [201]. Some
methods [202–204] try to limit the extent of weight sharing
across experiences by focusing on preserving past knowledge.
A method is proposed in [205] to adapt to changing envi-
ronments for semantic segmentation. However, the method
requires synthesizing new images on the ﬂy, which is not
computationally efﬁcient. Methods such as [206] may be
used to ﬁnd a compact representation of the whole dataset,
which may be more efﬁcient to ﬁne-tune the model without
forgetting the learned knowledge. Learning representations
that are generalizable to different domains could make the
network more robust against target domain change. [207, 208]
proposed to use style transfer to randomize the input domains
for better generalization performance.
Federated Domain Adaptation. Data generated by IoT
devices poses unique challenges for training machine learning
models. Usersâ ˘A´Z proﬁle data typically contains sensitive
information, thus cannot leave its hosting device for the
sake of privacy preservation. Due to the growing storage and
computational power of these devices and concerns about
data privacy, it is increasingly preferable to store them in a
decentralized way on individual devices rather than hosting
them in a central storage. Federated Learning (FL) provides a
privacy-preserving mechanism to leverage such decentralized
data and computation resources to train machine learning