UNDER REVIEW 1
A Review of Single-Source Deep Unsupervised
Visual Domain Adaptation
Sicheng Zhao, Senior Member, IEEE , Xiangyu Yue, Shanghang Zhang, Bo Li, Han Zhao, Bichen Wu, Ravi Kr-
ishna, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Fellow, IEEE , Sanjit A. Seshia Fellow,
IEEE , and Kurt Keutzer, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Large-scale labeled training datasets have enabled
deep neural networks to excel across a wide range of benchmark
vision tasks. However, in many applications, it is prohibitively
expensive and time-consuming to obtain large quantities of
labeled data. To cope with limited labeled training data, many
have attempted to directly apply models trained on a large-scale
labeled source domain to another sparsely labeled or unlabeled
target domain. Unfortunately, direct transfer across domains
often performs poorly due to the presence of domain shift or
dataset bias . Domain adaptation is a machine learning paradigm
that aims to learn a model from a source domain that can perform
well on a different (but related) target domain. In this paper,
we review the latest single-source deep unsupervised domain
adaptation methods focused on visual tasks and discuss new
perspectives for future research. We begin with the deﬁnitions
of different domain adaptation strategies and the descriptions of
existing benchmark datasets. We then summarize and compare
different categories of single-source unsupervised domain adapta-
tion methods, including discrepancy-based methods, adversarial
discriminative methods, adversarial generative methods, and self-
supervision-based methods. Finally, we discuss future research
directions with challenges and possible solutions.
Index Terms —Domain adaptation, discrepancy-based methods,
adversarial learning, self-supervised learning, transfer learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
In the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved signiﬁcant progress in various computer vision tasks
where large-scale labeled training data are available. For exam-
ple, the classiﬁcation error of the “Classiﬁcation + localization
with provided training data” task in the Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge was reduced from 0.28 in 2010 to
0.022 in 20171, even outperforming humans. However, in
many applications, it is difﬁcult to obtain a large amount of
labels, as manual annotation is expensive and time-consuming.
Copyright (c) 2013 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
Manuscript received July 17, 2019, revised May 15, 2020 and September
18, 2020. This work was supported by Berkeley DeepDrive. Corresponding
authors: Xiangyu Yue, Shanghang Zhang.
S. Zhao, X. Yue, S. Zhang, B. Li, B. Wu, R. Krishna, J. E. Gonzalez,
A. L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, S. A. Seshia, and K. Keutzer are with the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA (e-mail: schzhao@gmail.com,
xyyue@eecs.berkeley.edu, shz@eecs.berkeley.edu, drluodian@gmail.com,
bichen@berkeley.edu, ravi.krishna@berkeley.edu, jegonzal@berkeley.edu,
alberto@berkeley.edu, sseshia@berkeley.edu, keutzer@berkeley.edu).
H. Zhao is with School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA (e-mail: han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu).
1http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2017
Source: GTA Target: Cityscapes(a) Object classification
(b) Semantic segmentationTrain on source Train on targetmIoU
on target
Train on source 21.7
Train on target 62.6Source: Art Target: ClipartAccuracy 
on target
Train on source 34.9
Train on target 96.0
Ground truth
car
road
sidewalk bicyclebuilding
skyperson
ridertraffic sign
vegetationFig. 1. An example of domain shift . For both image-level object classiﬁcation
and pixel-wise semantic segmentation tasks, direct transfer of the models
trained on the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain results
in a dramatic performance drop.
An alternative solution is to train a model on another
related large-scale source domain with labels ( e.g.a simulation
domain) and apply it to the unlabeled target domain ( e.g.a
real-world domain). However, due to the presence of domain
shift ordataset bias [1], such a direct transfer might not
perform well, as shown in Figure 1.
One may argue that the pre-trained source models can be
ﬁne-tuned in the target domain. However, ﬁne-tuning still
requires considerable quantities of labeled training data, which
may be not available for many applications. For example, in
ﬁne-grained recognition, only experts are able to provide reli-
able labeled data [2]; in semantic segmentation, it takes about
90 minutes to label each image in the Cityscapes dataset [3];
in autonomous driving, the substantial trafﬁc data obtained
with different sensors, such as 3D LiDAR point clouds, are
difﬁcult to label [4, 5]; in affective image content analysis,
the perceived emotions are subjective and personalized across
viewers [6, 7].
a) Domain Adaptation in context of other sample-
efﬁcient learning methods: Domain adaptation techniques
were introduced to addresses the domain shift between source
and target domains [8] and for this reason, they have recently
attracted signiﬁcant interest in both academia and industry.
Domain adaptation (DA) , also known as domain transfer , is a
specialized form of transfer learning [9] that aims to learn aarXiv:2009.00155v3  [cs.CV]  19 Sep 2020