UNDER REVIEW 9
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ADVERSARIAL GENERATIVE MODELS . ‘W EIGHT ’INDICATES WHETHER THE WEIGHTS OF DIFFERENT GAN S ARE SHARED .
Ref Architecture & loss Input of GAN Weight Generative level Discriminative level Speciﬁc objective
[180] CoGAN z partially shared pixel-level pixel-level joint distribution learning without paired images
[23] GAN with newLg xS - pixel-level pixel-level self-regularization
[70] GAN, masked-PMSE z;xS - pixel-level pixel-level masked-PMSE minimization
[71] CycleGAN, semantic, feature xS;xT; fea unshared pixel-level pixel-level, feature-level semantic consistency enforcement
[72] CycleGAN, attention map xS;xT unshared pixel-level pixel-level, feature-level adversarial attention alignment
[73] GAN with class labels supervision xS;xT shared pixel-level pixel-level class-consistent generation
[74] CycleGAN with class labels supervision xS;xT shared pixel-level pixel-level, feature-level attribute-conditioned, photometric transformation
[75] CycleGAN with conditional loss xS;xT shared pixel-level pixel-level, feature-level conditioned on classiﬁer prediction
[76] CycleGAN with Lc xS;xT shared pixel-level pixel-level channel-wise statistics feature alignment
[77] Coupled GAN, V AE, cycle-consisteny xS;xT partially shared pixel-level pixel-level joint-distribution alignment in latent space
[128] GAN, constraint loss Lcon xS;xT shared pixel-level pixel-level, feature-level domain diversiﬁcation
[130] CycleGAN, feature xS;xT shared pixel-level feature-level pixel-level and feature-level alignment
methods were introduced. Hoffman et al. [71] proposed
discriminatively-trained Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Domain
Adaptation (CyCADA), which adapts representations at both
the pixel-level and feature-level, enforces cycle-consistency,
and leverages a task loss to perform semantic segmenta-
tion adaptation. Similarly, Russo et al. [78] introduced bi-
directional image translation mapping and proposed class-
consistency loss. While CycleGAN [182] can only trans-
late low-level appearance, e.g.texture, [74] realized multiple
view-point transformation combining with key-point detec-
tion network. Similarly, Tzeng et al. [87] performed domain
adaptation on object detection using pixel-level alignment
and feature-level alignment. Extending previous CycleGAN-
based works [71, 87, 182], Li et al. [75] proposed cycle-
consistent conditional adversarial transfer networks (3CATN)
to improve adversarial training and feature generation process
by conditioning on the classiﬁer prediction. Instead of using a
discriminator, Wu et al. [76] explored channel-wise statistics
alignment of CNN features to guide the generation process.
Liu et al. [77] combined CoGAN [180] with Variational
Autoencoder (V AE) [183] to perform unsupervised image-to-
image translation. A shared latent space between source and
target domains is inferred to align the joint distributions of
different domains. And then training data closer to the target
domain can be sampled from the shared latent space. Besides
the CycleGAN loss, Kang et al. [72] proposed to impose the
attention alignment penalty to reduce the discrepancy of atten-
tion maps across domains. To make the attention mechanism
invariant to domain shift, the target network is trained with a
mixture of real and synthetic data from both source and target
domains. Hsu et al. [130] leveraged CycleGAN together with
feature-level alignment for object detection adaptation. Kim et
al. [128] further proposed to generate diversiﬁed intermediate
domains to help domain-invariant representation learning for
object detection. A multi-domain discriminator is leveraged
to encourage the feature to be indistinguishable among the
domains.
E. Self-supervision-based Methods (Table VI)
Self-supervision based methods incorporate auxiliary self-
supervised learning task(s) into the original task network.
Training the self-supervision task jointly with the original task
network is helpful to bring the source and target domains
closer. Ghifary et al. [184] designed a three-layer Multi-taskAutoencoder (MTAE) architecture to transform the original
image into analogs in multiple related domains. The hidden-
input and hidden-output weights represent shared and domain-
speciﬁc parameters, respectively. The learned features are then
used as input to a classiﬁer. The category-level correspondence
across domains is required. Self-domain and between-domain
reconstruction tasks are introduced as the self-supervision
task and are performed during training. Deep reconstruction
classiﬁcation network (DRCN) [79] combines a convolutional
supervised network for source label prediction with a de-
convolutional unsupervised network for target data reconstruc-
tion. The feature mapping parameters of the two streams
are shared, while the labeling parameters of the supervised
network and the decoding parameters of the unsupervised
network are learned individually.
MTAE requires that the number of samples of corresponding
categories in the two domains should be the same. After the
sample selection procedure, some important information may
be missing. Further, the output of the algorithm is learned
features, based on which a classiﬁer (multi-class Support
Vector Machine with a linear kernel in this paper) needs to be
trained. DRCN employs an end-to-end strategy, without the
requirement of aligned pairs. The above two methods use the
same encoder to extract domain-invariant features, ignoring
the individual characteristics of each domain. Bousmalis et
al. [80] explicitly learned to extract image representations
that are partitioned into two subspaces. One component is
private to each domain, which aims to capture domain-speciﬁc
properties, such as background. The other is shared across
domains with the goal of capturing shared representations
by using autoencoders and explicit loss functions, i.e.scale-
invariant mean-square error (SIMSE).
Except for the reconstruction task, more recent self-
supervision tasks ( e.g.image rotation prediction and jigsaw
prediction) have been used for DA [81–83]. Xu et al. [83]
suggested using self-supervision pretext tasks ( e.g.image ro-
tation, patch location prediction) over a feature extractor. Feng
et al. [84] proposed to use self-supervision pretext tasks as part
of their framework for domain generalization. Carlucci et al.
[82] proposed to solve domain adaptation/generalization by
introducing a jigsaw puzzle as a self-supervision task. Images
are decomposed into 9 patches which are then randomly
shufﬂed and used to form images of the same dimension of
the original ones. The Maximal Hamming distance algorithm
is used to deﬁne a set of patch permutations and assign an