UNDER REVIEW 16
models. The main idea behind federated learning is to have
each node learn on its own local data and not share either
the data or the model parameters. FL improves data privacy
and efﬁciency in machine learning performed over networks of
distributed devices, such as mobile phones, IoT and wearable
devices, etc. While FL achieves better privacy and efﬁciency,
existing methods ignore the fact that the data on each node
are collected in a non-i.i.d manner, leading to domain shift
between nodes [193]. Models trained with federated learning
can still fail to generalize to new devices due to the problem
of domain shift. Thus it is of great importance to develop
domain adaptation algorithms for federated learning [209].
Such algorithms should be able to align the representations
learned among different source and target devices.
DA on the Edge. Nowadays, many vision-based perception
models are deployed in edge devices, e.g. mobile phones,
autonomous cars, and security cameras. These edge devices are
usually deployed in different environments, with substantial
need for domain adaptation. Different networks need to be
personalized via learning on the users’ private data. Sending
all the user data to the server, and training millions of networks
for all the users would be very expensive. Instead, training
networks on the device not only decreases computational
complexity, but it also protects privacy since the collected data
need not leave the device. While the edge devices normally
have a limited budget in terms of computation and power,
almost all the current state-of-the-art DA methods, e.g. the
adversarial generative methods, require training on high-end
GPUs for days. Invertible neural networks [210, 211] are
beneﬁcial to mitigate the memory limitation problem. Other
methods, such as quantization, pruning, neural architecture
search, and software-hardware co-design, can also be used for
efﬁcient on-device training. Performing DA on the edge with
efﬁcient deep learning techniques is a practical and fruitful
research area to explore.
C. New Applications of DA
Robotics. Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are typ-
ically trained in simulation environments. There are two
main reasons for this: ﬁrst, RL algorithms normally require
many interactions with the environment, while getting data
from the real-world is relatively slow compared to simulation
environments that can be sped up; second, training an agent
in the real-world would damage the environment as well as
the agent itself especially when the policy is not fully well
learned. However, if we want to apply the policy learned in
simulation into real-world, the domain difference needs to be
handled. Methods such as domain randomization [212] have
been proposed to mitigate the visual difference of the domains.
Normally, the source and target environments/domains are
similar in terms of dynamics of both the environments and
agents. An interesting direction is how to transfer if we know
the detailed difference of the dynamics.
Video Analysis. Current methods mainly focus on adapting
images from the source domain to the target domain. Adapting
videos is more challenging and worth studying. Effectively
exploring the temporal correlation of videos may signiﬁcantlyimprove the DA performance. Existing video style transfer
methods [213–215] may fail to work for DA, since the seman-
tics of generated videos cannot be guaranteed to be preserved.
Imposing some semantic constraint may help to solve this
problem. Further, maintaining the temporal consistency [216]
is an important factor. Audio is also an important channel in
videos, which is not considered in these methods.
Subjective Attributes. Existing DA methods work on
objective tasks, such as object classiﬁcation and semantic
segmentation, while the adaptation for the understanding of
subjective attributes, such as personality [217], aesthetics and
emotions [218, 219], has been rarely explored. There are
many other challenges to adapt these subjective attributes.
Take visual emotion for example: although the transferred
images with pixel-level alignment may not change the high-
level semantics, the emotion may still be changed [6, 7].
Employing emotion-speciﬁc distance measure, such as Mikels’
emotion wheel [7], may help to tackle this problem. Further,
emotions may be evoked by different features, such as low-
level artistic elements ( e.g.color) for abstract paintings and
high-level semantics for natural images [199]. First deter-
mining the image style and then conducting adaptation with
corresponding semantic consistency may perform better.
D. Brave New Perspectives
DA in the Wild. So far all the domain adaptation works
mainly focus on a neat setting, however, domain adapta-
tion problems in the real world can be a pretty complex
combination of different “clean” settings. For example, in
a practical domain adaptation setting, there may be several
source domains available: some source domains have no
labeled examples, some have few labeled samples, and some
have abundant labeled samples. At the same time, the label
spaces of the source domains and target domains may not be
exactly the same. There may also be multiple target domains,
with some target domains that have classes not existing in
any source domains. Solving practical DA problems in the
real-world remains an under-explored ﬁeld.
Model Robustness of DA. Due to the wide success of
deep neural networks and their unexpected vulnerability of
adversarial examples, there has been much attention placed
on evaluating and quantifying the robustness of neural net-
works [220, 221]. However, all the current DA work only
focus on boosting the performance on the target domain,
without any consideration on the robustness of the adapted
model. Investigating how to perform domain adaptation while
maintaining the robustness of the model on the target domain
is an interesting direction to explore.
Neural Architecture Search for DA. Existing domain
adaptation models usually manually design a speciﬁc neural
network architecture based the proposed algorithm. However,
there is not much work to automatically learn the optimal
network architecture to address the domain shift issue. Neural
architecture search (NAS) [222] is an emerging direction that
automatically looks for the optimal neural network architecture
for better performance or higher computational efﬁciency.
With the success of NAS, we suggest the research on auto-
matically learning optimal network architecture that can be