UNDER REVIEW 8
discriminator converges quickly during training, causing the
gradients to vanish. A gradient reversal layer was proposed to
achieve domain adversarial training with a single feed-forward
network with standard backpropagation and stochastic gradient
descent. Tzeng et al. [11] proposed Adversarial Discriminative
Domain Adaptation (ADDA), using an inverted label GAN
loss to split the optimization process into two independent
objectives for the generator and discriminator.
Besides aligning marginal distributions, several methods
also align conditional or joint distributions. Long et al.
[62] considered aligning conditional distribution across do-
mains, and proposed Conditional Domain Adversarial Net-
work (CDAN). Based on DANN [58], they used conditional
discriminator D(fg)with improved discriminability, where
fis feature extractor and gis classiﬁer, to capture the
cross-covariance between feature representations and classiﬁer
predictions. To extend joint distribution alignment, Du et al.
[67] used dual adversarial strategy to train a dual-discriminator
to pit against each other. Cicek et al. [63] also aimed for joint
distribution P(d; y)alignment over domain dand label yby a
joint predictor and aligned its output with classiﬁer’s predic-
tion.After analyzing the drawbacks of feature-level alignment
methods, Liu et al. [65] proposed Transferable Adversarial
Training (TAT), not only adapting feature representations from
difference domains, but also generating transferable examples
to make the classiﬁer learn a more robust decision boundary.
Xu et al. [66] explored two common limitations in current
adversarial-based methods. Sampling from source and target
domains separately is insufﬁcient to ensure domain-invariance
at the whole latent space, and does not give the discriminator
a hard label to judge real and fake samples. They proposed
a mixed version of the discriminator to guarantee domain-
invariance in a more continuous latent space, thus improv-
ing the robustness of models performance. Chen et al. [68]
adopted the concept of self-training. They analyzed the noise
of pseudo-labels in the confusion matrix and proposed corre-
spondingly an adversarial-learned loss to accurately estimate
the confusion matrix. In this way, their proposed method
inherits the strength of both adversarial learning and self-
training paradigm.
Hoffman et al. [57] made the very ﬁrst effort for domain
adaptation in semantic segmentation. They employed a pixel-
level adversarial loss to enforce the network to extract domain-
invariant features for semantic segmentation and further ap-
plied category-speciﬁc constraints, e.g.pixel percentage his-
tograms. Instead of only performing domain adversarial glob-
ally, Chen et al. [59] proposed to perform feature alignment
jointly at the global and class-wise levels by leveraging soft
labels from source and target-domain data. Hong et al. [60]
proposed to learn a conditional generator to transform features
of synthetic images to real-image like features, and perform
domain adversarial training on the learned features. However,
the proposed method is network-speciﬁc and only applied
to the FCN model structure. While previous works mostly
perform feature alignment in the middle of a network, Tsai et
al. [61] adopted adversarial learning in the output space. To
further enhance the adapted model, they constructed a multi-
level adversarial network to effectively perform output spacedomain adaptation at different feature levels. To address DA
in object detection, [126, 129] applied multi-level domain
alignment with adversarial training, and Chen et al. [45]
performed domain alignment on both image level and instance
level. Weak alignment model was introduce in [127] which
focused the adversarial alignment loss on images that are
globally similar, putting less emphasis on aligning images
which are globally dissimilar. Zhu et al. [125] instead proposed
to perform adversarial learning on region level for domain
alignment. Recently, Zhent et al. [131] proposed a coarase-
to-ﬁne feature adaptation approach for object detection. Dif-
ferent from image level or instance level feature alignment,
foreground regions are extracted by attention mechanism, and
aligned through multi-layer adversarial learning. Based on
prototypical representations, Hu et al. [64] recently proposed a
Prototypical Adversarial Learning scheme to align both feature
representations and intermediate prototypes across domains.
D. Adversarial Generative Models (Table V)
Adversarial generative models combine the domain discrim-
inative model with a generative component generally based
on generative adversarial nets (GANs) [181], which include
a generator gand a discriminator d.gtakes random noise
zas input to generate a virtual image, while dtakes the
output of gand real images xas input to classify whether
an image is real or generated. The learning process is that
dtries to maximize the probability of correctly classifying
real and generated images, while gtries to generate images to
maximize the probability of dmaking a mistake. The Coupled
Generative Adversarial Networks (CoGAN) [180] is composed
of a tuple of GANs, and each is responsible for synthesizing
images in one domain. CoGAN corresponds to a constrained
min-max game of two teams, each with two players.
Instead of taking random noise as input, the generator of
more recent GAN based methods is usually conditioned on
the source data. Shrivastava et al. [23] proposed simulated and
unsupervised learning (SimGAN) to improve the realism of a
simulator’s output using unlabeled real data. The discrimina-
tor’s loss in SimGAN is the same as is used in a traditional
GAN, while a self-regularization loss is added in the reﬁner
(generator) loss to ensure that the reﬁned data do not change
much, which aims to preserve the annotation information. The
generator in pixel-level DA [70] is conditioned on both a noise
vector and an image from the source domain. To penalize large
low-level differences between the source and generated images
for foreground pixels only, the model learns to minimize a
masked Pairwise Mean Squared Error (PMSE) which only
calculates the masked pixels (foreground) of the source and
the generated images. Sankaranarayanan et al. [73] proposed
to learn a mutual feature embedding for source and target
images, and to generate intermediate domain images from
source and target embeddings. They also designed a multi-
class discriminator to encourage the model to extract more
class-discriminative features.
To overcome the under-constrained nature of GAN, [182]
proposed CycleGAN with a cycle-consistency constraint.
Based on the CycleGAN loss, some effective adaptation