UNDER REVIEW 2
Task loss
Discrepancy 
lossSource data
Target dataClassifier Feature extractor
Feature extractorWeight sharing
(a) Discrepancy-based methods
Task loss
Adversarial 
lossSource data
Target dataClassifier Feature extractor
Discriminator Feature extractorWeight sharing (b) Adversarial discriminative methods
Task loss
Adversarial 
lossSource data
Target dataClassifierFeature 
extractor
Discriminator
Generator
Adapted data
GAN loss
Feature 
extractorWeight 
sharing Discriminator
(c) Adversarial generative methods
Task loss
Self-supervised 
lossSource data
Target dataClassifier Feature extractor
Auxiliary head Feature extractorWeight sharing (d) Self-supervision-based methods
Fig. 2. Classiﬁcation of widely employed framework of different single-source deep unsupervised domain adaptation (DUDA) pipelines. Most existing methods
can be obtained by employing different component values, slightly changing the architecture, or combining different pipelines.
model from a labeled source domain that can generalize well
to a different (but related) unlabeled or sparsely labeled target
domain. It belongs to the sample-efﬁcient learning class [10],
together with zero-shot learning, few-shot learning, and self-
supervised learning. We brieﬂy compare domain adaptation
with other methods in this category. While the unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) does not require the annotations
of target data, it usually needs a sufﬁcient number of unla-
beled target samples to train the model [11]. Compared to
UDA, zero-shot learning does not need either the target data
annotations or the unlabeled target samples [12, 13]. However,
existing methods often require some auxiliary information,
such as the attributes of the images, or the description of
the classes [14, 15]. Further, zero-shot learning is trained on
known/seen classes and tested on unknown/unseen classes,
which demands the model to generalize from known/seen
classes to unknown/unseen classes. Since the known/seen
classes and the unknown/unseen classes are from different
distributions, there is no concept of domain shift in zero-
shot learning. Different from zero-shot learning, DA deals
with the same learning tasks on different domains. Taking
image classiﬁcation as an example, both source data and target
data have the same classes. Few-shot learning shares similar
setting with zero-shot learning. The difference is that few-
shot learning has a few ( e.g.5 or 10) annotated samples for
the unknown/unseen classes [16–18]. Few-shot learning and
zero-shot learning can also be grouped as low-shot learning.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a learning paradigm that
captures the intrinsic patterns and properties of input data
without using human-provided labels [19]. The basic idea of
SSL is to construct some auxiliary tasks solely based on the
data itself without using human-annotated labels and force the
network to learn meaningful representations by performing
the auxiliary tasks well. Typical self-supervised learning ap-
proaches generally involve two aspects: constructing auxiliary
tasks and deﬁning loss functions [20]. The auxiliary tasks are
designed to encourage the model to learn meaningful represen-tations of input data. The loss functions are deﬁned to measure
the difference between a modelâ ˘A´Zs prediction and a ﬁxed
target, the similarities of sample pairs in a representation space
(e.g., contrastive loss), or the difference between probability
distributions ( e.g., adversarial loss). Compared with domain
adaptation, SSL does not speciﬁcally address the domain shift
problem between different domains.
b) Domain Adaptation Challenges: Albeit DA is a very
effective method, it is not without blemish. The main challenge
for single-source UDA is domain shift [1], i.e., the difference
between the source and target distributions that leads to
unreliable predictions on the target domain. Typically, three
types of domain shift are considered: covariate shift, label
shift, and concept drift (see Section II for details).
As Figure 1 shows, the presence of domain shift causes
the direct transfer of models trained on the source domain
to perform poorly on the target domain. Figure 1 (a) shows
an example of image-level object classiﬁcation on the Ofﬁce-
Home dataset [21]. When training a ResNet-50 model [22] on
the target Clipart domain, we can obtain a promising 96.0%
object classiﬁcation accuracy. However, if we train the model
on the source Art domain and directly test it on the target
domain, the accuracy signiﬁcantly drops to 34.9%.
Figure 1 (b) shows an example of simulation-to-real adap-
tation, which is a more realistic application with unlimited
synthetic labeled data created by graphics and simulation
infrastructure. For example, CARLA2, GTA-V3, and Auto-
ware.AI4are three popular simulators for autonomous driving
research. While there are ongoing efforts to make simulations
more realistic, it is very difﬁcult to model all the characteristics
of real data [23]. Using the FCN model [24] to conduct pixel-
wise segmentation on a real target dataset Cityscapes [3],
direct transfer from synthetic GTA [25] only obtains a mean
intersection-over-union (mIoU) of 21.7%, which is much lower
2http://www.carla.org
3https://www.rockstargames.com/V
4https://www.autoware.ai/