2017), express all possible meanings of a word as
a single vector representation and cannot disam-
biguate the word senses based on the surround-
ing context. Over the last two years, ELMo (Pe-
ters et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)
present strong solutions that can provide contex-
tualized word representations. By pre-training on
a large text corpus as a language model, ELMo
can create a context-sensitive embedding for each
word in a given sentence, which will be fed into
downstream tasks. Compared to ELMo, BERT is
deeper and contains much more parameters, thus
possessing greater representation power. More im-
portantly, rather than simply providing word em-
beddings as features, BERT can be incorporated
into a downstream task and gets ﬁne-tuned as an
integrated task-speciﬁc architecture.
BERT has, in general, been found to be supe-
rior to ELMo and far superior to non-contextual
embeddings on a variety of tasks, including those
in the clinical domain (Si et al., 2019). For
this reason, we only examine BERT here, rather
than including ELMo or non-contextual embed-
ding methods.
Contextual Clinical & Biomedical Embeddings
Several works have explored the utility of con-
textual models in the clinical and biomedical do-
mains. BioBERT (Lee et al., 2019) trains a BERT
model over a corpus of biomedical research arti-
cles sourced from PubMed3article abstracts and
PubMed Central4article full texts. They ﬁnd
the speciﬁcity offered by biomedical texts trans-
lated to improved performance on several biomed-
ical NLP tasks, and fully release their pre-trained
BERT model.
On clinical text, (Khin et al., 2018) uses a
general-domain pretrained ELMo model towards
the task of clinical text de-identiﬁcation, report-
ing near state-of-the-art performance on the i2b2
2014 task (Stubbs and Uzuner, 2015; Stubbs et al.,
2015) and state of the art performance on several
axes of the HIPAA PHI dataset.
Two works that we know of train contextual em-
bedding models on clinical corpora.
(Zhu et al., 2018) trains an ELMo model over
a corpus of mixed clinical discharge summaries,
clinical radiology notes and medically oriented
wikipedia articles, then demonstrates improved
performance on the i2b2 2010 task (Uzuner et al.,
3https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
4https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/2011). They release a pre-trained ELMo model
along with their work, enabling further clinical
NLP research to work with these powerful con-
textual embeddings.
(Si et al., 2019), released in late February 2019,
train a clinical note corpus BERT language model
and uses complex task-speciﬁc models to yield im-
provements over both traditional embeddings and
ELMo embeddings on the i2b2 2010 and 2012
tasks (Sun et al., 2013b,a) and the SemEval 2014
task 7 (Pradhan et al., 2014) and 2015 task 14 (El-
hadad et al.) tasks, establishing new state-of-the-
art results on all four corpora. However, this work
neither releases their embeddings for the larger
community nor examines the performance oppor-
tunities offered by ﬁne-tuning BioBERT with clin-
ical text or by training note-type speciﬁc embed-
ding models, as we do.
3 Methods
In this section, we ﬁrst describe our clinical text
dataset, the details of the BERT training proce-
dure, and ﬁnally the speciﬁc tasks we examine.
3.1 Data
We use clinical text from the approximately 2 mil-
lion notes in the MIMIC-III v1.4 database (John-
son et al., 2016). Details of our text pre-processing
procedure can be found in Appendix A. Note that
while some of our tasks use a small subset of
MIMIC notes in their corpora, we do not try to ﬁl-
ter these notes out of our BERT pre-training proce-
dure. We expect the bias this induces is negligible
given the relative sizes of the two corpora.
We train two varieties of BERT on MIMIC
notes: Clinical BERT, which uses text from all
note types, and Discharge Summary BERT, which
uses only discharge summaries in an effort to tai-
lor the corpus to downstream tasks (which often
largely use discharge summaries).
Note that we train our clinical BERT instantia-
tions on all notes of the appropriate type(s), with-
out regard for whether or not any individual note
appeared in any of the train/test sets for the vari-
ous tasks we use (two of which use a small subset
of MIMIC notes either partially or completely as
their backing corpora). We feel this has a negligi-
ble impact given the dramatically larger size of the
entire MIMIC corpus relative to the various task
corpora.