Model MedNLI i2b2 2006 i2b2 2010 i2b2 2012 i2b2 2014
BERT 77:6% 93 :9 83 :5 75 :9 92 :8
BioBERT 80:8% 94:8 86:5 78 :9 93:0
Clinical BERT 80:8% 91 :5 86 :4 78 :5 92 :6
Discharge Summary BERT 80:6% 91 :9 86 :4 78 :4 92 :8
Bio+Clinical BERT 82:7% 94:7 87 :2 78:9 92:5
Bio+Discharge Summary BERT 82:7% 94:8 87:8 78:9 92 :7
Table 2: Accuracy (MedNLI) and Exact F1 score (i2b2) across various clinical NLP tasks.
ModelDisease Operations Generic
Glucose Seizure Pneumonia Transfer Admitted Discharge Beach Newspaper Table
BioBERTinsulin episode vaccine drainage admission admission coast news tables
exhaustion appetite infection division sinking wave rock ofﬁcial row
dioxide attack plague transplant hospital sight reef industry dinner
Clinicalpotassium headache consolidation transferred admission disposition shore publication scenario
sodium stroke tuberculosis admitted transferred transfer ocean organization compilation
sugar agitation infection arrival admit transferred land publicity technology
Table 3: Nearest neighbors for 3 sentinel words for each of 3 categories. In the Disease and operations
categories, clinical BERT appears to show greater cohesion within the clinical domain than BioBERT,
whereas for generic words, the methods do not differ much, as expected.
ture of de-ID challenges.
De-ID challenge data presents a different data
distribution than MIMIC text. In MIMIC, PHI is
identiﬁed and replaced with sentinel PHI mark-
ers, whereas in the de-ID task, PHI is masked with
synthetic, but realistic PHI. This data drift would
be problematic for any embedding model, but will
be especially damaging to contextual embedding
models like BERT because the underlying sen-
tence structure will have changed: in raw MIMIC,
sentences with PHI will universally have a sentinel
PHI token. In contrast, in the de-ID corpus, all
such sentences will have different synthetic masks,
meaning that a canonical, nearly constant sentence
structure present during BERT’s training will be
non-existent at task-time. For these reasons, we
think it is sensible that clinical BERT is not suc-
cessful on the de-ID corpora. Furthermore, this
is a good example for the community given how
prevalent the assumption is that contextual embed-
ding models trained on task-like corpora will offer
dramatic improvements.
Overall, we feel our results demonstrates the
utility of using domain-speciﬁc contextual embed-
dings for non de-ID clinical NLP tasks. Addition-
ally, on one task Discharge Summary BERT offers
performance improvements over Clinical BERT,
so it may be that adding greater speciﬁcity to the
underlying corpus is helpful in some cases. We
release both models with this work for public use.Qualitative Embedding Comparisons Table 3
shows the nearest neighbors for 3 words each
from 3 categories under BioBERT and Clinical
BERT. These lists suggest that Clinical BERT re-
tains greater cohesion around medical or clinic-
operations relevant terms than does BioBERT. For
example, the word “Discharge” is most closely
associated with “admission,” “wave,” and “sight”
under BioBERT, yet only the former seems rele-
vant to clinical operations. In contrast, under Clin-
ical BERT, the associated words all are meaningful
in a clinical operations context.
Limitations & Future Work This work has
several notable limitations. First, we do not ex-
periment with any more advanced model architec-
tures atop our embeddings. This likely hurts our
performance. Second, MIMIC only contains notes
from the intensive care unit of a single healthcare
institution (BIDMC). Differences in care practices
across institutions are signiﬁcant, and using notes
from multiple institutions could offer signiﬁcant
gains. Lastly, our model shows no improvements
for either de-ID task we explored. If our hypoth-
esis is correct as to its cause, a possible solution
could entail introducing synthetic de-ID into the
source clinical text and using that as the source for
de-ID tasks going forward.