DenoiserDenoiser                      
−

Student
TeacherConsistency LossDiscriminator Adversarial Loss
Stop Grad\\𝐳𝜎𝑖+1
𝐳𝜎𝑖𝐳Codec
Decoderwaveform
𝑓𝜃(𝐳𝜎𝑖+1,𝜎𝑖+1,c)
𝑓𝜃(𝐳𝜎𝑖,𝜎𝑖,c)ො𝐳Figure 3: An illustration of adversarial consistency training.
where ais an adjustable constant, making the training more robust to outliers as it imposes a smaller
penalty for large errors than ℓ2loss. The parameters θ−of teacher model are
θ−←−stopgrad (θ), (13)
which are identical to the student parameters θ. This approach Song and Dhariwal (2023) has been
demonstrated to improve sample quality of previous strategies that employ varying decay rates Song
et al. (2023). The weighting function refers to
λ(σi) =1
σi+1−σi(14)
which emphasizes the loss of smaller noise levels. LCM through consistency training can generate
speech with acceptable quality in a few steps, but it still falls short of previous methods. Therefore,
to further enhance the quality of the generated samples, we integrate adversarial training.
3.3.2 Adversarial Training
For the adversarial objective, the generated samples ˆz←fθ(zσ, σ, c)and real samples zare passed
to the discriminator Dηwhich aims to distinguish between them, where ηrefers to the trainable
parameters. Thus, we employ adversarial training loss
Ladv(θ, η) =Ez[logDη(z)] +EσEzσ[log(1 −Dη(fθ(zσ, σ, c)))]. (15)
In this way, the error signal from the discriminator guides fθto produce more realistic outputs.
For details, we use a frozen pre-trained speech language model SLM and a trainable lightweight
discriminator head Dhead to build the discriminator. Since the current SLM is trained on the speech
waveform, we covert both zandˆzto ground truth waveform and predicted waveform using the
codec decoder. To further increase the similarity between prompt audio and generated audio, our
discriminator is conditioned on the prompt audio feature. This prompt feature Fprompt is extracted
using SLM on prompt audio and applies average pooling on the time axis. Therefore,
Dη=Dhead(Fprompt⊙Fgt, Fprompt⊙Fpred) (16)
where FgtandFpredrefer to feature extracted through SLM for ground truth waveform and predicted
waveform. The discriminator head consists of several 1D convolution layers. The input feature of the
discriminator is conditioned on Fprompt via projection Miyato and Koyama (2018).
3.3.3 Combined Together
Since there is a large gap on the loss scale between consistency loss and adversarial loss, it can lead
to instability and failure in training. Therefore, we follow Esser et al .(2021) to compute the adaptive
weight with
λadv=∥∇θLLN
ct(θ, θ−)∥
∥∇θLLadv(θ, η)∥(17)
where θLis the last layer of the neural network in LCM. The final loss of training LCM is defined as
LN
ct(θ, θ−)+λadvLadv(θ, η).This adaptive weighting significantly stabilizes the training by balancing
the gradient scale of each term.
6