Prosody 
RegressionProsody 
Refinement
Initial 
PredictionResidual
+Prosody 
FeaturePredicted
Prosody Noise
deterministicstochastic
𝜶 ∗ResidualFigure 4: An illustration of prosody generator.
3.4 Prosody Generator
3.4.1 Analysis of Prosody Prediction
Previous regression methods for prosody prediction Ren et al .(2020); Shen et al .(2024), due to their
deterministic mappings and assumptions of unimodal distribution, often fail to capture the inherent
diversity and expressiveness of human speech prosody. This leads to predictions that lack variation
and can appear over-smoothed. On the other hand, diffusion methods Le et al .(2023); Li et al .(2023)
for prosody prediction offer a promising alternative by providing greater prosody diversity. However,
they come with challenges regarding stability, and the potential for unnatural prosody. Additionally,
the iterative inference process in DMs requires a significant number of sampling steps that may also
hinder real-time application. Meanwhile, LM-based methods Jiang et al .(2024a); Wang et al .(2023a)
also need a long time for inference. To alleviate these issues, our prosody generator consists of a
prosody regression module and a prosody refinement module to enhance the diversity of prosody
regression results with efficient one-step consistency model sampling.
3.4.2 Prosody Refinement via Consistency Model
As shown in 4, our prosody generator consists of two parts which are prosody regression and prosody
refinement. We first train the prosody regression module to get a deterministic output. Next, we freeze
the parameters of the prosody regression module and use the residual of ground truth prosody and
deterministic predicted prosody as the training target for prosody refinement. We adopt a consistency
model as a prosody refinement module. The conditional feature of the consistency model is the
feature from prosody regression before the final projection layer. Thus, the residual from a stochastic
sampler refines the output of a deterministic prosody regression and produces a diverse set of plausible
prosody under the same transcription and audio prompt. One option for the final prosody output pfinal
can be represented as:
pfinal=pres+pinit, (18)
where pfinaldenotes the final prosody output, presrepresents the residual output from the prosody
refinement module, capturing the variations between the ground truth prosody and the deterministic
prediction, pinitis the initial deterministic prosody prediction from the prosody regression module.
However, this formulation may negatively affect prosody stability, a similar observation is found in
Vyas et al .(2023); Le et al .(2023). More specifically, higher diversity may cause less stability and
sometimes produce unnatural prosody. To address this, we introduce a control factor αthat finely
tunes the balance between stability and diversity in the prosodic output:
pfinal=αpres+pinit (19)
where αis a scalar value ranging between 0 and 1. This adjustment allows for controlled incorporation
of variability into the prosody, mitigating issues related to stability while still benefiting from the
diversity offered by the prosody refinement module.
3.5 Applications
This section elaborates on the practical applications of FlashSpeech. We delve into its deployment
across various tasks such as zero-shot TTS, speech editing, voice conversion, and diverse speech
sampling. All the sample audios of applications are available on the demo page.
7