•We propose a prosody generator module that enhances the diversity of prosody while
maintaining stability.
•FlashSpeech significantly outperforms strong baselines in audio quality and matches them
in speaker similarity. Remarkably, it achieves this at a speed approximately 20 times faster
than comparable systems, demonstrating unprecedented efficiency.
2 Related work
2.1 Large-Scale Speech Synthesis
Motivated by the success of the large language model, the speech research community has recently
shown increasing interest in scaling the sizes of model and training data to bolster generalization
capabilities, producing natural speech with diverse speaker identities and prosody under zero-shot
settings. The pioneering work is V ALL-E Wang et al .(2023a), which adopts the Encodec Défossez
et al.(2022) to discretize the audio waveform into tokens. Therefore, a language model can be trained
via in-context learning that can generate the target utterance where the style is consistent with prompt
utterance. However, generating audio in such an autoregressive manner Wang et al .(2023b); Peng
et al.(2024)can lead to unstable prosody, word skipping, and repeating issues Ren et al .(2020); Tan
et al.(2021); Shen et al .(2024). To ensure the robustness of the system, non-autoregressive methods
such as NaturalSpeech2 Shen et al .(2024) and V oicebox Le et al .(2023) utilize diffusion-style model
(VP-diffusion Song et al .(2020) or flow-matching Lipman et al .(2022)) to learn the distribution of a
continuous intermediate vector such as mel-spectrogram or latent vector of codec. Both LM-based
methods Zhao et al .(2023) and diffusion-based methods show superior performance in speech
generation tasks. However, their generation is slow due to the iterative computation. Considering
that many speech generation scenarios require real-time inference and low computational costs, we
employ the latent consistency model for large-scale speech generation that inference with one or two
steps while maintaining high audio quality.
2.2 Acceleration of Speech Synthesis
Since early neural speech generation models Tan et al .(2021) use autoregressive models such as
Tacotron Wang et al .(2017) and TransformerTTS Li et al .(2019), causing slow inference speed,
withO(N)computation, where Nis the sequence length. To address the slow inference speed, Fast-
Speech Ren et al .(2020, 2019) proposes to generate a mel-spectrogram in a non-autoregressive man-
ner. However, these models Ren et al .(2022) result in blurred and over-smoothed mel-spectrograms
due to the regression loss they used and the capability of modeling methods. To further enhance
the speech quality, diffusion models are utilized Popov et al .(2021a); Jeong et al .(2021); Popov
et al.(2021b) which increase the computation to O(T), where T is the diffusion steps. Therefore,
distillation techniques Luo (2023) for diffusion-based methods such as CoMoSpeech Ye et al .(2023),
CoMoSVC Lu et al .(2024) and Reflow-TTS Guan et al .(2023) emerge to reduce the sampling steps
back to O(1), but require additional pre-trained diffusion as the teacher model. Unlike previous
distillation techniques, which require extra training for the diffusion model as a teacher and are
limited by its performance, our proposed adversarial consistency training technique can directly
train from scratch, significantly reducing training costs. In addition, previous acceleration methods
only validate speaker-limited recording-studio datasets with limited data diversity. To the best of
our knowledge, FlashSpeech is the first work that reduces the computation of a large-scale speech
generation system back to O(1).
2.3 Consistency Model
The consistency model is proposed in Song et al .(2023); Song and Dhariwal (2023) to generate
high-quality samples by directly mapping noise to data. Furthermore, many variants Kong et al .
(2023); Lu et al .(2023); Sauer et al .(2023); Kim et al .(2023a) are proposed to further increase the
generation quality of images. The latent consistency model is proposed by Luo et al .(2023) which
can directly predict the solution of PF-ODE in latent space. However, the original LCM employs
consistency distillation on the pre-trained latent diffusion model (LDM) which leverages large-scale
off-the-shelf image diffusion models Rombach et al .(2022). Since there are no pre-trained large-scale
TTS models in the speech community, and inspired by the techniques Song and Dhariwal (2023);
3