FlashSpeech: Efficient Zero-Shot Speech Synthesis
Zhen Ye1, Zeqian Ju5, Haohe Liu3, Xu Tan2, Jianyi Chen1, Yiwen Lu1, Peiwen Sun1, Jiahao Pan1,
Weizhen Bian1,6, Shulin He1,4, Wei Xue1†, Qifeng Liu1, and Yike Guo1†
1The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology2Microsoft3University of Surrey
4Inner Mongolia University5University of Science and Technology of China
6National University of Singapore
Abstract
Recent progress in large-scale zero-shot speech synthesis has been significantly
advanced by language models and diffusion models. However, the generation
process of both methods is slow and computationally intensive. Efficient speech
synthesis using a lower computing budget to achieve quality on par with previous
work remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we present FlashSpeech, a
large-scale zero-shot speech synthesis system with approximately 5% of the in-
ference time compared with previous work. FlashSpeech is built on the latent
consistency model and applies a novel adversarial consistency training approach
that can train from scratch without the need for a pre-trained diffusion model as
the teacher. Furthermore, a new prosody generator module enhances the diversity
of prosody, making the rhythm of the speech sound more natural. The generation
processes of FlashSpeech can be achieved efficiently with one or two sampling
steps while maintaining high audio quality and high similarity to the audio prompt
for zero-shot speech generation. Our experimental results demonstrate the supe-
rior performance of FlashSpeech. Notably, FlashSpeech can be about 20 times
faster than other zero-shot speech synthesis systems while maintaining comparable
performance in terms of voice quality and similarity. Furthermore, FlashSpeech
demonstrates its versatility by efficiently performing tasks like voice conversion,
speech editing, and diverse speech sampling. Audio samples can be found in
https://flashspeech.github.io/.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the landscape of speech synthesis has been transformed by the advent of large-scale
generative models. Consequently, the latest research efforts have achieved notable advancements in
zero-shot speech synthesis systems by significantly increasing the size of both datasets and models.
Zero-shot speech synthesis, such as text-to-speech (TTS), voice conversion (VC) and Editing, aims
to generate speech that incorporates unseen speaker characteristics from a reference audio segment
during inference, without the need for additional training. Current advanced zero-shot speech
synthesis systems typically leverage language models (LMs) Wang et al .(2023a); Yang et al .(2023);
Zhang et al .(2023); Kharitonov et al .(2023); Wang et al .(2023b); Peng et al .(2024); Kim et al .
(2024) and diffusion-style models Shen et al .(2024); Kim et al .(2023b); Le et al .(2023); Jiang et al .
(2023b) for in-context speech generation on the large-scale dataset. However, the generation process
of these methods needs a long-time iteration. For example, V ALL-E Wang et al .(2023a) builds
on the language model to predict 75 audio token sequences for a 1-second speech, in its first-stage
autoregressive (AR) token sequence generation. When using a non-autoregressive (NAR) latent
diffusion model Rombach et al .(2022) based framework, NaturalSpeech 2 Shen et al .(2024) still
requires 150 sampling steps. As a result, although these methods can produce human-like speech,
they require significant computational time and cost. Some efforts have been made to accelerate the
Preprint. Under review. †: Corresponding authors.arXiv:2404.14700v4  [eess.AS]  24 Oct 2024