4.3.1 Evaluation Baselines
•V ALL-E Wang et al .(2023a): V ALL-E predicts codec tokens using both AR and NAR
models. RTF7is obtained from Kim et al .(2024); Le et al .(2023). We use our reproduced
results for MOS, Sim, and WER. Additionally, we do a preference test with their official
demo.
•V oicebox Le et al .(2023): V oicebox uses flow-matching to predict maksed mel-spectrogram.
RTF is from the original paper. We use our reproduced results for MOS, Sim, and WER. We
also implement a preference test with their official demo.
•NaturalSpeech2 Shen et al .(2024): NaturalSpeech2 uses a latent diffusion model to predict
latent features of codec. The RTF is from the original paper. the Sim, WER and samples for
MOS are obtained through communication with the authors. We also do a preference test
with their official demo.
•Mega-TTS Jiang et al .(2023a)8: Mega-TTS uses both language model and GAN to predict
mel-spectrogram. We obtain RTF from mobilespeech Ji et al .(2024) and WER from the
original paper. We do a preference test with their official demo.
•ClaM-TTS Kim et al .(2024): ClaM-TTS uses the AR model to predict mel codec tokens.
We obtain the objective evaluation results from the original paper and do a preference test
with their official demo.
4.3.2 Generation Quality
FlashSpeech stands out significantly in terms of speaker quality, surpassing other baselines in both
CMOS and audio quality preference tests. Notably, our method closely approaches ground truth
recordings, underscoring its effectiveness. These results affirm the superior quality of FlashSpeech in
speech synthesis. our method.
4.3.3 Generation Similarity
Our evaluation of speaker similarity utilizes Sim, SMOS, and speaker similarity preference tests,
where our methods achieve 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place rankings, respectively. These findings validate our
methods’ ability to achieve comparable speaker similarity to other methods. Despite our training data
(MLS) containing approximately 5k speakers, fewer than most other methods (e.g., Librilight with
about 7k speakers or self-collected data), we believe that increasing the number of speakers in our
methods can further enhance speaker similarity.
4.3.4 Robustness
Our methods achieve a WER of 2.7, placing them in the first echelon. This is due to the non-
autoregressive nature of our methods, which ensures robustness.
4.3.5 Generation Speed
FlashSpeech achieves a remarkable approximately 20x faster inference speed compared to previous
work. Considering its excellent audio quality, robustness, and comparable speaker similarity, our
method stands out as an efficient and effective solution in the field of large-scale speech synthesis.
4.4 Ablation Studies
4.4.1 Ablation studies of LCM
We explored the impact of different pre-trained models in adversarial training on UTMOS and Sim-O.
As shown in the table 2, the baseline, which employs consistency training alone, achieved a UTMOS
7In CLaM-TTS and V oicebox, they report the inference time for generating 10 seconds of speech. Therefore,
we divide by 10 to obtain the time for generating 1 second of speech (RTF).
8Since we do not find any audio samples for Mega-TTS2 Jiang et al .(2024b) under the 3-second cross-
sentence setting, we are not able to compare with them.
11