4.1.3 Model Details
The model structures of the prompt encoder and phoneme encoder are followShen et al .(2024). The
neural function part in LCM is almost the same as the Shen et al .(2024). We rescale the sinusoidal
position embedding in the neural function part by a factor of 1000. As for the prosody generator, we
adopt 30 non-casual wavenet Oord et al .(2016) layers for the neural function part in the prosody
refinement module and the same configurations for prosody regression parts in Shen et al .(2024).
And we set α= 0.2for the prosody refinement module empirically. For the discriminator’s head,
we stack 5 convolutional layers with weight normalization Salimans and Kingma (2016) for binary
classification.
4.2 Evaluation Metrics
We use both objective and subjective evaluation metrics, including
•RTF : Real-time-factor (RTF) measures the time taken for the system to generate one second
of speech. This metric is crucial for evaluating the efficiency of our system, particularly for
applications requiring real-time processing. We measure the time of our system end-to-end
on an NVIDIA V100 GPU following Shen et al. (2024).
•Sim-O and Sim-R : These metrics assess the speaker similarity. Sim-R measures the
objective similarity between the synthesized speech and the reconstruction reference speech
through the audio codec, using features embedding extracted from the pre-trained speaker
verification model Wang et al .(2023a); Kim et al .(2024)4. Sim-O is calculated with the
original reference speech. Higher scores in Sim-O and Sim-R indicate a higher speaker
similarity.
•WER (Word Error Rate) : To evaluate the accuracy and clarity of synthesized speech from
the TTS system, we employ the Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) model Wang et al .
(2023a)5to transcribe generated audio. The discrepancies between these transcriptions and
original texts are quantified using the Word Error Rate (WER), a crucial metric indicating
intelligibility and robustness.
•CMOS, SMOS, UTMOS : we rank the comparative mean option score (CMOS) and
similarity mean option score (SMOS) using mturk. The prompt for CMOS refers to ’Please
focus on the audio quality and naturalness and ignore other factors.’. The prompt for SMOS
refers to ’Please focus on the similarity of the speaker to the reference, and ignore the
differences of content, grammar or audio quality.’ Each audio has been listened to by at
least 10 listeners. UTMOS Saeki et al .(2022) is a Speech MOS predictor6to measure the
naturalness of speech. We use it in ablation studies which reduced the cost for evaluation.
•Prosody JS Divergence : To evaluate the diversity and accuracy of the prosody prediction
in our TTS system, we include the Prosody JS Divergence metric. This metric employs the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence Menéndez et al .(1997) to quantify the divergence between
the predicted and ground truth prosody feature distributions. Prosody features, including
pitch, and duration, are quantized and their distributions in both synthesized and natural
speech are compared. Lower JS divergence values indicate closer similarity between the
predicted prosody features and those of the ground truth, suggesting a higher diversity of
the synthesized speech.
4.3 Experimental Results on Zero-shot TTS
Following Wang et al .(2023a), We employ LibriSpeech Panayotov et al .(2015) test-clean for zero-
shot TTS evaluation. We adopt the cross-sentence setting in Wang et al .(2023a) that we randomly
select 3-second clips as prompts from the same speaker’s speech. The results are summarized in table
1 and figure 5.
4https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech/tree/main/downstreams/speaker_verification
5https://huggingface.co/facebook/hubert-large-ls960-ft
6https://github.com/tarepan/SpeechMOS
10