Figure 1: The inference time comparisons of different zero-shot speech synthesis systems using the
real-time factor (RTF).
generation process. V oicebox Le et al .(2023) adopts flow-matching Lipman et al .(2022) so that
fewer sampling steps (NFE1: 64) can be achieved because of the optimal transport path. ClaM-TTS
Kim et al .(2024) proposes a mel-codec with a superior compression rate and a latent language model
that generates a stack of tokens at once. Although the slow generation speed issue has been somewhat
alleviated, the inference speed is still far from satisfactory for practical applications. Moreover, the
substantial computational time of these approaches leads to significant computational cost overheads,
presenting another challenge.
The fundamental limitation of speech generation stems from the intrinsic mechanisms of language
models and diffusion models, which require considerable time either auto-regressively or through a
large number of denoising steps. Hence, the primary objective of this work is to accelerate inference
speed and reduce computational costs while preserving generation quality at levels comparable to
the prior research. In this paper, we propose FlashSpeech as the next step towards efficient zero-
shot speech synthesis. To address the challenge of slow generation speed, we leverage the latent
consistency model (LCM) Luo et al .(2023), a recent advancement in generative models. Building
upon the previous non-autoregressive TTS system Shen et al .(2024), we adopt the encoder of a
neural audio codec to convert speech waveforms into latent vectors as the training target for our
LCM. To train this model, we propose a novel technique called adversarial consistency training,
which utilizes the capabilities of pre-trained speech language models Chen et al .(2022b); Hsu et al .
(2021); Baevski et al .(2020) as discriminators. This facilitates the transfer of knowledge from large
pre-trained speech language models to speech generation tasks, efficiently integrating adversarial
and consistency training to improve performance. The LCM is conditioned on prior vectors obtained
from a phoneme encoder, a prompt encoder, and a prosody generator. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our proposed prosody generator leads to more diverse expressions and prosody while preserving
stability.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose FlashSpeech, an efficient zero-shot speech synthesis system that generates voice
with high audio quality and speaker similarity in zero-shot scenarios.
•We introduce adversarial consistency training, a novel combination of consistency and
adversarial training leveraging pre-trained speech language models, for training the latent
consistency model from scratch, achieving speech generation in one or two steps.
1NFE: number of function evaluations.
2