(b)VAE-CNN
(c)vMF-VAE(d)HR-VAE(a)VAE-LSTM-base
Figure 2: Training curves of reconstruction loss and KL loss of (a) V AE-LSTM-base, (b) V AE-CNN, (c) vMF-
V AE, and (d) our model, based on the E2E training set using the inputless setting.
Input1. blue spice is a coffee shop in city centre .
2. giraffe is a coffee shop found near the bakers .
3. a pub in the city centre area called blue spice
4. pub located near caf ´e sicilia called cocum with a high customer rating
5. the cricketers is a one star coffee shop near the ranch that is not family friendly .vMF-V AE1. blue spice is a coffee in city centre . it is not , and
2. cotto is a coffee shop located near the bakers . . is 5 out of
3. a coffee in the city city area is blue spice spice . the is is
4. located located near caf ´e rouge , cotto has a high customer rating and a customer
5. the cricketers is a low rated coffee shop near the bakers that is a star , is isOurs1. blue spice is a coffee shop in city centre .
2. giraffe is a coffee shop located near the bakers .
3. a restaurant in the city centre called blue spice italian
4. located place near caf ´e sicilia called punter has a high customer rating
5. the cricketers is a one star coffee shop near ranch ranch that is not family friendly .
Table 3: Example input sentences from the E2E test dataset (top); sentences reconstructed by vMF-V AE (middle);
sentences reconstructed by our model (bottom).
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we present a simple and generic ar-
chitecture called holistic regularisation V AE (HR-
V AE), which can effectively avoid latent variable
collapse. In contrast to existing V AE-RNN models
which merely impose a standard normal distribu-
tion prior on the last hidden state of the RNN en-
coder, our HR-V AE model imposes regularisation
on all the hidden states, allowing a better regular-
isation of the model learning process. Empirical
results show that our model can effectively miti-
gate the latent variable collapse issue while giving
a better predictive performance than the baselines.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the award made by the
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences ResearchCouncil (Grant number: EP/P011829/1).
References
Philip Bachman. 2016. An architecture for deep, hier-
archical generative models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 4826–4834.
Samuel Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, An-
drew M Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy Ben-
gio. 2016. Generating sentences from a continu-
ous space. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL).
Adji B Dieng, Yoon Kim, Alexander M Rush, and
David M Blei. 2019. Avoiding latent variable col-
lapse with generative skip models. In The 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Statistics , pages 2397–2405.