A Stable Variational Autoencoder for Text Modelling
Ruizhe Li, Xiao Li, Chenghua Lin~, Matthew Collinsonand Rui Mao
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, UK
fr02rl17, x.li, matthew.collinson, r03rm16 g@abdn.ac.uk
~Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld, UK
c.lin@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
Variational Autoencoder (V AE) is a powerful
method for learning representations of high-
dimensional data. However, V AEs can suffer
from an issue known as latent variable collapse
(or KL loss vanishing), where the posterior
collapses to the prior and the model will ig-
nore the latent codes in generative tasks. Such
an issue is particularly prevalent when em-
ploying V AE-RNN architectures for text mod-
elling (Bowman et al., 2016). In this paper,
we present a simple architecture called holistic
regularisation V AE (HR-V AE), which can ef-
fectively avoid latent variable collapse. Com-
pared to existing V AE-RNN architectures, we
show that our model can achieve much more
stable training process and can generate text
with signiﬁcantly better quality.
1 Introduction
Variational Autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013) is a powerful method for learning
representations of high-dimensional data. How-
ever, recent attempts of applying V AEs to text
modelling are still far less successful compared
to its application to image and speech (Bach-
man, 2016; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Semeniuta et al.,
2017). When applying V AEs for text modelling,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs)1are commonly
used as the architecture for both encoder and de-
coder (Bowman et al., 2016; Xu and Durrett, 2018;
Dieng et al., 2019). While such a V AE-RNN
based architecture allows encoding and generating
sentences (in the decoding phase) with variable-
length effectively, it is also vulnerable to an issue
known as latent variable collapse (or KL loss van-
ishing), where the posterior collapses to the prior
and the model will ignore the latent codes in gen-
erative tasks.
1NB: here we refer RNN to any type of recurrent neural
architectures including LSTM and GRU.Various efforts have been made to alleviate the
latent variable collapse issue. Bowman et al.
(2016) uses KL annealing, where a variable weight
is added to the KL term in the cost function at
training time. Yang et al. (2017) discovered that
there is a trade-off between the contextual capacity
of the decoder and effective use of encoding infor-
mation, and developed a dilated CNN as decoder
which can vary the amount of conditioning con-
text. They also introduced a loss clipping strategy
in order to make the model more robust. Xu and
Durrett (2018) addressed the problem by replacing
the standard normal distribution for the prior with
the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution. With
vMF, the KL loss only depends on the concentra-
tion parameter which is ﬁxed during training and
testing, and hence results in a constant KL loss. In
a more recent work, Dieng et al. (2019) avoided
latent variable collapse by including skip connec-
tions in the generative model, where the skip con-
nections enforce strong links between the latent
variables and the likelihood function.
Although the aforementioned works show ef-
fectiveness in addressing the latent variable col-
lapse issue to some extent, they either require
carefully engineering to balance the weight be-
tween the reconstruction loss and KL loss (Bow-
man et al., 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016), or re-
sort to designing more sophisticated model struc-
tures (Yang et al., 2017; Xu and Durrett, 2018; Di-
eng et al., 2019).
In this paper, we present a simple architec-
ture called holistic regularisation V AE (HR-V AE),
which can effectively avoid latent variable col-
lapse. In contrast to existing V AE-RNN models
for text modelling which merely impose a standard
normal distribution prior on the last hidden state
of the RNN encoder, our HR-V AE model imposes
regularisation for all hidden states of the RNN en-
coder. Another advantage of our model is that itarXiv:1911.05343v1  [cs.CL]  13 Nov 2019