Point Cloud Oversegmentation with Graph-Structured Deep Metric Learning
Loic Landrieu1, Mohamed Boussaha2
Univ. Paris-Est, IGN-ENSG, LaSTIG,1STRUDEL,2ACTE, Saint-Mandé, France
loic.landrieu@ign.fr,mohamed.boussaha@ign.fr
Abstract
We propose a new supervized learning framework for
oversegmenting 3D point clouds into superpoints. We cast
this problem as learning deep embeddings of the local ge-
ometry and radiometry of 3D points, such that the border of
objects presents high contrasts. The embeddings are com-
puted using a lightweight neural network operating on the
points’ local neighborhood. Finally, we formulate point
cloud oversegmentation as a graph partition problem with
respect to the learned embeddings.
This new approach allows us to set a new state-of-the-art
in point cloud oversegmentation by a signiﬁcant margin, on
a dense indoor dataset (S3DIS) and a sparse outdoor one
(vKITTI). Our best solution requires over ﬁve times fewer
superpoints to reach similar performance than previously
published methods on S3DIS. Furthermore, we show that
our framework can be used to improve superpoint-based
semantic segmentation algorithms, setting a new state-of-
the-art for this task as well.
1. Introduction
The interest of segmenting point clouds into sets
of points known as superpoints—the 3D equivalent of
superpixels— as a preprocessing step to their analysis has
been extensively demonstrated [ 27,39,35,7,50]. However,
these unsupervized methods rely on the assumption that
segments which are geometrically and/or radiometrically
homogeneous are also semantically homogeneous. This as-
sertion should be challenged, especially since the quality of
any further analysis is limited by the quality of the initial
oversegmentation. Our objective in this paper is to formu-
late a supervized framework for oversegmentating 3D point
clouds into semantically pure superpoints in order to facili-
tate their semantic segmentation.
Although superpixel-based methods and deep learning
have both been around for a long time in computer vision,
convolutional neural networks have only recently been used
for superpixel oversegmentation. Notably, [ 32] introduced
a loss function emulating oversegmentation metrics, andwhich is compatible with graph-based clustering methods.
[24] propose a fully differentiable version of the SLIC su-
perpixel algorithm [ 1], allowing for end-to-end training of
spatial clustering methods. Both approaches have shown
promising results, displaying signiﬁcant improvement upon
methods relying on handcrafted descriptors. In this paper,
we build upon these ideas, albeit in the 3D setting.
We propose formulating point cloud oversegmentation as
a deep metric learning problem structured by an adjacency
graph deﬁned on an input 3D point cloud. We introduce
thegraph-structured contrastive loss , a loss function which
learns to embed 3D points homogeneously within objects
and with high contrast at their interface. This loss can be
adapted to the non-differentiable task of oversegmentation
by using our cross-partition weighting strategy. The points’
embeddings themselves are computed from the points’ local
geometry and radiometry by a lightweight model inspired
from PointNet [ 36] and called Local Point Embedder (LPE).
Finally, the superpoints are deﬁned as a piecewise-constant
approximation of the learned embedding in the adjacency
graph, in the manner of [ 17].
Furthermore, we deﬁne the end-goal of our point cloud
oversegmentation as assisting semantic segmentation meth-
ods by providing semantically pure superpoints. We show
that our approach can be integrated with the superpoint
graph approach of [ 27] to signiﬁcantly improve the partition
step, and consequently the resulting semantic segmentation.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•We present the ﬁrst supervized framework for 3D point
cloud oversegmentation;
•We introduce the graph-structured contrastive loss,
which can be combined with our cross-partition
weighting strategy to produce point embeddings with
high contrast at objects’ borders;
•We introduce the local point embedder, a lightweight
architecture, inspired by [ 36], to embed the local ge-
ometry and radiometry of 3D points in a compact way;
•We signiﬁcantly improve the state-of-the-art of point
cloud oversegmentation for two well-known and very
different datasets;
1
7440