and machine agents that are parts of the system must
also be taken into account.
Figure 3displays the conceptual integration of Hybrid
Intelligence in related ﬁelds of research and the concepts
discussed earlier in the paper.
One recent example that provides an astonishing indi-
cator for the potential of Hybrid Intelligence is
DeepMind2/C19s AlphaGo. For training the game-playing AI,
a supervised learning approach was used that learned from
expert human moves and, thus, augment and improve the
AI through human input, which allowed AlphaGo to
achieve superhuman performance over time. During its
games against various human world-class players,
AlphaGo played several highly creative moves that previ-
ously were beyond human players /C19imagination. Conse-
quently, AlphaGo was able to augment human intelligence
as well and somehow taught expert players completely new
knowledge in a game that is one of the longest studied in
human history (Silver et al. 2016 ).
I believe players more or less have all been affected
by Professor Alpha. AlphaGo’s play makes us feel
more free and no move is impossible to play any-
more. Now everyone is trying to play in a style that
hasn’t been tried before. – Zhou Ruiyang, 9 Dan
Professional, World Champion
Solving problems through Hybrid Intelligence offers the
possibility to allocate a task between humans and artiﬁcial
agents, and deliberately achieve a superior outcome on the
socio-technical system level by aggregating the output of
its parts. Moreover, such systems can improve over time by
learning from each other through various mechanisms,
such as labeling, demonstrating, teaching adversarial
moves, criticizing, rewarding and so on. This will allow us
to augment both the human mind and the AI and extend
applications when men and machines can learn from each
other in much more complex tasks than games: for
instance, strategic decision making, managerial, political or
military decisions, science, and even AI development
leading to AI reproducing itself in the future. Hybrid
Intelligence, therefore, offers the opportunity to achieve
super-human levels of performance in tasks that so far
seem to be at the core of human intellect.
5 The Advantages of Hybrid Intelligence
This hybrid approach provides various advantages for
humans in the era of AI such as generating new knowledge
in complex domains that allow humans to learn from AIand transfer implicit knowledge from experienced experts
to novices without any kind of social interaction. On the
other hand, the human teaching approach makes it possible
to control the learning process by ensuring that the AI
makes inferences based on criteria that can be interpreted
by humans – a fact that is crucial for AI adoption in many
real-world applications and AI safety and that makes it
possible to exclude biases such as racism (Bostrom 2017 ).
Moreover, such hybrid approaches might allow for a better
customization of AI, based on learning the preferences of
humans during interaction. Finally, we argue that the co-
creation of Hybrid Intelligence services between humans
and intelligent agents might create a sense of psychological
ownership and, thus, increase acceptance and trust.
6 Future Research Directions for the BISE Community
As the technological development continues, the focus of
machine learning and Hybrid Intelligence is shifting
towards applications in real-world business contexts, but
solving complex problems will become the next challenge.
Such complex problems in managerial settings are typi-
cally time variant, dynamic, require much domain knowl-
edge and have no speciﬁc ground truth. These highly
uncertain contexts require intuitive and analytic abilities, as
well as human strengths such as creativity and empathy.
Consequently, we propose three speciﬁc but also interre-
lated directions for further development of the concept in
the ﬁeld of BISE that are focused on socio-technical system
design.
First, a lack of trust in AI is one of the most challenging
barriers to AI adoption. Furthermore, we need to keep in
mind that we should not aim at maximizing trust in AI, but
rather ﬁnd a balance between trust and distrust that makes
it possible to leverage the potentials of AI and at the same
time avoids negative effects stemming from overreliance
on AI (Lee and See 2004 ). We believe this challenge can
be overcome by researchers in the ﬁeld of Hybrid Intelli-
gence, since a key requirement for integrating human input
into an AI system is the translation of a system’s state and
needs in a way that humans can understand and process
them accordingly and vice versa. For instance, semi-au-
tonomous driving requires the AI to sense the state of the
human in order to distribute tasks between itself and the
human driver. Furthermore, it requires examining human-
centered AI architectures that balance, for instance, trans-
parency of the underlying model and its performance.
However, domain speciﬁc design guidelines for developing
user-interfaces that allow humans to understand and pro-
cess the needs of an artiﬁcial system are still missing. We,
therefore, believe that more research is needed to develop
more suitable human-AI interfaces as well as to investigate2https://deepmind.com (accessed 19 Mar 2019).
123D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019) 641