understanding and replication of intelligence. For instance,
the ﬁeld of cognitive computing ‘‘[ …] aims to develop a
coherent, uniﬁed, universal mechanism inspired by the
mind’s capabilities. [ …] We seek to implement a uniﬁed
computational theory of the mind [ …] ‘‘(Modha et al.
2011 , p. 60). Therefore, interdisciplinary research teams
rely on the reverse-engineering of human learning to create
machines that ‘‘[ …] learn and think like people [ …]’’
(Lake et al. 2017 , p. 1).
3 The Complementary Beneﬁts of Human
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The general rationale behind the idea of Hybrid Intelli-
gence is that humans and computers have complementary
capabilities that can be combined to augment each other.
The tasks that can be easily done by artiﬁcial and human
intelligence are quite divergent. This fact is known as
Moravec /C19s paradox ( 1988 , p. 15), which states that ‘‘[ …] it
is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult
level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers,
and difﬁcult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-
year-old when it comes to perception and mobility [ …]’’.
This is especially true for the human common sense that is
challenging to achieve in AI (Lake et al. 2017 ).
This can be explained by the separation of two distinct
types of cognitive procedures (Kahneman 2011 ). The ﬁrst,
system 1, is fast, automatic, affective, emotional, stereo-
typic, subconscious, and it capitalizes on what one might
call human intuition. The second one, system 2, is rather
effortful, logical, and conscious, and ideally follows strict
rational rules of probability theory. In the context of
complementary capabilities of human and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, humans have proved to be superior in various
settings that require system 1 thinking. Humans are ﬂexi-
ble, creative, empathic, and can adapt to various settings.
This allows, for instance, human domain experts to deal
with so called ‘‘broken-leg’’ predictions that deviate from
the currently known probability distribution. However,
they are restricted by bound rationality that prevents them
from aggregating information perfectly and drawing con-
clusions from that. On the other hand, machines are par-
ticularly good at solving repetitive tasks that require fast
processing of huge amounts of data, at recognizing com-
plex patterns, or weighing multiple factors following con-
sistent rules of probability theory. This has been proven by
a long-standing tradition of research that shows the supe-
riority of machines in such ﬁelds of application. Even in
very simple actuarial models, they outperform human
experts in making predictions under uncertainty (Meehl
1954 ). Figure 1summarizes the two types of thinking as
well as the respective strengths of humans and machines.These complementary strengths of humans and machi-
nes (see Fig. 1) have since led to two different forms of
interplay, that is, AI is in the loop of human intelligence,
improving human decisions by providing predictions, and
human intelligence is in the loop of AI, a form which is
frequently applied to train machine learning models.
3.1 Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Loop of Human
Intelligence
Currently, in typical business contexts, AI is applied in two
areas. First, it is used in automating tasks that can be solved
by machines alone. While this is frequently associated with
the fear of machines taking over jobs and making humans
obsolete in the future, it might also allow machines to solve
tasks that humans do not want to do themselves. Second,
AI is applied to provide humans with decision support by
offering some kind of prediction. This ranges from struc-
turing data, making forecasts, for example, in ﬁnancial
markets, or even predicting the best set of hyperparameters
to train new machine learning models (e.g., AutoML). As
humans frequently act non-Bayesian by violating proba-
bilistic rules and thus making inconsistent decisions, AI has
proven to be a valuable tool to help humans in making
better decisions (Agrawal et al. 2018 ). The goal in this
context is to improve human decision effectiveness and
efﬁciency.
In settings where AI provides us with input that is then
evaluated to make a decision, humans and machines act as
teammates. For instance, by processing patient data (e.g.,
CT scans) AI can help human physicians to make predic-
tions on diseases such as cancer, thereby empowering the
doctor to learn from the additional guidance. In this con-
text, the Hybrid Intelligence approach allows human
experts to leverage the predictive power of AI while using
their own intuition and empathy to make a choice from the
predictions of the AI.
3.2 Human Intelligence in the Loop of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
On the other hand, human intelligence also has a crucial
role in the loop of machine learning and AI. In particular,
humans provide assistance in several parts of the machine
learning process to support AI in tasks that it cannot (yet)
solve alone. Here, humans are most commonly needed for
the generation of algorithms (e.g., hyperparameter set-
ting/tuning), for training or debugging models, and for
making sense of unsupervised approaches such as data
clustering.
In this case, AI systems can beneﬁt and learn from
human input. This approach allows for integrating human
domain knowledge in the AI to design, complement and
123D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019) 639