evaluate the capabilities of AI (Mnih et al. 2015 ). Many of
these applications are based on supervised and interactive
learning approaches and require an enormous amount of
labeled data, provided by humans (Amershi et al. 2014 ).
The basic rationale behind this approach is that humans act
as teachers who train an AI. The same machine teaching
approach can also be found in the area of reinforcement
learning that uses, for instance, human game play as input
to initially train robots. In this context, human intelligence
functions as a teacher, augmenting the AI. Hybrid Intelli-
gence allows to distribute computational tasks to human
intelligence on demand (e.g., through crowdsourcing) to
minimize shortcomings of current AI systems. Such
human-in-the-loop approaches are particularly valuable
when only little data is available. In addition, they can be
used when pre-trained models need to be adapted for
speciﬁc domains, or in contexts where human annotations
are already used.
Since human intelligence in the loop of AI is most
frequently applied in settings where models are initially set
up or in the ﬁeld of research, the goal is to make AI more
effective. Figure 2summarizes the distribution of roles in
Hybrid Intelligence.4 Deﬁning Hybrid Intelligence
Another approach is to combine human and artiﬁcial
intelligence. The basic rationale behind this is the combi-
nation of complementary heterogeneous intelligences (i.e.,
human and artiﬁcial agents) to create a socio-technological
ensemble that is able to overcome the current limitations of
(artiﬁcial) intelligence. This approach focuses neither on
human intelligence in the loop of AI nor on automating
simple tasks through machine learning. Rather, the
emphasis lies on solving complex problems using the
deliberate allocation of tasks among different heteroge-
neous algorithmic and human agents. Both the human and
the artiﬁcial agents of such systems can then co-evolve by
learning and achieve a superior outcome on the system
level.
In accordance with Dellermann et al. ( 2019 ), we call this
concept Hybrid Intelligence, which is deﬁned as the ability
to achieve complex goals by combining human and artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, thereby reaching superior results to those
each of them could have accomplished separately, and
continuously improve by learning from each other.1Sev-
eral core concepts of this deﬁnition are noteworthy:
•Collectively Hybrid Intelligence covers the fact that
tasks are performed collectively. Consequently, activ-
ities conducted by each agent are conditionally depen-
dent. However, their goals are not necessarily always
aligned to achieve the common goal such as when
humans are teaching an AI adversarial tactics in playing
games.
•Superior results This deﬁnes the idiosyncratic fact that
the socio-technical system achieves a performance in a
speciﬁc task that none of the involved agents, whether
they are human or artiﬁcial, could have achieved
without the other. The aim is, therefore, to make the
outcome (e.g., a prediction) both more efﬁcient and
effective on the level of the socio-technical system by
achieving goals that could not have been solved before.
This contrasts Hybrid Intelligence with the most
common applications of human-in-the-loop machine
learning.
•Continuous learning a central aspect of Hybrid Intel-
ligence is that, over time, this socio-technological
system improves, both as a whole and each single
component (i.e., human and artiﬁcial agents). This facet
shows that they learn from each other through expe-
rience. The performance of Hybrid Intelligence systems
can, thus, not only be measured by the superior
outcome of the whole socio-technical system alone,
but the learning (i.e., performance increase) of humanHUMAN INTELLIGENCE MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
+ Flexibility & Transfer 
+ Empathy & Crea/g415vity
+ Annotate Arbitrary Data 
+ Common Sense
INTUITIVE+ Pa/g425ern Recogni/g415on 
+ Probabilis/g415c
+ Consistency
+ Speed & Eﬃciency
ANALYTIC
Fig. 1 Complementary strengths of humans and machines
Augmented Human 
IntelligenceAugmented Machine 
Intelligence
Learner Teacher Learner 
Teacher Hybrid Intelligence
Fig. 2 Distribution of roles in hybrid intelligence1For further work on this topic see Dellermann et al. ( 2019 ).
123640 D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)