CATCHWORD
Hybrid Intelligence
Dominik Dellermann M.Sc. •Philipp Ebel •Matthias So ¨llner •Jan Marco Leimeister
Received: 30 October 2017 / Accepted: 7 November 2018 / Published online: 28 March 2019
/C211Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, ein Teil von Springer Nature 2019
Keywords Hybrid intelligence /C1Artiﬁcial intelligence /C1
Machine learning /C1Human-computer collaboration /C1
Machines as teammates /C1Future of work
1 Introduction
Research has a long history of discussing what is superior
in predicting certain outcomes: statistical methods or the
human brain. This debate has repeatedly been sparked off
by the remarkable technological advances in the ﬁeld of
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), such as solving tasks like object
and speech recognition, achieving signiﬁcant improve-
ments in accuracy through deep-learning algorithms
(Goodfellow et al. 2016 ), or combining various methods of
computational intelligence, such as fuzzy logic, genetic
algorithms, and case-based reasoning (Medsker 2012 ). One
of the implicit promises that underlie these advancements
is that machines will 1 day be capable of performing
complex tasks or may even supersede humans inperforming these tasks. This triggers new heated debates of
when machines will ultimately replace humans (McAfee
and Brynjolfsson 2017 ). While previous research has
proved that AI performs well in some clearly deﬁned tasks
such as playing chess, playing Go or identifying objects on
images, it is doubted that the development of an artiﬁcial
general intelligence (AGI) which is able to solve multiple
tasks at the same time can be achieved in the near future
(e.g., Russell and Norvig 2016 ). Moreover, the use of AI to
solve complex business problems in organizational con-
texts occurs scarcely, and applications for AI that solve
complex problems remain mainly in laboratory settings
instead of being implemented in practice.
Since the road to AGI is still a long one, we argue that
the most likely paradigm for the division of labor between
humans and machines in the next decades is Hybrid
Intelligence. This concept aims at using the complementary
strengths of human intelligence and AI, so that they can
perform better than each of the two could separately (e.g.,
Kamar 2016 ).
2 Conceptual Foundations and What Hybrid
Intelligence is Not
Before focusing on Hybrid Intelligence in detail, we ﬁrst
want to delineate the differences between this concept and
related but still different forms of intelligence in this
context.
2.1 Intelligence
Various deﬁnitions and dimensions (e.g., social, logical,
spatial, musical) of the term intelligence exist in multiple
research disciplines, such as psychology, cognitive science,Accepted after two revisions by Prof. Weinhardt.
D. Dellermann M.Sc. /C1Prof. Dr. J. M. Leimeister
Research Center for IS Design (ITeG), Information Systems,
University of Kassel, Pfannkuchstraße 1, 34121 Kassel,
Germany
Dr. P. Ebel /C1Prof. Dr. M. So ¨llner /C1
Prof. Dr. J. M. Leimeister ( &)
Institute of Information Management, University of St. Gallen,
Mu¨ller-Friedberg-Strasse 8, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: janmarco.leimeister@unisg.ch
Prof. Dr. M. So ¨llner
Information Systems and Systems Engineering, University of
Kassel, Henschelstraße 4, 34127 Kassel, Germany123Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2