neuro science, human behavior, education, or computer
science. For the purpose of our research, we use an
inclusive and generic deﬁnition to describe general intel-
ligence. It is the ability to accomplish complex goals, learn,
reason, and adaptively perform effective actions within an
environment. This can generally be subsumed with the
capacity to both acquire and apply knowledge (Gottfredson
1997 ). While intelligence is most commonly used in the
context of humans (and more recently of intelligent artiﬁ-
cial agents), it also applies to intelligent, goal-directed
behavior of animals.
2.2 Human Intelligence
The sub-dimension of intelligence that is related to the
human species deﬁnes the mental capabilities of human
beings. On the most holistic level, it covers the capacity to
learn, reason, and adaptively perform effective actions
within an environment, based on existing knowledge. This
allows humans to adapt to changing environments and act
towards achieving their goals.
While one assumption concerning intelligence is the
existence of a so-called ‘‘g-factor’’, which indicates a
measure for general intelligence (Brand 1996 ), other
research in the ﬁeld of cognitive science explores intelli-
gence in relation to the evolutionary experience of indi-
viduals. This means that, rather than having a general form
of intelligence, humans become much more effective in
solving problems that occur in the context of familiar sit-
uations (Wechsler 1964 ).
Another view on intelligence supposes that general
human intelligence can be subdivided into specialized
intelligence components, such as linguistic, logical-math-
ematical, musical, kinesthetic, spatial, social, or existential
intelligence (Gardner 2000 ).
Synthesizing those perspectives on human intelligence,
Sternberg ( 1985 ) proposes three distinctive dimensions of
intelligence: componential, contextual, and experiential.
The componential dimension of intelligence refers to some
kind of individual (general) skill set of humans. Experi-
ential intelligence refers to one /C19s ability to learn and adapt
through evolutionary experience. Finally, contextual
intelligence deﬁnes the capacity of the mind to inductively
understand and act in speciﬁc situations as well as the
ability to make choices and modify those contexts.
2.3 Collective Intelligence
Another related concept is collective intelligence.
According to Malone and Bernstein ( 2015 , p. 3), collective
intelligence refers to ‘‘[ …] groups of individuals acting
collectively in ways that seem intelligent‘‘. Even though
the term ‘‘individuals’’ leaves room for interpretation,researchers in this domain usually refer to the concept of
wisdom of crowds and, thus, a combined intelligence of
individual human agents (Woolley et al. 2010 ). This con-
cept describes that, under certain conditions, a group of
average people can outperform any individual of the group
or even a single expert (Leimeister 2010 ). Other well-
known examples of collective intelligence are phenomena
found in biology, where, for example, a school of ﬁsh
swerves to increase protection against predators (Berdahl
et al. 2013 ). These examples show that collective intelli-
gence typically refers to large groups of homogenous
individuals (i.e., humans or animals), whereas Hybrid
Intelligence combines the complementary intelligence of
heterogeneous agents (i.e., humans and machines).
2.4 Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The subﬁeld of intelligence that relates to machines is
called artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). With this term, we mean
systems that perform ‘‘[ …] activities that we associate with
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, prob-
lem solving, learning [ …]’’ (Bellman 1978 , p. 3). It gen-
erally covers the idea of creating machines that can
accomplish complex goals. The basic idea behind this
concept is, that, by applying machine learning techniques,
a system becomes capable of analyzing its environment
and adapting to new circumstances in this environment.
Examples for this are object recognition, problem solving,
or natural language processing (Russell and Norvig 2016 ).
Other streams of research in this domain perceive AI as the
‘‘[…] synthesis and analysis of computational agents that
act intelligently [ …]’’ (Poole and Mackworth 2017 , p. 3).
Moreover, AI can be described as having the general goal
to replicate the human mind by deﬁning it as ‘‘[ …] the art
of creating machines that perform functions that require
intelligence when performed by people [ …]’’ (Kurzweil
1990 , p. 117). The performance of AI in achieving human-
level intelligence can then be measured by, for instance,
the Turing test. This test asks an AI program to simulate a
human in a text-based conversation. However, due to the
multi-facetted nature of general intelligence, such capa-
bilities can be seen as a sufﬁcient but not necessary crite-
rion for artiﬁcial general intelligence (Searle 1980 ).
Synthesizing those various deﬁnitions in the ﬁeld, AI
includes elements such as the human-level ability to solve
domain-independent problems, the capability to combine
highly task-specialized and more generalized intelligence,
the ability to learn from its environment and to interact
with other intelligent systems, or human teachers, which
allows intelligent agents to improve in problem solving
through experience.
To create such a kind of AI in intelligent agents, various
approaches exist that are more or less associated with the
123638 D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)