Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 22 of 36
5.2.6. Smart Environment
The impact of AI on smart environment in a smart city scenario is signiﬁcant. AI
can help optimize energy usage, reduce waste, and enhance sustainability. For example,
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms can monitor and manage energy consumption in buildings,
automatically adjusting lighting and temperature based on occupancy patterns, which
can lead to signiﬁcant reductions in energy waste and improved energy efﬁciency. AI
can also help in waste management by predicting waste accumulation, identifying the
optimal time for waste collection, and reducing transportation costs. AI can also be utilized
for environmental monitoring and conservation. It can help track air and water quality,
monitor vegetation changes, and predict natural disasters. Integrating AI and IoT devices
makes it possible to create a more comprehensive and real-time picture of the environment,
which can aid in environmental management and conservation efforts. AI can transform
smart environment solutions in a smart city scenario. By leveraging AI, smart cities can
become more sustainable, efﬁcient, and resilient while improving citizens’ quality of life.
Smart environment refers to using advanced technologies and data-driven solutions to
improve natural and built environments’ sustainability, efﬁciency, and resilience.
G. Halhoul Merabet et al. [ 154] comprehensively examined methods utilizing AI to
develop control systems. To reduce energy consumption while maintaining comfortable
indoor conditions. L. Li et al. [ 155] discussed the obstacles encountered when applying AI to
enhance energy efﬁciency and comfort, along with proposed paths for future advancements
for research in this area. Their research describes developing and applying A versa-tile AI
algorithm with multiple goals that can be implemented in real-world environmental control
to quickly and precisely improve the Indoor Air Quality (IAQ), thermal comfort, and energy
efﬁciency of buildings. The results showed a high level of accuracy in predicting outcomes,
with over 90% accuracy. Additionally, there was a decrease in air pollution, an increase
in thermal comfort, and an average energy savings of 31%, 45%, and 35%, respectively.
A. I. Dounis [ 156] explored the possibility of using AI as a means of designing building
automation systems and with an emphasis on the importance of optimizing energy usage,
ensuring comfort, promoting good health, and enhancing productivity in residential areas.
L. Anthopoulos and V . Kazantzi [ 157] discussed the increasing attention given to energy
efﬁciency, especially in cities, in response to sustainability and climate change challenges.
It highlights the impact of emerging technologies such as blockchain and electricity and
suggests analyzing how autonomous vehicles, intelligent building systems, AI, and big
data impact the energy system in urban areas. It also proposes a uniﬁed evaluation model
for determining the energy efﬁciency of AI and big data. S. Rubab et al. [ 158] presented
a comparative study of these techniques and suggested a comprehensive approach to
managing COVID-19 waste, taking into account its potential uses and beneﬁts and outlining
both short-term and long-term goals for waste management. A. Shreyas Madhav et al. [ 159]
offered the use of a mobile robot that can identify and segregate ordinary electronic wastes
from households. The robot uses a convolutional neural network-based identiﬁcation
system to categorize E-wastes with 96% accuracy.
S. Shukla and S. Hait [ 160] examined how integrating technologies such as IoT, AI,
intelligent transportation systems, and cloud computing could be utilized to establish
intelligent waste management practices in smart cities within the current waste manage-
ment systems. Y. Himeur et al. [ 161] discussed applying data fusion strategies and AI in
evaluating and monitoring the environment, utilizing remote sensing (RS) data and satellite
imagery. The discussion culminates in suggestions for future directions and recommen-
dations. K. Bakker [ 162] discussed introducing a new technique for marine governance
and environmental monitoring called AI-enabled, mobile marine protected areas (MMPAs).
MMPAs use digital devices to gather information from different sources and employ ML
algorithms to analyze the data and swiftly adjust to changes in environmental conditions
and disruptions. S. J. Soheli et al. [ 163] discussed the capacity for enhancing crop pro-
duction by utilizing an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) and the IoT in
a smart, automated greenhouse. The system used sensors to gather real-time data on