Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 23 of 36
weather factors such as temperature, humidity, sunlight, and soil moisture. Overall, the
system is efﬁcient, cost-effective, and has the potential to improve crop production in the
greenhouse signiﬁcantly.
D. Pamucar et al. [ 164] discussed the potential impact of Metaverse technologies
on the transportation system, highlighted the preparations underway for the transition
of transportation into the world of Metaverse, and concluded that Metaverse technolo-
gies could revolutionize the transportation system. The assessment framework can help
decision-makers prioritize the implementation of sustainable transportation alternatives
in the Metaverse. I. Ahmed et al. [ 165] introduced an intelligent and environmentally
conscious theoretical model that uses cloud computing, IoT devices, and AI to handle and
acquire essential data. The setup furnished digital data analysis and stores ﬁndings in de-
centralized cloud repositories using blockchain technology to support diverse applications.
E. K. Nti et al. [ 166] discussed that the importance of AI could not be overstated when
tackling environmental sustainability problems such as energy, water management, bio-
diversity, and transportation. AI models, such as decision support and CV , have been used
in transportation. However, it is vital to monitor interventions to enhance environmental
sustainability continuously.
5.2.7. Smart Living
Smart living refers to using advanced technologies and data-driven solutions to enhance
living standards, ease of use, and the long-term viability of daily living. W. Li et al. [167] exam-
ined the development of smart home studies in the last twenty years, driven by technological
advancements such as ICTs, AI, and IoT. IoT is prevalent in creating operational smart homes,
yet there is an inadequate exploration of its impact on urban environments and societal concerns.
Smart homes have the potential to become a significant contributor towards the realization
of smart cities. X. Guo et al. [ 168] reviewed and aimed to comprehend the direction of smart
home advancements and merchandise and the correlation between literature and AI-enabled
products in smart homes. D. N. Mekuria et al. [ 169] discussed the difficulties of logical thinking
in environments that supported assisted living technology and emphasized the significance
of employing hybrid reasoning methods to manage multiple inhabitants’ overlapping, simul-
taneous, and conflicting pursuits and objectives. L. M. Gladence et al. [ 170] summarize that
Smart Living Home automation is a technology that enables remote access and management of
different devices and appliances within a household. IoT, AI, and cloud computing technologies
can be utilized. This technology offers a more comfortable and convenient lifestyle for the
physically impaired or elderly .
K. Zvarikova et al. [ 171] review literature from various databases, identify 18 main em-
pirical sources, and show that AI chatbot customer service and hyper-realistic personalized
interactive experiences can boost customer engagement. Additionally, the study suggests
that digital interactive experiences involving virtual goods and assets inﬂuenced consumer
behavior by utilizing location data. R. Dr. Bharati [ 172] highlighted the Chat Generative
Pre-trained Transformer (ChatGPT), which facilitates the processing of natural language
and generation of automated text, and its capacity to transform how humans interact and
communicate with machines. W. Wang et al. [ 173] highlight the potential of using IoT,
5G, and AI technologies to revolutionize the tourism industry and provide personalized
recommendations to travelers.
O. Taiwo et al. [ 174] presented the importance of security in smart homes and gave
an intelligent home automation system that monitors environmental conditions, manages
household appliances, and detects motion within the house and its surroundings. It high-
lights the signiﬁcance of intelligent monitoring and response for the efﬁciency and safety
of smart home automation. K. Ahmad et al. [ 175] explore the challenges of implementing
data-driven AI services in modern smart cities, focusing on these algorithms’ security,
safety, and interpretability and advising on existing constraints, drawbacks, and future
avenues for research in these areas. M. H. Panahi Rizi and S. A. Hosseini Seno [ 176] rec-
ognize existing security and privacy remedies, unresolved research issues and obstacles,