Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 18 of 36
reducing trafﬁc congestion, and improving mobility for all. Y. Ma et al. [ 148] provided
an overview of validation and veriﬁcation techniques used for the decision-making and
planning of autonomous vehicles. G. Bendiab et al. [ 149] deliberated on the potential
security and privacy risks of the advent of autonomous vehicles (AVs) and emphasized the
signiﬁcance of addressing these concerns to realize the full beneﬁts of Avs. L. Hernandez
and A. Castillo [ 150] examined cloud computing applications in intelligent vehicles and
highlighted the advantages of cloud computing, including enhanced storage capacity and
computational power, real-time data analysis, and remote access to vehicle data.
For predictive maintenance, C. Yun et al. [ 151] present an extensive analysis of predic-
tive maintenance in the context of smart city planning. They deﬁne predictive analytics as
using statistical techniques, ML algorithms, and data mining methods to examine historical
and real-time data and make projections for future events and trends. S. Kussl and A.
Wald [ 152] review smart mobility and its implications for road infrastructure provision, em-
phasizing predictive maintenance and its potential effects on road infrastructure provision.
5.2.2. Smart Governance
Smart governance is a fundamental aspect of smart cities, which aims to transform
traditional governance models by leveraging advanced technologies to provide better
services and decision-making processes. With the help of digital technologies such as AI,
blockchain, IoT, and data analytics, governments can optimize their operations, stream-
line decision-making, and provide better services to their citizens. Examples include
AI-powered chatbots and virtual assistants, which can automate mundane tasks and re-
spond promptly and precisely to citizen queries. Blockchain can enhance government
operations’ security, transparency, and traceability, including voting systems, identity
management, and supply chain management. IoT sensors within smart cities allow for
acquiring real-time information on essential urban factors, including trafﬁc patterns, air
quality, and waste management. This abundance of data has the potential to assist gov-
ernments in making informed decisions and enhancing their services to better cater to the
requirements of their constituents. In general, intelligent governance is critical in fostering
citizen participation, boosting transparency and accountability, and elevating the quality of
life within urban areas.
S. A. A. Bokhari and S. Myeong [ 153] explored the connections between AI, social inno-
vation (SI), and smart decision-making (SDM) in South Korea and Pakistan. They learned
about a favorable and robust mediating effect of SI between the association of AI and
SDM, indicating that SI plays a crucial role in AI decision-making. G. V . Pereira et al. [ 154]
reviewed and proposed that smart governance can be regarded as the intelligent utilization
of ICT for enhancing decision-making and cooperation between various stakeholders, such
as citizens and government. ICT tools, such as social media, can potentially augment
citizen engagement and facilitate the establishment of novel governance models for smart
government. A. Kankanhalli et al. [ 155] investigated the potential beneﬁts of employing
AI and the Internet of Things (IoT) in smart governance to improve decision-making and
provide valuable services in various domains, including transportation, energy, healthcare,
education, and public safety.
In a study by M. K. Hasan and colleagues (2019) [ 156], a blockchain-based Internet of
Things (IoT) framework was proposed to address issues of price hikes and corruption in
Industry 4.0 and blockchain 5.0. The framework utilized a remote database integrated with
blockchain technology, allowing government authorities to monitor transactions between
industrial companies and purchasers. Another study by C. van Noordt and G. Misuraca
(2020) [ 157] found that while AI is commonly used to enhance public service delivery and
internal management, its use in policy decision-making is still limited.
L. Anthopoulos et al. [ 158] investigated the relationship between Smart Governance
(SG) and Smart City (SC) and examined their signiﬁcance to scholars in public administra-
tion, political science, and information science, as both topics are becoming increasingly
popular. Ž. Bojovi´ c et al. [ 159] presented a fresh approach to modelling information systems