Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 2 of 36
required for daily life. The excess population and rapid urbanization bring many problems,
such as socio-economic, technical, and organizational problems, and risks to urban cities’
environmental or economic sustainability. Several modern cities faced rapid urbanization
by meeting the standards and, in the process, generated pollution, trafﬁc congestion, and
socio-economic inequality [ 1]. Over the past few years, many individuals have migrated
towards urban areas, and predictions indicate that by 2030, 60% of the global population
is going to be living in urban settings [ 2]. Due to the increment of people, varieties of
smart applications are introduced to make life easier, contributing to smart cities’ develop-
ment [ 3–6]. The smart city concept entails intelligent management of valuable components
such as transportation, medical services, utility services, residences, agriculture [ 7,8], and
environmental building [ 9]. Furthermore, in smart cities, different telecommunication or
wireless infrastructures are required to provide the services effectively and connect millions
of devices with numerous technologies, such as machine-to-machine (M2M) communi-
cation, network virtualization, wireless sensor networks, and gateways [ 10,11]. Figure 1
illustrates the data rate, power consumption, establishment cost, and coverage range of
available communication technologies [12].
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 38 
 
 utilities for improving the lifestyle of urban people . Vast  numbers of people are coming 
towards cities, and the city government is pressured to provide the minimum services 
required for daily life . The excess population and rapid urbanization bring many prob-
lems, such as socio -economic, technical, and organizatio nal problems, and risks to urban 
cities’ environmental or economic sustainabi lity. Several modern cities faced rapid urban-
ization by meeting the standards and, in the process, generated pollution, tra ﬃc conges-
tion, and socio-economic inequality [1]. Over  the past few years, many individuals have 
migrated towards urban areas, and predictions indicate that by 2030, 60% of the global 
population is going to be living in urban se ttings [2]. Due to the increment of people, va-
rieties of smart applications are introduced to ma ke life easier, contributing to smart cities’ 
development  [3–6]. The smart city concept entails intelligent management of valuable 
components such as transportation, medical se rvices, utility services, residences, agricul-
ture [7,8], and environmental building [9]. Furthermore, in smart cities, di ﬀerent telecom-
munication or wireless infrastructures are required to provide the services e ﬀectively and 
connect millions of devices with numerous technologies, such as machine-to-machine 
(M2M) communication, network virtualization,  wireless sensor networks, and gateways 
[10,11]. Figure 1 illustrates the data rate, power consumption, establishment cost, and cov-
erage range of available communication technologies [12] . 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of date rate, power consumption, cost, and a coverage range of available com-
munication technologies. 
IoT plays a dynamic role in the new commu nication paradigm in our everyday ob-
jects, which are equipped with microcontro llers, radio modules, and appropriate commu-
nication protocols [13, 14]. IoT enables IoT devices to communicate and become essential 
to smart cities . Many national governments and private organizations use the IoT concept 
in Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) solutions to manage the idea of a 
smart city [15]. The IoT concept aims to use community resources be tter, improving the 
quality of services (QoS) with reduced operational and management costs in smart cities [16,17]. IoT  technologies are essential  in developing the landscape of present smart cities 
Figure 1. Comparison of date rate, power consumption, cost, and a coverage range of available
communication technologies.
IoT plays a dynamic role in the new communication paradigm in our everyday objects,
which are equipped with microcontrollers, radio modules, and appropriate communica-
tion protocols [ 13,14]. IoT enables IoT devices to communicate and become essential to
smart cities. Many national governments and private organizations use the IoT concept
in Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) solutions to manage the idea of
a smart city [ 15]. The IoT concept aims to use community resources better, improving
the quality of services (QoS) with reduced operational and management costs in smart
cities [ 16,17]. IoT technologies are essential in developing the landscape of present smart
cities and steering the smart city standard to the enormous data scale [ 18,19]. According
to Statista Research in 2022 [ 20], by 2030, the global count of IoT-enabled devices is pro-
jected to exceed 29 billion, nearly three times the ﬁgure of 9.7 billion in 2020. The ﬁgures
mentioned earlier demonstrate that IoT is regarded as one of the most valuable emerging