Citation: Alahi, M.E.E.; Sukkuea, A.;
Tina, F.W.; Nag, A.; Kurdthongmee,
W.; Suwannarat, K.; Mukhopadhyay,
S.C. Integration of IoT-Enabled
Technologies and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) for Smart City
Scenario: Recent Advancements and
Future Trends. Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23115206
Academic Editor: Antonio J. Jara
Received: 25 April 2023
Revised: 24 May 2023
Accepted: 29 May 2023
Published: 30 May 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Review
Integration of IoT-Enabled Technologies and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) for Smart City Scenario: Recent
Advancements and Future Trends
Md Eshrat E. Alahi1,*,†, Arsanchai Sukkuea1,†
, Fahmida Wazed Tina2
, Anindya Nag3,4
,
Wattanapong Kurdthongmee1, Korakot Suwannarat1and Subhas Chandra Mukhopadhyay5
1School of Engineering and Technology, Walailak University, 222 Thaiburi, Thasala,
Nakhon Si Thammarat 80160, Thailand; arsanchai.su@wu.ac.th (A.S.); kwattana@wu.ac.th (W.K.);
skorakot@mail.wu.ac.th (K.S.)
2Creative Innovation in Science and Technology Program, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Nakhon Si Thammarat Rajabhat University, Nakhon Si Thammarat 80280, Thailand; fahmida_tina@nstru.ac.th
3Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany;
anindya.nag@tu-dresden.de
4Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop (CeTI), Technische Universität Dresden,
01069 Dresden, Germany
5School of Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia;
subhas.mukhopadhyay@mq.edu.au
*Correspondence: mdeshrat.al@mail.wu.ac.th or mealahi@gmail.com
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: As the global population grows, and urbanization becomes more prevalent, cities often
struggle to provide convenient, secure, and sustainable lifestyles due to the lack of necessary smart
technologies. Fortunately, the Internet of Things (IoT) has emerged as a solution to this challenge
by connecting physical objects using electronics, sensors, software, and communication networks.
This has transformed smart city infrastructures, introducing various technologies that enhance
sustainability, productivity, and comfort for urban dwellers. By leveraging Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) to analyze the vast amount of IoT data available, new opportunities are emerging to design
and manage futuristic smart cities. In this review article, we provide an overview of smart cities,
deﬁning their characteristics and exploring the architecture of IoT. A detailed analysis of various
wireless communication technologies employed in smart city applications is presented, with extensive
research conducted to determine the most appropriate communication technologies for speciﬁc
use cases. The article also sheds light on different AI algorithms and their suitability for smart
city applications. Furthermore, the integration of IoT and AI in smart city scenarios is discussed,
emphasizing the potential contributions of 5G networks coupled with AI in advancing modern urban
environments. This article contributes to the existing literature by highlighting the tremendous
opportunities presented by integrating IoT and AI, paving the way for the development of smart
cities that signiﬁcantly enhance the quality of life for urban dwellers while promoting sustainability
and productivity. By exploring the potential of IoT, AI, and their integration, this review article
provides valuable insights into the future of smart cities, demonstrating how these technologies can
positively impact urban environments and the well-being of their inhabitants.
Keywords: smart city; communication technology; IoT; 5G; AI
1. Introduction
Cities are considered complex systems with massive numbers of interconnected cit-
izens, transportation, communication network, varieties of services and businesses, and
utilities for improving the lifestyle of urban people. Vast numbers of people are coming
towards cities, and the city government is pressured to provide the minimum services
Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23115206 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors