Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 13 of 36
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 38 
 
 Ingenu  2450 MHz 1 MHz 624 kbps 156 kbps 6 bytes–10 k 
bytes 100 20 dBm Available 
Sigfox Protocol 
Sigfox [97] adopts an ultra-narrowband (UNB) technology where devices 
communicate directly to the base station in a star-like topology . Multiple base stations are 
available for data collection, making it a reliable network . Most devices are used for uplink 
communication, and tiny downlink channels control the device from gateways . Sigfox 
network supports a message payload capacity of up to 12 bytes and employs a technique 
where the same payload message can be transmi tted multiple times for robust reception. 
The frequency of messages a device can transmit daily can be customized based on the 
application’s speci ﬁc requirements. The network coverage of Sigfox is estimated to reach 
up to 10 km in urban areas and 50 km in rural areas. Building, installing, and maintaining 
the low-powered network lies with Sigfox Network Operators (SNO ). They are also 
responsible for business development and maintaining /upgrading the reference 
architecture if necessary [97]. 
Weightless Protocol 
The weightless system is controlled by the Weightless Special Interest Group (SIG) 
[98], a nonpro ﬁt organization for implementing the standard architecture . The reference 
architecture of the weightless system is illustr ated in Figure 6. It includes the uplink and 
downlink, which are part of the physical layer. The uplink transmission adopts FDMA to 
enable concurrent transmissions and prevent interference.  The base station also uses  a 
time scheduling method to notify the devices of their time allocation. 
 
Figure 6. The reference architecture for the weightless system. 
The data link layer comprises three sub-laye rs: the baseband, lower link layer, and 
upper link layer. The manage ment of radio resources at the Medium Access Control 
(MAC) layer and con ﬁguration of network arrangements are handled by the Radio 
Figure 6. The reference architecture for the weightless system.
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 38 
 
 Resource Manager (RRM). Additionally , the system supports transmission 
acknowledgement, fragmentation, and multi-cast and can interrupt the base station . 
Low Power, Wide Area Networking (LoRaWAN) 
The LoRa Alliance [1] has developed a standard for connecting low-power IoT 
devices covering extensive areas. The standard uses di ﬀerent ISM bands according to the 
regulations in speci ﬁc regions. Various ISM bands comply with speci ﬁc regional 
regulations in the standard. The physical laye r incorporates Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS) 
modulation, facilitating two-way communication between base stations/gateways and 
end devices [41]. Three modes are available in the Medium Access Control, enabling 
access control while balancing the uplink and downlink capabilities. 
Figure 7 illustrates the reference architec ture of the LoRaWAN. The Class A device 
requires low power and limited downlink channels for communication from the base station, and Class B shares the same characteristics . However, they have extra time 
windows not available on Class A devices. Clas s C device has continuous receiving time 
windows . It can support multicasts, such as Class A and Class B . During communication 
between the base station and the end devices,  all classes of devices in LoRaWAN utilize 
the ALOHA access protocol. 
 
Figure 7. The reference architecture of LoRaWAN. 
4.4. Communications in Multi-Tier Architectures 
Multi -tier architectures [99] rely on a layered approach to collect and process sensing 
data and establish a network infrastructure in a multi-hop manner. The sensor data are 
typically transmi tted to central gateways, which then transmit the data to the internet 
using various communication technologies . The multi-hop tran smission technique 
[100,101] compensates  for  the limited communication ranges by introducing various radio 
Figure 7. The reference architecture of LoRaWAN.