Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 6 of 36
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 38 
 
  
Figure 4. An overview of the methodology for introducin g applications in a smart city through in-
tegrating IoT and AI.  
3. The Smart City Paradigm 
There exist multiple de ﬁnitions of the smart city [15,39–41]. The term “smart city” is 
often used interchangeably with other terms such as “intelligent city”, “knowledgeable 
city”, and “digital city”. This has resulted in  diverse theoretical choices for the smart city 
concept [4]. The term “smart city” is an am biguous concept used in multiple ways. There 
is no speci ﬁc template for de ﬁning the smart city, nor is there a unique de ﬁnition that is 
universally accepted  [42,43]. Smart city concepts emerged as a response to the challenges 
posed by urbanization and the need for sust ainable urban development. Integrating vari-
ous technologies, such as the IoT, AI, and big data analytics, aims to improve the e ﬃciency 
of urban services, reduce resource consumption, and elevate the standard of living, which 
can lead to an improved quality of life for citizens. Technological development has ad-
vanced so much that a modern smart city can collect data from various applications, such 
as smart agriculture, smart industry, smart farming, smart health care, smart tra ﬃc, and 
smart pedestrians, and then analyze and integrate critical data to provide a decision for 
an improved standard of life [44]. The rapi d development of the IoT [45,46], cloud com-
puting technologies [47,48], and AI [49,50] could be vital factors in improving urban facil-
ities’ performance, quality, and interactivity, which is going to decrease management costs and enhance skills. 
While the de ﬁnition of a smart city can vary, th ere are generally two distinct ap-
proaches based on the key areas a smart city should focus on. In the ﬁrst trend, smart city 
deﬁnitions emphasize a single urban feature, such as technology or ecology, while leaving 
the rest of the features of a city included. The de ﬁnitions do not consider the primary aim 
of a smart city, which is to introduce a novel framework for managing urban areas and 
assessing the interconnectedness of variou s components within an urban ecosystem.  Fo-
cusing solely on the development of a single aspect of an urban system does not neces-sarily imply that the problems of the entire system can be overcome. It is important to 
consider the interconnectedness of all urban ch aracteristics to tackle  modern cities’ chal-
lenges and ensure a thorough and e ﬀective approach [51–53]. Under a di ﬀerent set of def-
initions, the focus is on how the smart-city concept represen ts a comprehensive approach 
that considers all urban features integral parts of a system. This approach emphasizes that the smart city is a new methodology for organi zing and developing a city, which considers 
Figure 4. An overview of the methodology for introducing applications in a smart city through
integrating IoT and AI.
3. The Smart City Paradigm
There exist multiple deﬁnitions of the smart city [ 15,39–41]. The term “smart city” is
often used interchangeably with other terms such as “intelligent city”, “knowledgeable
city”, and “digital city”. This has resulted in diverse theoretical choices for the smart city
concept [ 4]. The term “smart city” is an ambiguous concept used in multiple ways. There
is no speciﬁc template for deﬁning the smart city, nor is there a unique deﬁnition that is
universally accepted [ 42,43]. Smart city concepts emerged as a response to the challenges
posed by urbanization and the need for sustainable urban development. Integrating various
technologies, such as the IoT, AI, and big data analytics, aims to improve the efﬁciency of
urban services, reduce resource consumption, and elevate the standard of living, which can
lead to an improved quality of life for citizens. Technological development has advanced
so much that a modern smart city can collect data from various applications, such as
smart agriculture, smart industry, smart farming, smart health care, smart trafﬁc, and
smart pedestrians, and then analyze and integrate critical data to provide a decision for an
improved standard of life [ 44]. The rapid development of the IoT [ 45,46], cloud computing
technologies [ 47,48], and AI [ 49,50] could be vital factors in improving urban facilities’
performance, quality, and interactivity, which is going to decrease management costs and
enhance skills.
While the deﬁnition of a smart city can vary, there are generally two distinct approaches
based on the key areas a smart city should focus on. In the ﬁrst trend, smart city deﬁnitions
emphasize a single urban feature, such as technology or ecology, while leaving the rest of
the features of a city included. The deﬁnitions do not consider the primary aim of a smart
city, which is to introduce a novel framework for managing urban areas and assessing the
interconnectedness of various components within an urban ecosystem. Focusing solely
on the development of a single aspect of an urban system does not necessarily imply
that the problems of the entire system can be overcome. It is important to consider the
interconnectedness of all urban characteristics to tackle modern cities’ challenges and
ensure a thorough and effective approach [ 51–53]. Under a different set of deﬁnitions, the
focus is on how the smart-city concept represents a comprehensive approach that considers
all urban features integral parts of a system. This approach emphasizes that the smart city
is a new methodology for organizing and developing a city, which considers economic,