1784 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
agent they are dealing with—human, artificial, or a hybrid combination of both—
they may wrongly assume that the tacit norms of human-to-human social interaction are upheld (e.g., not recording every detail of a conversation) (Kerr 2003). As ever, the social context in which an AI4SG application takes place impacts the extent to which AI systems should be transparent in their operations. Because transparency is the default but not absolute position, there may be valid reasons for designers to obviate informing users of the software’s goals. For example, the scientific value of a project or the health and safety conditions of a public space may justify temporar -
ily opaque goals. Consider a study that deceived students into believing that they 
were interacting with a human course-assistant that was in fact, over time, realised to be a bot (Eicher et al. 2017). The bot’s deception, as the authors argue, was for 
playing the “imitation game” without causing the students to choose simpler and less human-like natural-language queries based on preconceptions of AI capabili-ties. In such cases, the choice between opacity and transparency may be informed by preexisting notions of informed consent for human-subject experiments embed-ded in the Nuremberg Code, the Declaration of Helsinki, and the Belmont Report (Nijhawan et al. 2013).
More broadly, the ability to avoid the use of an AI system becomes more likely 
when AI software reveals its endogenous goals, like classifying data about a person. For example, AI software could inform staff in a hospital ward that it has the goal of classifying their hygiene levels (Haque et al. 2017). In this case, the staff may decide 
to avoid such classifications if there are reasonable alternative actions that they can take. In other cases, revealing a goal makes it less likely to be fulfilled.
Making transparent the goals and motivations of AI4SG developers themselves 
is an essential factor to the success of any project, but one that may contrast the very purpose of the system. This is why it is crucial to assess, at a design stage, what level of transparency (i.e. how much transparency, of what kind, for whom, and about what?) the project will embrace given its overall goal and the context of implementation. Taken together with the need for receiver-conceptualised explana-tion, this consideration yields the following set of best practices:
(4) AI4SG designers should choose a Level of Abstraction for AI explanation that 
fulfils the desired explanatory purpose and is appropriate to the system and the receivers; then deploy arguments that are rationally and suitably persuasive for the receivers to deliver the explanation; and ensure that the goal (the system’s purpose) for which an AI4SG system is developed and deployed is knowable to receivers of its outputs by default.
Privacy Protection and Data Subject Consent
Of our seven factors, privacy has perhaps the most voluminous literature. This 
should not be a surprise, since privacy is considered to be an essential condition 
for safety, human dignity, and social cohesion, among other things (Solove 2008), and because earlier waves of digital technology have already had a major impact