1783
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
most central nodes in the network were the best for maximising the influence of 
education, while the optimal choice is often a set of less well-connected nodes. This disjuncture may have arisen from the nature of the connectivity between members of the network of homeless youths, which reflects real-life uncertainty about friend-ships. Since who counts as a “friend” is often vague and changeable over time, the researchers classified edges in the network as either “certain” or “uncertain” based on domain knowledge. For “uncertain” relationships, the probability of a friendship existing between two youths was determined by domain experts.
8 The third LoA was 
eventually chosen, after subsequent user testing of different explanation frameworks (Yadav et al. 2016a, b). In light of their stated goal to justify decisions in a way that would be intuitive to homeless shelter officials, the researchers considered omitting references to the Maximum Expected Utility (MEU) calculations, even though this is what actually underlies the decisions made by the system. Instead, the researchers considered justifying decisions using concepts with which officials would be more comfortable and familiar, such as the centrality of the nodes (i.e., the youths) that the system recommends officials prioritise for intervention. In this way, the research-ers sought to provide the most relevant information contextualised to the receiver.
As this example shows, given a particular system, the purpose one chooses to 
pursue when seeking an explanation of it, at what LoA, and the issuing model that is obtained are crucial variables that impact the effectiveness of an explanation. Explainability breeds trust in, and fosters adoption of, AI4SG solutions (Herlocker et  al. 2000; Swearingen and Sinha 2002; Bilgic and Mooney 2005). This is why 
it is essential that software uses persuasive argumentation for the target audience. This is likely to include information about both the general functionality and logic employed by a system and the reasons for the specific decision being made (Wachter et al. 2017).
Transparency in the goal (i.e., system’s purpose) of the system is also crucial, for 
it follows directly from the principle of autonomy. Consider, for example, the devel-opment of AI solutions to prompt people with cognitive disabilities to take their medication (Chu et al. 2012). On its face, this application may seem invasive, involv -
ing vulnerable users, limiting the effectiveness of receiver-conceptualised explana-tion. However, the system is not designed to coerce the patients into a given behav -
iour, nor is it designed to resemble a human being. The patients have autonomy not to interact with the AI system in question. This case highlights the importance of transparency in goals, particularly in contexts in which explainable operations and outcomes are unworkable or undesirable. Transparency in goals, thus, undergirds other safeguards around the protection of target populations and may help ensure compliance with relevant legislation and precedent (Reed 2018).
Conversely, opaque goals may prompt misunderstanding and the potential for 
harms. For instance, when users of an AI system are unclear about what type of 
8 Note that the significance of involving domain experts in the process was not merely to improve 
their experience as decision recipients, but also for their unparalleled knowledge of the domain that the 
researchers drew upon in the system design, helping to provide the researchers with what Pagallo (2015) calls “preventive understanding” of the field.