1786 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
Striking a balance between respecting patient privacy and creating effective 
AI4SG is still possible, however. This was the challenge faced by the researchers 
in Haque et al. (2017), who wanted to create a system for tracking compliance with rules around hand hygiene in hospitals, to prevent the spread of infections. Despite the clear technical advantages of taking a computer vision-based approach to the problem, the use of video recording runs up against privacy regulations constrain-ing it. Even in cases where video recording is allowed, access to the recordings (in order to train an algorithm) is often strict. Instead, the researchers resorted to “depth images”, which de-identify subjects, preserving their privacy. While this design choice meant “losing important visual appearance cues in the process”, it satisfied privacy rules, and the researchers’ non-intrusive system still managed to outperform existing solutions.
Finally, consent in the online space is also problematic; users often lack the 
choice and are presented with a ‘take it or leave it’ option when accessing online services (Nissenbaum 2011; Taddeo and Floridi 2015). The relative lack of pro-tection or consent for the second-hand use of personal data that is publicly shared online enables the development of ethically problematic AI software. For example, a recent paper used publicly available images of faces uploaded to a dating website as a way to train AI software to detect someone’s sexuality based on a small number of photos (Wang and Kosinski 2018). While the study received ethics committee approval, it raises further questions around consent, since it is implausible that the users of the dating website could or necessarily would have consented to the use of their data for this particular purpose.
Privacy is not a novel problem, but the centrality of personal data to many AI 
(and AI4SG) applications heightens its ethical significance and creates issues around consent (Taddeo and Floridi 2018a). From this we can derive the following best practice.
(5) AI4SG designers should respect the threshold of consent established for the 
processing of datasets of personal data.
Situational fairness
AI developers typically rely on data, which may be biased in ways that are socially 
significant. This bias may carry across to the algorithmic decision-making that underpins many AI systems, in ways that are unfair to the subjects of the decision-making process (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017) and, thus, may breach the principle of justice. These decisions may be based on factors of ethical importance (e.g., ethnic, gender, or religious grounds) and irrelevant to the decision-making at hand, or they may be relevant but legally protected as a nondiscriminatory charac-teristic (Friedman and Nissenbaum 1996). Moreover, AI-driven decisions may be 
amalgamated from factors that are not of obvious ethical importance, and yet col-
lectively constitute unfairly biased decision-making (Pedreshi et  al. 2008; Floridi 2012).