1774 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
and/or the wellbeing of the natural world, and/or (ii) enable socially preferable 
and/or environmentally sustainable developments.1
Following this definition, we analysed a set of 27 projects, obtained via a systematic review of relevant literature undertaken by the authors, to identify clear and signifi-cant cases of successful and unsuccessful examples of AI4SG. The literature anal-ysis that underpins this article involved searching five databases (Google Scholar, PhilPapers, Scopus, SSRN, and Web of Science), between October 2018 and May 2019. We initially conducted a broad search for AI for Social Good on each of these search engines. This general search returned many results on AI’s application for good. Hence, we searched for uses of AI in areas related to human life and the well-being of the natural world, like ‘healthcare’, ‘education’, ‘equality’, ‘climate change’, and ‘environmental protection’. This provided disjoined keywords from which we derived chosen synonyms to perform area-specific searches. Each research-area search used the query: < area and synonyms > AND ("Artificial Intelligence" OR 
"Machine Learning" OR "AI ") AND “Social Good”. From the set of 27 cases, we identified 7 cases (see Appendix for a list) as being most representative in terms of scope, variety, impact, and for their potentiality to corroborate the essential factors that we argue should characterise the design of AI4SG projects.
The factors described in this article have been identified in coherence with more 
general work in the field of AI ethics. Each factor relates to at least one of five ethi-cal principles of AI—beneficence, nonmaleficence, justice, autonomy, and explica-
bility—identified in the comparative analysis mentioned above (Floridi et al. 2018). This coherence is crucial: AI4SG cannot be inconsistent with the ethical framework guiding the design and evaluation of AI in general. The principle of beneficence is of particular relevance. It states that the use of AI should provide benefit to people and the natural world, and indeed AI4SG projects should not just comply with but reify this principle, such that the benefits of AI4SG should be preferable and sustain-able, in line with the definition above. Beneficence is thus a necessary condition of AI4SG, yet it is insufficient, not least because the beneficent impact of an AI4SG project may be “offset” by the creation or amplification of other risks or harms.
2 
Moreover, while others of these ethical principles, such as autonomy and explicabil-ity, indeed recur throughout our discussion, the factors we evince below are more closely associated with design considerations that are specific to AI4SG, and may be operationalised in the form of the corresponding best practices provided for each. In this way, ethical analysis informing the design and the deployment of AI4SG initia-tives has a central role in mitigating foreseeable risks of unintended consequences and possible misuses of the technology.
1 While it is beyond present scope to adjudicate this for any particular case, it is important to acknowl-
edge at the outset that in practice there is likely to be considerable disagreement and contention regarding 
what would constitute a socially good outcome.
2 This should not be taken as necessitating a utilitarian calculation: the beneficial impact of a given pro-
ject may be “offset” by the violation of some categorical imperative. Therefore even if an AI4SG project would do “more good than harm”, the harm may be ethically intolerable. In such a hypothetical case, one would not be morally obliged to develop and deploy the project in question.