1777
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
necessarily always satisfied. But a simulation often enables one to test a much wider 
set of cases that cannot be dealt with formally, e.g., due to the complexity of the proof.
It would be misguided to rely purely on formal properties or simulations to fal-
sify an AI4SG application. The assumptions of these models cage the real-world applicability of any conclusions that one might make. And assumptions may be incorrect in reality. What one may prove to be correct via a formal proof, or likely correct via testing in simulation, may be disproved later with the real-world deployment of the system. For example, developers of a game-theoretic model for wildlife security assumed a relatively flat topography without serious obstruc-tions. Hence, the software that they developed originally had an incorrect defini-tion of an optimal patrol route. Incremental testing of the application enabled the refinement of the optimal patrol route by proving wrong the assumption of a flat topography (Fang et al. 2016).
If novel dilemmas in real-world contexts require the alteration of prior 
assumptions made in the lab, one solution is to rectify a priori assumptions after deployment. Alternatively, one may adopt an “on-the-fly” or runtime system for a constant update of a program’s processing (“understanding”) of its inputs. Yet, problems also abound with this approach. For example, Microsoft’s infa-mous Twitter bot, Tay, acquired meanings, in a very loose sense, at runtime, as it learned from Twitter users how it should respond to tweets. After deployment in the real—and frequently vicious—world of social media, however, the bot’s ability to adapt constantly its “conceptual understanding” became an unfortunate bug, as Tay “learned” and regurgitated offensive language and unethical associa-tions between concepts from other users (Neff and Nagy 2016).
The use of a retrodictive approach—that is, an attempt to understand some aspect 
of reality through a priori information—to deal with the falsifiability of require-ments presents similar problems. This is noteworthy, since retrodiction is the pri-mary method of supervised machine learning approaches that learn from data (e.g., the learning of a continuous transformation function in the case of neural networks).
From the previous analysis it follows that the essential factor of falsifiability and 
incremental development comprises a cycle: engineering requirements that are fal-sifiable (so that it is at least possible to know whether the requirements are not met); falsification testing for incrementally improving levels of trustworthiness; adjust-ment of a priori assumptions; and then and only then deployment in an incremen-tally wider and critical context. Germany’s approach to regulating autonomous vehi-cles offer a good example of this incremental approach. Deregulated zones allow experimentation of constrained autonomy and, after increasing the levels of trust-worthiness, manufacturers may test vehicles with higher levels of autonomy (Pagallo 2017). Indeed, the creation of such deregulated zones, or teststrecken, was one rec-ommendation to support more ethical AI policy at the European level (Floridi et al. 2018). The identification of this essential factor yields the following best practice:
(1) AI4SG designers should identify falsifiable requirements and test them in incre-
mental steps from the lab to the “outside world”.