1789
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
the legal meaning of ‘violation’. Likewise, the meaning and sense of affective sym-
bols, such as facial expressions, also depends on the type of agent showing a given expression. Affective AI can detect an emotion (Martı́nez-Miranda and Aldea 2005), an artificial agent may state accurately that a human appears sad, but cannot change the meaning of sadness.
The solution to these two problems rest on distinguishing between tasks that 
should and should not be delegated to an artificial system. AI should be deployed to facilitate human-friendly semantisation, but not to provide it itself. This is true, for example, when considering patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Research into carer-patient relations highlights three points (Burns and Rabins 2000). First, carers play a critical, but burdensome, role in reminding patients of the activities in which they participate, e.g., taking medication. Second, carers also play a critical role in provid-ing patients with meaningful interaction. And third, when carers remind patients to take their medication, the patient-carer relation may become weaker by annoying the patient, with the carer losing some capacity to provide empathy and meaningful sup-port. Consequently, researchers have developed AI software that balances reminding the patient against annoying the patient (Chu et al. 2012). The balance is learned and optimised using reinforcement learning. The researchers designed the system so that caregivers can spend most of their time providing empathic support and preserving a meaningful relationship with the patient. As this example shows, it is possible to use AI to sweep away formulaic tasks whilst sustaining human-friendly semanticisation.
Human-centric semanticisation, as an essential factor for AI4SG, underpins our 
final best practice:
(7) AI4SG designers should not hinder the ability for people to semanticise (that is, 
to give meaning to, and make sense of) something.
Conclusion: Balancing Factors for AI for Social Good
The seven factors analysed in the previous pages are summarised in Table  1, together 
with the corresponding best practices, and the five principle(s) of AI ethics identi-
fied in (Floridi and Cowls 2019) to which each factor is most closely identified. To reiterate, the principle of beneficence is assumed as a precondition for an AI4SG, so the factors relate to one or more of the other four principles: nonmaleficence, autonomy, justice and explicability.
The seven factors suggest that creating successful AI4SG requires two kinds of 
balances to be struck: intra and inter.
On the one hand, each single factor in and of itself may require an intrinsic bal-
ance, for example, between the risk of over-intervening and the risk of under-interven-ing when devising contextual interventions; or between protection-by-obfuscation and protection-by-enumeration of salient differences between people, depending on the purposes and context of a system. On the other hand, balances are not just specific to a single factor; they are also systemic, because they must also be struck between multiple