1772 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
significantly. They range from models to predict septic shock (Henry et al. 2015) 
to game-theoretic models to prevent poaching (Fang et al. 2016); from online rein-
forcement learning to target HIV-education at homeless youths (Yadav et al. 2016a, b) to probabilistic models to prevent harmful policing (Carton et al. 2016) and sup-port student retention (Lakkaraju et al. 2015). Indeed, new applications of AI4SG 
appear almost daily, making possible socially good outcomes that were once less easily achievable, unfeasible, or unaffordable.
Several frameworks for the design, development, and deployment of ethical AI in 
general have recently emerged (see Floridi et al. 2018 for a comparative analysis and synthesis). However, there is still only limited understanding about what constitutes AI “for the social good” (Taddeo and Floridi 2018a). Approaching AI4SG ad hoc, by analysing specific areas of application—like famine-relief or disaster manage-ment—as an annual summit for AI industry and government has done (ITU 2017, 
2018; “AI for Good Global Summit” 2019) indicates the presence of a phenomenon, but neither explains it, nor does it suggest how other AI4SG solutions could and should be designed to harness AI’s full potential. Furthermore, many projects that generate socially good outcomes using AI are not (self-)described as such (Moore 2019).
Lacking a clear understanding of what makes AI socially good in theory, what 
may be described as AI4SG in practice, and how to reproduce its initial successes in terms of policies is a problem because designers of AI4SG face at least two main challenges: unnecessary failures and missed opportunities. AI software is shaped by human values which, if not carefully selected, may lead to “good-AI-gone-bad” scenarios. For example, consider the failure of IBM’s oncology-support software, which attempts to use machine learning to identify cancerous tumours, but which was rejected by medical practitioners “on the ground” (Ross and Swetlitz 2017). The system was trained using synthetic data and was not sufficiently refined to interpret ambiguous, nuanced, or otherwise “messy” patient health records (Strickland 2019). It also relied on US medical protocols, which are not applicable worldwide. The heedless deployment and the poor design of the software led to misdiagnoses and erroneous treatment suggestions, breaching the trust of doctors. Context-specific design and deployment could help prevent such value misalignment and deliver suc-cessful AI4SG projects on a more consistent basis.
At the same time, the genuinely socially good outcomes of AI may arise merely 
by chance, for example through an accidental application of an AI solution in a dif-ferent context. This was the case with the use of a different version of IBM’s cogni-tive system. In this case, the Watson system was originally designed to identify bio-logical mechanisms, but when used in a classroom setting, it inspired engineering students to solve design problems (Goel et al. 2015). In this instance, AI provided a unique mode of education. But lacking a clear understanding of AI4SG means that this success is accidental and cannot be repeated systematically, whilst for each “accidental success” there may be countless examples of missed opportunities to exploit the benefits of AI for advancing socially good outcomes in different settings.
In order to avoid unnecessary failures and missed opportunities, AI4SG would 
benefit from an analysis of the essential factors that support and underwrite the design and deployment of successful AI4SG. In this article, we provide the first,