1780 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
suggested routes (Fang et  al. 2016). If a route poses physical obstacles, however, 
then the software lacks the possibility to provide alternative suggestions. Officers may ignore the advice by taking a different route, but not without disengaging from the application. It is essential to relax such constraints, so that users can ignore an intervention, but accept subsequent, more appropriate interventions (in the form of advice) later on.
These examples point to the importance of seeing users as equal partners in both 
the design and deployment of autonomous decision-making systems. The adoption of this mindset might have helped prevent the tragic loss of two Boeing 737 Max airliners. It appears that the pilots of these flights struggled to reverse a software malfunction caused by faulty sensors, due in part to the absence of “optional safety features” which Boeing sold separately (Tabuchi and Gelles 2019).
The risk of false positives (unnecessary intervention, creating disillusionment) 
is often just as problematic as false negatives (no intervention where it is neces-sary, limiting effectiveness). Hence, a suitable receiver-contextualised intervention is one that achieves the right level of disruption while respecting autonomy through optionality. This contextualisation rests on information about users’ capacities, pref-erences and goals, and the circumstances in which the intervention will take effect.
One can consider five dimensions relevant to a receiver-contextualised interven-
tion. Four of these dimensions emerge from McFarlane’s taxonomy of interdisci-plinary research on disruptive computer–human interruptions (McFarlane 1999; McFarlane and Latorella 2002 17–19). These are: the individual characteristics of the person receiving the intervention; the methods of coordination between the receiver and the system; the meaning or purpose of the intervention; and the overall effects of the intervention.
7 A fifth dimension of relevance is optionality: a user can 
choose either to ignore all offered advice or to drive the process and request a differ -
ent intervention better suited to their needs.
We can summarise these five dimensions in the form of the following best prac-
tice for receiver-contextualised intervention.
(3) AI4SG designers should build decision-making systems in consultation with 
users interacting with, and impacted, by these systems; with understanding of users’ characteristics, of the methods of coordination, and the purposes and effects of an intervention; and with respect for users’ right to ignore or modify interventions.
7 The four remaining dimensions proposed by MacFarlane—the source of the interruption, the method 
of expression, the channel of conveyance and the human activity changed by the interruption—are not 
relevant for purpose of this article.