1788 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
Respecting situational fairness is essential for the successful implementation of 
AI4SG. To achieve it, AI4SG projects need to remove factors (and their proxies) that 
are of ethical importance but irrelevant to an outcome, and include the same fac-tors when these are required, whether for the sake of inclusiveness, safety, or other ethical considerations. The problem of historical biases affecting future decision-making is an old one. What is new is the potential that these biases will be embed-ded in, strengthened, and perpetuated anew by erroneous reinforcement learning mechanisms. This risk is especially pronounced when considered alongside the risk of opacity in AI decision-making systems and their outcomes. We will return to this topic in the next section.
From our identification of situational fairness as an essential factor, we can yield 
the following best practice:
(6) AI4SG designers should remove from relevant datasets variables and proxies that 
are irrelevant to an outcome, except when their inclusion supports inclusivity, safety, or other ethical imperatives.
Human‑Friendly Semanticisation
AI4SG must allow humans to curate and foster their “semantic capital”, that is,
any content that can enhance someone’s power to give meaning to and make 
sense of (semanticise) something (Floridi et al. 2018).
This is crucial to maintain and foster human autonomy. With AI, we may often have the technical capacity to automate meaning- and sense-creation (semanticisa-tion), but mistrust or unfairness may also arise if we do so carelessly. Two prob-lems emerge. The first problem is that AI software may define semanticisation in a way that diverges from our own choices. This is the case if a procedure arbitrar -
ily defines meanings (e.g., based on a coin toss). The same problem may arise if AI software support some kind of semanticisation based on preexisting uses. For example, researchers have developed an application that predicts the legal meaning of ‘violation’ based on past cases (Al-Abdulkarim et al. 2015). If one used the soft-
ware to define the meaning of ‘violation’,
9 then one would end up limiting the role 
of judges and justices. They would no longer be able to semanticise (refine and re-define the meaning, and the possibility of making sense of) “violation”, when they interpret the law. This is a problem, because past usage does not always predict how we would semanticise the same concepts or phenomena in the future.
The second problem is that, in a social setting, it would be impractical for AI 
software to define all meanings and senses. Some semanticisation is subjective, because who or what is involved in the semanticisation is also partly constitutive of the process and its outcome. For example, only legally empowered agents can define 
9 There is no suggestion that this is the intended use.