1776 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
Trustworthiness of an AI application entails a high probability that the application 
will respect the principle of beneficence, or at the very least the principle of nonma-leficience. While there is no universal rule or guideline that can ensure or guarantee trustworthiness, falsifiability is an essential factor to improve the trustworthiness of 
technological applications in general, and AI4SG applications in particular.
Falsifiability entails the specification, and the possibility of empirical testing, of 
one or more critical requirements, that is, an essential condition, resource, or means for a capability to be fully operational, such that something could or should not work without it. Safety is an obvious critical requirement. Hence, for an AI4SG system to be trustworthy, its safety should be falsifiable.
4 If falsifiability is not possible, 
then the critical requirements cannot be checked, and then the system should not be deemed trustworthy. This is why falsifiability is an essential factor for all conceiv -
able AI4SG projects.
Unfortunately, we cannot know for sure that a given AI4SG application is safe 
unless we can test the application in all possible contexts. In this case, the map of testing would simply equate to the territory of deployment. As this reductio ad absurdum makes clear, complete certainty is out of reach. What is within reach, in an uncertain and fuzzy world with many unforeseen situations, is the possibility to know when a given critical requirement is not implemented or may be failing to work properly. Hence, if the critical requirements are falsifiable, we can know when the AI4SG application is not trustworthy, but not whether it is trustworthy.
Critical requirements should be tested with an incremental deployment cycle. 
Unintended hazardous effects may only reveal themselves after testing. At the same time, software should only be tested in the real world if it is safe to do so. This requires adoption of a deployment cycle whereby developers: (a) ensure that the application’s most critical requirements or assumptions are falsifiable, (b) undertake hypothesis testing of those most critical requirements and assumptions in safe, pro-tected contexts, and, if these hypotheses are not disproven over a small set of suit-able contexts, then (c) conduct testing across increasingly wide contexts, and/or test a larger set of less critical requirements, and all this while (d) being ready to halt or modify the deployment as soon as hazardous or other unwanted effects may appear.
AI4SG applications may use formal approaches to try to test critical require-
ments. For example, they may include the use of formal verification to ensure that autonomous vehicles, and AI systems in other safety–critical contexts, would make the ethically preferable choice (Dennis et  al. 2016). Such methods offer safety checks that, in terms of falsifiability, can be proved correct. Simulations may offer roughly similar guarantees. A simulation enables one to test whether critical require-ments (again, consider safety) are met under a set of formal assumptions. Unlike a formal proof, a simulation cannot always indicate that the required properties are 
4 It is of course likely that in practice, an assessment of the safety of an AI system must also take into 
account wider societal values and cultural beliefs, for example, which may necessitate different trade-offs 
between the requirements of critical requirements like safety and other, potentially competing norms and expectations.