1775
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
Before discussing the factors, it is important to clarify three general features of 
the whole set: dependency, order, and coherence. The seven factors are often inter -
twined and co-dependent, but for the sake of simplicity we discuss them separately. 
Nothing should be inferred from this choice. In the same way, the factors are all essential, none of them is “more important” than any other, so we shall introduce them not in terms of priority, but somewhat historically, starting with factors that pre-date AI, and yet take on greater importance when AI technologies are used, owing to the particular capabilities and risks of AI (Yang et al. 2018).
3 These include 
falsifiability and incremental deployment and safeguards against the manipulation of data. There are also factors that relate more intrinsically to the sociotechnical characteristics of AI as it exists today, like situational fairness and human-friendly semanticisation.
The factors are ethically robust and pragmatically applicable, in the sense that 
they give rise to design considerations in the form of best practices that should be ethically endorsed. It is crucial to stress here that the seven factors we identify are not by themselves sufficient for socially good AI, but careful consideration of each 
of them is, we argue, necessary. Hence, the set of factors we identify should not be taken as a “checklist” which, if merely complied with, guarantees socially good out-comes from the use of AI in a particular domain. In the same vein, we highlight the need to strike a balance between the different factors, and indeed between tensions that may arise even within a single factor. It follows that seeking to frame a pro-ject as “for social good” or “not for social good” in a binary way seems needlessly reductive, not to mention subjective. The aim of the article is not to identify, or offer the means to identify AI4SG projects; our goal is to identify ethically important characteristics of projects that could feasibly be described as AI4SG.
Seven Essential Factors for Successful AI4SG
As we anticipated, the factors are (1) falsifiability and incremental deployment; (2) safeguards against the manipulation of predictors; (3) receiver-contextualised inter -
vention; (4) receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes; (5) pri-vacy protection and data subject consent; (6) situational fairness; and (7) human-friendly semanticisation. We shall elucidate each factor with one or more examples of projects in the sample, and offer a corresponding best practice.
Falsifiability and Incremental Deployment
Trustworthiness is essential for technology in general (Taddeo and Floridi 
2011; Taddeo 2017), and for AI4SG applications in particular, to be adopted and have a meaningful positive impact on human life and environmental wellbeing. 
3 As noted in the introduction, we cannot hope to document every single ethical consideration for a 
social good project, so even the least novel factors here are those that take on new relevance in the con-
text of AI.