1787
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
AI4SG initiatives relying on biased data may propagate this bias through a 
vicious cycle (Yang et  al. 2018). Such a cycle would begin with a biased dataset 
informing a first phase of AI decision-making, resulting in discriminatory actions, leading to the collection and use of biased data in turn. Consider the use of AI to predict preterm birth in the United States, where the health outcomes of pregnant women have long been affected by their ethnicity. Longstanding bias against Afri-can-American women seeking treatment, owing to harmful historical stereotypes, contributes to a maternal morbidity rate that is over three times higher than that of white women (CDC  2020). Here, AI may offer great potential to reduce this stark 
racial divide, but only if the same historical discrimination is not replicated in AI systems (Banjo 2018). Or consider the use of predictive policing software. Devel-opers may train predictive policing software on policing data that contains deeply ingrained prejudices. When discrimination affects arrest rates, it becomes embedded in prosecution data (Lum and Isaac 2016). Such biases may cause discriminatory 
decisions (e.g., warnings or arrests) that feed back into the increasingly biased data-sets (Crawford 2016), thereby completing a vicious cycle.
These examples involve the use of AI to improve outcomes in domains where 
data were already collected. Yet, in many other contexts, AI4SG projects (or indeed similar initiatives) are, in effect, making citizens “visible” in ways that they previ-ously were not, including in global South contexts (Taylor and Broeders 2015). This increased visibility stresses the importance of protecting against the potential ampli-fication of harmful bias by AI technologies.
Clearly, designers must sanitise the datasets used to train AI. However, there is 
equally a risk of applying too strong a disinfectant, so to speak, by removing impor -
tant contextual nuances which could improve ethical decision-making. So, designers must also ensure that AI decision-making maintains sensitivity to factors that are important for inclusiveness. For instance, we should ensure that a word processor interacts identically with a human user regardless of that user’s gender and ethnicity, but also expect that it may operate in a non-equal and yet equitable way by aiding people with visual impairments.
Such expectations are not always met in the context of AI-driven reasoning. 
Compared to the word processor, AI makes possible a far wider range of decision-making and interaction modalities, many of which are driven by potentially biased data. Training datasets may contain natural language that carries unfair associations between genders and words which, in turn, carry normative power (Caliskan et al. 2017). In other contexts and use cases, an equitable approach may require differ -
ences in communication, based on factors such as gender. Consider the case of the virtual teaching assistant which failed to discriminate sufficiently well between men and women in its responses to being told that a user was expecting a baby, congratu-lating the men and ignoring the women (Eicher et al. 2017). A BBC News investiga-tion highlighted an even more egregious example: a mental health chatbot deemed suitable for use by children was unable to understand a child explicitly reporting underage sexual abuse (White 2018). As these cases make clear, the use of AI in human–computer interactions, such as chatbots, requires the correct understand-ing of both the salient groups to which a user belongs and the characteristics they embody when they interact with the software.