1778 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
Safeguards Against the Manipulation of Predictors
The use of AI to predict future trends or patterns is very popular in AI4SG contexts, 
from applying automated prediction to redress academic failure (Lakkaraju et  al. 2015), to preventing illegal policing (Carton et  al. 2016), and detecting corporate fraud (Zhou and Kapoor 2011). The predictive power of AI4SG faces two risks: the manipulation of input data, and excessive reliance on non-causal indicators.
The manipulation of data is not a new problem, nor is it limited to AI systems 
alone. Well-established findings such as Goodhart’s Law (Goodhart 1975), which is often summarised as “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure” (Strathern 1997, 308), long pre-date widespread adoption of AI systems. But in the case of AI, the problem of data manipulation may be exacerbated (Man-heim and Garrabrant 2019) and lead to unfair outcomes that breach the principle of justice. As such, it is a noteworthy risk for any AI4SG initiative, because it can impair the predictive power of AI and lead to the avoidance of socially good inter -
ventions at the individual level. Consider the concern raised by Ghani over teachers who face being evaluated in respect to:
the percentage of students in their class who are above a certain risk threshold. If the model was transparent — for example, heavily reliant on math GPA — the 
teacher could inflate math grades and reduce the intermediate risk scores of their students (Ghani 2016).
As Ghani goes on to argue, the same concern applies to predictors of adverse police officer interactions:
these systems [are] very easy to understand and interpret, but that also makes them easy to game. An officer who has had two uses of force in the past 80 days may choose to be a bit more careful over the next 10 days, until the count rolls over to zero again.
These hypothetical examples make clear that, when the model used is an easy one to understand “on the ground”, it is already open to abuse or “gaming”, indepen-dently of whether AI is used. The introduction of AI complicates matters, owing to the scale at which AI is typically applied.
5As we have seen, if the information 
used to predict a given outcome is known, an agent with such information (that is predicted to take a particular action) can change each predictive variable’s value in order to avoid an intervention. In this way, the predictive power of the overall model is reduced, as it has been shown by empirical research in the domain of corporate fraud (Zhou and Kapoor 2011). Such a phenomenon could carry across from fraud detection to the domains that AI4SG initiatives seek to address.
6
5 While, for the sake of simplicity, our focus is on minimising the spread of information used to predict 
an outcome, we do not intend to foreclose on the suggestion, offered in Prasad (2018), that in some cases 
a fairer approach may be to maximise the available information and hence “democratise” the ability to manipulate predictors.
6 For a discussion of the use of artificial intelligence in criminal acts more generally, see King et  al. 
2019.