1791
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
factors. Consider the tension between preventing malicious actors from understanding 
how to “game” the input data of AI prediction systems versus enabling humans to over -
ride genuinely flawed outcomes; or the tension between ensuring the effective disclo-sure of the reasons behind a decision without compromising the consensual anonymity of data subjects.
The overarching question facing the AI4SG community is, for each given case, 
whether one is morally obliged to, or obliged not to, design, develop, and deploy a spe-cific AI4SG project. This article does not seek to answer such a question in the abstract. Resolving the tensions that are likely to arise among and between factors is highly con-text-dependent, and the previous analysis is not meant to cover all potential contexts, not least because this would be inconsistent with the argument for falsifiable hypothesis testing and incremental deployment supported in this article; nor would a checklist of purely technical “dos and don’ts” suffice. Rather, our analysis has yielded a set of essen-tial factors that need to be considered, interpreted and evaluated contextually when one is designing, developing, and deploying a specific AI4SG project. The future of AI4SG will likely provide more opportunities to enrich such a set of essential factors. AI itself may help to manage its own life cycle by providing, in a meta-reflective way, tools to evaluate how best to strike the individual and systemic balances indicated above.
The most pertinent questions to arise from the factors described in this article are 
likely to concern this challenge of balancing the competing needs and claims that the factors and corresponding best practices introduce. This concerns what it is that legitimates decision-making with and about AI. While we leave this concern pri-marily to future research, we offer some remarks on it in closing. Questions such as this are inevitably intertwined with wider ethical and political challenges regarding who has the power or “standing” to participate in this process of evaluation, as well as how multiple preferences are measured and aggregated, as Baum’s trichotomic framework outlines (Baum 2017). If we assume that the challenge of balancing fac-tors ought to be at least somewhat participatory in nature, Prasad’s (2018) overview of relevant social choice theorems identifies several background conditions to sup-port efficacious group decision-making. As these analyses suggest, the incorporation of multiple perspectives into the design of AI decision-making systems is likely to be an ethically important step both for AI in general, and AI4SG in particular.
There is much work still to be done to ensure that AI4SG projects are designed 
in ways that not merely advance beneficial goals and address societal challenges, but that do so in socially preferable and sustainable ways. This article seeks to contrib-ute to lay the ground for good practices and policies in this respect, as well as for further research on the ethical considerations that should undergird AI4SG projects, and hence the  “AI4SG project” at large.
Appendix: Representative AI4SG Examples
In the table below, we list the seven initiatives from our wider sample that are espe-cially representative in terms of scope, variety, impact, and for their potentiality to evince the factors that should characterise the design of AI4SG projects. This includes the factor(s) that were identified as a result of our analysis of each project.