1782 L. Floridi et al.
1 3
There is an interdependency between the choice of the specific purpose, the rel-
evant LoA that can fulfil the purpose, the system analysed, and the model obtained 
by analysing the system at a specified LoA for a particular purpose. The LoA pro-vides the conceptualisation of the system (e.g., GPA scores, and socio-economic backgrounds). But the purpose constrains the construction of LoAs. For example, if we choose to explain the decision making system itself (e.g., the use of particular machine learning techniques), then the LoA can only conceptualise those AI tech-niques. In turn, the LoA generates the model, which explains the system. The model identifies system structures, such as a specific student’s GPA score, poor attendance rate, and their socioeconomic background being predictors of their academic failure. Consequently, designers must choose carefully the purpose and the corresponding LoA, so that the explanation model can provide the right explanation of the system in question for a given receiver.
A LoA is chosen for a specific purpose: for example, a LoA chosen to explain a 
decision taken on the basis of outcomes obtained through an algorithmic procedure varies depending on whether the explanation is meant for the receiver of that deci-sion or for an engineer responsible for the design of the algorithmic procedure. This is because, depending on the purpose and its granularity (e.g. a customer-friendly vs. engineer-friendly explanation), not every LoA is appropriate for a given receiver. Sometimes, a receiver’s conceptual view of the world may differ from the one on which the explanation is based. In other cases, a receiver and an explanation may be conceptually aligned, but the receiver may not agree on the amount of granularity (LoA) of the information (what we called more precisely the model) provided. Con-ceptual disalignment means that the receiver may find the explanation irrelevant, unintelligible or, as we shall see below, questionable. In respect of (un)intelligibility, a LoA may use unknown labels (so-called observables), or labels that have different meanings for different users.
Empirical studies (Gregor and Benbasat 1999) suggest that the suitability of an 
explanation differs among receivers according to their expertise. Receivers may require explanations about how the AI software came to a decision, especially when they must take action based on that decision (Gregor and Benbasat 1999; Watson et al. 2019). How the AI system came to a conclusion can be just as important as the justification for that conclusion. Consequently, designers must also contextualise the method of explanation to the receiver.
The case of the software that uses influence-maximisation algorithms to target 
homeless youths for HIV education provides a good example of the relevance of the receiver-contextualisation of concepts (Yadav et al. 2016a, b). The researchers 
involved in this project considered three possible LoAs when designing the explana-tion model: the first LoA included utility calculations; the second LoA focused on social graph connectivity; and a third LoA focusing on pedagogic purpose. The first LoA highlighted the utility of targeting one homeless youth over another. Accord-ing to the researchers, in this case, homeless shelter workers (the receivers) might have misunderstood the utility calculations or found them irrelevant. Utility calcula-tions offer little explanatory power beyond the decision itself, because they often simply show that the “best” choice was made, and how good it was. Explanations based on the second LoA faced a different problem: the receivers assumed that the