1785
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
on privacy (Nissenbaum 2009). People’s safety may be compromised when a mali-
cious actor or state gain control over individuals via privacy infringements (Taddeo 
2015; Lynskey 2015). Respect for privacy is also a necessary condition of human dignity, since we can view personal information as constituting an individual, and deprivatising records without consent is likely to constitute a violation of human dignity (Floridi 2016). The conception of individual privacy as a fundamental right 
underlies recent legislative action in, for example, Europe (through its General Data Protection Regulation) and Japan (through its Act on Protection of Personal Infor -
mation), as well as judicial decisions in jurisdictions such as India (Mohanty and Bhatia 2017). Privacy supports people in deviating from social norms without caus-
ing offense, and communities in maintaining their social structures, so privacy also undergirds social cohesion.
In the case of AI4SG, it is particularly important to emphasise the relevance 
of users’ consent to the use of personal data. Tensions may arise between differ -
ent thresholds of consent (Price and Cohen 2019). The tension is often at its most fraught in “life-or-death” situations such national emergencies and pandemics. Con-sider the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa in 2014, which posed a complex ethical dilemma (The Economist 2014). In this case, the rapid release and analysis of call-
data records from cell phone users in the region may have allowed epidemiologists to track the spread of the deadly disease. However, the release of the data was held up over valid concerns around users’ privacy, as well as the value of the data to industrial competitors.
In circumstances where haste is not so crucial, it is possible to obtain a subject’s 
consent for—and before—the data being used. The level or type of consent sought can vary with the context. In healthcare, one may adopt an assumed consent thresh-old, whereby reporting a medical issue to a doctor constitutes assumed consent on the part of a patient. In other circumstances, an informed consent threshold will be more appropriate. Yet, since informed consent requires researchers to obtain a patient’s specific consent before using their data for a non-consented purpose, prac-titioners may choose an explicit consent threshold to general data processing, i.e., for any medical usage. This threshold does not require informing the patient about all of the possible ways that researchers may use their data (Etzioni 1999). Another alternative is the evolving notion of “dynamic consent”, whereby individuals can monitor and adjust their privacy preferences on a granular level (Kaye et al. 2015).
In other cases, informed consent may be waived altogether. This was the case 
with the recent creation of machine learning software to predict the prognosis of ovarian cancer sufferers by drawing upon retrospective analysis of anonymised images (Lu et al. 2019). The use of patient health data in the development of AI solutions without patients’ consent has also attracted the attention of data protection regulators. In 2017, the UK’s Information Commissioner ruled that the Royal Free NHS Foundation Trust violated the Data Protection Act when it provided patient details to Google DeepMind, for the purposes of training an AI system to diagnose acute kidney injury (Burgess 2017). The Commissioner noted as a “shortcoming” that “patients were not adequately informed that their data would be used as part of the test” (“Royal Free—Google DeepMind Trial Failed to Comply with Data Protec-tion Law” 2017).