1773
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
fine-grained analysis of these factors. Our aim here is not to document every single 
ethical consideration for an AI4SG project. For example, it is essential, and hope-fully self-evident, that an AI4SG project ought not to advance the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, an imperative which we do not discuss here (Tad-deo and Floridi 2018b). Likewise, it is important to acknowledge at the outset that there are myriad circumstances in which AI will not be the most effective way to address a particular social problem. This could be due to the existence of alternative approaches that are more efficacious (i.e., “Not AI For Social Good”) or because of the unacceptable risks that the deployment of AI would introduce (i.e., “AI For Insufficient Social Good” as weighed against its risks). Nor do we foresee many (or perhaps any) cases in which AI is a “silver bullet”—the single-handed solution to an entrenched social problem (i.e., “Only AI for Social Good”). What is therefore essential about the factors and the corresponding best practices is not their incor -
poration in every circumstance; we note several examples where it would be mor -
ally defensible not to incorporate a particular factor. Instead, what is essential is that each best practice is (i) considered proactively, and (ii) not incorporated if and only if there is a clear, demonstrable, and morally defensible reason why it should not be.
In this article, we focus on identifying factors that are particularly relevant to AI 
as a technological infrastructure, to the extent that it is designed and used for the advancement of social good. To anticipate, these seven factors are: (1) falsifiability and incremental deployment; (2) safeguards against the manipulation of predictors; (3) receiver-contextualised intervention; (4) receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes; (5) privacy protection and data subject consent; (6) situational fairness; and (7) human-friendly semanticisation. With these factors identified, the questions that are likely to arise in turn are: how these factors ought to be evalu-ated and resolved, by whom, and with what supporting mechanism (e.g. regulation or codes of conduct). These questions, which are not within the scope of this article and will be addressed in the next stage of this research, are intertwined with wider ethical and political issues regarding the legitimacy of decision-making with, and about, AI.
The rest of the article is structured as follows. In section two, we explain how we 
identified the seven factors. In section three, we analyse the seven factors individu-ally. We elucidate each of them by reference to one or more case studies, and we derive from each factor a corresponding best practice for AI4SG creators to follow. In the concluding section, we discuss the factors and suggest how tensions between them may be resolved.
Methodology
AI4SG initiatives are successful insofar as they help to reduce, mitigate or eradicate a given problem of moral significance. Thus, our analysis of the essential factors for successful AI4SG is based on the following working definition:
AI4SG =
def. the design, development, and deployment of AI systems in ways 
that (i) prevent, mitigate or resolve problems adversely affecting human life