1779
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
At the same time, there is a risk that excessive reliance on non-causal indica-
tors—that is, data which is correlated with, but not causal of, a phenomenon—may 
distract attention from the context in which the AI4SG designer is seeking to inter -
vene. To be effective, any such intervention should alter the underlying causes of a given problem, such as a student’s domestic problems or inadequate corporate governance, rather than non-causal predictors. To do otherwise is to risk addressing only a symptom, rather than the root cause of a problem.
These risks suggest the need to consider the use of safeguards as a design factor 
for AI4SG projects. Such safeguards may constrain the selection of indicators to be used in the design of AI4SG projects; the extent to which these indicators should shape interventions; and/or the level of transparency that should apply to how indi-cators affect decision. This yields the following best practice:
(2) AI4SG designers should adopt safeguards which (i) ensure that non-causal indi -
cators do not inappropriately skew interventions, and (ii) limit, when appropri-
ate, knowledge of how inputs affect outputs from AI4SG systems, to prevent manipulation.
Receiver‑Contextualised Intervention
It is essential that software intervenes in users’ life only in ways that respect their 
autonomy. Again, this is not a problem that arises only with AI-driven interventions, but the use of AI introduces new considerations. In particular, a core challenge for AI4SG projects is to devise interventions that balance current and future benefits. The balancing problem, which is familiar to preference-elicitation research (Bou-tilier 2002; Faltings et al. 2004; Chajewska et al. 2000), boils down to a temporal 
choice interdependency. An intervention in the present can elicit user preferences that then enable the software to contextualise future interventions to the given user. Consequently, an intervention strategy that has no impact on user autonomy (e.g., one that lacks any interventions) may be ineffective in extracting the necessary information for correctly contextualised future interventions. Conversely, an inter -
vention that overly infringes upon a user’s autonomy may cause the user to reject the technology, making future interventions impossible.
This balancing consideration is a common one for AI4SG initiatives. Take, for 
example, interactive activity recognition software for people with cognitive disabili-ties (Chu et  al. 2012). The software is designed to prompt patients to maintain a daily schedule of activities (e.g., taking medication), whilst minimising interrup-tions to their wider goals. Each intervention is contextualised in such a way that the software learns the timing of future interventions from responses to past inter -
ventions. Moreover, only important interventions are made, and yet all interventions are partially optional because declining one prompt leads to the same prompt later 
on. Here, the concern was that patients would reject an overly intrusive technology; 
hence a balance was sought. This balance is lacking in our second example. A game-theoretic application intervenes in wildlife security officers’ patrols by offering