1781
1 3How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
Receiver‑Contextualised Explanation and Transparent Purposes
AI4SG applications should be designed to make explainable the operations and out-
comes of these systems and to make transparent their purposes. These two require-ments are of course intrinsically linked, as the operations and outcomes of AI sys-tems reflect the wider purposes of human designers; in this section, we address both in turn.
Making AI systems explainable is an important ethical principle (Floridi et  al. 
2018). It has been a focus of research since at least 1975 (Shortliffe and Buchanan 1975). And it has gained more attention recently (Thelisson et  al. 2017; Wachter et al. 2016) given the increasingly pervasive distribution of AI systems. As we saw 
above, AI4SG projects should offer interventions that are contextualised to the receiver. In addition, the explanation for an intervention should be contextualised in order to be adequate, and protect the autonomy of the receiver.
Designers of AI4SG projects have tried to increase the explainability of decision-
making systems in various ways. For example, researchers have used machine learn-ing to predict academic adversity (Lakkaraju et  al. 2015). These predictors used concepts that the school officials interpreting the system found familiar and sali-ent, such as GPA scores and socio-economic categorisations. Researchers have also used reinforcement-learning to help officials at homeless shelters educate homeless youths about HIV (Yadav et al. 2016a, b). The system learns how to maximise the 
influence of HIV education, by choosing which homeless youths to educate, on the basis that homeless youths may pass on their knowledge. One version of the system explained which youth was chosen by revealing their social network graph. How -
ever, the homeless shelter officials found that these explanations were counter-intu-itive, potentially affecting the understanding of how the system worked and, hence, users’ trust in the system. These two cases exemplify the importance of the right conceptualisation when explaining an AI-based decision.
The right conceptualisation is likely to vary between AI4SG projects, because 
they differ greatly in their objectives, subject matter, context and stakeholders. The conceptual framework, that is, the Level of Abstraction (LoA) depends on what is being explained and to whom (Floridi 2017). An LoA is a key component of a the-ory, and hence of any explanation. A theory comprises five components:
1. a System, which is the referent or object analysed by a theory;
2. a Purpose, which is the “what for” that motivates the analysis of a system (note 
that this answers the question “what is the analysis for?” and should not be con-
fused with a system’s purpose, which answers the question “what is the system for?”. Below, we use the term “goal” for system’s purpose whenever there may be a risk of confusion);
3. a Level of Abstraction, which provides a lens through which a system is analysed, 
and generates;
4. a Model, that is, some relevant and reliable information about the analysed system, 
which identifies;
5. a Structure of the system, which comprises the features that belong to the system 
being analysed.