Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
30 includes digging out the potential models, helping the makers 
of business decisions, predicting total  customer behaviour, 
making right decisions and reducing overall risks. Text 
mining is also known to be the process of data mining and it 
is the actual process that demonstrates the transforming of 
unstructured texts into a structure format. It is used for  
identifying the meaningful patterns and other new insights 
and one of the main popular decisions includes the 
appropriate applications of text mining which is Information 
Retrieval.  
The main benefits of using the process of data mining 
includes that it helps the companies that gather reliable 
information. Furthermore, it is also considered to be the 
efficient and cost -effective solution that is  compared with 
other data applications. Apart from that, it also helps  the 
business more profitable production an d other operational 
adjustments. The data mining processes also uses both the 
legacy and new systems and also help the overall business in 
making the informed decisions.     
Text mining is considered to be the critical way of 
processing and analysing the u nstructured data . The process 
of text mining includes in analysing and exploring larger 
amounts regarding  unstructured text data that are aided by 
particular  software which can identify several concepts, 
keywords and topics. On the other hand, it also focuses on 
text analytics and some people also draw  the distinctions 
between two terms. The main technique that is  used within 
text mining includes in identifyin g the intrinsic structures 
within the textual information and it organise into the 
relevant subgroups for the further analysis [9]. The text 
analytics also refers to the applications that includes in using 
the techniques of text mining for the sort out thr ough all the 
data sets. On the other hand, the process  of text mining is 
much more practical for all the data scientists and it also 
includes other users according to the development of big data 
platforms and it also uses the deep learning algorithm which 
can help to analyse several sets of unstructured data.  
 
Figure 2: Venn diagram  of test mining  Analysing the data mining process  help several 
organisations in finding valuable business insights within the 
corporate documents, call centre logs, posts of social network 
and several other resources based on text data. The 
capabilities of the process of data mining are  corporate  into 
virtual agents and AI chat bots  where a company can easily 
deploy in providing the automated responses. It is for all the 
customers as the main part of marketing, operations of 
customer services and sales. The overall process of text 
mining also includes the  conventional process which focuses 
on gathering the unstructured information from several 
sources that are accessible within the document organisation . 
It also focuses on data cleansing and pre -processing tasks that 
are performed for eliminating and disti nguishing the 
inconsistency from all the data variables.  
The data mining process is totally focused on the process 
of document clustering and document classification. It also 
focuses on other process such as machine learning and AI, 
computational linguist ics, library and information science, 
several databases and others [10]. Power BI is also 
considered  to be the powered self -service  BI tool which can 
be performed the unstructured data analytics and it is 
well-suited for both the business audiences and ana lysts as 
per the initiative dashboard features and other visualisation 
features. Therefore, text analytics is considered to be the 
concept which  includes the information retrieval and process 
of information extraction process with web mining and data 
minin g process.              
Importance of Text mining includes in huge collection 
regarding  collection of documents . The main importance of 
text mining includes in using the processing of natural 
language and also for processing AI for uncovering the 
relationships and patterns within unstructured texts. On the 
other hand, it also enables the business for automatically 
identifying the useful information within emails, tickets for 
customer service, Chabot , posts within social media and 
several other texts. The larger collection of the text data 
within  the text analytics process that includes in the 
extraction process of int eresting patterns and information’s  
from several data within larger database [11]. It is the process 
that helps  to extract several useful information and the 
nontrivial patterns form  the larger amount of text database. 
The IR systems also make  the use of d ifferent algorithm for 
monitoring and tracking the user behaviour and it also 
discover the relevant data. The main features of this process 
include text clustering process, text categorisation process, 
sentiment analysis, entity -relation modelling and docu ment 
summarisation.