Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
29 research design  for scientifically exploring the effect of text 
mining on the service management of an organization. 
Explanatory research design is used within the  research  realm 
when the available information is significantly scanty in the 
amount [2]. This research design wanted to explore the 
causes of a particular phenomenon for gaining in -depth 
insight into the beneficial effect of the text -mining approach 
within the org anizational setup.   
The inductive approach is chosen for identifying the 
benefits of text mining within the business organization. The 
inductive research approach deals with the understanding of 
the phenomenon of specific scenarios to the general conclusi on of a fact [3]. It relies on the collection of a large 
amount of data from the different situations of a particular 
problem for delivering an effective conclusion from it. Apart 
from that the present investigative study uses secondary 
qualitative data fo r continuing the entire study in a systematic 
manner. Secondary data are collected from different 
scholarly articles as well as high -impact journals for 
evaluating the background of the aforementioned topic [4]. 
As the present study deals with the collecti on of secondary 
qualitative data, no sample size is denoted for the data set. 
Rather a set of inclusion and exclusion criteria are set for the 
effective collection of the data set.  
Table 1:  Inclusion and Exclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria  Exclusion criteria  
● Data after the year 2019  
● Peer-reviewed journals  
● Scholarly articles  
● Journal which only used the English language  
● Keyword -specific search of the information  ● Data before the year 2019  
● Journal with another unknown language  
● Journal with restricted  access  
 
Above table denoted the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
for the collection of secondary qualitative data which are 
particularly set for the identification of the resourceful 
journals for the collection of information. The present study 
used the  Google scholar platform for collecting secondary 
qualitative data for gaining effective insight into the benefits 
of the text -mining approach within the organizational setup 
[5]. 
Using secondary qualitative data is cost -effective as well 
as less time -consuming for the entire study. The collected 
secondary data set are analyzed by using thematic analysis of 
the data seat. Thematic analysis is one of the essential 
qualitative data an alysis methods that helps in the effective 
identification of codes based on the repetition of the 
keywords within the previous research work. It is a 
cost-effective method for the authentic analysis of the 
benefits of text mining within an organizational s etup. On the 
other hand, the thematic analysis needs more time for the 
accurate analysis of the collected data set [6]. In the case of 
the present study, a total of 6 months is allocated for the 
effective completion of the research study based on the 
benef its of the text mining approach for effective service 
management within the organization.  
RESULTS  
Text mining is used for improving the provision regarding 
service to the potential and existing customers of business.  
The text mining is used for the overall improvement 
regarding provision of service for potential and existing 
customer’s  communications. Furthermore, it also includes 
the reviews that can identify the new features for 
strengthening the product offerings. A part from that, the 
technology also provides the main opportunity for improving 
the customer experience that will result in increasing the profits and revenue [7]. The text mining is considered to be 
the act of taking vast volumes based on raw text data an d it 
also performs the analysis for producing the structured 
results. On the other hand, the process  of text mining is often 
delegated for AI -powered mining tools which are  due to all 
the benefits regarding  machine learning and automation 
regarding  the min ing process. Within the business processes, 
the data mining process  is used for discovering the 
relationship and several patterns within the data which help in 
making better business decisions. Moreover, the data mining 
process  can help in spotting the sal es trends, help in 
predicting the customer loyalty and help in developing 
smarter campaigns of marketing.   
 
Figure  1: Components of Text data mining  
The above figure illustrates about the main components of 
Text data mining includes incorporating results, applications, 
processes, numerating  the texts, areas, pros and cons and 
other approaches. Apart from that, the process of text mining 
is analysed thr ough the automatic process with the help of 
advanced technology and it is the reason for which larger 
amount of information within e -commerce [8]. It also