Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
31  
Figure 3: Steps of text analytics  
The process of text analytics includes transforming the 
unstructured  text data within the machine -process able  
structured form that form in discovering the hidden patterns. 
On the other hand, it also deals with machine learning that are 
focused on the supported analysis regarding text data [12]. 
The main process of text mining includes pre -processing 
operations, a nalysing the patterns through management 
information systems, information extraction, categorisation, 
clustering and summarisation . It also includes in identifying 
the file systems for collecting data and also for retrieval of 
data. Therefore, within the o verall file systems, the stored 
information cannot be isolated in individual files and it can be 
much more difficult to retrieve and identify. The main factors 
that are linked with the process of text analytics includes text 
features, text content, text or ganisation and several other 
processes.  
The process includes in transforming overall information 
based on the data variables. Furthermore, the machines can 
easily understand and the process of text analytics also 
automates the overall process that classif ies the texts by 
intent, topic and sentiments. Data cleansing is also 
considered to be the important step as it holds the total 
importance of dirty data if they are used within the mining 
process directly and it can also causes much confusion within  
severa l procedures and it also produces the inaccurate results. 
Therefore, the importance  regarding  file information and 
document information help to be much more organised, 
transparent, efficient and systematic. Hence , it also helps  
several people that can be c apable to access overall 
information which can be much easier for implementing the 
process.       
The process of Text mining can assist in interpretation and 
tracking the texts created by blogs, news and emails . The 
process of text mining includes in assis ting the interpretation 
and tracking process regarding  the texts that are created by 
blogs, news and emails. The organisation  might use the 
technologies that are based on the process of data mining and 
it is used for assessing the visibility of the brands,  likes, followers and posts. It also provides the organisation  with the 
clear picture of customers that react to several contents and 
brands. It is considered as the main act that takes vast 
volumes regarding  raw data texts and analyse in producing 
structu red results [13]. In addition, i t also delegates the 
mining tools that are AI -powered which benefits the 
automation process of mining. The first step within  the 
process of text mining is information retrieval and it help 
retrieve several information based on data variables. 
Furthermore, it might require  by using the search engine for 
identifying the coups  regarding texts which are digitised and 
may necessitat e digitisation of the physical texts within 
publications.  
 
Figure 4: Important phases of text mining process  
The above figures about the phases of test mining process 
and it focuses on text transformation, text pre -processing, 
data mining, evaluation, feature selection and applications. 
On the other hand, information extraction is one of the main 
techniques of text mining and information exchange also 
refers to the process. It also extracts  some meaningful 
information which is having vast chunks of the textual data 
[14]. The process of data mining includes in handling the 
structured data that have highly formatted data within the 
database and with ERP systems. Apart from that, i t deals with 
the unstructured textual data that are not pre -defined and it 
integrates the text mining and data mining approaches based 
on the analytics. Therefore, it also focuses on the mining 
techniques such as process discovery, process enhancements 
and conformance checking.  
DISCUSSION  
Present an investigative study that deals with the 
understanding of the beneficial effect of the text mining 
approach for effective service management within the 
organizational setup. Thematic analysis is done on the 
collected secondary qualitative data fo r gaining effective 
insight into the positive effect of the text -mining approach