Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November  2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
28 The Importance of Text Mining for Services 
Management  
Shaily Malik  1, Dr. Shashi Kant Gupta  2 
1 Maharaja Surajmal institute of Technology , India . 
2 Ph.D. & Researcher, CSE, Integral  University, Luck now, UP , India . 
*Corresponding  Author  Email:  1 shaily.singh@msit.in   
 
Abstract  
The present investigative study is a systematic as well as scientific endeavor to understand the beneficial effect of the tex t mining approach 
for the service management of the organization. This stud uses secondary qualitative data for gaining accurate in sight into the present 
research study. Thematic analysis is done on the collected data set for gaining accurate insight into the present study. Inte rpretive research 
philosophy is chosen for this study along with the inductive research approach. This study  also uses an explanatory research design for 
effective insight into the beneficial effect of the text mining process for the service management of the organization.  The study focuses on the 
process of text mining which is used for analysing the client forums, call logs, tickets of customer service, and platforms  of social me dia, 
news feeds, tweets and many  others. It also focuses on the business that have better insights  based on client expectations and it requires the 
areas that focus on overall improvements. The study integrates the customer communications and reviews that can identify the new features 
for strengthening the product offerings. It focuses on the latest technologies that provide  several opportunities  for improving the customer 
experience those results  in increased profits and revenue.   
Keywords  
Customer , management , Text mining . 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Text mining  is an effective transforming method that deals 
with the modification of unstructured text documents into 
systemic structural text. The data text mining technique is 
essential for the identification of a meaningful pattern of the 
information. The natural l anguage processing technique is 
used for the automatic procession of unstructured text into the 
structural format. Transformation of data into meaningful 
information is essential for service management within the 
organizational setup. Service management  is essential for 
providing a valuable customer relationship approach. It 
provides a systematic framework for the effective 
management of the potential customer of the organization.  
Objectives  
The major objectives of the present investigative research 
study  are  
● To understand the concept of text mining within the 
business organization  
● To evaluate the effect of service management within the 
organization  
● To identify the benefits of the text mining approach for 
effective service management within the organizat ion.  
● To detect the importance of text mining for the effective 
customer retention of an organization  
The major purpose of the present study is to analyze the 
beneficial effect of the text mining approach for effective 
service management within the organi zational setup. Text 
mining is an essential gateway for managing the customer 
relationship with the organization. Service strategy and 
offerings of an organization became easier by implementing a text -mining approach within the organizational setup. 
Servic e management is believed to be a set of specialized 
activities that deals with effective customer service 
management within the organizational setup.  
Natural language processing  (NLP) techniques are 
majorly used for the transformation of the data into 
meaningful text based on the machine learning algorithm. 
Text mining helps to analyze a large amount of information 
quickly as well as efficiently within the organizational setup. 
Apart from that, the text -mining approach helps in decoding 
the expectation of the customer towards a particular 
organization. It also improves the overall quality of the 
business organization by utilizing the comment of the 
customer towards the organiza tion. 
MATE RIAL AND METHODS  
The research study is based on the beneficial ef fect of the 
text mining approach within the organizational setup for 
effective service management. Service management is 
essential for the customer need -based growth of the business 
organization. The entire research focused on the 
philosophical assumption of Interpretive for enhancing the 
knowledge regarding the benefits of the text -mining 
approach for the growth of the organization. Identification of 
research philosophy is an essential criterion for controlling 
the data collection as well as the data analy sis process of the 
study. Interpretive  research philosophy is a renowned 
philosophy that is mainly used in social science research. It 
directly focused on situational analysis by using the 
qualitative data set rather than the quantitative data [1]. This 
research philosophy believed in situatio nal truth rather than 
the universal truth. This research deals with the explanatory