Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
32 within the organizational setup. It is evident from the result of 
the thematic analysis that text mining deals with a large 
number of data set that effectively enable the anal ytical 
processing of the data set in an accurate manner. The text 
mining process is also utilized in the service management 
approach of an organization [15]. In the case of social media 
analysis, text mining is believed to be one of the essential 
processes  that quickly transform the unstructured data of the 
social media handles into a systematic as well as a structured 
manner for gaining effective insight from the social media 
users. Apart from that, the feedback response of the 
customers is also analyzed b y using a text -mining process for 
improving the customer -based approach of the organization.  
It is also stated that the text mining process is effectively 
used in social media analysis for the strategic improvement of 
the organization. Social media analys is is believed to be one 
of the essential methods for analyzing the target market of the 
organization [16]. Text mining is an approach that enhances 
data transformation in a quick as well as accurate manner. On 
the other hand, the capacity of handling larg e amounts of data 
set is essential for the effective growth as well as the 
profitability of the organization. It is stated that utilization of 
the text mining approach enhances the customer relationship 
with the organization [17]. Text mining is a benefici al tool for 
effective communication of the organization with potential 
customer. Maintenance of appropriate customer relationship 
management is essential for the effective growth and 
development of the organization.  
It is evident from the present analysis  that text mining 
enhances the report generation process of the organization in 
an effective manner that impacted the service management 
approach of the organization. In the era of globalization, 
people are more interested to go in intellectual investment.  In 
the case of business organizations, intellectual investment is 
to invest a large amount towards the repairing as well as 
maintenance of a good relationship with potential customers. 
It is evident from the analysis that the text -mining approach 
enhances  the provision of organizational service for the 
effective retention of customers [18]. Natural language 
processing techniques are used in the text mining approach 
for the growth and development of the organization. Coding 
of the structured data set along with the sentimental analysis 
has been done in the text mining approach for gaining 
effective insight into the customer’s perspective regarding 
the quality of a particular organization.  
The present study suggested that the incorporation of 
automatic techn iques enhances the profitability as well as 
productivity of the organization. Incorporation of a text 
mining approach within the organizational process leads 
towards automation and increased productivity of the 
organization. The automatic data translating process 
enhances the systematic processing of the structured data for 
quick understanding and effective decision -making processes 
within the organization. Incorporation of a text mining 
approach enhances the chances of establishing new market 
opportunities  along with the innovative marketing approach for a particular product . The study indicated that the 
incorporation of text mining enhances the effective 
relationship of the company with its effective stakeholders. 
On the other hand, it emphasizes the effec tive 
decision -making process of the organization that in turn helps 
in the customer -centric growth of the organization in an 
effective manner [19]. Depending on the need of the specific 
business firm the form of text mining is applied for the 
betterment of  the organization. Testing the social media 
handles of the target group of customers is essential for the 
incorporation of customer -specific policies of the 
organization.  
It is evident from this study that social media analysis deals 
with a large number of potential customers which is analyzed 
for tracking the current perspective of the customer towards 
purchasing a particular product. Apart from that, sentiment 
analysis, m easuring the satisfaction rate of the customer, 
customer voice analysis, and more are effectively handled by 
the text mining approach within the organization [20]. 
Sometimes analyzing the feedback response is another 
important criterion that is used for th e implication 
customer -centric approach within the organization. 
Open -ended survey questions are also analyzed by the 
implication of the text -mining approach within the 
organization. Text mining enhances the overall service 
management approach within the o rganizational setup.   
CONCLUSION  
The present investigative study is an endeavor to 
understand the beneficial effect of the text mining approach 
for the effective service management of the organization. The 
present study uses secondary qualitative data  for gaining 
effective insight into the aforementioned problem. 
Interpretive research philosophy is used in the research study 
along with an inductive research approach for gaining 
accurate insight into the benefits of the text -mining approach 
within the o rganizational setup. Secondary quantitative data 
is used for quick as well as efficient analysis of the 
above -mentioned concepts. Particular inclusion and 
exclusion criteria are set for the effective collection of the 
data set. It is clear from the result of the thematic analysis that 
text mining benefited the business organization for the 
effective service management of the organization. It helps to 
enhance the customer relationship approach of the 
organization which in turn positively affected the 
profita bility of the organization. The entire duration of the 
entire investigative study is 6 months for gaining effective 
insight into the research problem.  
Text mining is used for improving the provision of the 
service to both existing as well as potential cus tomers of the 
organization. Apart from that, the text mining act as a critical 
analytical process for transforming unstructured data into 
structured information of a particular data set. It helps to 
analyze a large amount of data in a quick as well as effi cient 
manner. One of the major benefits of the text mining 
approach is the handling capacity of a large number of