5
0.40.50.60.70.80.91
LDP,    
ε=2LDP,    
ε=4LDP,    
ε=8FML,
E=5FML,
E=10Inference Accuracy 
Strategies
(a) NYC Taxi
0.40.50.60.70.80.91
LDP,    
ε=2LDP,    
ε=4LDP,    
ε=8FML,
E=5FML,
E=10Inference Accuracy 
Strategies
(b) BR2000
0.40.50.60.70.80.91
LDP,    
ε=2LDP,    
ε=4LDP,    
ε=8FML,
E=5FML,
E=10Inference Accuracy
Strategies
(c) Adult
Fig. 2. Privacy of different strategies (E: number of local passes in FML)
local dataset when its minimum distance is less than a
threshold. As for FML , since adversary can obtain both
global model and local updated one, by comparing the
membership inference [12] on the two models, the local
samples can be exposed. That is, given a threshold, if a
record is recognized as a member in the inference on the
local model but non-member on the global model, it is likely
that this record belongs to the local set. We evaluated all
settings on a testing dataset with half of the samples used
in local training and the other half outside of the device,
such that the random guess is 0.5. All results were reported
under optimal threshold in their settings.
As shown in Fig. 2, LDP achieves a ﬂexible control over
privacy loss compared to FML . Except for the budget of
8, the inference accuracy is constrained to less than 80%and even 55% as privacy budget drops to 2 in all datasets.
As for FML , the inference accuracy can reach over 80%
among all datasets with 5 local passes and even 90% in
NYC Taxi and Adult when local passes increase to 10. to
improve communication efﬁciency, it commonly adds more
computation to clients by iterating local updates multiple
times before the aggregation step. This indicates that such
ﬁne-grained updates can signiﬁcantly capture the details of
local data and are vulnerable to malicious inference. In this
case, LDP with low budget has stronger privacy guarantee
than FML while the performance of classiﬁer is the trade-off
by revisiting model misclassiﬁcation rate.
4.4 CPU Consumption
4.4.1 Client Side
The main client CPU consumption is on perturbation of
data for LDP while FML spends most of the time updating
the global model with local data. We review the CPU time
against the average local dataset size of each device in Fig. 3.
FML consumes more CPU to iterate through the data and
grows linearly to over 3:8ms forNYC Taxi (resp. 6:3ms
forBR2000 ) while LDP grows signiﬁcantly slower and only
reaches 1:2msforNYC Taxi (resp. 1:7msforBR2000 ). When
the size of local dataset is small, the time will approximate
preparation time such as parameters initialization since the
real processing time is too short. The battery will drain faster
under the setting of FML .
4.4.2 Server Side
The computation resources of server are spent on pooling
client’s data and training the model in LDP . Obviously it
consumes more CPU over server side to train the model
compared to FML where the server only needs to coordinate
clients and aggregates all received updates, since training
workload is transferred to clients. For each model, 100
server training epochs take an average of 36swith 500
iterations in LDP while the aggregation and update process
inFML take less than 1s.
4.5 Communication Cost
4.5.1 Client Side
As for data transmission of client device, since LDP will
collect all data, the transmission amount is constant to
the size of local dataset while FML sends a number of
parameters depending on model size. In Fig. 4, LDP has a
larger communication cost than FML when communication
rounds are less than 300. Eventually, FML has 3x more cost
due to frequent exchange of model updates with server.
4.5.2 Server Side
On the server side, since the communication cost against
round change just aggregates all client’s, we instead inves-
tigate the transferred data size against the number of clients
by ﬁxing round number at 1.1k (best model performance)
for each client. As shown in Fig. 5, LDP grows much faster
with more participants than FML in communication cost
since it is equivalent to collect the whole dataset combined
from all clients. Due to the frequent interactions between
clients and server, the accumulated transferred data grows