1
Preserving User Privacy For Machine Learning:
Local Differential Privacy or Federated Machine
Learning?
Huadi Zheng, Haibo Hu, Senior Member, IEEE , Ziyang Han
Abstract —The growing number of mobile and IoT devices has nourished many intelligent applications. In order to produce high-quality
machine learning models, they constantly access and collect rich personal data such as photos, browsing history and text messages.
However, direct access to personal data has raised increasing public concerns about privacy risks and security breaches. To address
these concerns, there are two emerging solutions to privacy-preserving machine learning, namely local differential privacy and
federated machine learning. The former is a distributed data collection strategy where each client perturbs data locally before
submitting to the server, whereas the latter is a distributed machine learning strategy to train models on mobile devices locally and
merge their output (e.g., parameter updates of a model) through a control protocol. In this paper, we conduct a comparative study on
the efﬁciency and privacy of both solutions. Our results show that in a standard population and domain setting, both can achieve an
optimal misclassiﬁcation rate lower than 20% and federated machine learning generally performs better at the cost of higher client CPU
usage. Nonetheless, local differential privacy can beneﬁt more from a larger client population (> 1k). As for privacy guarantee, local
differential privacy also has ﬂexible control over the data leakage.
Index Terms —Federated Machine Learning, Local Differential Privacy
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
The pervasive application of mobile, wearable and IoT
devices has encouraged the boosting amount of generated
data. Together with the drastic development of machine
learning, mobile apps are empowered to provide person-
alized and self-evolving AI service such as voice assistant,
word suggestion, facial recognition, and smart video feeds.
In most of these applications, the machine learning model is
reﬁned by continually feeding in new user data (as features)
and their feedback (as labels) from their mobile devices.
However, these data, such as type history, web access logs,
and frequently visited locations, are often sensitive and
private information. To combat privacy infringement, US
Federal Trade Commission has called for a national law
against general violation of privacy after the testimony of
Facebook–Cambridge Analytica scandal [1]; and EU has
adopted the more stringent “General Data Protection Regu-
lation” (GDPR) to supersede the “Data Protection Directive”
in May 2018 [2].
Despite of strict legislation on personal data protection
and the efforts made by most service providers, hosting
personal data in a centralized location can still be highly
risky due to security breach, internal theft or corporate dis-
honesty. A famous incident is the leakage of celebrity photos
from iCloud in 2014. Unfortunately, centralized sanitation
(e.g., generalization) and encryption schemes are shown
The authors are with the Department of Electronic and Information
Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong
and PolyU Shenzhen Research Institute (Corresponding author: Haibo
Hu). E-mail:fhuadi.zheng@connect.polyu.hk, haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk,
ziyang.han@connect.polyu.hk gvulnerable to various attacks, such as deanonymizing Net-
ﬂix challenge dataset with IMDb data [3].
More recently, two distributed data analytical tools are
proposed to protect privacy, namely, local differential pri-
vacy [4] and federated machine learning [5]. Both tools
avoid direct access of personal data while still retaining
high utility, e.g., high accuracy on statistics estimation or
the trained model. Their mechanisms are summarized as
follows:
1) Local differential privacy (LDP): Each user perturbs
her data locally before sending them to an untrusted
service provider for data collection and analytics.
LDP achieves plausible deniability of each individ-
ual under a measurable and rigorous mechanism.
LDP is heavily investigated in the literature of
privacy-preserving statistics collection.
2) Federated machine learning (FML): It trains a glob-
ally shared model over a large number of dis-
tributed clients using an efﬁcient control protocol
with the central server. Only model parameter up-
dates calculated on local data are submitted to the
server, who aggregates them to improve the shared
global model. This approach not only protects users’
local data but also leverages on the computing re-
sources on mobile devices.
Although both tools avoid direct access, their method-
ologies are essentially different. LDP is a theoretical privacy
notation that can be achieved by different algorithms, while
FL is a generic distributed learning framework without the-
oretical provable privacy. To conduct a comparative study
of both tools, we deploy them to solve a common set of
classiﬁcation problems in mobile scenarios. This allows us
This is the Pre-Published Version.The following publication H. Zheng, H. Hu and Z. Han, "Preserving User Privacy for Machine Learning: Local Differential Privacy or 
Federated Machine Learning?," in IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 5-14, 1 July-Aug. 2020 is available at https://doi.org/10.1109/
MIS.2020.3010335.
© 2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, 
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to 
servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.