Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
This work uses language models, for which the risks and potential harms are discussed in Bender &
Koller (2020), Brown et al. (2020), Bender et al. (2021), Patterson et al., (2021), and others. As our
contribution in this paper is not a pretrained language model itself but rather an empirical study of
how instruction tuning affects the zero-shot performance of a language model on unseen tasks, we
additionally highlight two relevant ethical considerations. First, labeled datasets such as those we
use for ﬁnetuning can contain undesirable biases, and these biases can be propagated into zero-shot
applications of the model on downstream tasks. And second, instruction-tuned models can potentially
require less data and expertise to use; such lower barriers to access could increase both the beneﬁts
and associated risks of such models.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
We use the same pretrained language models as Austin et al. (2021). The energy cost and carbon
footprint for the pretrained models were 451 MWh and 26 tCO2e, respectively. The additional
instruction tuning gradient-steps for ﬁnetuning FLAN is less than 2% of the number of pretraining
steps, and so the estimated additional energy cost is comparatively smaller.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Maarten Bosma conceived the original idea and implemented the ﬁrst version of FLAN. Vincent Zhao
prototyped the training and evaluation pipelines, as well as rank classiﬁcation. Kelvin Guu proposed
and implemented the idea of task clusters and evaluation using inter-cluster splits. Jason Wei, Maarten
Bosma, Vincent Zhao, and Adams Wei Yu implemented the NLP tasks. Jason Wei, Vincent Zhao,
and Adams Wei Yu conducted and managed most of the experiments. Jason Wei designed and ran the
ablation studies. Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, and Quoc V . Le wrote most of the paper. Jason Wei,
Maarten Bosma, and Nan Du obtained the zero and few-shot baselines. Vincent Zhao and Kelvin Guu
designed, implemented, and conducted the few-shot FLAN experiments. Maarten Bosma and Jason
Wei ran the data contamination analysis. Brian Lester ran the prompt tuning experiments. Quoc V . Le
and Andrew M. Dai advised, provided high-level guidance, and helped edit the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ed Chi, Slav Petrov, Dan Garrette, Ruibo Liu, and Clara Meister for providing feedback
on our manuscript. We thank Adam Roberts, Liam Fedus, Hyung Won Chung, and Noam Shazeer
for helping debug some of our models. We thank Ellie Pavlick for feedback on the study design
during the middle stages of the project. We thank Daniel De Freitas Adiwardana for helping initiate
the project, large language model advising, and giving us access to some computational resources.
Finally, we thank the team involved in pretraining LaMDA-PT: Daniel De Freitas Adiwardana, Noam
Shazeer, Yanping Huang, Dmitry Lepikhin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu and Zhifeng Chen.
10