Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
B F URTHER ABLATION STUDIES AND ANALYSIS
B.1 D ATASETS PER TASK CLUSTER & T EMPLATES PER DATASET
Our primary hypothesis is that instruction tuning on a diverse set of tasks improves performance on
unseen tasks. §4.1 showed that adding more task clusters improves performance; here, we further
explore whether adding additional datasets improves performance when the number of task clusters
is held constant. We use the same split as in §4.1, where the NLI, commonsense reasoning, and
closed-book QA clusters are held-out, and seven other task clusters remain for instruction tuning. For
these seven task clusters, we instruction tune models using just one dataset per task cluster and using
four datasets per task cluster (for task clusters that did not have four tasks, we just used all available
tasks). In addition, we simultaneously explore the role of the number of instruction templates per
dataset; as mentioned in §2.1, for each dataset we manually composed ten instructional templates for
instruction tuning. Here, we instruction tune models using 1, 4, and 10 templates per dataset.
Figure 11 shows these results. Using more datasets per cluster improved performance by almost
10% on average across the three held-out clusters. Using more templates per dataset, however,
had a comparatively negligible effect on performance when there was one task per cluster, which
disappeared when there were four tasks per cluster. The small effect of templates is striking given our
original motivation that composing ten templates per task would mitigate overﬁtting to any particular
template. This results serves to underscore, however, the unpredictability of ﬁnetuning large language
models, as one hypothesis is that models at such scale do not easily overﬁt to a ﬁnetuning single task.
Figure 11: Effect of datasets per task cluster and templates per dataset on performance on three
held-out clusters: NLI, commonsense reasoning, and closed-book QA. Adding more datasets per task
cluster substantially improves performance. Using more templates per dataset, however, only had
a very small effect on performance, which disappeared when there were sufﬁcient dataset per task
cluster.
B.2 R OLE OF INSTRUCTIONS DURING FINETUNING
The per-cluster results for the ablation study from §4.3 are shown in Table 3.
B.3 F URTHER ANALYSIS : INSTRUCTION TUNING FACILITATES PROMPT TUNING
The per-dataset results for the analysis in §4.5 are given in Table 4. As the above tasks are all
classiﬁcation, further work in this direction might include tasks such as summarization or question
answering, or try to ﬁnetune the model using the supervised datasets.
C D ATA CONTAMINATION ANALYSIS
One reasonable concern is that since the pretraining corpus of FLAN has more than 2 trillion tokens,
it is possible that examples from a given evaluation dataset may have already been seen verbatim
by the model during pre-training, hence inﬂating the performance of our purported zero-shot model.
To this end, like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), we perform post-hoc data contamination analysis to
24