Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
G.2 R EADING COMPREHENSION
INPUT
There are four ways an individual can acquire Canadian citizenship: by birth on Canadian
soil; by descent (being born to a Canadian parent); by grant (naturalization); and by adoption.
Among them, only citizenship by birth is granted automatically with limited exceptions, while
citizenship by descent or adoption is acquired automatically if the speciﬁed conditions have been
met. Citizenship by grant, on the other hand, must be approved by the Minister of Immigration,
Refugees and Citizenship.
Can we conclude that can i get canadian citizenship if my grandfather was canadian?
OPTIONS:
- no
- yes
TARGET
no
Table 9: Example input and target for Boolean Questions (BoolQ). BoolQ Clark et al. (2019a) asks a
yes/no question based on a passage and a question. Of the training set with 9,427 examples, we use
9,227 for train and 200 for dev. We use the TFDS validation set of 3,270 examples as our test set for
reporting numbers.
INPUT
Imagine you are standing in a farm ﬁeld in central Illinois. The land is so ﬂat you can see for
miles and miles. On a clear day, you might see a grain silo 20 miles away. You might think to
yourself, it sure is ﬂat around here. If you drive one hundred miles to the south, the landscape
changes. In southern Illinois, there are rolling hills. Why do you think this is? What could have
caused these features? There are no big rivers that may have eroded and deposited this material.
The ground is capable of supporting grass and trees, so wind erosion would not explain it. To
answer the question, you need to go back 12,000 years. Around 12,000 years ago, a giant ice
sheet covered much of the Midwest United States. Springﬁeld, Illinois, was covered by over a
mile of ice. Its hard to imagine a mile thick sheet of ice. The massive ice sheet, called a glacier,
caused the features on the land you see today. Where did glaciers go? Where can you see them
today? Glaciers are masses of ﬂowing ice.
Question: "How big were the glaciers?"
Response: "One mile"
Does the response correctly answer the question?
OPTIONS:
- no
- yes
TARGET
yes
Table 10: Example input and target for Multi-Sentence Reading Comprehension (MultiRC). MultiRC
Khashabi et al. (2018) asks an open-ended question given a paragraph that contains the answer. Of
the training set with 27,243 examples, we use 27,043 for train and 200 for dev. We use the TFDS
validation set of 4,848 examples as our test set for reporting numbers.
40