Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Overall, we observe that instruction tuning is very effective on tasks naturally verbalized as instruc-
tions (e.g., NLI, QA, translation, struct-to-text) and is less effective on tasks directly formulated as
language modeling, where instructions would be largely redundant (e.g., commonsense reasoning
and coreference resolution tasks that are formatted as ﬁnishing an incomplete sentence or paragraph).
Results on natural language inference, reading comprehension, closed-book QA, and translation are
summarized in Figure 5 and described below.
Natural language inferenceReading comprehensionClosed-book QA
010080604020Zero-shot performanceTQANQARC-cARC-eOBQARTECBANLI R3ANLI R2ANLI R1MultiRCBoolQTranslationEN to FREN to DEFR to ENDE to ENEN to RORO to ENLaMDA-PT137BFLAN 137BGPT-3 175BGLaM 64B/64ESupervised model
Figure 5: Zero-shot performance of FLAN compared to LaMDA-PT 137B, GPT-3 175B, and GLaM
64B/64E on natural language inference, reading comprehension, closed-book QA, and translation.
Performance of FLAN is the mean of up to 10 instructional templates per task. Supervised models
were either T5, BERT, or translation models (speciﬁed in Table 2 and Table 1 in the Appendix).
Natural language inference (NLI). On ﬁve NLI datasets, where a model must determine whether a
hypothesis is true given some premise, FLAN outperforms all baselines by a large margin. As noted
by Brown et al. (2020), perhaps one reason why GPT-3 struggles with NLI is that NLI examples are
unlikely to have appeared naturally in an unsupervised training set and are thus awkwardly phrased
as a continuation of a sentence. For FLAN, we phrase NLI as the more natural question “ Does
<premise> mean that <hypothesis>? ”, achieving much higher performance.
Reading comprehension. On reading comprehension, where models are asked to answer a question
about a provided passage, FLAN outperforms baselines for MultiRC (Khashabi et al., 2018) and
OBQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018). On BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019a), FLAN outperforms GPT-3 by a large
margin, though LaMDA-PT already achieves high performance on BoolQ.
Closed-book QA. For closed-book QA, which asks models to answer questions about the world
without access to speciﬁc information containing the answer, FLAN outperforms GPT-3 on all four
datasets. Compared to GLaM, FLAN has better performance on ARC-e and ARC-c (Clark et al.,
2018), and slightly lower performance on NQ (Lee et al., 2019; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and TQA
(Joshi et al., 2017).
Translation. Similar to GPT-3, the training data for LaMDA-PT is around 90% English and includes
some text in other languages that was not speciﬁcally used to train the model to perform machine
translation. We also evaluate FLAN’s performance on machine translation for the three datasets
evaluated in the GPT-3 paper: French–English from WMT’14 (Bojar et al., 2014), and German–
5