Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
FINETUNED LANGUAGE MODELS AREZERO-SHOT
LEARNERS
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu,
Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V . Le
Google Research
ABSTRACT
This paper explores a simple method for improving the zero-shot learning abilities
of language models. We show that instruction tuning —ﬁnetuning language models
on a collection of datasets described via instructions—substantially improves zero-
shot performance on unseen tasks.
We take a 137B parameter pretrained language model and instruction tune it on
over 60 NLP datasets verbalized via natural language instruction templates. We
evaluate this instruction-tuned model, which we call FLAN, on unseen task types.
FLAN substantially improves the performance of its unmodiﬁed counterpart and
surpasses zero-shot 175B GPT-3 on 20 of 25 datasets that we evaluate. FLAN even
outperforms few-shot GPT-3 by a large margin on ANLI, RTE, BoolQ, AI2-ARC,
OpenbookQA, and StoryCloze. Ablation studies reveal that number of ﬁnetuning
datasets, model scale, and natural language instructions are key to the success of
instruction tuning.
TargetInput (Commonsense Reasoning)
keep stack of pillow cases in fridgeInference on unseen task typeFinetune on many tasks (“instruction-tuning”)
…Translate this sentence to Spanish: The new office building was built in less than three months.Input (Translation)
El nuevo edificio de oficinas se construyó en tres meses.TargetInput (Natural Language Inference)
It is not possible to tellFLAN ResponseCoreference resolution tasksSentiment analysis tasksGPT-3 175B zero shotGPT-3 175B few-shotFLAN 137B zero-shotPerformance on unseen task typesNatural language inference42.953.256.2Reading Comprehension63.772.677.4Closed-Book QA49.855.756.6Here is a goal: Get a cool sleep on summer days. How would you accomplish this goal? OPTIONS: -Keep stack of pillow cases in fridge. -Keep stack of pillow cases in oven.Premise: At my age you will probably have learnt one lesson. Hypothesis: It's not certain how many lessons you'll learn by your thirties. Does the premise entail the hypothesis? OPTIONS: -yes     -it is not possible to tell      -no
Figure 1: Top: overview of instruction tuning and FLAN. Instruction tuning ﬁnetunes a pretrained
language model on a mixture of tasks phrased as instructions. At inference time, we evaluate on
an unseen task type; for instance, we could evaluate the model on natural language inference (NLI)
when no NLI tasks were seen during instruction tuning. Bottom: performance of zero-shot FLAN,
compared with zero-shot and few-shot GPT-3, on three unseen task types where instruction tuning
improved performance substantially out of ten we evaluate. NLI datasets: ANLI R1–R3, CB, RTE.
Reading comprehension datasets: BoolQ, MultiRC, OBQA. Closed-book QA datasets: ARC-easy,
ARC-challenge, NQ, TriviaQA.
Lead contributors. Author contributions listed at end of paper.
1arXiv:2109.01652v5  [cs.CL]  8 Feb 2022