Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
4.2 S CALING LAWS
0.4B2B8B68B137BModel Size (# parameters)3040506070Instruction tuningUntuned modelAverage zero-shot accuracy  on 13 held-out tasks (%) Performance on held-out tasks
Figure 7: Whereas instruction tuning helps large
models generalize to new tasks, for small models it
actually hurts generalization to unseen tasks, poten-
tially because all model capacity is used to learn the
mixture of instruction tuning tasks.As Brown et al. (2020) shows that zero and
few-shot capabilities of language models sub-
stantially improve for larger models, we next
explore how the beneﬁts of instruction tuning
are affected by model scale. Using the same
cluster split as in the previous ablation study,
we evaluate the effect of instruction tuning
on models of size 422M, 2B, 8B, 68B, and
137B parameters.
Figure 7 shows these results. We see that
for the two models on the order of 100B pa-
rameters, instruction tuning substantially im-
proves performance on held-out tasks, as is
expected given the prior results in our pa-
per. The behavior on held-out tasks for the
8B and smaller models, however, is thought-
provoking—instruction tuning actually hurts performance on held-out tasks. One potential explana-
tion for this result could be that for small-scale models, learning the 40 tasks used during instruction
tuning ﬁlls the entire model capacity, causing these models to perform worse on new tasks. Under
this potential explanation, for the larger scale models, instruction tuning ﬁlls up some model capacity
but also teaches these models how to follow instructions, allowing them to generalize to new tasks
with the remaining capacity.
4.3 R OLE OF INSTRUCTIONS
2030405060FT: no instruction
Eval: instructionFT: dataset name
Eval: instructionFT: dataset name
Eval: dataset nameFT: instruction
Eval: instruction
(FLAN)37.346.647.055.2Zero-shot performance 
(4 task cluster avg.) 
Figure 8: Ablation study result using mod-
els with instructions removed from ﬁnetun-
ing (FT).In a ﬁnal ablation study, we explore the role of in-
structions during ﬁnetuning, as one possibility is that
performance gains come entirely from multi-task ﬁne-
tuning and the model could perform just as well without
instructions. We hence consider two ﬁnetuning setups
without instructions. In a no template setup, only inputs
and outputs were given to the model (e.g., for transla-
tion the input would be “ The dog runs. ” and the output
would be “ Le chien court. ”). In a dataset name setup,
each input is prepended with the name of the task and
dataset (e.g., for translation to French, the input would
be “[Translation: WMT’14 to French] The dog runs. ”).
We compare these two ablations to FLAN’s ﬁnetun-
ing procedure, which used natural instructions (e.g.,
“Please translate this sentence to French: ‘The dog
runs. ’ ”). We perform evaluations for four held-out clus-
ters from Figure 5. For the no template setup, we used the FLAN instructions during zero-shot
inference (because if we used no template, the model would not know what task to perform). For
models ﬁnetuned on dataset name only, we report zero-shot performance for FLAN instructions as
well as using the dataset name. Figure 8 shows the results—both ablation conﬁgurations performed
substantially worse than FLAN, indicating that training with instructions is crucial for zero-shot
performance on unseen tasks.
4.4 I NSTRUCTIONS WITH FEW-SHOT EXEMPLARS
So far, we have focused on instruction tuning in the zero-shot setting. Here, we study how instruction
tuning can be used when few-shot exemplars are available at inference time. The format for the
few-shot setting builds on the zero-shot format. For some input xand output y, let instruct (x)
denote the zero-shot instructions. Then, given kfew-shot exemplars (xi; yi)k
i=1and a new input
x, the instruction format for the few-shot setting is “ instruct (x1)y1instruct (x2)y2: : :
7