Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
G.6 R EADING COMPREHENSION WITH COMMONSENSE
INPUT
Complete the passage.
(CNN) – At ﬁrst glance, "The Flat" might seem like an episode of "Hoarders," Israeli-style. The
documentary ﬁlm opens after an elderly woman dies in Tel Aviv. Her grandchildren assemble to
clean out her apartment, packed with dusty books, vintage clothing (dozens of pairs of fancy
gloves, for instance), enough purses to stock a department store, jewelry, mementoes and closets
full of knickknacks. But buried among the detritus they chance upon something remarkable –
mysterious papers linking the grandparents to an important Nazi ﬁgure. How could such ardent
Zionists, who left their native Germany in the early 1930s, have been involved with an SS ofﬁcial
like Leopold von Mildenstein?
What I found out was this journey, the Nazi (
OPTIONS:
- Arnon Goldﬁnger) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- CNN) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- Germany) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- Israeli) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- Leopold von Mildenstein) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger
told CNN.
- Nazi) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- SS) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- Tel Aviv) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- The Flat) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
- Zionists) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told CNN.
TARGET
Leopold von Mildenstein) and his wife were accompanied by my grandparents," Goldﬁnger told
CNN.
Table 21: Example input and target for Reading Comprehension with Commonsense Reasoning
(ReCoRD). ReCoRD (Zhang et al., 2018) asks for the answer to a cloze-style question where an
entity is masked out. Of the the training set of 100,730 examples, we use 30,000 for train and 200 for
dev. We use the TFDS validation set of 10,000 examples as our test set for reporting numbers.
G.7 T RANSLATION (7LANGUAGES )
INPUT
Here the largest town of the district is located: Nordenham , lying opposite to Bremerhaven at
the Weser mouth.
Translate to German
TARGET
An der B 211 beﬁndet sich in Loyermoor der so genannte “Geest-Abbruch”, der eine Höhendif-
ferenz von gut 30 Meter überbrückt.
Table 22: Example input and output for translation. This example is from WMT’16 English–German;
all languages use the same translation templates.
46