Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
E F REQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How do the FLAN instructions differ from GPT-3 or T5 prompts?
GPT-3 prompting is done in a way such that the prompt looks like data that the model has been
pretrained on, and the model ﬁnishes the continuation. T5 prompts are mostly just a tag for the
dataset, which would not work in the zero-shot setting. In contrast, the prompts that we use for FLAN
are similar to what would be used to ask a human to perform the task.
For instance, given an input for an NLI task, these would be the prompts.
T5 prompt:
cb hypothesis: At my age you will probably have learnt one lesson.
premise: It’s not certain how many lessons you’ll learn by your
thirties.
GPT-3 prompt:
At my age you will probably have learnt one lesson.
question: It’s not certain how many lessons you’ll learn by your
thirties. true, false, or neither? answer:
FLAN prompt:
Premise: At my age you will probably have learnt one lesson.
Hypothesis: It’s not certain how many lessons you’ll learn by your
thirties.
Does the premise entail the hypothesis?
So because FLAN prompts are formulated as responding to an instruction, they do not work well
for pretrained language models without ﬁnetuning. Performance was near zero for most generation
tasks. For instance, given the input “‘The dog runs. ’ Translate this sentence to French. ” , LaMDA-PT
continues with ”The dog runs after the cat” instead of actually translating the sentence. Hence, we
used the established GPT-3 prompts for our LaMDA-PT baselines.
What are some limitations/failure cases of FLAN?
While we qualitatively ﬁnd that FLAN responds well to most tasks, it does fail on some simple tasks.
For instance, as shown in Figure 22, FLAN fails at the very simple task of returning the second word
in a sentence, and also incorrectly translates a question to Danish when asked to answer the question
in Danish. Additional limitations include a context length of only 1024 tokens (which is not enough
for most summarization tasks), and that the model was mostly trained on English data.
Can FLAN be used when large amounts of training data are available?
In this work, we focus on cross-task generalization to zero-shot tasks, but we also believe that
instruction tuning could result in positive task transfer among seen tasks, depending on the mixture
of tasks (though we leave this for future work). In §4.5, where we apply prompt tuning to the FLAN
checkpoint, we see promising results that indicate positive task transfer in a supervised setting.
Are the ten unique templates per dataset or per task cluster?
The ten unique templates are for each dataset and not for a task cluster. This is because datasets in the
same task cluster often differed slightly (e.g., “is this movie review positive” vs“is this yelp review
positive” ).
In Figure 7A, why does the untuned LaMDA-PT model see worse performance with more
parameters for reading comprehension and sentiment analysis?
For context, Figure 7A is a check of correctness for Figure 7B. Figure 7A conﬁrms that scale improves
performance for tasks that were seen during instruction tuning, as expected. The untuned LaMDA-PT
model performance in Figure 7A is shown just for completeness.
30