Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
The way we ask a model to respond to instructions is similar to QA-based task formulation (Kumar
et al., 2016; McCann et al., 2018), which aims to unify NLP tasks by casting them as QA over a
context. Though these methods are very similar to ours, they mostly focus on multi-task learning
instead of zero-shot learning, and—as noted by Liu et al. (2021)—they are generally not motivated
by using existing knowledge in pretrained LMs. Moreover, our work supercedes recent work such as
Chai et al. (2020) and Zhong et al. (2021) in terms of both model scale and scope of tasks.
The success of language models has led to nascent research on the ability of models to follow
instructions. Most recently, Mishra et al. (2021) ﬁnetune 140M parameter BART on instructions
with few-shot exemplars, and evaluate its few-shot abilities on unseen tasks—this is similar to our
few-shot instruction tuning result from §4.4. This promising result (as well as one from Ye et al.
(2021), which does not emphasize instructions as much) suggests that ﬁnetuning on a collection of
tasks improves few-shot performance on unseen tasks, even at a smaller model scale. Sanh et al.
(2021) ﬁnetune T5 in a setup similar to ours, ﬁnding that zero-shot learning can be improved in a
model of 11B parameters. At a model scale similar to ours, OpenAI’s InstructGPT models are trained
via both ﬁnetuning and reinforcement learning to produce outputs that are more preferred by human
raters (Ouyang et al., 2022).
6 D ISCUSSION
Our paper has explored a simple question in zero-shot prompting: does ﬁnetuning a model on a
collection of tasks phrased as instructions improve its performance on unseen tasks? We operationalize
this question via instruction tuning, a simple method that combines appealing aspects of both
the pretrain–ﬁnetune and prompting paradigms. Our instruction-tuned model, FLAN, improves
performance against an untuned model and surpasses zero-shot GPT-3 on the majority of tasks that
we evaluate on. Ablation studies reveal that performance on unseen tasks improves with the number
of instruction tuning task clusters, and, interestingly, that performance improvements from instruction
tuning emerge only with sufﬁcient model scale. Moreover, instruction tuning can be combined with
other prompting methods such as few-shot prompting and prompt tuning.
The diverse capabilities of language models at scale have drawn attention to the tradeoffs between
specialist models (one model per task) and generalist models (one model for many tasks; Arivazhagan
et al., 2019; Pratap et al., 2020), for which our study has potential implications. Although one might
expect labeled data to have the most natural role in improving specialist models, instruction tuning
demonstrates how labeled data can be used to help large language models perform many, unseen
tasks. In other words, the positive effect of instruction tuning on cross-task generalization shows that
task-speciﬁc training is complementary to general language modeling and motivates further research
on generalist models.
As for limitations of our study, there is a degree of subjectivity in assigning tasks to clusters (though
we try to use accepted categorizations in the literature), and we only explore the use of relatively
short instructions of typically a single sentence (c.f. detailed instructions given to crowd-workers).
A limitation for our evaluation is that individual examples might have appeared in the models’
pretraining data, which includes web documents, though in post-hoc analysis (Appendix C) we do
not ﬁnd any evidence that data overlap substantially impacted the results. Finally, the scale of FLAN
137B makes it costly to serve. Future work on instruction tuning could include gathering/generating
even more task clusters for ﬁnetuning, cross-lingual experiments, using FLAN to generate data for
training downstream classiﬁers, and using ﬁnetuning to improve model behavior with respect to bias
and fairness (Solaiman & Dennison, 2021).
7 C ONCLUSIONS
This paper has explored a simple method for improving the ability of language models at scale to
perform zero-shot tasks based purely on instructions. Our instruction-tuned model, FLAN, compares
favorably against GPT-3 and signals the potential ability for language models at scale to follow
instructions. We hope that our paper will spur further research on instructions-based NLP, zero-shot
learning, and using labeled data to improve large language models.
9