Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Generate utterances with the intent “where to vote in the state Senate election"● Tell me where to vote in the state senate election
● Find out where to vote in the state senate election
● Where am i supposed to vote in the state senate election
● Where can i get information on where to vote in the state Senate election?Input:FLAN output:Generate utterances with the intent “get COVID vaccine"Input:● I would like to get the covid vaccine.
● I would like a COVID vaccine as soon as possible
● Can I get a COVID vaccine as a preventative measure?
● Get COVID vaccine for a ﬁve year old
● Where is a center for COVID vaccine testing?FLAN output:
Figure 17: FLAN can be used in a zero-shot fashion to generate data, such as utterances that are
consistent with a given intent. Multiple FLAN outputs are generated via random sampling with a
temperature of 0.9 and top kof 40.
Suggest a related search term to “Novak Djokovic"● novak djokovic girlfriend
● serena williams
● rafael nadal
● novak djokovic wife
● roger federer
● andy murray
● novak djokovic news
● novak djokovic serbia
● novak djokovic wimbledonInput:FLAN output:Suggest a related search term to “watermelon”Input:● Cantaloupe
● Cucumber
● Melon
● Fruit
● Watermelon juice
● Watermelons
● Lemon
● AppleFLAN output:
Figure 18: FLAN can be used for zero-shot query expansion. Multiple FLAN outputs are generated
via random sampling with a temperature of 0.9 and top kof 40.
"I guess I need to do laundry.”
Rewrite the above sentence in a
Shakespearean style.● To my mind, verily, I suppose 'tis time, I wash my clothes.
● Mine eyes and ears and tongue declare me idle; and yet it is true I guess, By my garments, that I need to do laundry
● Lo my duty now calls To thee, to wash this body's clothes.Input:FLAN output:On the way to Yosemite, our front tire blew.
Finish writing the story, and include a happy ending.Input:● We got our tire replaced. The mechanic was honest, kind and helpful. Then we had a smooth ride for the rest of the trip. Our trip was ﬁlled with fun and excitement.
● We waited three hours for the tow truck, but had a great picnic. The tow truck driver helped us put the spare on, and we arrived
in Yosemite for our reservations dinner, with time to spare.FLAN output (cherrypicked):
Figure 19: FLAN can perform zero-shot tasks relevant to assisted-writing applications. Multiple
FLAN outputs are generated via random sampling with a temperature of 0.9 and top kof 40.
33