Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Nonetheless, the fact that scale does not always improve zero-shot performance of untuned LaMDA-
PT is an interesting artifact. Initially, we were surprised, because Brown et al. (2020) shows that scale
improves performance across a large number of tasks in aggregate.
It turns out that scale does not improve performance for certain tasks. This is especially true for
zero-shot learning, and we think that this happens to be the case for the reading comprehension
and sentiment analysis tasks we evaluate. The GPT-3 paper itself similarly reports that zero-shot
performance on BoolQ and DROP decreases from 13B to 175B parameters. The GPT-3 paper does
not show results on sentiment analysis, but Holtzman et al. (2021) ﬁnd that zero-shot performance on
SST-2 also gets worse from 13B to 175B parameters. Hence, this artifact is consistent across both
GPT-3 and the models we use.
This artifact is certainly worth further study, but is outside the scope of instruction tuning. Ideally,
we would have performed the Figure 7 ablation with cross-validation instead of a single split, which
likely would have smoothed out that artifact.
F Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES
This section shows qualitative examples of FLAN responding to various prompts.
Movie review: This movie is the best RomCom since Pretty Woman.
Did this critic dislike the movie?
OPTIONS
-yes
-nonoInput:
FLAN output:Movie review: This movie is the best RomCom since Pretty Woman.
Did this critic like the movie?
OPTIONS
-yes
-noyesInput:
FLAN output:
Figure 13: For sentiment analysis, FLAN changes the answer appropriately when the question is
ﬂipped.
What is Barack Obama’s profession?
Answer in Chinese● 总统
● 美国总统Input:FLAN output:What is Barack Obama’s profession?Input:● politician
● lawyer
● senator
● us presidentFLAN output:
Figure 14: For question answering, FLAN can answer a question in another language when instructed
to do so. Multiple FLAN outputs are generated via random sampling with a temperature of 0.9 and
topkof 40.
31