Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
1 I NTRODUCTION
Language models (LMs) at scale, such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), have been shown to perform
few-shot learning remarkably well. They are less successful at zero-shot learning, however. For
example, GPT-3’s zero-shot performance is much worse than few-shot performance on tasks such as
reading comprehension, question answering, and natural language inference. One potential reason
is that, without few-shot exemplars, it is harder for models to perform well on prompts that are not
similar to the format of the pretraining data.
In this paper, we explore a simple method to improve the zero-shot performance of large language
models, which would expand their reach to a broader audience. We leverage the intuition that NLP
tasks can be described via natural language instructions, such as “ Is the sentiment of this movie review
positive or negative? ” or “ Translate ‘how are you’ into Chinese. ” We take a pretrained language
model of 137B parameters and perform instruction tuning —ﬁnetuning the model on a mixture of
more than 60 NLP datasets expressed via natural language instructions. We refer to this resulting
model as FLAN, for F inetuned La nguage N et.
To evaluate the zero-shot performance of FLAN on unseen tasks, we group NLP datasets into clusters
based on their task types and hold out each cluster for evaluation while instruction tuning FLAN
on all other clusters. For example, as shown in Figure 1, to evaluate FLAN’s ability to perform
natural language inference, we instruction tune the model on a range of other NLP tasks such as
commonsense reasoning, translation, and sentiment analysis. As this setup ensures that FLAN has
not seen any natural language inference tasks in instruction tuning, we then evaluate its ability to
perform zero-shot natural language inference.
Our evaluations show that FLAN substantially improves the zero-shot performance of the base
137B-parameter model. FLAN’s zero-shot also outperforms 175B-parameter GPT-3’s zero-shot on 20
of 25 datasets that we evaluate, and even outperforms GPT-3’s few-shot by a large margin on ANLI,
RTE, BoolQ, AI2-ARC, OpenbookQA, and StoryCloze. In ablation studies, we ﬁnd that increasing
the number of task clusters in instruction tuning improves performance on unseen tasks and that the
beneﬁts of instruction tuning emerge only with sufﬁcient model scale.
Instruction tuning is a simple method that, as depicted in Figure 2, combines appealing aspects
of both the pretrain–ﬁnetune and prompting paradigms by using supervision via ﬁnetuning to
improve language model’s responses to inference-time text interactions. Our empirical results
demonstrate promising abilities of language models to perform tasks described purely via instructions.
Source code for loading the instruction tuning dataset used for FLAN is publicly available at
https://github.com/google-research/flan .
(A) Pretrain–finetune (BERT, T5)Finetune on task AInference on task APretrained LM•Typically requires many task-specific examples •One specialized model for each task(B) Prompting (GPT-3)Inference on task APretrained LMImprove performance via few-shot prompting or prompt engineeringPretrained  LM(C) Instruction tuning (FLAN)Instruction-tune on many tasks:  B, C, D, …Inference on task AInference on unseen taskModel learns to perform many tasks via natural language instructions
Figure 2: Comparing instruction tuning with pretrain–ﬁnetune and prompting.
2 FLAN: I NSTRUCTION TUNING IMPROVES ZERO-SHOT LEARNING
The motivation of instruction tuning is to improve the ability of language models to respond to NLP
instructions. The idea is that by using supervision to teach an LM to perform tasks described via
instructions, the LM will learn to follow instructions and do so even for unseen tasks. To evaluate
performance on unseen tasks, we group datasets into clusters by task type and hold out each task
cluster for evaluation while instruction tuning on all remaining clusters.
2