Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
0-20204060
Percent of Data Clean in Dataset Percent change in performance of FLAN (accuracy, F1, or BLEU)eval on only clean data did better  eval on all data (including dirty) did betterANLI R2SQuAD v2ANLI R1DROP
ReCoRDPIQA2550075100
Figure 12: Like GPT-3, we also measured performance on cleaned versions of our datasets, which
had high conﬁdence to be unseen in the pretraining data of FLAN. We do not see a correlation that
FLAN performed better on evaluation sets for which examples occurred more often in the pretraining
data. When the percent of clean data is very small, there are fewer examples for computing the clean
performance, which leads to high variance.
model gains only background information and cannot memorize the answer to any speciﬁc questions
(aside from the ﬁve examples in SQuADv2).
ANLI R1 and R2 (Nie et al., 2020) also had almost complete data contamination, to a much higher
degree than GPT-3. Upon further inspection, we see that most overlaps occur in example contexts
and not hypotheses (97.3% for ANLI R1 and 98.2% for ANLI R2). As ANLI R1 and R2 are based
entirely from Wikipedia examples (R3 is not), we posit that this higher degree of contamination in
our pretraining dataset compared with GPT-3’s is potentially due to using a more-recent version
of Wikipedia that includes the contexts used in ANLI R1 and R2 (which were collected in 2019).
Because seeing a particular context in pretraining does not help with the NLI task given a new, unseen
sentence, we think it is unlikely that these overlaps affected performance on the two datasets.
Of the remaining datasets, only ReCoRD and PIQA had a clean subset performance that was lower
than the overall evaluation set performance by more than 1%. These two datasets are language
modeling (i.e., “what’s the best continuation of this sentence?”), and so it is more likely compared
with previous tasks that seeing a complete sentence in the pretraining data could help the model
predict the right answer in downstream evaluations. For PIQA, both the goal and solution had
overlaps in 93 of the 1,838 evaluation examples, and for ReCoRD, the query had overlaps in 2,320 of
the 10,000 training examples. We hence mark these results with an asteriskin Table 2. Brown et al.
(2020) also reported substantial contamination rates for these two datasets (61% dirty for ReCoRD
and 29% for PIQA), and also mark PIQA with an asterisk.
As this overlap analysis follows that performed in Brown et al. (2020), we reiterate the same caveats:
the conservative nature of our n-gram matching procedure likely introduces additional false positives;
there are no guarantees that the clean subset is drawn from the same distribution as the overall subset;
and, accurately detecting test contamination is a relatively new research area without established best
practices. Moreover, as our pretraining corpus is almost ﬁve times larger than that used for GPT-3
(which was 500B tokens), it is possible that there are more false positives in detecting dirty data.
26