Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
English and Romanian–English from WMT’16 (Bojar et al., 2016). Compared with GPT-3, FLAN
outperforms zero-shot GPT-3 for all six evaluations, though it underperforms few-shot GPT-3 in
most cases. Similar to GPT-3, FLAN shows strong results for translating into English and compares
favorably against supervised translation baselines. Translating from English into other languages,
however, was relatively weaker, as might be expected given that FLAN uses an English sentencepiece
tokenizer and that the majority of pretraining data is English.
Additional tasks. Although we see strong results for the above task clusters, one limitation with
instruction tuning is that it does not improve performance for many language modeling tasks (e.g.,
commonsense reasoning or coreference resolution tasks formulated as sentence completions). For
seven commonsense reasoning and coreference resolution tasks (see Table 2 in the Appendix), FLAN
only outperforms LaMDA-PT on three of the seven tasks. This negative result indicates that when the
downstream task is the same as the original language modeling pre-training objective (i.e., in cases
where instructions are largely redundant), instruction tuning is not useful. Finally, we report results for
sentiment analysis, paraphrase detection, and struct-to-text, as well as additional datasets for which
GPT-3 results are not available, in Table 2 and Table 1 in the Appendix. Generally, zero-shot FLAN
outperforms zero-shot LaMDA-PT and is comparable with or better than few-shot LaMDA-PT.
4 A BLATION STUDIES & F URTHER ANALYSIS
4.1 N UMBER OF INSTRUCTION TUNING CLUSTERS
As the core question of our paper asks how instruction tuning improves a model’s zero-shot perfor-
mance on unseen tasks, in this ﬁrst ablation we examine how performance is affected by the number
of clusters and tasks used in instruction tuning. For this setup, we hold out NLI, closed-book QA, and
commonsense reasoning as evaluation clusters, and use the seven remaining clusters for instruction
tuning.3We show results for one to seven instruction tuning clusters, where clusters are added in
decreasing order of number of tasks per cluster.
Figure 6 shows these results. As expected, we observe that average performance across the three
held-out clusters improves as we add additional clusters and tasks to instruction tuning (with the
exception of the sentiment analysis cluster), conﬁrming the beneﬁts of our proposed instruction
tuning approach on zero-shot performance on novel tasks. It is further interesting to see that, for
the seven clusters we test, the performance does not appear to saturate, implying that performance
may further improve with even more clusters added to instruction tuning. Of note, this ablation does
not allow us to draw conclusions about which instruction tuning cluster contributes the most to each
evaluation cluster, although we see minimal added value from the sentiment analysis cluster.
Performance (%)  on held-out clusterClusters used for instruction tuning507090– AverageHeld-out clusters
30# clusters: 1234567+ summarization+ translation+ read. comp.(# datasets): (11)(20)(26)(30)(34)(37)(39)+ sentiment+ data to text+ coreference+ conv. QA– Commonsense NLI  Closed-book QA49.955.059.359.260.861.963.5Base LM: Commonsense
Base LM: NLIBase LM: Closed-book QA
Figure 6: Adding additional task clusters to instruction tuning improves zero-shot performance on
held-out task clusters. The evaluation tasks are the following. Commonsense: CoPA, HellaSwag,
PiQA, and StoryCloze. NLI: ANLI R1–R3, QNLI, RTE, SNLI, and WNLI. Closed-book QA: ARC
easy, ARC challenge, Natural Questions, and TriviaQA.
3We do not use the paraphrase or reading comprehension with commonsense clusters for instruction tuning
in this ablation because they are too similar to NLI and commmonsense reasoning, respectively.
6