Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Make up a word that means "like a
pipedream"● Pipedreamic
● Pipedreamish
● Pipedreamlike
● PhantasmagoricInput:FLAN output (cherrypicked):Make up a new word that means “when bananas shower from the sky"Input:● Bananation
● Banana shower
● Banania
● Bananafall
● BananadaFLAN output:
Figure 20: FLAN can be used for zero-shot word formation. Multiple FLAN outputs are generated
via random sampling with a temperature of 0.9 and top kof 40.
Write a sad story about carrots.The sun had barely risen when the carrots were taken from their beds and brought to market. They'd had no time to gather their strength. They smelled of earth, their greens still wet from the dew. At ﬁrst no one was interested in buying them. But one man ﬁnally reached out and picked up one of the carrots. "I'll take this one!” he cried out. "It's for my mother! I'll pay you well for it.” The man took the carrot to the cashier, eager to get it home to his mother. He was careful to wrap it carefully so that it wouldn't get bruised or dirty. He hurried home, and when he saw his mother, he gave her the carrot. “Is this one of the ones I grew?" she asked, her voice wavering with emotion. "Yes, mother," he replied. "It is, dear." The man left the carrot with his mother and hurried back to market. His mother was very sick, and he was afraid she wouldn't last much longer. He needed to buy all the carrots in market so that none would be left when she was gone.Input:FLAN output:John moved to mountain view. He spent friday night in San Francisco. He got a COVID vaccine. He voted in the state senate election.
Write a story that follows the above plot.Input:
John arrived at the city with his vaccine, feeling prepared enough for the state senate election of San Francisco. He had voted for the ﬁrst time last night and was feeling good about it. He felt more prepared than ever to win, and win big, because he was getting a COVID vaccine. He knew that his opponent had not gotten a COVID vaccine, and he knew he had already defeated him before the election began.FLAN output (cherrypicked):
Figure 21: Open-ended generation tasks by FLAN. The carrot story was from sampling sixteen
outputs with a minimum length of 150 and choosing the highest probability output.
What is Barack Obama’s profession?
Answer in Danish● Hvad er Barack Obamas beskæftigelse?
● Hvad er Barack Obamas erhverv?Input:FLAN output:Conan went to the store to buy some pencils.
What is the second word in this sentence?Input:● pencils
● Conan
● store
● buyFLAN output:
Figure 22: Example failure cases for FLAN. Left: FLAN fails to perform a simple task of returning
thenth word. Right: FLAN translates a question instead of answering it. Multiple FLAN outputs are
generated via random sampling with a temperature of 0.9 and top kof 40.
34