Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
2.3 C LASSIFICATION WITH OPTIONS
The output space for a given task is either one of several classes (classiﬁcation) or free text (generation).
As FLAN is an instruction-tuned version of a decoder-only language model, it naturally responds in
free text, and so no further modiﬁcations are needed for generation tasks.
For classiﬁcation tasks, prior work (Brown et al., 2020) used a rank classiﬁcation approach where,
for example, only two outputs (“ yes” and “ no”) are considered and the higher probability one is
taken as the model’s prediction. Though this procedure is logically sound, it is imperfect in that the
probability mass for answers may have an undesired distribution among ways of saying each answer
(e.g., a large number of alternative ways of saying “ yes” may lower the probability mass assigned
to “yes”). Therefore, we include an options sufﬁx, in which we append the token OPTIONS to the
end of a classiﬁcation task along with a list of the output classes for that task. This makes the model
aware of which choices are desired when responding to classiﬁcation tasks. Example use of options
is shown in the NLI and commonsense examples in Figure 1.
2.4 T RAINING DETAILS
Model architecture and pretraining. In our experiments, we use LaMDA-PT, a dense left-to-right,
decoder-only transformer language model of 137B parameters (Thoppilan et al., 2022). This model
is pretrained on a collection of web documents (including those with computer code), dialog data,
and Wikipedia, tokenized into 2.49T BPE tokens with a 32k vocabulary using the SentencePiece
library (Kudo & Richardson, 2018). Around 10% of the pretraining data was non-English. Note that
LaMDA-PT only has language model pretraining (c.f. LaMDA, which was ﬁnetuned for dialog).
Instruction tuning procedure. FLAN is the instruction-tuned version of LaMDA-PT. Our instruc-
tion tuning pipeline mixes all datasets and randomly samples from each dataset. To balance the
different sizes of datasets, we limit the number of training examples per dataset to 30k and follow
the examples-proportional mixing scheme (Raffel et al., 2020) with a mixing rate maximum of 3k.2
We ﬁnetune all models for 30k gradient steps with a batch size of 8,192 tokens using the Adafactor
Optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) with a learning rate of 3e-5. The input and target sequence lengths
used in ﬁnetuning are 1024 and 256, respectively. We use packing (Raffel et al., 2020) to combine
multiple training examples into a single sequence, separating inputs from targets using a special EOS
token. This instruction tuning takes around 60 hours on a TPUv3 with 128 cores. For all evaluations,
we report results on the ﬁnal checkpoint trained for 30k steps.
3 R ESULTS
We evaluate FLAN on natural language inference, reading comprehension, closed-book QA, transla-
tion, commonsense reasoning, coreference resolution, and struct-to-text. As described in §2.2, we
evaluate on unseen tasks by grouping datasets into task clusters and holding out each cluster for
evaluation while instruction tuning on all remaining clusters (i.e., each evaluation task cluster uses
a different checkpoint). For each dataset, we evaluate the mean of performance on all templates,
which proxies the expected performance given a typical natural language instruction. As a dev set is
sometimes available for manual prompt engineering (Brown et al., 2020), for each dataset we also
obtain the test set performance using the template with the best dev set performance.
For comparison, we report zero and few-shot results for LaMDA-PT using the same prompts as
GPT-3 (as LaMDA-PT is not suitable for natural instructions without instruction tuning). This
baseline provides the most direct ablation of how much instruction tuning helps. Instruction tuning
signiﬁcantly improves LaMDA-PT on most datasets.
We also show the zero-shot performances of GPT-3 175B (Brown et al., 2020) and GLaM 64B/64E
(Du et al., 2021), as reported in their respective papers. With the best dev template, zero-shot FLAN
outperforms zero-shot GPT-3 on 20 of 25 datasets and even surpasses GPT-3’s few-shot performance
on 10 datasets. With the best dev-template, zero-shot FLAN outperforms zero-shot GLaM on 13 of
19 available datasets and one-shot GLaM on 11 of 19 datasets.
2In this mixing scheme, a mixing rate maximum of 3,000 means that a dataset does not receive additional
sampling weight for examples in excess of 3,000.
4