The rise of  AI in marketing is not taking place in isolation  from the rapid, wider advance of marketing 
technology, whether in front -line marketing operations such as contact centres, or the management of 
marketing resources. This advance helps in the deployment of AI in marketing, in the sense that it computerises other aspects of marketing and generates data which can be used to support AI. However, this also means that AI use should be integrated with these applications, taking data feeds automatically and making r ecommendations back to these other areas.  
Ethical and data protection issues  
Marketing involves doing things to customers and using their data. Both involve  important ethical 
considerations. Asking computers  to decide which customers shall be offered which products or which 
customers seem to have committed fraud is already normal in industries such as financial services, but has already raised problems of equity and trust. Where customers’ data is concerned, legislation makes it paramount that AI- based processing does not lead to infringement of increasingly stringent data protection 
legislation, or of basic ethical rules which marketers should observe.  
Patterns of expenditure and distribution in consumer markets  
In most developed markets,  much  consumer expe nditure is now on services, while government services are 
an important element of government expenditure (e.g. health services, education, security ). Services 
generally yield richer data flows about consumer behaviour, because (depending on the extent of digitalisation), usage , not just purchase,  can be or is tracked. The  data  richness is growing (for example, in 
motor insurance some policies require use of devices which track amount and style of usage). Data is an important theme of this paper , because one of the barriers to the use of AI is absence of data.  
 
Another important development is the emergence of giant web retailers e.g. Amazon, eBay and of platforms 
for advertising e.g. Google, which yield rich data about product and service purchasing. This data may or may not make its way back to product or service providers (this is increasingly the focus of a commercial transaction), but it is certainly available to these “platform players” to plan their marketing (Wright et al. , 
2019; Stone et al. , 2017) . 
 Finally, within the strict category of pure consumer expenditure, patterns are changing. Instead of going to the cinema, consumers use streaming video. Use of mobile apps has in many ways replaced other forms of 
entertainment. Channels are changing too, with digitalisation (particularly of content) supporting the switch 
from physical to virtual retail, perhaps seen in its most dramatic form in areas such as holiday booking, fashion and furniture. I n some countries, a rapidly ageing demography is causing an even faster shift away 
from physical products to services which can be easily consumed by the older adult.  
Business to business (B2B) marketing  
Much early thinking on customer relationship management arose from the experience of B2B companies, 
who  kept  contact with customers through sales  forces and then contact centres (e.g. Stone and Shaw, 1987 , 
1988 ; Stone et al. , 1990).  However, the data- richness of consumer marketing has led to much of the 
discussion on marketing automation being focused on consumer markets. Despite this, much of B2B 
marketing is completely analogous to  consumer  marketing, es pecially where it involves marketing to many 
small businesses. A t the other extreme is the world of major account and key account marketing, involving 
the sale of large contracts and the personal management of customers by sales forces  (Hughes et al. , 2004) . 
However, even this is becoming extensively digitalised. For example, in this world advanced content management systems are used to target content to appropriate prospects and customers, and downloading 
and engagement of this content is tracked, enabling suppliers to prioritise customers according to their 
interest in a product or service. However, as we shall see later, factors such as the big differences among 
customer s (and so the lack of simple replicability of decisions about them) can limit the appl icability of AI.  
Public sector marketing (i.e. from the public sector)  
In some countries, where the public sector retains a large share of expenditure on (if not always by) consumers, much of what is written about consumer marketing applies. In some situat ions, close 
partnerships between public and private sector organisations can also produce the same effect (e.g. partnerships between public owners of airports and privately- owned  airlines and retailers). The  boundary