Progress to date  
The use of AI in marketing operations has been extensively publicised by suppliers of systems which are 
either ones where AI can be deployed or which provide the AI component, for example, from the leading 
supplier of Customer Relationship Management software, Salesforce.com (Garvin, 2019) . However, the use 
of AI in making strategic marketing decisions has been researched very little, with the most recent 
comprehensive report being from Accenture ( Awalegaonkar  et al. , 2019). This report, based on interviews 
with 1,500 C -suite executives  from companies with a minimum revenue of US$1 billion in 12 countries in 16 
industries, focused on the factors require to scale artificial intelligence. The report used the concepts of 
piloting and scaling to segment users of AI. It defined “Pilot ” as rolling out a capability with real data, users 
and processes in a production environment (using a subset of the relevant scope). The purpose of piloting to test how the capability performs with a limited scope and to then make any needed modifications before 
expanding to the full applicable scope. It defined “Scale” as extension of the piloted capability across the full 
applicable scope with all relevant data, end users, customers, and processes.   The main findings of the report were as follows:  
• 84% of C -suite executives believe they  need to use A rtificial Intelligence (AI) to achieve their growth 
objectives. Nearly all C -suite executives view AI as an enabler of their strategic priorities and that 
achieving a positive return on AI investments requires scaling across the organization.  
• 76% acknowle dge that they struggl e in scaling AI across the business and that if they do  not scale AI in 
the next five years, they risk going out of business.  
• Companies that successfully scale AI achieve much better financial returns from their investment in it.  
 The report suggested that users of AI fell into three groups:  
• Those at proof of concept stage (80- 85% of companies), with a low scaling success rate, a low return on 
their AI investments, their efforts usually siloed within a department or team, often IT -led, with no 
connection to a business imperative and difficult to scale . 
• Those engaged in strategic scaling (15- 20% of companies), having moved beyond proof of concept, with a 
higher success rate for AI, with a clear AI strategy and operating model linked to the company’s business 
objectives, with an experimental mindset, with their efforts supported by a larger, multi -dimensional 
team championed by the Chief AI, Data or Analytics Officer, but with the scaled AI generally applied to 
individual applications suc h as personalization, intelligent automation and predictive reporting. 
• Those (at most 5%) who have industrialised their use of AI, creating a culture of AI, a clear enterprise vision based on strategy and competitive advantage that resists siloed applications, with strong accountability, metrics and governance, with thousands of models in use within an AI framework, using it to promote product and service innovation, using ‘What if’ analysis enabling improved acquisition, 
service and satisfaction, and re -using digital assets.  They recognise the importance of business -critical 
data — identifying financial, marketing, consumer, and master data as a priority, investing in structuring 
and managing data, data quality, data management, and data governance frameworks on the cloud, with 
clear operating models for generation versus consumption of data, integrating internal and external data sets as a standard practice, and understand the importance of using more diverse datasets to support initiatives.  
 The report cites two case studies, as follows:  
• A brewing firm which uses AI to develop  more accurate forecasting models, improved  consumer and 
customer segmentations, and enhanced sales , deploying advanced analytics capabilities  on more than 
one hundred global datasets, including sales and forecast data, social media, trade  spend, customer and 
product master data,  and weather data . 
• A convenience store chain which uses AI in pricing to match customer demand across the world, using virtual agents to interact with global category management teams to drive adoption of the new pricing approach, supported by multi -disciplinary teams with skills in areas like data engineering, visualization, 
data quality, and human- centered design.