customer relationship management and digital marketing, with data about individual customers, their 
behaviour and needs, becoming more widely used compared to “classic” market research ( Stone , 1996; 
Stone and Woodcock, 2014). Digitally supported marketing allows an initiative to move from an idea o r 
concept to execution in weeks or even days, compared to the months or years suggested in classic marketing (Chaffey and Ellis -Chadwick , 2019). More generally, the impact of big data on board decisions has been 
researched by Merendino et al.  (2018).  The impact of the digitisation  of data on board decisions has been 
explored by Dibb et al . (2015) . The impact of digitisation on the role of strategists is discussed by Åberg et al.  
(2017), while the problem posed by data overload and the impossibility of articulating all data is covered by Quinn et al.  (2018).  One of the most relevant points emphasised by Lee et al. (2019) is the dependence of AI 
on data quality and quantity  and the issue of  shortage of AI skills, pointing out that even in relativ ely 
straightforward operational implementation o n AI, shortage of AI skills may hinder progress. Blending the 
relatively high- level  skills of business/marketing planning with AI skills may prove an even greater challenge. 
Strateg ic tools  
Academic writing in this area focuses on the  tools of strategic analysis and decision- making and case studies 
of “successful” strategies. Many of the tools (e.g. SWOT  – Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats 
analysis, TOWS – Threats, Opportunities, Weaknesses, Strengths - analysis, Ansoff Matrix, BCG – Boston 
Consulting Group - matrix) have been integrated into marketing planning processes, but new tools /versions 
of tools  have emerged to meet the needs of marketing and business planning in the digital world. For 
examp le, instead of segmentation based upon static categories of need, it might be based up what is 
revealed real -time by what a customer does on a website.  One of the best books on strategy which covers all 
the relevant tools is that of Johnson et al.  (2017).  It is noteworthy that the SDMP literature does not focus on 
the use of different tools but focuses on decisions in general, so an additional aspect which should be explored is whether and how the SDMP varies according to the data and tools being used and the types of 
strategy being considered.  
AI in marketing decision -making – benefits and examples  
The benefits  
The benefits of applying AI to strategic marketing decision- making are expected  to include these:  
• Increased speed of decision -making, especially in response to new data being available or competitive 
threats emerging, allowing companies to capture the benefits of stronger market positions earlier . 
• Identification of missing data . 
• Increased rationality, particularly via removal or reduction of cognitive bias by decision- makers . 
• Creation of a common basis for decision -making . 
• Incorporation of learning from experience . 
• Higher quality management of marketing projects . 
Examples of application  
In this section, we consider some of the ways in which AI might be used in dif feren t areas of marketing 
decision -making and planning. It is based on the analysis framework proposed by Stone and Woodcock 
(2014)  for analysing the impact of digitalization but applied to AI . A similar matrix needs could be developed 
for corporate strategy.  There is no t always a clear separation between marketing strategy and business 
strategy . Nor is there a clear separation between overall marketing strategy and strategy for different 
elements of  the marketing mix. For example, decisions about marketing channels have strategic aspects 
(Stone et al. , 2002) as well as tactical aspects, particularly  as digital approaches change the balance between 
channels and the roles that different channels play. These decisions  can affect every aspect of marketing . 
However, T able s I-III present an attempt to show the main changes that digital marketing has made t o 
different  marketing activit ies, as digitalisa tion of marketing is a precondition for the data to be made 
available for AI to be deployed, and examples  of possible AI deployment . The tables cover in turn marketing 
strategy, marketing mix and marketing management.