It is this latter alternative which reflects most closely the topic of this paper.  
 
Shrest ha et al.  (2019) also suggest that the appropriateness of these alternatives, and in particular the 
likelihood of appropriateness of full delegation to AI, depends upon:  
• Decision search space  specificity  – the more specific the required decisions, the more suitable AI is . 
• Interpretability – how easy it is to understand the reasons for decisions/recommendations (this relates to 
whether the AI approach used is “black box” or can “explain” its decisions) . 
• Size of the alternative set – the larger the size, the greater the problems humans have in dealing with  
• Decision -making speed required – the faster it is, the more suitable AI is . 
• Replicability – the higher the commonality of data/decisions etc., the more suitable AI is, given that  AI 
depends partly from learning from other cases.  
 In strategic decisions, t he time it can take to see if  a particular approach works ; the lack of specificity ; 
possible diversity of interpretations ; the fact that speed is less of the essence and relative lack of 
replicability ; means that aggregated human- AI decision -making  may be more appropriate , although Hybrid 1 
may be used too.  
 
In terms of evidence on implementation of AI in strategy, this seems to be  secret, though there is evidence 
of a battle betwe en the two main relevant digital players, Amazon and Google, to extend AI use, using the 
enormous data sets available to both companies (Condon, 2019; Kiron and Schrage, 2019). 
Industrial b ackground  
Marketing has changed much in the past and will  continue to change in the future,  so the scope  for the 
application of AI will change as a result, including: 
• The evolution of marketing analytics towards AI and changes in market research. 
• Ethical and data protection issues . 
• Patterns of expenditure and distribution in consumer markets . 
• Business to business marketing (including to the public sector) . 
• Public sector marketing (i.e. from the public sector) . 
 
We need to review these area s for two reasons:  
• Our interest is in the future of marketing strategic decision- making and related areas, not just AI. 
• Where we focus on the use of AI, we need to consider how it might apply in all these five  areas.  
 This paper is written main ly from the perspective of business -to-consumer (B2C), and also businesses  selling 
to consumers via other businesses (known as B2B2C).  We have covered some aspects of these developments 
in Wright et al.  (2019), Parnell et al.  (2018), Stone and Aravopoulou (2018), Stone et al.  (2017, 2018).  
The evolution of marketing analytics towards AI  
There is a fashion element to discussions about AI, particularly in marketing, where the boundary between advanced analytics and AI is definitely fuzzy. Analytics has evolved to where it can handle problems which are relatively unstructured and come up with suggestions in a way that would once have been considered “expert”  and even defined as AI . One essential characteristic  of AI that distinguishes it from classic 
“advanced analytics” is automation of feedback loops and improvement i.e. learning by the system (machine learning) about how to do things better, and this in turn implies that conclusions are being tested and 
assessed against certain criteria, as opposed to being reviewed by humans who then make decisions about 
what to do next.  Where the  action being “managed” by AI is precise and contained, implemented quickly 
and with the results also being measurable and assessable quickly, AI is generally very productive. But where decisions are more wide- ranging, take time to implement and time elapses before the results of the 
decisions are apparent, let alone measurable and assessable, deployment of AI can be  more complicated . It 
may  be hybrid, with parts of the cycle being undertaken by AI, part by human decision- makers.  The latter 
applies to marketing strategy. However, one technique which may be usable to improve applicability is back -
casting, in which decisions  taken earlier and o f which the results are now known are used along with dat a 
from the period of analysis to train the system.  This approach can also be used to capture the “ historic 
expertise” of strategic marketers , by rule elicitation or case -based reasoning.