Public relations  Electronic word of mouth, or "word of mouse", is replacing conventional media exposu re, not 
solely through social networks, but through all aspects of web and mobile dialogue  – and often 
developing rapidly and in real time (‘trending’) . In some sectors, online reviews have become 
critical in determining whether a product will sell, while social influencers have become a very 
important part of marketing in some sectors, such as travel, clothing, cosmetics and automotive.  Identifying patterns of word of mouth, 
reasons for them, suggested actions and 
underlying sentiment.  
Sales promotion  The effectiveness of sales promotions can be gauged much more quickly  than ever before , while 
online channels facilitate distribution of buying incentives (such as coupons , discounts  and other 
incentives ). Identifying which promotions work best 
and quickest w ith which customers/market 
segments . 
Identifying which offers should be used and 
when.  
Content  The increase in the number of channels and the importance of content (text, audio, image, 
video) in persuading and influencing customers has come to the fore, particularly given the possibility of customising all kinds of content to market segments and now  individual customers, 
supported by the ability to search for, classify and analyse all kinds of content. The rapid rise in video content, facilitated by significant improvements in mobile bandwidth (with more to come with the advent of 5G), is both a challenge and an opportunity, multiplied by using messaging to communicate content. Extended (virtual and augmented) reality are changing the approach to content, allowing the blending of real and digital experiences. Brand and product storytelling are  
being used much more, partly because they support the development of much richer content 
that can be used across all communication channels. However, an issue which remains controversial is the extent to which the use of AI can support and encourage creativity and 
increase the returns from it.  Serving content to the right customers and 
prospects at the right time and analysing results of serving it.  
Customising content to target segments and customers.  
Customer management (acquisition, retention, development, customer service, customer experience)  This relates to how the customer inventory is built for particular products or groups of them, 
from the targets set to the techniques used to achieve desired results and track fulfilment of commitment and  customer promises following transaction.  Optimising inventory levels real -time, and 
helping the customer react to different segments demand.  
Automating interaction with the customer 
(bots)  
Distribution  The web has become a very important channel of distr ibution for many information -based 
products and services, as well as some physical products, and in many markets the dominant 
channel for marketing communication, so that distribution and the communication decisions 
become closely tied to each other, with customers seeking immediate response to their 
requests, or a simple method in which to purchase when they are ready.  Optimising channels. Identifying missing 
channels. Improve transaction times and 
streamline fulfilment.