Marketing 
resource 
management  Marketing automation allows marketing processes to be managed more effectively as the return on 
investment for different marketing expenditures to be calculated and forecast with more accuracy  
than traditional channels.  Optimising resource management is key with 
business being more stretched than ever by a hyper 
competitive market.  
Content 
management  Managing the increasing volume and variety of content requires maint aining various  systems, and 
constantly customising content to the  needs  and use -cases of specific situations is particularly 
important, given the rising possibility of exposing the wrong customer to the wrong content. Matching content to the right end customer (at the right time) uses significantly more marketing resources, so the return on the additional cost improving content management must be measured 
and acted upon.  Detailed optimisation for individual custom ers. 
Provision of tool that speed s up delivery of content 
and improve s its optimisation.  
Managing marketing people  This relates to how marketing people are recruited, trained, developed, targeted and assessed as 
marketing professionals. This is particularly important in a rapidly changing landscape of digital technology, which is necessitating an entirely new skill set from traditional marketing channels and 
disciplines.  Identifying the most productive marketers and 
assisting the resolution of problems ass ociated with 
the decision- making of others.  
Marketing operating model  With digitalisation, the marketing operating model is changing. One of the best examples of this is the 
rise of programmatic advertising, which is helping companies use technology to move beyond the 
manual management of advertising to use technology to reach the nirvana of attributing the correct 
value to different advertising interventions, given the possession and use of the right analytics tools 
to reach the right target audience auto matically.  Optimising the efficient working of model, including 
using machine learning to make real time decisions 
on appropriate audiences and investment levels.  
Marketing 
finance  Identifying where revenue and crucially profit come from in while operati ng in a complex multi -
channel, multi -product/service business is essential. Given the reduction in barriers to entry online, 
the increasing speed of change in the market, ensuring that a business is acting in a sustainable manner needs to be ascertained much more quickly. New measures are being used, not just the 
classic financial ones, that take into account, portfolio approaches, and digital traction.  Identifying returns accurately, more rapidly and 
with greater impartiality than human analysis.