Table II. Deployment of AI in the marketing  mix 
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each 
area  
Branding  The locus of many companies' brands has shifted from the real to the virtual world, w ith many  
brands of many others are strongly affected by what is said about them in the virtual world. Tracking shifting brand image using 
evidence from the web, particularly social 
media.  
Finding evidence of the causes of brand 
shift and loss of market share.  
Product  Customer input into product design (collaborative design) can be obtained much more quickly. 
Customers can design their own products more easily. Designs can be tested and revised more quickly, while problems can be identified and rectified more quickly and easily  using a variety of 
digital channels and collaboration tools.  Synthesising input from customers.  
Simulating results of new product designs of formulations.  
Proposition  The proposition can be more closely attuned to target markets, and the engagement of 
customers with different propositions can be understood more quickly, with iterative changes 
made and tested for further feedback.  Identifying which propositions work best 
though customer feedback and testing.  
Price  Prices can be tailored mo re easily to different customers. Yield management can be applied in 
many new areas . Resetting pricing strategies based on 
results of different yield management 
approaches.  
Advertising  Website/mobile /digital advertising is gradually usurping advertising i n conventional physical 
media, allowing greater trackability and better assessment of return on investment. This is leading to a blurring of the distinction between advertising , digital and other marketing 
communications methods.  The automation applied to advertising via programmatic and similar 
approaches is greatly increasing the opportunity for applying AI approaches.  Choosing/designing text, images and 
videos to suit market segments and individuals in different channels and platforms.  
Direct marketing  Direct marketing has expanded out of the conventional media of mail and telephone to include 
virtually all marketing communications , especially digital and CRM  (Customer Relationship 
Management) , so that in some ways it appears in all marketing, whether in itiated by the 
company or its customers. Referrals, always valuable, have been transformed into 
recommendations  for many companies.  Choosing which form / combinations of 
contact types / channels / content that is appropriate for different target markets and individuals.  
Personal selling  Personal selling now has much stronger information support, while improved sales management 
systems, sometimes integrated with response management systems, allow much more effective targeting , prospecting and management of customers and prospects . Providing personalised response to 
individuals . 
Analysing the results . 
Recommending different ways to 
personalise.