between public and private expenditure and the data that arises from it is shifting as government becomes 
more involved in enabling service provision, as in the case of smart cities  (Stone et al. , 2018) , where 
information platforms used to manage services may be partly or wholly gov ernment owned.  Indeed, the idea 
that public sector information platforms may be arenas in which private as well as public sector organisations compete to provide public services has been aired extensively – the so -called “government as 
a platform” (Brown et al., 2017). So, public expenditure is certainly not excluded from this paper, though 
some aspects of use of AI might be more constrained by political decisions, data protection and regulation.  
Applying AI to strategic management  
In this section of the ar ticle, we review some of the research in areas which are closely related to the topic of 
this article and need to be tied in more closely.  
The strategic decision- making process (SDMP)  
There is an extensive literature on this topic , summarised well by Shepherd and Rudd (2014). It arises from  
the n eed to understand how strategic decisions are made rather than their outcomes. However, there is 
little  literature on SDMP on m arketing , as most  SDMP literature covers  general management, particularly 
financial decisions relating to acquisitions and mergers, as well as psychology (the cognitive aspect). 
 
The SDMP literature identifies the importance of the se factors . 
• External environmental characteristics  
• Internal organisational characteristics  
• Top management team  characteristics  and behaviour  
• Other team characteristics  e.g. how it works together  
• Decision -specific characteristics  
• Decision maker’s individual characteristics  
• Data and technology 
• Cognitive issues  
 However, the SDMP literature has not been linked  with the literature on the use of AI in decision- making, 
and thus the two literatures need to be connected.  
The military experience  
The use of AI in strategic decision -making is becoming an area of focus  in military strategy  (Ayoub and Payne, 
2016; Payne, 2018). This is relevant because marketing is essentially a competitive activity, involving improving performance relative to a competitor (i.e. enemy), and in some industries in a complex world of alliances, where allies may have relationships with enemies and share forces. 
Cognitive bias  
One off the main advantages of the deployment of AI in strategy is the extent to which it could be used in removing the cognitive bias that results from individual and group decision- making (often but not always 
strategic) . The  individual and social biases  in making decisions  have  been the subject of intense research in 
many disciplines.  Reviews include those in the following areas – finance (Kumar and Goyal, 2015), 
entrepreneurship (Kerr et al. , 2018; Zhang and Cueto, 2017), pricing ( Iyer et al. , 2015) . A related area is the 
application of cognitive neuroscience disciplines, a general summary of which is provided by  Butler et al.  
(2016). A good review of cognitive and motivational biases and debiasing in decisions and risk analysis, is the 
work of Montibeller  and Von Winterfeldt  (2015). The broad conclusion relates to the ubiquity of bias, 
identifying the opportunity for AI to remove bias.  
Planning processes  
Research into this topic  goes back  to the 1960s , when the first marketing planning texts were produced, first  
by management consultants, then  by academics, becoming integrated into university teaching a decade or 
so later. The leading author here is McDonald (2016a, 2016b ), who h as researched marketing planning for 40 
years  and focuses on logical (e.g. from objectives, through strategies, to tactics), analytical and functional  or 
cross -functional (especially finance) and other processes deemed necessary  to produce a marketing plan 
appropriate for a firm’s context. It includes ideas about appropriate market research, customer information management and competitive intelligence. The data content of planning has been changed by the advent of