Table III. Deployment of AI in marketing  management  
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each area  
People  Marketing, sales and service people can be much better informed about what they need to know to 
sell and market better, and results of their work can be obtained and distributed more easily . They 
can also benefit professionally from having more training on new digital marketing tools and how to 
apply the technology personally.  Identifying what information should be used to 
support different types of decision.  
Identifying where managers are not using the right information , have not got access to the right 
information  or are misinterpreting the information 
they have .  
Providing tool s and frameworks to better use the 
opportunities created by new AI technology.  
Marketing analysis  Using the huge volumes of data now available to some companies, and customers growing 
increasingly impatient for rapid responses targeting of outbound messaging and rapid response to inbound messaging can be much more accurate and timely. Timing has become critically important to 
capture buying intent, as customers may be in the market for a very short time, as they make their comparisons and reach their conclusions using the mountains of content available from firms and 
their competitors.  Accelerating analysis and its application – both from 
a ‘reactive’ internal perspective and also from the point of view of customers accessing information relevant to a purchase.  
Market research  Market resea rch is increasing ly online, while gaining insight from both customer -initiated feedback  
and sentiment analysis (with the appropriate permissions)  are providing a new source of information 
to marketers on how their current and prospective customers think, f eel and act.  Gaining and analysing larger data sets.  
Analysis of results of research, especially when 
combined across different studies,  
Market targeting  Due to its growing complexity , market targeting is becoming increasingly automated. The results of 
recent changes in targets and deployment of different elements of marketing mix to produce 
appropriate response rates and sales . AI can assist with more accurate targeting, including 
allowing for real- time changes to strategy.  
Data and systems  Marketing processes can be migrated onto systems, increasingly  running on the "cloud"  and allowing 
the marketing and wider team to collaborate and  enhanc e their effectiveness and speed of proces ses 
such as workflow/ project management. Systems allow much b etter access to data required for 
decision -making  on everything from individual customers to strategic decisions, and then for 
measurement, review and calculation of return on investment . Personalisation and location -based 
marketing have  moved on from  beco ming watchwords,  to being ‘business as usual’ for the most 
effective marketing teams. They however pose significant privacy risks, as  data protection 
requirements have become  a central focus for marketing management. Meanwhile, the requirements 
for integra ting data from different sources so as to maximise marketing effectiveness, particularly the 
integration of their Data Management Platforms (centralized systems for collecting and analysing large data sets from disparate sources) with their Demand- Side Pla tforms  (systems that allow buyers 
of digital advertising to coordinate their activity, including bidding) are essential to keep up with 
competitors.  Identifying opportunities for improving returns to 
systems deployment.  
Identifying new ways to accelerate w orkflow and a 
collaboration to assist in developing speed to market and increased compliance.