Introduction  
This paper focuses on  the evolution of marketing practice  and in particular on the possible application of 
artificial intelligence  (AI) to strategic marketing decision- making . We use Accenture ’s definition of AI  as the 
use of multiple technologies that enable  computers to sense,  comprehend, act, and learn , including 
techniques such as  machine learning, natural language  processing, knowledge representation,  
computational intelligence  (Awalegaonkar  et al., 2019) . This report is discussed later.   
 
In marketing – and in other disciplines – there boundary between humans and computers in decision- making  
is shifting. Today, AI is increasingly deployed in operational marketing e.g.  identification of risks, contact 
centre response management, as well as in marketing including analysis and targeting of customers, design 
and selection of advertising copy to match target customers, pricing to maximise yield from individual customers (Marinchak et al. , 2018). Tomorrow, we expect that AI will be employed in strategic decision-
making ( e.g. which business models to use , which strategies to follow, which markets to target, which 
products to market, which channels of communication and distribution to use, what pricing  and competitive 
positioning strategies to follow, etc.). However, the use of AI in marketing strategy has not been much 
discussed in the public domain. Our contacts with industry indicate that some companies have made great 
progress in this area, but thes e projects are kept secret and treated as a source of competitive advantage.  
 
It should be emphasised at this point that the focus is not primarily on the replacement of human decision-
making in strategic decisions, but on the creation of a higher quality decision- making mechanism, using AI, in 
which marketers are provided with quicker, more complete and more fully -worked out options from which 
to choose, and the creation of the associated theoretical framework.  
 
Much of the writing about AI and strategy currently focuses on strategies which are based on extending the 
use of AI in organisations, often in operational areas, as Kiron and Schrage (2019) point out. However, as researchers start to focus on how AI can be used to develop new business models – a po ssible outcome of 
business and/or marketing planning (e.g. Lee et al. , 2019; Valter et al. , 2019), this may lead to the extension 
that Kiron and Schrage (2019) focus on, the use of AI in determining strategy. A related area is the literature on using AI to achieve digital transformation (e.g. Brock and Wagenheim, 2019), although this too focuses on 
AI in strategy. However, the focus of this article is firmly on the use of AI in marketing strategy.  
AI in management decision- making  
The frontier between humans  and computers in management  is moving from operational to strategic. A 
good synthesis is provided by Jarrahi (2018). This forms part of a wider discussion on the encroachment of AI on professions such as law, where the focus is partly on the ability of AI  to help humans make sense of high 
volumes of information, which themselves are growing (so -called “big -data”). A particularly relevant article, 
based on empirical research, is that of Kolbjørnsrud  et al.  (2016), which focuses on the use of AI in redefining 
management. In management decision- making, there is usually a trade -off between efficiency and fairness 
(equity). For example, see the work of Perris and Labib (2004) on prioritisation of patients for organ transplant waiting list using fuzzy logic. Another application of AI in management decision- making is 
classification and incorporation of various stakeholders’ views using AI technique of fuzzy logic ( Poplawska et 
al., 2015), and group decision- making using a machine learning method (Chakhar et al ., 2016).  
 Claudé and Comb (2018) identify that today, AI is seen primarily as a support to major business decisions rather than a decision- maker, but attribute this to the fact that AI as currently cons tituted is relatively weak, 
compared to what will be the strong AI of the future. As computational capacity and speed increase, and as data sets available to support decisions grow, the frontier of substitutability of AI for human decision- making 
shifts. S hrest ha et al.  (2019) suggest several possibilities, as follows:  
• Full human to AI delegation e.g. recommender systems, digital advertising, online fraud detection, dynamic pricing. 
• Hybrid 1: AI to human sequential decision- making  e.g. idea evaluation, hiring. 
• Hybrid 2: Human to AI sequential decision -making  e.g. sports analytics, health monitoring. 
• Aggregated human- AI decision -making  e.g. top management teams, boards.