Table I. Deployment of AI in marketing  strategy  
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each area  
Overall strategy – target 
markets, marketing mix for 
each, objectives, KPIs, goals 
etc. This allows infor mation for decision -making  to be assembled quickly and  be automated, 
and results of different strategies to be analysed more quickly so strategy can be revised in a ‘test and learn’ approach.  Quickly assessing different outcomes based on 
alternative strate gies. 
Assisting in rapid decision- making to choose those 
most likely to produce best results.  
Business model of customer management  This relates to which customers the company wants to acquire, retain, develop (up -sell 
and cross -sell) and divest, with what resulting revenues and costs, to achieve its strategic 
objectives rather than to meet the goals of certain elements of the marketing mix in 
isolation.  Using technology such as machine learning to 
assist in ‘reaching’ look alike audiences . 
Quantifying and exploring consequences of 
different business models.  
Overall branding and proposition  Depending on whether the company is involved in many different types of product and 
market, this may apply to the whole company or to parts of it, but at a higher level than individual products and services – with different branding approaches taken on different 
channels.  Identifying results of brand investments, 
recommending future investments and channel strategy.  
Developing new revenue streams  This refers to devel oping revenue using a way or introducing a new product or service 
that is in some sense different from existing ways – it may involve any or all elements of 
the marketing mix, and different markets.  Identifying revenue streams for existing customer 
base an d for new markets in order to accelerate 
launch.  
Ecosystem management, partnering, outsourcing and value chain redefinition This relates to how companies and partners (i.e. suppliers and manufacturers!) that are 
not owned by the client but work very closely with it are organised to ensure that the company’s overall marketing (and business) strategy is developed and delivered, and how 
the gains from working together are shared.  Identifying most productive parts of ecosystem 
and gaps in ecosystem development . 
Competitive strategy – who are 
main competitors, targeting for winning and defence  This relates to how direct and indirect competitors are identified, their strategies 
discovered and understood, and how the company strategizes so as to avoid where possi ble the negative effects of competition.  Identifying weak signals of impending 
competition . 
Identifying weaknesses in own and competitor’s 
strategy.  
Resource management  This allows overall costs and benefits of different strategies to be measured and analysed 
more quickly in order to adjust resourcing (i.e. for periods of peak demand).  Analysis of the data to identify risks, rewards and 
outcomes/ possible planning scenarios .