Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Strategic Marketing Decision -Making: A research agenda  
To be published in The B ottom Line, 2019 
Professor Merlin Stone  
St Mary’s University, London, UK; University of Portsmouth UK; Merlin Stone Consulting  
Dr Eleni Aravopoulou  
St Mary’s University, London, UK  
Professor Yuksel Ekinci  
University of Portsmouth, UK  
Geraint Evans  
St Mary’s University, London, UK  
Matt Hobbs  
Accenture  
Professor Ashraf Labib  
University of Portsmouth, UK  
Paul Laughlin  
Laughlin Consultancy  
Dr Jon Machtynger  
Microsoft; Surrey University, UK  
Liz Machtynger  
Customer Essential Ltd ; Kingston University, UK;  University  of Portsmouth, UK  
Purpose  
The purpose of this article is to review literature and thinking about the application of AI in strategic 
situations and to identify the research that is needed in the area of applying AI to strategic marketing 
decisions.  
Design/methodology/approach  
Review  of literature and consultation with marketing experts who were invited to contribute to the article.  
Findings  
There is little research into applying AI to strategic marketing decision- making . This  is needed as the frontier 
of AI application to decision -making is moving in many management areas from operational to strategic. 
Given the competitive nature of such decisions and the insights from  applying AI to defence and similar 
areas, it is time to focus on applying AI to strategic marketing decisions.  
Research limitations/implications  
Applying AI to strategic marketing decision -making is known to be taking place, but the it is  commercially 
sensitive, so data is not available to the authors.  
Practical implications  
There are strong implications for all bu sinesses, particularly large businesses in competitive industries, where 
failure to deploy AI in the face of competition from firms who have deployed AI to improve their decision-
making could be dangerous.  
Social implications  
The public sector is a very important marketing decision- maker . Although in most cases it does not operate 
competitively , it must still make decisions about making different services available to different citizens and 
identify the risks of not providing services to certain citizens, s o this article is relevant to the public sector . 
Originality/valu e 
This is one of the first articles to probe deployment of  AI in strategic marketing decision- making. 
Keyword s 
Artificial intelligence, marketing, decision -making, strategy, planning, operati ons. 
Paper type 
Conceptual .