0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Confidence threshold4.55.05.56.0Error rate
(a)
0.1 0.5 0.91.0
Temperature4.55.05.56.06.57.0Error rate
τ=0
τ=0.8
τ=0.95 (b)
Figure 3: Plots of ablation studies on FixMatch. (a) Varying the conﬁdence
threshold for pseudo-labels. (b) Measuring the effect of “sharpening” the
predicted label distribution while varying the conﬁdence threshold ( ). Error
rate of FixMatch with default hyperparameters is in red dotted line.Ablation Error
FixMatch 4:84
Only Cutout 6:15
No Cutout 6:15
Table 3: Ablation
study with different
strong data augmenta-
tion of FixMatch. Er-
ror rates are reported
on a single 250-label
split from CIFAR-10.
5 Ablation Study
Since FixMatch comprises a simple combination of two existing techniques, we perform an extensive
ablation study to better understand why it is able to obtain state-of-the-art results. Due to the number
of experiments in our ablation study, we focus on studying with a single 250 label split from CIFAR-
10 and only report results using CTAugment. Note that FixMatch with default parameters achieves
4:84% error rate on this particular split. We present complete ablation results, including optimizer
(appendix B.3), learning rate decay schedule (appendix B.4), weight decay (appendix B.6), labeled to
unlabeled data ratio (appendix B.5), in the supplementary material.
5.1 Sharpening and Thresholding
A “soft” version of pseudo-labeling can be designed by sharpening the predicted distribution. This
formulation appears in UDA and is of general interest since other methods such as MixMatch and
ReMixMatch also make use of sharpening (albeit without thresholding). Using sharpening instead of
anarg max introduces a hyper-parameter: the temperature T[4, 54, 3].
We study the interactions between the temperature Tand the conﬁdence threshold . Note that
pseudo-labeling in FixMatch is recovered as T!0. The results are presented in ﬁg. 3a and ﬁg. 3b.
The threshold value of 0:95shows the lowest error rate, though increasing it to 0:97or0:99did not
hurt much. In contrast, accuracy drops by more than 1.5% when using a small threshold value. Note
that the threshold value controls the trade-off between the quality and the quantity of pseudo-labels.
As discussed in appendix B.2, the accuracy of pseudo-labels for unlabeled data increases with higher
threshold values, while the amount of unlabeled data contributing to `uin eq. (4) decreases. This
suggests that the quality of pseudo-labels is more important than the quantity for reaching a high
accuracy. Sharpening, on the other hand, did not show a signiﬁcant difference in performance when a
conﬁdence threshold is used. In summary, we observe that swapping pseudo-labeling for sharpening
and thresholding would introduce a new hyperparameter while achieving no better performance.
5.2 Augmentation Strategy
We conduct an ablation study on different strong data augmentation policies as it plays a key role in
FixMatch. Speciﬁcally, we chose RandAugment [ 11] and CTAugment [ 3], which have been used for
state-of-the-art SSL algorithms such as UDA [ 54] and ReMixMatch [ 4] respectively. On CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and SVHN we observed highly comparable results between the two policies, whereas in
STL-10 (table 2), we observe a signiﬁcant gain by using CTAugment.
We measure the effect of Cutout in table 3, which is used by default after strong augmentation in both
RandAugment and CTAugment. We ﬁnd that both Cutout and CTAugment are required to obtain the
best performance; removing either results in a signiﬁcant increase in error rate.
We also study different combinations of weak and strong augmentations for pseudo-label generation
and prediction (i.e., the upper and lower paths in ﬁg. 1). When we replaced the weak augmentation
for label guessing with strong augmentation, we found that the model diverged early in training.
Conversely, when replacing weak augmentation with noaugmentation, the model overﬁts the guessed
unlabeled labels. Using weak augmentation in place of strong augmentation to generate the model’s
prediction for training peaked at 45% accuracy but was not stable and progressively collapsed to 12%,
8