suggesting the importance of strong data augmentation. This observation is well-aligned with those
from supervised learning [10].
6 Conclusion
There has been rapid recent progress in SSL. Unfortunately, much of this progress comes at the cost of
increasingly complicated learning algorithms with sophisticated loss terms and numerous difﬁcult-to-
tune hyper-parameters. We introduce FixMatch, a simpler SSL algorithm that achieves state-of-the-art
results across many datasets. We show how FixMatch can begin to bridge the gap between low-label
semi-supervised learning and few-shot learning or clustering: we obtain surprisingly-high accuracy
with just one label per class. Using only standard cross-entropy losses on both labeled and unlabeled
data, FixMatch’s training objective can be written in just a few lines of code.
Because of this simplicity, we are able to thoroughly investigate how FixMatch works. We ﬁnd
that certain design choices are important (and often underemphasized) – most importantly, weight
decay and the choice of optimizer. The importance of these factors means that even when controlling
for model architecture as is recommended in [ 36], the same technique can not always be directly
compared across different implementations.
On the whole, we believe that the existence of such simple but performant semi-supervised machine
learning algorithms will help to allow machine learning to be deployed in increasingly many practical
domains where labels are expensive or difﬁcult to obtain.
Broader Impact
FixMatch helps democratize machine learning in two ways: ﬁrst, its simplicity makes it available
to a wider audience, and second, its accuracy with only a few labels means that it can be applied to
domains where previously machine learning was not feasible. The ﬂip side of democratization of
machine learning research is that it becomes easy for both good and bad actors to apply. We hope
that this ability will be used for good—for example, obtaining medical scans is often far cheaper than
paying an expert doctor to label every image. However, it is possible that more advanced techniques
for semi-supervised learning will allow for more advanced surveillance: for example, the efﬁcacy of
our one-shot classiﬁcation might allow for more accurate person identiﬁcation from a few images.
Broadly speaking, any progress on semi-supervised learning will have these same consequences.
Funding Disclosure
Google is the sole source of funding for this work.
Acknowledgment
We thank Qizhe Xie, Avital Oliver, Quoc V . Le, and Sercan Arik for their feedback on this paper.
References
[1]E. Arazo, D. Ortego, P. Albert, N. E. O’Connor, and K. McGuinness. Pseudo-labeling and
conﬁrmation bias in deep semi-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02983 , 2019. 5,
15
[2]P. Bachman, O. Alsharif, and D. Precup. Learning with pseudo-ensembles. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 3365–3373, 2014. 1, 3, 5
[3]D. Berthelot, N. Carlini, E. D. Cubuk, A. Kurakin, K. Sohn, H. Zhang, and C. Raffel. Remix-
match: Semi-supervised learning with distribution matching and augmentation anchoring. In
Eighth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 18,
19, 20, 21
[4]D. Berthelot, N. Carlini, I. Goodfellow, N. Papernot, A. Oliver, and C. A. Raffel. Mixmatch: A
holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 5050–5060, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 19
9