Figure 2: FixMatch reaches 78% CIFAR-10 accuracy using only above 10 labeled images.
4.2 STL-10
The STL-10 dataset contains 5;000labeled images of size 9696from 10 classes and 100;000
unlabeled images. There exist out-of-distribution images in the unlabeled set, making it a more
realistic and challenging test of SSL performance. We test SSL algorithms on ﬁve of the predeﬁned
folds of 1;000labeled images each. Following [ 4], we use a WRN-37-2 network (comprising 5.9M
parameters).5As in table 2, FixMatch achieves the state-of-the-art performance of ReMixMatch [ 3]
despite being signiﬁcantly simpler.
4.3 ImageNet
We evaluate FixMatch on ImageNet to verify that it performs well on a larger and more complex
dataset. Following [ 54], we use 10% of the training data as labeled and treat the rest as unlabeled
examples. We use a ResNet-50 network architecture and RandAugment [ 11] as strong augmentation
for this experiment. We include additional implementation details in appendix C. FixMatch achieves
a top-1 error rate of 28:540:52%, which is 2:68% better than UDA [ 54]. Our top-5 error rate is
10:870:28%. While S4L [57] holds state-of-the-art on semi-supervised ImageNet with a 26:79%
error rate, it leverages 2 additional training phases (pseudo-label re-training and supervised ﬁne-
tuning) to signiﬁcantly lower the error rate from 30:27% after the ﬁrst phase. FixMatch outperforms
S4L after its ﬁrst phase, and it is possible that a similar performance gain could be achieved by
incorporating these techniques into FixMatch.
4.4 Barely Supervised Learning
To test the limits of our proposed approach, we applied FixMatch to CIFAR-10 with only one
example per class .6We conduct two sets of experiments.
First, we create four datasets by randomly selecting one example per class. We train on each dataset
four times and reach between 48:58% and85:32% test accuracy with a median of 64:28%. The
inter-dataset variance is much lower, however; for example, the four models trained on the ﬁrst dataset
all reach between 61% and67% accuracy, and the second dataset reaches between 68% and75%.
We hypothesize that this variability is caused by the quality of the 10labeled examples comprising
each dataset and that sampling low-quality examples might make it more difﬁcult for the model to
learn some particular class effectively. To test this, we construct eight new training datasets with
examples ranging in “prototypicality” (i.e., representative of the underlying class). Speciﬁcally, we
take the ordering of the CIFAR-10 training set from [ 5] that sorts examples from those that are
most representative to those that are least. This example ordering was determined after training
many CIFAR-10 models with all labeled data. We thus do not envision this as a practical method
for choosing examples for use in SSL, but rather to experimentally verify that examples that are
more representative are better suited for low-label training. We divide this ordering evenly into eight
buckets (so all of the most representative examples are in the ﬁrst bucket, and all of the outliers in the
last). We then create eight labeled training sets by randomly selecting one labeled example of each
class from the same bucket.
Using the same hyperparameters, the model trained only on the most prototypical examples reaches
a median of 78% accuracy (with a maximum of 84% accuracy); training on the middle of the
distribution reaches 65% accuracy; and training on only the outliers fails to converge completely,
with 10% accuracy. Figure 2 shows the full labeled training dataset for the split where FixMatch
achieved a median accuracy of 78%. Further analysis is presented in Appendix B.7.
5We clarify that both FixMatch and ReMixMatch [ 3], which has reported an incorrect number of network
parameters (23.8M), are tested with the same network architecture containing 5.9M parameters.
6The experimental protocol of barely supervised learning (BSL) shares similarities to those of few-shot
learning (FSL) [ 37] as they both assume a limited availability (e.g., 1 or 5) of labeled examples from categories
of interest. However, two protocols have a critical difference, where for FSL one is provided with extra labeled
training examples from regular classes, whereas for BSL one is given additional unlabeled training examples.
7