FixMatch: Simplifying Semi-Supervised Learning
with Consistency and Conﬁdence
Kihyuk SohnDavid BerthelotChun-Liang Li Zizhao Zhang Nicholas Carlini
Ekin D. Cubuk Alex Kurakin Han Zhang Colin Raffel
Google Research
{kihyuks,dberth,chunliang,zizhaoz,ncarlini,
cubuk,kurakin,zhanghan,craffel}@google.com
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides an effective means of leveraging unla-
beled data to improve a model’s performance. This domain has seen fast progress
recently, at the cost of requiring more complex methods. In this paper we propose
FixMatch, an algorithm that is a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of existing SSL methods.
FixMatch ﬁrst generates pseudo-labels using the model’s predictions on weakly-
augmented unlabeled images. For a given image, the pseudo-label is only retained
if the model produces a high-conﬁdence prediction. The model is then trained
to predict the pseudo-label when fed a strongly-augmented version of the same
image. Despite its simplicity, we show that FixMatch achieves state-of-the-art
performance across a variety of standard semi-supervised learning benchmarks,
including 94.93% accuracy on CIFAR-10 with 250 labels and 88.61% accuracy
with 40 – just 4 labels per class. We carry out an extensive ablation study to tease
apart the experimental factors that are most important to FixMatch’s success. The
code is available at https://github.com/google-research/fixmatch .
1 Introduction
Deep neural networks have become the de facto model for computer vision applications. Their success
is partially attributable to their scalability , i.e., the empirical observation that training them on larger
datasets produces better performance [ 30,20,42,55,41,21]. Deep networks often achieve their
strong performance through supervised learning, which requires a labeled dataset. The performance
beneﬁt conferred by the use of a larger dataset can therefore come at a signiﬁcant cost since labeling
data often requires human labor. This cost can be particularly extreme when labeling must be done
by an expert (for example, a doctor in medical applications).
A powerful approach for training models on a large amount of data without requiring a large amount of
labels is semi-supervised learning (SSL). SSL mitigates the requirement for labeled data by providing
a means of leveraging unlabeled data. Since unlabeled data can often be obtained with minimal
human labor, any performance boost conferred by SSL often comes with low cost. This has led to a
plethora of SSL methods that are designed for deep networks [33, 46, 24, 51, 4, 54, 3, 25, 45, 52].
A popular class of SSL methods can be viewed as producing an artiﬁcial label for unlabeled images
and training the model to predict the artiﬁcial label when fed unlabeled images as input. For example,
pseudo-labeling [ 25] (also called self-training [ 32,55,44,47]) uses the model’s class prediction as a
label to train against. Similarly, consistency regularization [ 2,46,24] obtains an artiﬁcial label using
the model’s predicted distribution after randomly modifying the input or model function.
Equal contribution.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.