Page 15 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
3. Large-scale network implementation is much easier with CNN than with other neu -
ral networks.
CNN layers
The CNN architecture consists of a number of layers (or so-called multi-building blocks). 
Each layer in the CNN architecture, including its function, is described in detail below. 
1. Convolutional Layer: In CNN architecture, the most significant component is the 
convolutional layer. It consists of a collection of convolutional filters (so-called ker -
nels). The input image, expressed as N-dimensional metrics, is convolved with these 
filters to generate the output feature map.
• Kernel definition: A grid of discrete numbers or values describes the kernel. 
Each value is called the kernel weight. Random numbers are assigned to act as 
the weights of the kernel at the beginning of the CNN training process. In addi -
tion, there are several different methods used to initialize the weights. Next, these 
weights are adjusted at each training era; thus, the kernel learns to extract signifi -
cant features.
• Convolutional Operation: Initially, the CNN input format is described. The 
vector format is the input of the traditional neural network, while the multi-
channeled image is the input of the CNN. For instance, single-channel is the 
format of the gray-scale image, while the RGB image format is three-channeled. 
To understand the convolutional operation, let us take an example of a 4×4 
gray-scale image with a 2×2 random weight-initialized kernel. First, the ker -
nel slides over the whole image horizontally and vertically. In addition, the dot 
product between the input image and the kernel is determined, where their 
corresponding values are multiplied and then summed up to create a single sca -
lar value, calculated concurrently. The whole process is then repeated until no 
further sliding is possible. Note that the calculated dot product values represent 
the feature map of the output. Figure  8 graphically illustrates the primary cal -
culations executed at each step. In this figure, the light green color represents 
the 2×2 kernel, while the light blue color represents the similar size area of the 
input image. Both are multiplied; the end result after summing up the resulting 
product values (marked in a light orange color) represents an entry value to the 
output feature map.
 However, padding to the input image is not applied in the previous example, 
while a stride of one (denoted for the selected step-size over all vertical or hori -
zontal locations) is applied to the kernel. Note that it is also possible to use 
another stride value. In addition, a feature map of lower dimensions is obtained 
as a result of increasing the stride value.
 On the other hand, padding is highly significant to determining border size 
information related to the input image. By contrast, the border side-features 
moves carried away very fast. By applying padding, the size of the input image