Page 42 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Training data
DL is extremely data-hungry considering it also involves representation learning [145, 
146]. DL demands an extensively large amount of data to achieve a well-behaved per -
formance model, i.e. as the data increases, an extra well-behaved performance model 
can be achieved (Fig.  27). In most cases, the available data are sufficient to obtain a 
good performance model. However, sometimes there is a shortage of data for using 
DL directly [87]. To properly address this issue, three suggested methods are avail -
able. The first involves the employment of the transfer-learning concept after data is 
collected from similar tasks. Note that while the transferred data will not directly aug -
ment the actual data, it will help in terms of both enhancing the original input repre -
sentation of data and its mapping function [147]. In this way, the model performance 
is boosted. Another technique involves employing a well-trained model from a similar 
task and fine-tuning the ending of two layers or even one layer based on the limited 
original data. Refer to [148, 149] for a review of different transfer-learning techniques 
applied in the DL approach. In the second method, data augmentation is performed 
[150]. This task is very helpful for use in augmenting the image data, since the image 
translation, mirroring, and rotation commonly do not change the image label. Con -
versely, it is important to take care when applying this technique in some cases such 
as with bioinformatics data. For instance, when mirroring an enzyme sequence, the 
output data may not represent the actual enzyme sequence. In the third method, the 
simulated data can be considered for increasing the volume of the training set. It is 
occasionally possible to create simulators based on the physical process if the issue is 
well understood. Therefore, the result will involve the simulation of as much data as 
needed. Processing the data requirement for DL-based simulation is obtained as an 
example in Ref. [151].
Transfer learning
Recent research has revealed a widespread use of deep CNNs, which offer ground-
breaking support for answering many classification problems. Generally speaking, 
deep CNN models require a sizable volume of data to obtain good performance. The 
Fig. 27 The performance of DL regarding the amount of data