Page 49 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
model output. A recently proposed technique penalizes the over-confident outputs for 
regularizing the model [178]. This technique has demonstrated the ability to regularize 
RNNs and CNNs.
Vanishing gradient problem
In general, when using backpropagation and gradient-based learning techniques along 
with ANNs, largely in the training stage, a problem called the vanishing gradient prob -
lem arises [212–214]. More specifically, in each training iteration, every weight of the 
neural network is updated based on the current weight and is proportionally relative to 
the partial derivative of the error function. However, this weight updating may not occur 
in some cases due to a vanishingly small gradient, which in the worst case means that no 
extra training is possible and the neural network will stop completely. Conversely, simi -
larly to other activation functions, the sigmoid function shrinks a large input space to a 
tiny input space. Thus, the derivative of the sigmoid function will be small due to large 
variation at the input that produces a small variation at the output. In a shallow network, 
only some layers use these activations, which is not a significant issue. While using more 
layers will lead the gradient to become very small in the training stage, in this case, the 
network works efficiently. The back-propagation technique is used to determine the gra -
dients of the neural networks. Initially, this technique determines the network deriva -
tives of each layer in the reverse direction, starting from the last layer and progressing 
back to the first layer. The next step involves multiplying the derivatives of each layer 
down the network in a similar manner to the first step. For instance, multiplying N small 
derivatives together when there are N hidden layers employs an activation function such 
as the sigmoid function. Hence, the gradient declines exponentially while propagating 
back to the first layer. More specifically, the biases and weights of the first layers cannot 
be updated efficiently during the training stage because the gradient is small. Moreover, 
this condition decreases the overall network accuracy, as these first layers are frequently 
critical to recognizing the essential elements of the input data. However, such a problem 
can be avoided through employing activation functions. These functions lack the squish -
ing property, i.e., the ability to squish the input space to within a small space. By mapping 
X to max, the ReLU [91] is the most popular selection, as it does not yield a small deriva -
tive that is employed in the field. Another solution involves employing the batch nor -
malization layer [81]. As mentioned earlier, the problem occurs once a large input space 
is squashed into a small space, leading to vanishing the derivative. Employing batch nor -
malization degrades this issue by simply normalizing the input, i.e., the expression |x| 
does not accomplish the exterior boundaries of the sigmoid function. The normalization 
process makes the largest part of it come down in the green area, which ensures that the 
derivative is large enough for further actions. Furthermore, faster hardware can tackle 
the previous issue, e.g. that provided by GPUs. This makes standard back-propagation 
possible for many deeper layers of the network compared to the time required to recog -
nize the vanishing gradient problem [215].