Page 38 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
These axes are subsequently used as the 1×1 convolutions (pointwise convolution) for 
performing cross-channel correspondence. The 1×1 convolution is utilized in Xception 
to regularize the depth of the channel. The traditional convolutional operation in Xcep -
tion utilizes a number of transformation segments equivalent to the number of channels; 
Inception, moreover, utilizes three transformation segments, while traditional CNN 
architecture utilizes only a single transformation segment. Conversely, the suggested 
Xception transformation approach achieves extra learning efficiency and better perfor -
mance but does not minimize the number of parameters [126, 127].
Residual attention neural network
To improve the network feature representation, Wang et al. [128] proposed the Residual 
Attention Network (RAN). Enabling the network to learn aware features of the object is 
the main purpose of incorporating attention into the CNN. The RAN consists of stacked 
residual blocks in addition to the attention module; hence, it is a feed-forward CNN. 
However, the attention module is divided into two branches, namely the mask branch 
and trunk branch. These branches adopt a top-down and bottom-up learning strategy 
respectively. Encapsulating two different strategies in the attention model supports top-
down attention feedback and fast feed-forward processing in only one particular feed-
forward process. More specifically, the top-down architecture generates dense features 
to make inferences about every aspect. Moreover, the bottom-up feedforward architec -
ture generates low-resolution feature maps in addition to robust semantic information. 
Restricted Boltzmann machines employed a top-down bottom-up strategy as in previ -
ously proposed studies [129]. During the training reconstruction phase, Goh et al. [130] 
used the mechanism of top-down attention in deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs) as a 
regularizing factor. Note that the network can be globally optimized using a top-down 
learning strategy in a similar manner, where the maps progressively output to the input 
throughout the learning process [129–132].
Incorporating the attention concept with convolutional blocks in an easy way was used 
by the transformation network, as obtained in a previous study [133]. Unfortunately, 
these are inflexible, which represents the main problem, along with their inability to be 
Fig. 24 The basic block diagram for the Xception block architecture