Page 24 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
learning optimization. This is represented by the Hessian matrix, which employs a 
second-order derivative. Adam is a learning strategy that has been designed specifi -
cally for training deep neural networks. More memory efficient and less computa -
tional power are two advantages of Adam. The mechanism of Adam is to calculate 
adaptive LR for each parameter in the model. It integrates the pros of both Momen -
tum and RMSprop. It utilizes the squared gradients to scale the learning rate as 
RMSprop and it is similar to the momentum by using the moving average of the gra -
dient. The equation of Adam is represented in Eq. 14. 
Design of algorithms (backpropagation)
Let’s start with a notation that refers to weights in the network unambiguously. We 
denote wh
ij to be the weight for the connection from ith input or (neuron at (h−1)th ) 
to the jt neuron in the hth layer. So, Fig.  12 shows the weight on a connection from the 
neuron in the first layer to another neuron in the next layer in the network.
Where w2
11 has represented the weight from the first neuron in the first layer to the 
first neuron in the second layer, based on that the second weight for the same neuron 
will be w2
21 which means is the weight comes from the second neuron in the previous 
layer to the first layer in the next layer which is the second in this net. Regarding the 
bias, since the bias is not the connection between the neurons for the layers, so it is 
easily handled each neuron must have its own bias, some network each layer has a 
certain bias. It can be seen from the above net that each layer has its own bias. Each 
network has the parameters such as the no of the layer in the net, the number of the 
neurons in each layer, no of the weight (connection) between the layers, the no of 
connection can be easily determined based on the no of neurons in each layer, for 
example, if there are ten input fully connect with two neurons in the next layer then (14)wijt=wijt−1−η/radicalBig
/hatwiderE[δ2]t+∈∗/hatwiderE[δ2]t
Fig. 12 MLP structure