Page 20 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
(a) Cross-Entropy or Softmax Loss Function: This function is commonly employed 
for measuring the CNN model performance. It is also referred to as the log 
loss function. Its output is the probability p∈{0,1} . In addition, it is usually 
employed as a substitution of the square error loss function in multi-class clas -
sification problems. In the output layer, it employs the softmax activations to 
generate the output within a probability distribution. The mathematical repre -
sentation of the output class probability is Eq. 8. 
 Here, eai represents the non-normalized output from the preceding layer, while 
N represents the number of neurons in the output layer. Finally, the mathemat -
ical representation of cross-entropy loss function is Eq. 9. 
(b) Euclidean Loss Function: This function is widely used in regression problems. 
In addition, it is also the so-called mean square error. The mathematical expres -
sion of the estimated Euclidean loss is Eq. 10. 
(c) Hinge Loss Function: This function is commonly employed in problems related 
to binary classification. This problem relates to maximum-margin-based clas -
sification; this is mostly important for SVMs, which use the hinge loss function, 
wherein the optimizer attempts to maximize the margin around dual objective 
classes. Its mathematical formula is Eq. 11. 
 The margin m is commonly set to 1. Moreover, the predicted output is denoted 
as pi , while the desired output is denoted as yi.
Regularization to CNN
For CNN models, over-fitting represents the central issue associated with obtaining 
well-behaved generalization. The model is entitled over-fitted in cases where the model 
executes especially well on training data and does not succeed on test data (unseen data) 
which is more explained in the latter section. An under-fitted model is the opposite; this 
case occurs when the model does not learn a sufficient amount from the training data. 
The model is referred to as “just-fitted” if it executes well on both training and testing 
data. These three types are illustrated in Fig.  11. Various intuitive concepts are used to 
help the regularization to avoid over-fitting; more details about over-fitting and under-
fitting are discussed in latter sections. (8)pi=eai
/summationtextN
k=1ea
k
(9)H(p,y)=−/summationdisplay
iyilog(pi)where i ∈[1,N]
(10) H(p,y)=1
2NN/summationdisplay
i=1(pi−yi)2
(11) H(p,y)=N/summationdisplay
i=1max (0,m−(2yi−1)pi)