Page 50 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Exploding gradient problem
Opposite to the vanishing problem is the one related to gradient. Specifically, large error 
gradients are accumulated during back-propagation [216–218]. The latter will lead to 
extremely significant updates to the weights of the network, meaning that the system 
becomes unsteady. Thus, the model will lose its ability to learn effectively. Grosso modo, 
moving backward in the network during back-propagation, the gradient grows exponen -
tially by repetitively multiplying gradients. The weight values could thus become incred -
ibly large and may overflow to become a not-a-number (NaN) value. Some potential 
solutions include: 
1. Using different weight regularization techniques.
2. Redesigning the architecture of the network model.
Underspecification
In 2020, a team of computer scientists at Google has identified a new challenge called 
underspecification [219]. ML models including DL models often show surprisingly poor 
behavior when they are tested in real-world applications such as computer vision, medi -
cal imaging, natural language processing, and medical genomics. The reason behind the 
weak performance is due to underspecification. It has been shown that small modifica -
tions can force a model towards a completely different solution as well as lead to dif -
ferent predictions in deployment domains. There are different techniques of addressing 
underspecification issue. One of them is to design “stress tests” to examine how good 
a model works on real-world data and to find out the possible issues. Nevertheless, 
this demands a reliable understanding of the process the model can work inaccurately. 
The team stated that “Designing stress tests that are well-matched to applied require -
ments, and that provide good “coverage” of potential failure modes is a major challenge” . 
Underspecification puts major constraints on the credibility of ML predictions and may 
require some reconsidering over certain applications. Since ML is linked to human by 
serving several applications such as medical imaging and self-driving cars, it will require 
proper attention to this issue.
Applications of deep learning
Presently, various DL applications are widespread around the world. These applica -
tions include healthcare, social network analysis, audio and speech processing (like rec -
ognition and enhancement), visual data processing methods (such as multimedia data 
analysis and computer vision), and NLP (translation and sentence classification), among 
others (Fig.  29) [220–224]. These applications have been classified into five categories: 
classification, localization, detection, segmentation, and registration. Although each of 
these tasks has its own target, there is fundamental overlap in the pipeline implementa -
tion of these applications as shown in Fig.  30. Classification is a concept that categorizes 
a set of data into classes. Detection is used to locate interesting objects in an image with 
consideration given to the background. In detection, multiple objects, which could be 
from dissimilar classes, are surrounded by bounding boxes. Localization is the concept