Page 59 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
CPU‑based approach
The well-behaved performance of the CPU nodes usually assists robust network con -
nectivity, storage abilities, and large memory. Although CPU nodes are more common-
purpose than those of FPGA or GPU, they lack the ability to match them in unprocessed 
computation facilities, since this requires increased network ability and a larger memory 
capacity.
GPU‑based approach
GPUs are extremely effective for several basic DL primitives, which include greatly 
parallel-computing operations such as activation functions, matrix multiplication, and 
convolutions [326–330]. Incorporating HBM-stacked memory into the up-to-date 
GPU models significantly enhances the bandwidth. This enhancement allows numerous 
primitives to efficiently utilize all computational resources of the available GPUs. The 
improvement in GPU performance over CPU performance is usually 10-20:1 related to 
dense linear algebra operations.
Maximizing parallel processing is the base of the initial GPU programming model. For 
example, a GPU model may involve up to sixty-four computational units. There are four 
SIMD engines per each computational layer, and each SIMD has sixteen floating-point 
computation lanes. The peak performance is 25 TFLOPS (fp16) and 10 TFLOPS (fp32) 
as the percentage of the employment approaches 100%. Additional GPU performance 
may be achieved if the addition and multiply functions for vectors combine the inner 
production instructions for matching primitives related to matrix operations.
For DNN training, the GPU is usually considered to be an optimized design, while for 
inference operations, it may also offer considerable performance improvements.
FPGA‑based approach
FPGA is wildly utilized in various tasks including deep learning [199, 247, 331–334]. 
Inference accelerators are commonly implemented utilizing FPGA. The FPGA can be 
effectively configured to reduce the unnecessary or overhead functions involved in GPU 
systems. Compared to GPU, the FPGA is restricted to both weak-behaved floating-point 
performance and integer inference. The main FPGA aspect is the capability to dynami -
cally reconfigure the array characteristics (at run-time), as well as the capability to con -
figure the array by means of effective design with little or no overhead.
As mentioned earlier, the FPGA offers both performance and latency for every watt it 
gains over GPU and CPU in DL inference operations. Implementation of custom high-
performance hardware, pruned networks, and reduced arithmetic precision are three 
factors that enable the FPGA to implement DL algorithms and to achieve FPGA with 
this level of efficiency. In addition, FPGA may be employed to implement CNN over -
lay engines with over 80% efficiency, eight-bit accuracy, and over 15 TOPs peak perfor -
mance; this is used for a few conventional CNNs, as Xillinx and partners demonstrated 
recently. By contrast, pruning techniques are mostly employed in the LSTM context. The 
sizes of the models can be efficiently minimized by up to 20×, which provides an impor -
tant benefit during the implementation of the optimal solution, as MLP neural process -
ing demonstrated. A recent study in the field of implementing fixed-point precision and