Page 44 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
2. A research problem using pre-trained models: Training a DL approach requires a 
massive number of images. Thus, obtaining good performance is a challenge under 
these circumstances. Achieving excellent outcomes in image classification or rec -
ognition applications, with performance occasionally superior to that of a human, 
becomes possible through the use of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) 
including several layers if a huge amount of data is available [37, 148, 153]. How -
ever, avoiding overfitting problems in such applications requires sizable datasets and 
properly generalizing DCNN models. When training a DCNN model, the dataset 
size has no lower limit. However, the accuracy of the model becomes insufficient 
in the case of the utilized model has fewer layers, or if a small dataset is used for 
training due to over- or under-fitting problems. Due to they have no ability to uti -
lize the hierarchical features of sizable datasets, models with fewer layers have poor 
accuracy. It is difficult to acquire sufficient training data for DL models. For exam -
ple, in medical imaging and environmental science, gathering labelled datasets is 
very costly [148]. Moreover, the majority of the crowdsourcing workers are unable to 
make accurate notes on medical or biological images due to their lack of medical or 
biological knowledge. Thus, ML researchers often rely on field experts to label such 
images; however, this process is costly and time consuming. Therefore, producing 
the large volume of labels required to develop flourishing deep networks turns out 
to be unfeasible. Recently, TL has been widely employed to address the later issue. 
Nevertheless, although TL enhances the accuracy of several tasks in the fields of pat -
tern recognition and computer vision [154, 155], there is an essential issue related to 
the source data type used by the TL as compared to the target dataset. For instance, 
enhancing the medical image classification performance of CNN models is achieved 
by training the models using the ImageNet dataset, which contains natural images 
[153]. However, such natural images are completely dissimilar from the raw medical 
images, meaning that the model performance is not enhanced. It has further been 
proven that TL from different domains does not significantly affect performance on 
medical imaging tasks, as lightweight models trained from scratch perform nearly 
as well as standard ImageNet-transferred models [156]. Therefore, there exists sce -
narios in which using pre-trained models do not become an affordable solution. In 
2020, some researchers have utilized same-domain TL and achieved excellent results 
[86–88, 157]. Same-domain TL is an approach of using images that look similar to 
the target dataset for training. For example, using X-ray images of different chest dis -
eases to train the model, then fine-tuning and training it on chest X-ray images for 
COVID-19 diagnosis. More details about same-domain TL and how to implement 
the fine-tuning process can be found in [87].
Data augmentation techniques
If the goal is to increase the amount of available data and avoid the overfitting issue, data 
augmentation techniques are one possible solution [150, 158, 159]. These techniques are 
data-space solutions for any limited-data problem. Data augmentation incorporates a 
collection of methods that improve the attributes and size of training datasets. Thus, DL