Page 40 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
they can be employed in segmentation. In the final module (cSE), a similar SE-block con -
cept is used. Furthermore, the scaling factor is derived founded on the contribution of 
the feature maps within the object detection [137, 138].
CapsuleNet
CNN is an efficient technique for detecting object features and achieving well-behaved 
recognition performance in comparison with innovative handcrafted feature detectors. 
A number of restrictions related to CNN are present, meaning that the CNN does not 
consider certain relations, orientation, size, and perspectives of features. For instance, 
when considering a face image, the CNN does not count the various face components 
(such as mouth, eyes, nose, etc.) positions, and will incorrectly activate the CNN neu -
rons and recognize the face without taking specific relations (such as size, orientation 
etc.) into account. At this point, consider a neuron that has probability in addition to 
feature properties such as size, orientation, perspective, etc. A specific neuron/capsule of 
this type has the ability to effectively detect the face along with different types of infor -
mation. Thus, many layers of capsule nodes are used to construct the capsule network. 
An encoding unit, which contains three layers of capsule nodes, forms the CapsuleNet 
or CapsNet (the initial version of the capsule networks).
For example, the MNIST architecture comprises 28×28 images, applying 256 filters 
of size 9×9 and with stride 1. The 28−9+1=20 is the output plus 256 feature maps. 
Next, these outputs are input to the first capsule layer, while producing an 8D vector 
rather than a scalar; in fact, this is a modified convolution layer. Note that a stride 2 
with 9×9 filters is employed in the first convolution layer. Thus, the dimension of the 
output is (20−9)/2+1=6 . The initial capsules employ 8×32 filters, which generate 
32 × 8 × 6 × 6 (32 for groups, 8 for neurons, while 6 × 6 is the neuron size).
Figure  25 represents the complete CapsNet encoding and decoding processes. In the 
CNN context, a max-pooling layer is frequently employed to handle the translation 
change. It can detect the feature moves in the event that the feature is still within the 
max-pooling window. This approach has the ability to detect the overlapped features; 
Fig. 25 The complete CapsNet encoding and decoding processes