Page 55 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
segmentation, particularly tumors [295–300]. This issue is highly significant in surgical 
preparation to obtain the precise tumor limits for the shortest surgical resection. Dur -
ing surgery, excessive sacrificing of key brain regions may lead to neurological shortfalls 
including cognitive damage, emotionlessness, and limb difficulty. Conventionally, medi -
cal anatomical segmentation was done by hand; more specifically, the clinician draws 
out lines within the complete stack of the CT or MRI volume slice by slice. Thus, it is 
perfect for implementing a solution that computerizes this painstaking work. Wadhwa 
et  al. [301] presented a brief overview on brain tumor segmentation of MRI images. 
Akkus et  al. [302] wrote a brilliant review of brain MRI segmentation that addressed 
the different metrics and CNN architectures employed. Moreover, they explain several 
competitions in detail, as well as their datasets, which included Ischemic Stroke Lesion 
Segmentation (ISLES), Mild Traumatic brain injury Outcome Prediction (MTOP), and 
Brain Tumor Segmentation (BRATS).
Chen et  al. [299] proposed convolutional neural networks for precise brain tumor 
segmentation. The approach that they employed involves several approaches for better 
features learning including the DeepMedic model, a novel dual-force training scheme, 
a label distribution-based loss function, and Multi-Layer Perceptron-based post-pro -
cessing. They conducted their method on the two most modern brain tumor segmenta -
tion datasets, i.e., BRATS 2017 and BRATS 2015 datasets. Hu et al. [300] introduced the 
brain tumor segmentation method by adopting a multi-cascaded convolutional neural 
network (MCCNN) and fully connected conditional random fields (CRFs). The achieved 
results were excellent compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
Moeskops et al. [303] employed three parallel-running CNNs, each of which had a 2D 
input patch of dissimilar size, for segmenting and classifying MRI brain images. These 
images, which include 35 adults and 22 pre-term infants, were classified into various tis -
sue categories such as cerebrospinal fluid, grey matter, and white matter. Every patch 
concentrates on capturing various image aspects with the benefit of employing three 
dissimilar sizes of input patch; here, the bigger sizes incorporated the spatial features, 
while the lowest patch sizes concentrated on the local textures. In general, the algorithm 
has Dice coefficients in the range of 0.82–0.87 and achieved a satisfactory accuracy. 
Although 2D image slices are employed in the majority of segmentation research, Mil -
letrate et al. [304] implemented 3D CNN for segmenting MRI prostate images. Further -
more, they used the PROMISE2012 challenge dataset, from which fifty MRI scans were 
used for training and thirty for testing. The U-Net architecture of Ronnerberger et al. 
[305] inspired their V-net. This model attained a 0.869 Dice coefficient score, the same 
as the winning teams in the competition. To reduce overfitting and create the model of 
a deeper 11-convolutional layer CNN, Pereira et  al. [306] applied intentionally small-
sized filters of 3x3. Their model used MRI scans of 274 gliomas (a type of brain tumor) 
for training. They achieved first place in the 2013 BRATS challenge, as well as second 
place in the BRATS challenge 2015. Havaei et  al. [307] also considered gliomas using 
the 2013 BRATS dataset. They investigated different 2D CNN architectures. Compared 
to the winner of BRATS 2013, their algorithm worked better, as it required only 3 min 
to execute rather than 100 min. The concept of cascaded architecture formed the basis 
of their model. Thus, it is referred to as an InputCascadeCNN. Employing FC Condi -
tional Random Fields (CRFs), atrous spatial pyramid pooling, and up-sampled filters