Page 58 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
than 14 million images, along with ResNet as a network model, take around 30K to 40K 
repetitions to converge to a steady solution. In addition, the overall computational load, 
as an upper-level prediction, may exceed 1020 FLOPS when both the training set size 
and the DNN complexity increase.
Prior to 2008, boosting the training to a satisfactory extent was achieved by using 
GPUs. Usually, days or weeks are needed for a training session, even with GPU sup -
port. By contrast, several optimization strategies were developed to reduce the extensive 
learning time. The computational requirements are believed to increase as the DNNs 
continuously enlarge in both complexity and size.
In addition to the computational load cost, the memory bandwidth and capacity have 
a significant effect on the entire training performance, and to a lesser extent, deduction. 
More specifically, the parameters are distributed through every layer of the input data, 
there is a sizeable amount of reused data, and the computation of several network layers 
exhibits an excessive computation-to-bandwidth ratio. By contrast, there are no distrib -
uted parameters, the amount of reused data is extremely small, and the additional FC 
layers have an extremely small computation-to-bandwidth ratio. Table  3 presents a com -
parison between different aspects related to the devices. In addition, the table is estab -
lished to facilitate familiarity with the tradeoffs by obtaining the optimal approach for 
configuring a system based on either FPGA, GPU, or CPU devices. It should be noted 
that each has corresponding weaknesses and strengths; accordingly, there are no clear 
one-size-fits-all solutions.
Although GPU processing has enhanced the ability to address the computational 
challenges related to such networks, the maximum GPU (or CPU) performance is not 
achieved, and several techniques or models have turned out to be strongly linked to 
bandwidth. In the worst cases, the GPU efficiency is between 15 and 20% of the maxi -
mum theoretical performance. This issue is required to enlarge the memory bandwidth 
using high-bandwidth stacked memory. Next, different approaches based on FPGA, 
GPU, and CPU are accordingly detailed.
Table 3 A comparison between different aspects related to the devices
Feature Assessment Leader
Development CPU is the easiest to program, then GPU, then FPGA CPU
Size Both FPGA and CPU have smaller volume solutions due to their lower 
power consumptionFPGA‑ CPU
Customization Broader flexibility is provided by FPGA FPGA
Ease of change Easier way to vary application functionality is provided by GPU and CPU GPU‑ CPU
Backward compatibility Transferring RTL to novel FPGA requires additional work. Furthermore, GPU 
has less stable architecture than CPUCPU
Interfaces Several varieties of interfaces can be implemented using FPGA FPGA
Processing/$ FPGA configurability assists utilization in wider acceleration space. Due to 
the considerable processing abilities, GPU winsFPGA‑ GPU
Processing/watt Customized designs can be optimized FPGA
Timing latency Implemented FPGA algorithm offers deterministic timing, which is in turn 
much faster than GPUFPGA
Large data analysis FPGA performs well for inline processing, while CPU supports storage 
capabilities and largest memoryFPGA‑ CPU
DCNN inference FPGA has lower latency and can be customized FPGA
DCNN training Greater float ‑point capabilities provided by GPU GPU