Page 4 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
details the challenges of DL and alternate solutions. “ Applications of deep learning ” sec -
tion outlines the applications of DL. “ Computational approaches” section explains the 
influence of computational approaches (CPU, GPU, FPGA) on DL. “Evaluation met -
rics” section presents the evaluation metrics. “Frameworks and datasets” section lists 
frameworks and datasets. “Summary and conclusion ” section presents the summary and 
conclusion.
Survey methodology
We have reviewed the significant research papers in the field published during 2010–
2020, mainly from the years of 2020 and 2019 with some papers from 2021. The main 
focus was papers from the most reputed publishers such as IEEE, Elsevier, MDPI, 
Nature, ACM, and Springer. Some papers have been selected from ArXiv. We have 
reviewed more than 300 papers on various DL topics. There are 108 papers from the 
year 2020, 76 papers from the year 2019, and 48 papers from the year 2018. This indi -
cates that this review focused on the latest publications in the field of DL. The selected 
papers were analyzed and reviewed to (1) list and define the DL approaches and network 
types, (2) list and explain CNN architectures, (3) present the challenges of DL and sug -
gest the alternate solutions, (4) assess the applications of DL, (5) assess computational 
approaches. The most keywords used for search criteria for this review paper are (“Deep 
Learning”), (“Machine Learning”), (“Convolution Neural Network”), (“Deep Learning” 
AND “ Architectures”), ((“Deep Learning”) AND (“Image”) AND (“detection” OR “classi -
fication” OR “segmentation” OR “Localization”)), (“Deep Learning” AND “detection” OR 
“classification” OR “segmentation” OR “Localization”), (“Deep Learning” AND “CPU” 
OR “GPU” OR “FPGA”), (“Deep Learning” AND “Transfer Learning”), (“Deep Learn -
ing” AND “Imbalanced Data”), (“Deep Learning” AND “Interpretability of data”), (“Deep 
Learning” AND “Overfitting”), (“Deep Learning” AND “Underspecification”). Figure  1 
shows our search structure of the survey paper. Table  1 presents the details of some of 
the journals that have been cited in this review paper.
Background
This section will present a background of DL. We begin with a quick introduction to 
DL, followed by the difference between DL and ML. We then show the situations that 
require DL. Finally, we present the reasons for applying DL.
DL, a subset of ML (Fig.  2), is inspired by the information processing patterns found 
in the human brain. DL does not require any human-designed rules to operate; rather, 
it uses a large amount of data to map the given input to specific labels. DL is designed 
using numerous layers of algorithms (artificial neural networks, or ANNs), each of which 
provides a different interpretation of the data that has been fed to them [18, 25].
Achieving the classification task using conventional ML techniques requires several 
sequential steps, specifically pre-processing, feature extraction, wise feature selection, 
learning, and classification. Furthermore, feature selection has a great impact on the 
performance of ML techniques. Biased feature selection may lead to incorrect discrimi -
nation between classes. Conversely, DL has the ability to automate the learning of fea -
ture sets for several tasks, unlike conventional ML methods [18, 26]. DL enables learning 
and classification to be achieved in a single shot (Fig.  3). DL has become an incredibly