Page 13 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
CNN is considered to be more powerful than RNN. RNN includes less feature com -
patibility when compared to CNN.
Convolutional neural networks
In the field of DL, the CNN is the most famous and commonly employed algorithm [30, 
71–75]. The main benefit of CNN compared to its predecessors is that it automatically 
identifies the relevant features without any human supervision [76]. CNNs have been 
extensively applied in a range of different fields, including computer vision [77], speech 
processing [78], Face Recognition [79], etc. The structure of CNNs was inspired by neu -
rons in human and animal brains, similar to a conventional neural network. More specif -
ically, in a cat’s brain, a complex sequence of cells forms the visual cortex; this sequence 
is simulated by the CNN [80]. Goodfellow et al. [28] identified three key benefits of the 
CNN: equivalent representations, sparse interactions, and parameter sharing. Unlike 
conventional fully connected (FC) networks, shared weights and local connections in 
the CNN are employed to make full use of 2D input-data structures like image signals. 
This operation utilizes an extremely small number of parameters, which both simplifies 
the training process and speeds up the network. This is the same as in the visual cor -
tex cells. Notably, only small regions of a scene are sensed by these cells rather than the 
whole scene (i.e., these cells spatially extract the local correlation available in the input, 
like local filters over the input).
A commonly used type of CNN, which is similar to the multi-layer perceptron (MLP), 
consists of numerous convolution layers preceding sub-sampling (pooling) layers, while 
the ending layers are FC layers. An example of CNN architecture for image classification 
is illustrated in Fig. 7.
The input x of each layer in a CNN model is organized in three dimensions: height, 
width, and depth, or m×m×r , where the height (m) is equal to the width. The depth 
is also referred to as the channel number. For example, in an RGB image, the depth (r) is 
equal to three. Several kernels (filters) available in each convolutional layer are denoted 
by k and also have three dimensions ( n×n×q ), similar to the input image; here, 
Fig. 6 Typical unfolded RNN diagram