Page 54 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Thus, detection is a field of study requiring both accuracy and sensitivity [272–274]. 
Chouhan et al. [275] introduced an innovative deep learning framework for the detec -
tion of pneumonia by adopting the idea of transfer learning. Their approach obtained 
an accuracy of 96.4% with a recall of 99.62% on unseen data. In the area of COVID-
19 and pulmonary disease, several convolutional neural network approaches have been 
proposed for automatic detection from X-ray images which showed an excellent perfor -
mance [46, 276–279].
In the area of skin cancer, there several applications were introduced for the detection 
task [ 280–282]. Thurnhofer-Hemsi et al. [283] introduced a deep learning approach for 
skin cancer detection by fine-tuning five state-of-art convolutional neural network mod -
els. They addressed the issue of a lack of training data by adopting the ideas of transfer 
learning and data augmentation techniques. DenseNet201 network has shown superior 
results compared to other models.
Another interesting area is that of histopathological images, which are progressively 
digitized. Several papers have been published in this field [284–290]. Human patholo -
gists read these images laboriously; they search for malignancy markers, such as a high 
index of cell proliferation, using molecular markers (e.g. Ki-67), cellular necrosis signs, 
abnormal cellular architecture, enlarged numbers of mitotic figures denoting augmented 
cell replication, and enlarged nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratios. Note that the histopathologi -
cal slide may contain a huge number of cells (up to the thousands). Thus, the risk of 
disregarding abnormal neoplastic regions is high when wading through these cells at 
excessive levels of magnification. Ciresan et  al. [291] employed CNNs of 11–13 layers 
for identifying mitotic figures. Fifty breast histology images from the MITOS dataset 
were used. Their technique attained recall and precision scores of 0.7 and 0.88 respec -
tively. Sirinukunwattana et al. [292] utilized 100 histology images of colorectal adenocar -
cinoma to detect cell nuclei using CNNs. Roughly 30,000 nuclei were hand-labeled for 
training purposes. The novelty of this approach was in the use of Spatially Constrained 
CNN. This CNN detects the center of nuclei using the surrounding spatial context and 
spatial regression. Instead of this CNN, Xu et al. [293] employed a stacked sparse auto-
encoder (SSAE) to identify nuclei in histological slides of breast cancer, achieving 0.83 
and 0.89 recall and precision scores respectively. In this field, they showed that unsu -
pervised learning techniques are also effectively utilized. In medical images, Albarquoni 
et  al. [294] investigated the problem of insufficient labeling. They crowd-sourced the 
actual mitoses labeling in the histology images of breast cancer (from amateurs online). 
Solving the recurrent issue of inadequate labeling during the analysis of medical images 
can be achieved by feeding the crowd-sourced input labels into the CNN. This method 
signifies a remarkable proof-of-concept effort. In 2020, Lei et  al. [285] introduced the 
employment of deep convolutional neural networks for automatic identification of 
mitotic candidates from histological sections for mitosis screening. They obtained the 
state-of-the-art detection results on the dataset of the International Pattern Recognition 
Conference (ICPR) 2012 Mitosis Detection Competition.
Segmentation
Although MRI and CT image segmentation research includes different organs such 
as knee cartilage, prostate, and liver, most research work has concentrated on brain