Page 43 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
common challenge associated with using such models concerns the lack of training 
data. Indeed, gathering a large volume of data is an exhausting job, and no successful 
solution is available at this time. The undersized dataset problem is therefore cur -
rently solved using the TL technique [148, 149], which is highly efficient in address -
ing the lack of training data issue. The mechanism of TL involves training the CNN 
model with large volumes of data. In the next step, the model is fine-tuned for train -
ing on a small request dataset.
The student-teacher relationship is a suitable approach to clarifying TL. Gathering 
detailed knowledge of the subject is the first step [152]. Next, the teacher provides a 
“course” by conveying the information within a “lecture series” over time. Put simply, 
the teacher transfers the information to the student. In more detail, the expert (teacher) 
transfers the knowledge (information) to the learner (student). Similarly, the DL network 
is trained using a vast volume of data, and also learns the bias and the weights during the 
training process. These weights are then transferred to different networks for retraining 
or testing a similar novel model. Thus, the novel model is enabled to pre-train weights 
rather than requiring training from scratch. Figure  28 illustrates the conceptual diagram 
of the TL technique. 
1. Pre-trained models: Many CNN models, e.g. AlexNet [30], GoogleNet [103], and 
ResNet [37], have been trained on large datasets such as ImageNet for image rec -
ognition purposes. These models can then be employed to recognize a different task 
without the need to train from scratch. Furthermore, the weights remain the same 
apart from a few learned features. In cases where data samples are lacking, these 
models are very useful. There are many reasons for employing a pre-trained model. 
First, training large models on sizeable datasets requires high-priced computational 
power. Second, training large models can be time-consuming, taking up to multiple 
weeks. Finally, a pre-trained model can assist with network generalization and speed 
up the convergence.
Fig. 28 The conceptual diagram of the TL technique