Page 29 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
perception convolution. These convolutions are executed using a 1×1 filter, which sup -
ports the addition of extra nonlinearity in the networks. Moreover, this supports enlarg -
ing the network depth, which may later be regularized using dropout. For DL models, 
this idea is frequently employed in the bottleneck layer. As a substitution for a FC layer, 
the GAP is also employed, which represents the second novel concept and enables a sig -
nificant reduction in the number of model parameters. In addition, GAP considerably 
updates the network architecture. Generating a final low-dimensional feature vector 
with no reduction in the feature maps dimension is possible when GAP is used on a 
large feature map [95, 96]. Figure 16 shows the structure of the network.
ZefNet
Before 2013, the CNN learning mechanism was basically constructed on a trial-and-
error basis, which precluded an understanding of the precise purpose following the 
enhancement. This issue restricted the deep CNN performance on convoluted images. In 
response, Zeiler and Fergus introduced DeconvNet (a multilayer de-convolutional neu -
ral network) in 2013 [97]. This method later became known as ZefNet, which was devel -
oped in order to quantitively visualize the network. Monitoring the CNN performance 
via understanding the neuron activation was the purpose of the network activity visuali -
zation. However, Erhan et al. utilized this exact concept to optimize deep belief network 
(DBN) performance by visualizing the features of the hidden layers [98]. Moreover, in 
addition to this issue, Le et al. assessed the deep unsupervised auto-encoder (AE) per -
formance by visualizing the created classes of the image using the output neurons [99]. 
By reversing the operation order of the convolutional and pooling layers, DenconvNet 
operates like a forward-pass CNN. Reverse mapping of this kind launches the convolu -
tional layer output backward to create visually observable image shapes that accordingly 
give the neural interpretation of the internal feature representation learned at each layer 
[100]. Monitoring the learning schematic through the training stage was the key con -
cept underlying ZefNet. In addition, it utilized the outcomes to recognize an ability issue 
coupled with the model. This concept was experimentally proven on AlexNet by apply -
ing DeconvNet. This indicated that only certain neurons were working, while the others 
were out of action in the first two layers of the network. Furthermore, it indicated that 
the features extracted via the second layer contained aliasing objects. Thus, Zeiler and 
Fergus changed the CNN topology due to the existence of these outcomes. In addition, 
they executed parameter optimization, and also exploited the CNN learning by decreas -
ing the stride and the filter sizes in order to retain all features of the initial two convo -
lutional layers. An improvement in performance was accordingly achieved due to this 
Fig. 16 The architecture of network ‑in‑network