Page 39 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
used for varying surroundings. By contrast, stacking multi-attention modules has made 
RAN very effective at recognizing noisy, complex, and cluttered images. RAN’s hierar -
chical organization gives it the capability to adaptively allocate a weight for every feature 
map depending on its importance within the layers. Furthermore, incorporating three 
distinct levels of attention (spatial, channel, and mixed) enables the model to use this 
ability to capture the object-aware features at these distinct levels.
Convolutional block attention module
The importance of the feature map utilization and the attention mechanism is certified 
via SE-Network and RAN [128, 134, 135]. The convolutional block attention (CBAM) 
module, which is a novel attention-based CNN, was first developed by Woo et al. [136]. 
This module is similar to SE-Network and simple in design. SE-Network disregards the 
object’s spatial locality in the image and considers only the channels’ contribution during 
the image classification. Regarding object detection, object spatial location plays a sig -
nificant role. The convolutional block attention module sequentially infers the attention 
maps. More specifically, it applies channel attention preceding the spatial attention to 
obtain the refined feature maps. Spatial attention is performed using 1 × 1 convolution 
and pooling functions, as in the literature. Generating an effective feature descriptor can 
be achieved by using a spatial axis along with the pooling of features. In addition, gen -
erating a robust spatial attention map is possible, as CBAM concatenates the max pool -
ing and average pooling operations. In a similar manner, a collection of GAP and max 
pooling operations is used to model the feature map statistics. Woo et al. [136] demon -
strated that utilizing GAP will return a sub-optimized inference of channel attention, 
whereas max pooling provides an indication of the distinguishing object features. Thus, 
the utilization of max pooling and average pooling enhances the network’s representa -
tional power. The feature maps improve the representational power, as well as facilitating 
a focus on the significant portion of the chosen features. The expression of 3D attention 
maps through a serial learning procedure assists in decreasing the computational cost 
and the number of parameters, as Woo et al. [136] experimentally proved. Note that any 
CNN architecture can be simply integrated with CBAM.
Concurrent spatial and channel excitation mechanism
To make the work valid for segmentation tasks, Roy et al. [137, 138] expanded Hu et al. 
[134] effort by adding the influence of spatial information to the channel information. 
Roy et al. [137, 138] presented three types of modules: (1) channel squeeze and excita -
tion with concurrent channels (scSE); (2) exciting spatially and squeezing channel-wise 
(sSE); (3) exciting channel-wise and squeezing spatially (cSE). For segmentation pur -
poses, they employed auto-encoder-based CNNs. In addition, they suggested inserting 
modules following the encoder and decoder layers. To specifically highlight the object-
specific feature maps, they further allocated attention to every channel by expressing a 
scaling factor from the channel and spatial information in the first module (scSE). In the 
second module (sSE), the feature map information has lower importance than the spatial 
locality, as the spatial information plays a significant role during the segmentation pro -
cess. Therefore, several channel collections are spatially divided and developed so that