Page 32 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
jam, which substantially decreased the feature space in the following layer, and in turn 
occasionally leads to valuable information loss.
Highway network
Increasing the network depth enhances its performance, mainly for complicated tasks. 
By contrast, the network training becomes difficult. The presence of several layers in 
deeper networks may result in small gradient values of the back-propagation of error at 
lower layers. In 2015, Srivastava et al. [105] suggested a novel CNN architecture, called 
Highway Network, to overcome this issue. This approach is based on the cross-connec -
tivity concept. The unhindered information flow in Highway Network is empowered by 
instructing two gating units inside the layer. The gate mechanism concept was motivated 
by LSTM-based RNN [106, 107]. The information aggregation was conducted by merg -
ing the information of the ıth−k layers with the next ıth layer to generate a regulariza -
tion impact, which makes the gradient-based training of the deeper network very simple. 
This empowers the training of networks with more than 100 layers, such as a deeper 
network of 900 layers with the SGD algorithm. A Highway Network with a depth of fifty 
layers presented an improved rate of convergence, which is better than thin and deep 
architectures at the same time [108]. By contrast, [69] empirically demonstrated that 
plain Net performance declines when more than ten hidden layers are inserted. It should 
be noted that even a Highway Network 900 layers in depth converges much more rapidly 
than the plain network.
ResNet
He et  al. [37] developed ResNet (Residual Network), which was the winner of ILS -
VRC 2015. Their objective was to design an ultra-deep network free of the vanishing 
gradient issue, as compared to the previous networks. Several types of ResNet were 
developed based on the number of layers (starting with 34 layers and going up to 1202 
layers). The most common type was ResNet50, which comprised 49 convolutional lay -
ers plus a single FC layer. The overall number of network weights was 25.5 M, while 
the overall number of MACs was 3.9  M. The novel idea of ResNet is its use of the 
bypass pathway concept, as shown in Fig.  20, which was employed in Highway Nets to 
address the problem of training a deeper network in 2015. This is illustrated in Fig.  20, 
which contains the fundamental ResNet block diagram. This is a conventional feed -
forward network plus a residual connection. The residual layer output can be identi -
fied as the (l−1)th outputs, which are delivered from the preceding layer (xl−1) . 
After executing different operations [such as convolution using variable-size filters, 
or batch normalization, before applying an activation function like ReLU on (xl−1) ], 
the output is F(xl−1) . The ending residual output is xl , which can be mathematically 
represented as in Eq. 18.
There are numerous basic residual blocks included in the residual network. Based on 
the type of the residual network architecture, operations in the residual block are also 
changed [37].(18) xl=F(xl−1)+xl−1