Page 52 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Classification
Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CADx) is another title sometimes used for classifica -
tion. Bharati et  al. [231] used a chest X-ray dataset for detecting lung diseases based 
on a CNN. Another study attempted to read X-ray images by employing CNN [232]. 
In this modality, the comparative accessibility of these images has likely enhanced the 
progress of DL. [233] used an improved pre-trained GoogLeNet CNN containing more 
than 150,000 images for training and testing processes. This dataset was augmented 
from 1850 chest X-rays. The creators reorganized the image orientation into lateral and 
frontal views and achieved approximately 100% accuracy. This work of orientation clas -
sification has clinically limited use. As a part of an ultimately fully automated diagno -
sis workflow, it obtained the data augmentation and pre-trained efficiency in learning 
the metadata of relevant images. Chest infection, commonly referred to as pneumo -
nia, is extremely treatable, as it is a commonly occurring health problem worldwide. 
Conversely, Rajpurkar et  al. [234] utilized CheXNet, which is an improved version of 
DenseNet [112] with 121 convolution layers, for classifying fourteen types of disease. 
These authors used the CheXNet14 dataset [235], which comprises 112,000 images. This 
network achieved an excellent performance in recognizing fourteen different diseases. 
In particular, pneumonia classification accomplished a 0.7632 AUC score using receiver 
operating characteristics (ROC) analysis. In addition, the network obtained better than 
or equal to the performance of both a three-radiologist panel and four individual radi -
ologists. Zuo et al. [236] have adopted CNN for candidate classification in lung nodule. 
Shen et al. [237] employed both Random Forest (RF) and SVM classifiers with CNNs to 
classify lung nodules. They employed two convolutional layers with each of the three 
parallel CNNs. The LIDC-IDRI (Lung Image Database Consortium) dataset, which con -
tained 1010-labeled CT lung scans, was used to classify the two types of lung nodules 
(malignant and benign). Different scales of the image patches were used by every CNN 
to extract features, while the output feature vector was constructed using the learned 
features. Next, these vectors were classified into malignant or benign using either the 
RF classifier or SVM with radial basis function (RBF) filter. The model was robust to 
various noisy input levels and achieved an accuracy of 86% in nodule classification. 
Conversely, the model of [238] interpolates the image data missing between PET and 
MRI images using 3D CNNs. The Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database, containing 830 PET and MRI patient scans, was utilized in their work. The 
PET and MRI images are used to train the 3D CNNs, first as input and then as output. 
Furthermore, for patients who have no PET images, the 3D CNNs utilized the trained 
images to rebuild the PET images. These rebuilt images approximately fitted the actual 
disease recognition outcomes. However, this approach did not address the overfitting 
issues, which in turn restricted their technique in terms of its possible capacity for gen -
eralization. Diagnosing normal versus Alzheimer’s disease patients has been achieved 
by several CNN models [239, 240]. Hosseini-Asl et al. [241] attained 99% accuracy for 
up-to-date outcomes in diagnosing normal versus Alzheimer’s disease patients. These 
authors applied an auto-encoder architecture using 3D CNNs. The generic brain fea -
tures were pre-trained on the CADDementia dataset. Subsequently, the outcomes of 
these learned features became inputs to higher layers to differentiate between patient 
scans of Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment, or normal brains based on the