Page 61 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
7. False Positive Rate (FPR): This metric refers to the possibility of a false alarm ratio as 
calculated in Eq. 26
8. Area Under the ROC Curve: AUC is a common ranking type metric. It is utilized to 
conduct comparisons between learning algorithms [336–338], as well as to construct 
an optimal learning model [339, 340]. In contrast to probability and threshold met -
rics, the AUC value exposes the entire classifier ranking performance. The following 
formula is used to calculate the AUC value for two-class problem [341] (Eq. 27) 
 Here, Sp represents the sum of all positive ranked samples. The number of negative 
and positive samples is denoted as nn and np , respectively. Compared to the accu -
racy metrics, the AUC value was verified empirically and theoretically, making it 
very helpful for identifying an optimized solution and evaluating the classifier perfor -
mance through classification training.
 When considering the discrimination and evaluation processes, the AUC perfor -
mance was brilliant. However, for multiclass issues, the AUC computation is primar -
ily cost-effective when discriminating a large number of created solutions. In addi -
tion, the time complexity for computing the AUC is O/parenleftbig
|C|2nlogn/parenrightbig
 with respect to 
the Hand and Till AUC model [341] and O/parenleftbig
|C|nlogn/parenrightbig
 according to Provost and 
Domingo’s AUC model [336].
Frameworks and datasets
Several DL frameworks and datasets have been developed in the last few years. vari -
ous frameworks and libraries have also been used in order to expedite the work with 
good results. Through their use, the training process has become easier. Table  4 lists 
the most utilized frameworks and libraries.
Based on the star ratings on Github, as well as our own background in the field, 
TensorFlow is deemed the most effective and easy to use. It has the ability to work on 
several platforms. (Github is one of the biggest software hosting sites, while Github 
stars refer to how well-regarded a project is on the site). Moreover, there are several 
other benchmark datasets employed for different DL tasks. Some of these are listed in 
Table 5 .
Summary and conclusion
Finally, it is mandatory the inclusion of a brief discussion by gathering all the relevant 
data provided along this extensive research. Next, an itemized analysis is presented in 
order to conclude our review and exhibit the future directions.(25) Jscore=Sensitivity +Speciﬁcity −1
(26) FPR=1−Speciﬁcity
(27) AUC=Sp−np(nn+1)/2
npnn