Page 14 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
however, n must be smaller than m, while q is either equal to or smaller than r. In addi -
tion, the kernels are the basis of the local connections, which share similar parameters 
(bias bk and weight Wk ) for generating k feature maps hk with a size of ( m−n−1 ) each 
and are convolved with input, as mentioned above. The convolution layer calculates a 
dot product between its input and the weights as in Eq.  1, similar to NLP , but the inputs 
are undersized areas of the initial image size. Next, by applying the nonlinearity or an 
activation function to the convolution-layer output, we obtain the following:
The next step is down-sampling every feature map in the sub-sampling layers. This leads 
to a reduction in the network parameters, which accelerates the training process and 
in turn enables handling of the overfitting issue. For all feature maps, the pooling func -
tion (e.g. max or average) is applied to an adjacent area of size p×p , where p is the 
kernel size. Finally, the FC layers receive the mid- and low-level features and create the 
high-level abstraction, which represents the last-stage layers as in a typical neural net -
work. The classification scores are generated using the ending layer [e.g. support vector 
machines (SVMs) or softmax]. For a given instance, every score represents the probabil -
ity of a specific class.
Benefits of employing CNNs
The benefits of using CNNs over other traditional neural networks in the computer 
vision environment are listed as follows: 
1. The main reason to consider CNN is the weight sharing feature, which reduces the 
number of trainable network parameters and in turn helps the network to enhance 
generalization and to avoid overfitting.
2. Concurrently learning the feature extraction layers and the classification layer causes 
the model output to be both highly organized and highly reliant on the extracted fea -
tures.(1) hk=f(Wk∗x+bk)
Fig. 7 An example of CNN architecture for image classification