Page 37 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
ResNet, VGG, and AlexNet. By contrast, the spatial dimension reduces, since a sub-sam -
pling follows each convolutional layer. Thus, augmented feature representation is recom -
pensed by decreasing the size of the feature map. The extreme expansion in the depth 
of the feature map, alongside the spatial information loss, interferes with the learning 
ability in the deep CNNs. ResNet obtained notable outcomes for the issue of image clas -
sification. Conversely, deleting a convolutional block—in which both the number of 
channel and spatial dimensions vary (channel depth enlarges, while spatial dimension 
reduces)—commonly results in decreased classifier performance. Accordingly, the sto -
chastic ResNet enhanced the performance by decreasing the information loss accom -
panying the residual unit drop. Han et al. [123] proposed Pyramidal Net to address the 
ResNet learning interference problem. To address the depth enlargement and extreme 
reduction in spatial width via ResNet, Pyramidal Net slowly enlarges the residual unit 
width to cover the most feasible places rather than saving the same spatial dimension 
inside all residual blocks up to the appearance of the down-sampling. It was referred to 
as Pyramidal Net due to the slow enlargement in the feature map depth based on the 
up-down method. Factor l, which was determined by Eq.  19, regulates the depth of the 
feature map.
Here, the dimension of the lth residual unit is indicated by dl ; moreover, n indicates the 
overall number of residual units, the step factor is indicated by /afii9838 , and the depth increase 
is regulated by the factor /afii9838
n , which uniformly distributes the weight increase across the 
dimension of the feature map. Zero-padded identity mapping is used to insert the resid -
ual connections among the layers. In comparison to the projection-based shortcut con -
nections, zero-padded identity mapping requires fewer parameters, which in turn leads 
to enhanced generalization [124]. Multiplication- and addition-based widening are two 
different approaches used in Pyramidal Nets for network widening. More specifically, 
the first approach (multiplication) enlarges geometrically, while the second one (addi -
tion) enlarges linearly [92]. The main problem associated with the width enlargement is 
the growth in time and space required related to the quadratic time.
Xception
Extreme inception architecture is the main characteristic of Xception. The main idea 
behind Xception is its depthwise separable convolution [125]. The Xception model 
adjusted the original inception block by making it wider and exchanging a single 
dimension ( 3×3 ) followed by a 1×1 convolution to reduce computational complex -
ity. Figure  24 shows the Xception block architecture. The Xception network becomes 
extra computationally effective through the use of the decoupling channel and spatial 
correspondence. Moreover, it first performs mapping of the convolved output to the 
embedding short dimension by applying 1×1 convolutions. It then performs k spatial 
transformations. Note that k here represents the width-defining cardinality, which is 
obtained via the transformations number in Xception. However, the computations were 
made simpler in Xception by distinctly convolving each channel around the spatial axes. (19) dl=/braceleftBigg16 if l=1/floorleftBig
dl−1+/afii9838
n/floorrightBig
if2≤l≤n+1/bracerightBigg