Page 3 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
components of it. Furthermore, we have elaborated in detail the most common CNN 
architectures, starting with the AlexNet network and ending with the High-Resolution 
network (HR.Net).
Several published DL review papers have been presented in the last few years. How -
ever, all of them have only been addressed one side focusing on one application or topic 
such as the review of CNN architectures [21], DL for classification of plant diseases [22], 
DL for object detection [23], DL applications in medical image analysis [24], and etc. 
Although these reviews present good topics, they do not provide a full understanding of 
DL topics such as concepts, detailed research gaps, computational tools, and DL applica -
tions. First, It is required to understand DL aspects including concepts, challenges, and 
applications then going deep in the applications. To achieve that, it requires extensive 
time and a large number of research papers to learn about DL including research gaps 
and applications. Therefore, we propose a deep review of DL to provide a more suit -
able starting point from which to develop a full understanding of DL from one review 
paper. The motivation behinds our review was to cover the most important aspect of DL 
including open challenges, applications, and computational tools perspective. Further -
more, our review can be the first step towards other DL topics.
The main aim of this review is to present the most important aspects of DL to make it 
easy for researchers and students to have a clear image of DL from single review paper. 
This review will further advance DL research by helping people discover more about 
recent developments in the field. Researchers would be allowed to decide the more suit -
able direction of work to be taken in order to provide more accurate alternatives to the 
field. Our contributions are outlined as follows:
• This is the first review that almost provides a deep survey of the most important 
aspects of deep learning. This review helps researchers and students to have a good 
understanding from one paper.
• We explain CNN in deep which the most popular deep learning algorithm by 
describing the concepts, theory, and state-of-the-art architectures.
• We review current challenges (limitations) of Deep Learning including lack of train -
ing data, Imbalanced Data, Interpretability of data, Uncertainty scaling, Catastrophic 
forgetting, Model compression, Overfitting, Vanishing gradient problem, Exploding 
Gradient Problem, and Underspecification. We additionally discuss the proposed 
solutions tackling these issues.
• We provide an exhaustive list of medical imaging applications with deep learning by 
categorizing them based on the tasks by starting with classification and ending with 
registration.
• We discuss the computational approaches (CPU, GPU, FPGA) by comparing the 
influence of each tool on deep learning algorithms.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: “Survey methodology ” section describes 
The survey methodology. “Background ” section presents the background. “ Classification 
of DL approaches” section defines the classification of DL approaches. “ Types of DL net -
works” section displays types of DL networks. “ CNN architectures” section shows CNN 
Architectures. “ Challenges (limitations) of deep learning and alternate solutions” section