Page 56 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
were techniques introduced by Chen et al. [308]. These authors aimed to enhance the 
accuracy of localization and enlarge the field of view of every filter at a multi-scale. Their 
model, DeepLab, attained 79.7% mIOU (mean Intersection Over Union). In the PAS -
CAL VOC-2012 image segmentation, their model obtained an excellent performance.
Recently, the Automatic segmentation of COVID-19 Lung Infection from CT Images 
helps to detect the development of COVID-19 infection by employing several deep 
learning techniques [309–312].
Registration
Usually, given two input images, the four main stages of the canonical procedure of the 
image registration task are [313, 314]:
• Target Selection: it illustrates the determined input image that the second counter -
part input image needs to remain accurately superimposed to.
• Feature Extraction: it computes the set of features extracted from each input image.
• Feature Matching: it allows finding similarities between the previously obtained fea -
tures.
• Pose Optimization: it is aimed to minimize the distance between both input images.
Then, the result of the registration procedure is the suitable geometric transformation 
(e.g. translation, rotation, scaling, etc.) that provides both input images within the same 
coordinate system in a way the distance between them is minimal, i.e. their level of 
superimposition/overlapping is optimal. It is out of the scope of this work to provide an 
extensive review of this topic. Nevertheless, a short summary is accordingly introduced 
next.
Commonly, the input images for the DL-based registration approach could be in vari -
ous forms, e.g. point clouds, voxel grids, and meshes. Additionally, some techniques 
allow as inputs the result of the Feature Extraction or Matching steps in the canonical 
scheme. Specifically, the outcome could be some data in a particular form as well as the 
result of the steps from the classical pipeline (feature vector, matching vector, and trans -
formation). Nevertheless, with the newest DL-based methods, a novel conceptual type 
of ecosystem issues. It contains acquired characteristics about the target, materials, and 
their behavior that can be registered with the input data. Such a conceptual ecosystem is 
formed by a neural network and its training manner, and it could be counted as an input 
to the registration approach. Nevertheless, it is not an input that one might adopt in 
every registration situation since it corresponds to an interior data representation.
From a DL view-point, the interpretation of the conceptual design enables differen -
tiating the input data of a registration approach into defined or non-defined models. In 
particular, the illustrated phases are models that depict particular spatial data (e.g. 2D or 
3D) while a non-defined one is a generalization of a data set created by a learning system. 
Yumer et al. [315] developed a framework in which the model acquires characteristics of 
objects, meaning ready to identify what a more sporty car seems like or a more comfy 
chair is, also adjusting a 3D model to fit those characteristics while maintaining the main 
characteristics of the primary data. Likewise, a fundamental perspective of the unsuper -
vised learning method introduced by Ding et al. [316] is that there is no target for the