Page 12 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Recurrent neural networks
RNNs are a commonly employed and familiar algorithm in the discipline of DL [63–
65]. RNN is mainly applied in the area of speech processing and NLP contexts [66, 
67]. Unlike conventional networks, RNN uses sequential data in the network. Since 
the embedded structure in the sequence of the data delivers valuable information, this 
feature is fundamental to a range of different applications. For instance, it is impor -
tant to understand the context of the sentence in order to determine the meaning of 
a specific word in it. Thus, it is possible to consider the RNN as a unit of short-term 
memory, where x represents the input layer, y is the output layer, and s represents the 
state (hidden) layer. For a given input sequence, a typical unfolded RNN diagram is 
illustrated in Fig.  6. Pascanu et al. [68] introduced three different types of deep RNN 
techniques, namely “Hidden-to-Hidden” , “Hidden-to-Output” , and “Input-to-Hidden” . 
A deep RNN is introduced that lessens the learning difficulty in the deep network and 
brings the benefits of a deeper RNN based on these three techniques.
However, RNN’s sensitivity to the exploding gradient and vanishing problems rep -
resent one of the main issues with this approach [69]. More specifically, during the 
training process, the reduplications of several large or small derivatives may cause the 
gradients to exponentially explode or decay. With the entrance of new inputs, the net -
work stops thinking about the initial ones; therefore, this sensitivity decays over time. 
Furthermore, this issue can be handled using LSTM [70]. This approach offers recur -
rent connections to memory blocks in the network. Every memory block contains a 
number of memory cells, which have the ability to store the temporal states of the 
network. In addition, it contains gated units for controlling the flow of information. 
In very deep networks [37], residual connections also have the ability to considerably 
reduce the impact of the vanishing gradient issue which explained in later sections. 
Fig. 5 An example of RvNN tree