Page 30 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
rearrangement in CNN topology. This rearrangement proposed that the visualization of 
the features could be employed to identify design weaknesses and conduct appropriate 
parameter alteration. Figure 17 shows the structure of the network.
Visual geometry group (VGG)
After CNN was determined to be effective in the field of image recognition, an easy and 
efficient design principle for CNN was proposed by Simonyan and Zisserman. This inno -
vative design was called Visual Geometry Group (VGG). A multilayer model [101], it fea -
tured nineteen more layers than ZefNet [97] and AlexNet [30] to simulate the relations 
of the network representational capacity in depth. Conversely, in the 2013-ILSVRC com -
petition, ZefNet was the frontier network, which proposed that filters with small sizes 
could enhance the CNN performance. With reference to these results, VGG inserted a 
layer of the heap of 3×3 filters rather than the 5×5 and 11 × 11 filters in ZefNet. This 
showed experimentally that the parallel assignment of these small-size filters could pro -
duce the same influence as the large-size filters. In other words, these small-size filters 
made the receptive field similarly efficient to the large-size filters (7×7 and 5 ×5) . By 
decreasing the number of parameters, an extra advantage of reducing computational 
complication was achieved by using small-size filters. These outcomes established a 
novel research trend for working with small-size filters in CNN. In addition, by inserting 
1×1 convolutions in the middle of the convolutional layers, VGG regulates the network 
complexity. It learns a linear grouping of the subsequent feature maps. With respect 
to network tuning, a max pooling layer [102] is inserted following the convolutional 
layer, while padding is implemented to maintain the spatial resolution. In general, VGG 
obtained significant results for localization problems and image classification. While it 
did not achieve first place in the 2014-ILSVRC competition, it acquired a reputation due 
to its enlarged depth, homogenous topology, and simplicity. However, VGG’s computa -
tional cost was excessive due to its utilization of around 140 million parameters, which 
represented its main shortcoming. Figure 18 shows the structure of the network.
GoogLeNet
In the 2014-ILSVRC competition, GoogleNet (also called Inception-V1) emerged as the 
winner [103]. Achieving high-level accuracy with decreased computational cost is the 
core aim of the GoogleNet architecture. It proposed a novel inception block (module) 
concept in the CNN context, since it combines multiple-scale convolutional transfor -
mations by employing merge, transform, and split functions for feature extraction. Fig -
ure 19 illustrates the inception block architecture. This architecture incorporates filters 
Fig. 17 The architecture of ZefNet