Page 57 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
registration approach. In this instance, the network is able of placing each input point 
cloud in a global space, solving SLAM issues in which many point clouds have to be reg -
istered rigidly. On the other hand, Mahadevan [317] proposed the combination of two 
conceptual models utilizing the growth of Imagination Machines to give flexible artifi -
cial intelligence systems and relationships between the learned phases through training 
schemes that are not inspired on labels and classifications. Another practical application 
of DL, especially CNNs, to image registration is the 3D reconstruction of objects. Wang 
et al. [318] applied an adversarial way using CNNs to rebuild a 3D model of an object 
from its 2D image. The network learns many objects and orally accomplishes the regis -
tration between the image and the conceptual model. Similarly, Hermoza et al. [319] also 
utilize the GAN network for prognosticating the absent geometry of damaged archaeo -
logical objects, providing the reconstructed object based on a voxel grid format and a 
label selecting its class.
DL for medical image registration has numerous applications, which were listed by 
some review papers [320–322]. Yang et al. [323] implemented stacked convolutional lay -
ers as an encoder-decoder approach to predict the morphing of the input pixel into its 
last formation using MRI brain scans from the OASIS dataset. They employed a regis -
tration model known as Large Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping (LDDMM) 
and attained remarkable enhancements in computation time. Miao et al. [324] used syn -
thetic X-ray images to train a five-layer CNN to register 3D models of a trans-esophageal 
probe, a hand implant, and a knee implant onto 2D X-ray images for pose estimation. 
They determined that their model achieved an execution time of 0.1 s, representing 
an important enhancement against the conventional registration techniques based on 
intensity; moreover, it achieved effective registrations 79–99% of the time. Li et al. [325] 
introduced a neural network-based approach for the non-rigid 2D–3D registration of 
the lateral cephalogram and the volumetric cone-beam CT (CBCT) images.
Computational approaches
For computationally exhaustive applications, complex ML and DL approaches have rap -
idly been identified as the most significant techniques and are widely used in different 
fields. The development and enhancement of algorithms aggregated with capabilities of 
well-behaved computational performance and large datasets make it possible to effec -
tively execute several applications, as earlier applications were either not possible or dif -
ficult to take into consideration.
Currently, several standard DNN configurations are available. The interconnection 
patterns between layers and the total number of layers represent the main differences 
between these configurations. The Table  2 illustrates the growth rate of the overall num -
ber of layers over time, which seems to be far faster than the “Moore’s Law growth rate” . 
In normal DNN, the number of layers grew by around 2.3× each year in the period from 
2012 to 2016. Recent investigations of future ResNet versions reveal that the number of 
layers can be extended up to 1000. However, an SGD technique is employed to fit the 
weights (or parameters), while different optimization techniques are employed to obtain 
parameter updating during the DNN training process. Repetitive updates are required to 
enhance network accuracy in addition to a minorly augmented rate of enhancement. For 
example, the training process using ImageNet as a large dataset, which contains more