Page 18 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 Non-linear activation layers are employed after all layers with weights (so-called 
learnable layers, such as FC layers and convolutional layers) in CNN architecture. 
This non-linear performance of the activation layers means that the mapping of input 
to output will be non-linear; moreover, these layers give the CNN the ability to learn 
extra-complicated things. The activation function must also have the ability to differ -
entiate, which is an extremely significant feature, as it allows error back-propagation 
to be used to train the network. The following types of activation functions are most 
commonly used in CNN and other deep neural networks.
• Sigmoid: The input of this activation function is real numbers, while the output is 
restricted to between zero and one. The sigmoid function curve is S-shaped and 
can be represented mathematically by Eq. 2. 
• Tanh: It is similar to the sigmoid function, as its input is real numbers, but the out -
put is restricted to between − 1 and 1. Its mathematical representation is in Eq. 3. 
• ReLU: The mostly commonly used function in the CNN context. It converts the 
whole values of the input to positive numbers. Lower computational load is the 
main benefit of ReLU over the others. Its mathematical representation is in Eq. 4. 
 Occasionally, a few significant issues may occur during the use of ReLU. For 
instance, consider an error back-propagation algorithm with a larger gradient 
flowing through it. Passing this gradient within the ReLU function will update the 
weights in a way that makes the neuron certainly not activated once more. This 
issue is referred to as “Dying ReLU” . Some ReLU alternatives exist to solve such 
issues. The following discusses some of them.
• Leaky ReLU: Instead of ReLU down-scaling the negative inputs, this activation 
function ensures these inputs are never ignored. It is employed to solve the Dying 
ReLU problem. Leaky ReLU can be represented mathematically as in Eq. 5. 
 Note that the leak factor is denoted by m. It is commonly set to a very small value, 
such as 0.001.
• Noisy ReLU: This function employs a Gaussian distribution to make ReLU noisy. 
It can be represented mathematically as in Eq. 6. (2) f(x)sigm=1
1+e−x
(3) f(x)tanh=ex−e−x
ex+e−x
(4) f(x)ReLU=max (0,x)
(5) f(x)LeakyReLU =/braceleftbigg
x,if x >0
mx,x≤0/bracerightbigg
(6) f(x)NoisyReLU =max (x+Y),with Y ∼N(0,σ(x))