Page 26 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
• Expand the dataset with data augmentation or use transfer learning (explained in lat -
ter sections).
• Increase the training time.
• Increase the depth (or width) of the model.
• Add regularization.
• Increase hyperparameters tuning.
CNN architectures
Over the last 10 years, several CNN architectures have been presented [21, 26]. Model 
architecture is a critical factor in improving the performance of different applications. 
Various modifications have been achieved in CNN architecture from 1989 until today. 
Such modifications include structural reformulation, regularization, parameter optimi -
zations, etc. Conversely, it should be noted that the key upgrade in CNN performance 
occurred largely due to the processing-unit reorganization, as well as the development 
of novel blocks. In particular, the most novel developments in CNN architectures were 
performed on the use of network depth. In this section, we review the most popular 
CNN architectures, beginning from the AlexNet model in 2012 and ending at the High-
Resolution (HR) model in 2020. Studying these architectures features (such as input size, 
depth, and robustness) is the key to help researchers to choose the suitable architecture 
for the their target task. Table 2 presents the brief overview of CNN architectures.
AlexNet
The history of deep CNNs began with the appearance of LeNet [89] (Fig.  14). At that 
time, the CNNs were restricted to handwritten digit recognition tasks, which cannot 
be scaled to all image classes. In deep CNN architecture, AlexNet is highly respected 
[30], as it achieved innovative results in the fields of image recognition and classification. 
Krizhevesky et  al. [30] first proposed AlexNet and consequently improved the CNN 
learning ability by increasing its depth and implementing several parameter optimiza -
tion strategies. Figure 15 illustrates the basic design of the AlexNet architecture.
The learning ability of the deep CNN was limited at this time due to hardware 
restrictions. To overcome these hardware limitations, two GPUs (NVIDIA GTX 580) 
were used in parallel to train AlexNet. Moreover, in order to enhance the applicabil -
ity of the CNN to different image categories, the number of feature extraction stages 
was increased from five in LeNet to seven in AlexNet. Regardless of the fact that depth 
enhances generalization for several image resolutions, it was in fact overfitting that rep -
resented the main drawback related to the depth. Krizhevesky et al. used Hinton’s idea to 
address this problem [90, 91]. To ensure that the features learned by the algorithm were 
extra robust, Krizhevesky et  al. ’s algorithm randomly passes over several transforma -
tional units throughout the training stage. Moreover, by reducing the vanishing gradient 
problem, ReLU [92] could be utilized as a non-saturating activation function to enhance 
the rate of convergence [93]. Local response normalization and overlapping subsampling 
were also performed to enhance the generalization by decreasing the overfitting. To 
improve on the performance of previous networks, other modifications were made by 
using large-size filters (5×5 and 11 ×11) in the earlier layers. AlexNet has considerable