Page 2 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
Introduction
Recently, machine learning (ML) has become very widespread in research and has been 
incorporated in a variety of applications, including text mining, spam detection, video 
recommendation, image classification, and multimedia concept retrieval [1–6]. Among 
the different ML algorithms, deep learning (DL) is very commonly employed in these 
applications [7–9]. Another name for DL is representation learning (RL). The continuing 
appearance of novel studies in the fields of deep and distributed learning is due to both 
the unpredictable growth in the ability to obtain data and the amazing progress made in 
the hardware technologies, e.g. High Performance Computing (HPC) [10].
DL is derived from the conventional neural network but considerably outperforms its 
predecessors. Moreover, DL employs transformations and graph technologies simulta -
neously in order to build up multi-layer learning models. The most recently developed 
DL techniques have obtained good outstanding performance across a variety of applica -
tions, including audio and speech processing, visual data processing, natural language 
processing (NLP), among others [11–14].
Usually, the effectiveness of an ML algorithm is highly dependent on the integrity of 
the input-data representation. It has been shown that a suitable data representation pro -
vides an improved performance when compared to a poor data representation. Thus, 
a significant research trend in ML for many years has been feature engineering, which 
has informed numerous research studies. This approach aims at constructing features 
from raw data. In addition, it is extremely field-specific and frequently requires sizable 
human effort. For instance, several types of features were introduced and compared in 
the computer vision context, such as, histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) [15], scale-
invariant feature transform (SIFT) [16], and bag of words (BoW) [17]. As soon as a novel 
feature is introduced and is found to perform well, it becomes a new research direction 
that is pursued over multiple decades.
Relatively speaking, feature extraction is achieved in an automatic way throughout the 
DL algorithms. This encourages researchers to extract discriminative features using the 
smallest possible amount of human effort and field knowledge [18]. These algorithms 
have a multi-layer data representation architecture, in which the first layers extract the 
low-level features while the last layers extract the high-level features. Note that artificial 
intelligence (AI) originally inspired this type of architecture, which simulates the process 
that occurs in core sensorial regions within the human brain. Using different scenes, the 
human brain can automatically extract data representation. More specifically, the output 
of this process is the classified objects, while the received scene information represents 
the input. This process simulates the working methodology of the human brain. Thus, it 
emphasizes the main benefit of DL.
In the field of ML, DL, due to its considerable success, is currently one of the most 
prominent research trends. In this paper, an overview of DL is presented that adopts 
various perspectives such as the main concepts, architectures, challenges, applications, 
computational tools and evolution matrix. Convolutional neural network (CNN) is one 
of the most popular and used of DL networks [19, 20]. Because of CNN, DL is very pop -
ular nowadays. The main advantage of CNN compared to its predecessors is that it auto -
matically detects the significant features without any human supervision which made 
it the most used. Therefore, we have dug in deep with CNN by presenting the main