Page 10 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
semi-supervised learning. Due to difficulty of obtaining a large amount of labeled text 
documents, semi-supervised learning is ideal for text document classification task.
Deep unsupervised learning
This technique makes it possible to implement the learning process in the absence 
of available labeled data (i.e. no labels are required). Here, the agent learns the sig -
nificant features or interior representation required to discover the unidentified 
structure or relationships in the input data. Techniques of generative networks, 
dimensionality reduction and clustering are frequently counted within the category 
of unsupervised learning. Several members of the DL family have performed well on 
non-linear dimensionality reduction and clustering tasks; these include restricted 
Boltzmann machines, auto-encoders and GANs as the most recently developed tech -
niques. Moreover, RNNs, which include GRUs and LSTM approaches, have also 
been employed for unsupervised learning in a wide range of applications. The main 
disadvantages of unsupervised learning are unable to provide accurate information 
concerning data sorting and computationally complex. One of the most popular 
unsupervised learning approaches is clustering [54].
Deep reinforcement learning
Reinforcement Learning operates on interacting with the environment, while super -
vised learning operates on provided sample data. This technique was developed in 
2013 with Google Deep Mind [55]. Subsequently, many enhanced techniques depend -
ent on reinforcement learning were constructed. For example, if the input environ -
ment samples: xt∼ρ , agent predict:  and the received cost of the agent is 
, P here is the unknown probability distribution, then the environ -
ment asks a question to the agent. The answer it gives is a noisy score. This method 
is sometimes referred to as semi-supervised learning. Based on this concept, several 
supervised and unsupervised techniques were developed. In comparison with tradi -
tional supervised techniques, performing this learning is much more difficult, as no 
straightforward loss function is available in the reinforcement learning technique. In 
addition, there are two essential differences between supervised learning and rein -
forcement learning: first, there is no complete access to the function, which requires 
optimization, meaning that it should be queried via interaction; second, the state 
being interacted with is founded on an environment, where the input xt is based on 
the preceding actions [9 , 56].
For solving a task, the selection of the type of reinforcement learning that needs to 
be performed is based on the space or the scope of the problem. For example, DRL is 
the best way for problems involving many parameters to be optimized. By contrast, 
derivative-free reinforcement learning is a technique that performs well for problems 
with limited parameters. Some of the applications of reinforcement learning are busi -
ness strategy planning and robotics for industrial automation. The main drawback of 
Reinforcement Learning is that parameters may influence the speed of learning. Here 
are the main motivations for utilizing Reinforcement Learning: