Page 45 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
networks can perform better when these techniques are employed. Next, we list some 
data augmentation alternate solutions. 
1. Flipping: Flipping the vertical axis is a less common practice than flipping the hori -
zontal one. Flipping has been verified as valuable on datasets like ImageNet and 
CIFAR-10. Moreover, it is highly simple to implement. In addition, it is not a label-
conserving transformation on datasets that involve text recognition (such as SVHN 
and MNIST).
2. Color space: Encoding digital image data is commonly used as a dimension tensor 
( height×width×colorchannels  ). Accomplishing augmentations in the color space 
of the channels is an alternative technique, which is extremely workable for imple -
mentation. A very easy color augmentation involves separating a channel of a par -
ticular color, such as Red, Green, or Blue. A simple way to rapidly convert an image 
using a single-color channel is achieved by separating that matrix and inserting addi -
tional double zeros from the remaining two color channels. Furthermore, increas -
ing or decreasing the image brightness is achieved by using straightforward matrix 
operations to easily manipulate the RGB values. By deriving a color histogram that 
describes the image, additional improved color augmentations can be obtained. 
Lighting alterations are also made possible by adjusting the intensity values in histo -
grams similar to those employed in photo-editing applications.
3. Cropping: Cropping a dominant patch of every single image is a technique employed 
with combined dimensions of height and width as a specific processing step for 
image data. Furthermore, random cropping may be employed to produce an impact 
similar to translations. The difference between translations and random cropping is 
that translations conserve the spatial dimensions of this image, while random crop -
ping reduces the input size [for example from (256, 256) to (224, 224)]. According to 
the selected reduction threshold for cropping, the label-preserving transformation 
may not be addressed.
4. Rotation: When rotating an image left or right from within 0 to 360 degrees around 
the axis, rotation augmentations are obtained. The rotation degree parameter greatly 
determines the suitability of the rotation augmentations. In digit recognition tasks, 
small rotations (from 0 to 20 degrees) are very helpful. By contrast, the data label 
cannot be preserved post-transformation when the rotation degree increases.
5. Translation: To avoid positional bias within the image data, a very useful transforma -
tion is to shift the image up, down, left, or right. For instance, it is common that the 
whole dataset images are centered; moreover, the tested dataset should be entirely 
made up of centered images to test the model. Note that when translating the initial 
images in a particular direction, the residual space should be filled with Gaussian or 
random noise, or a constant value such as 255 s or 0 s. The spatial dimensions of the 
image post-augmentation are preserved using this padding.
6. Noise injection This approach involves injecting a matrix of arbitrary values. Such 
a matrix is commonly obtained from a Gaussian distribution. Moreno-Barea et  al. 
[160] employed nine datasets to test the noise injection. These datasets were taken 
from the UCI repository [161]. Injecting noise within images enables the CNN to 
learn additional robust features.