Page 17 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
small; hence, this approach is memory-effective. In addition, matrix operation 
is computationally much more costly than the dot (.) operation in CNN.
• Weight Sharing: There are no allocated weights between any two neurons of 
neighboring layers in CNN, as the whole weights operate with one and all 
pixels of the input matrix. Learning a single group of weights for the whole 
input will significantly decrease the required training time and various costs, 
as it is not necessary to learn additional weights for each neuron.
2. Pooling Layer: The main task of the pooling layer is the sub-sampling of the feature 
maps. These maps are generated by following the convolutional operations. In other 
words, this approach shrinks large-size feature maps to create smaller feature maps. 
Concurrently, it maintains the majority of the dominant information (or features) in 
every step of the pooling stage. In a similar manner to the convolutional operation, 
both the stride and the kernel are initially size-assigned before the pooling operation 
is executed. Several types of pooling methods are available for utilization in various 
pooling layers. These methods include tree pooling, gated pooling, average pooling, 
min pooling, max pooling, global average pooling (GAP), and global max pooling. 
The most familiar and frequently utilized pooling methods are the max, min, and 
GAP pooling. Figure 9 illustrates these three pooling operations.
 Sometimes, the overall CNN performance is decreased as a result; this represents 
the main shortfall of the pooling layer, as this layer helps the CNN to determine 
whether or not a certain feature is available in the particular input image, but focuses 
exclusively on ascertaining the correct location of that feature. Thus, the CNN model 
misses the relevant information.
3. Activation Function (non-linearity) Mapping the input to the output is the core func -
tion of all types of activation function in all types of neural network. The input value 
is determined by computing the weighted summation of the neuron input along with 
its bias (if present). This means that the activation function makes the decision as to 
whether or not to fire a neuron with reference to a particular input by creating the 
corresponding output.
Fig. 9 Three types of pooling operations