Page 9 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
to the task under consideration. Thus, robustness to the usual changes of the input 
data is attained.
3. Generalization: Different data types or different applications can use the same DL 
technique, an approach frequently referred to as transfer learning (TL) which 
explained in the latter section. Furthermore, it is a useful approach in problems 
where data is insufficient.
4. Scalability: DL is highly scalable. ResNet [37], which was invented by Microsoft, 
comprises 1202 layers and is frequently applied at a supercomputing scale. Law -
rence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), a large enterprise working on evolving 
frameworks for networks, adopted a similar approach, where thousands of nodes can 
be implemented [53].
Classification of DL approaches
DL techniques are classified into three major categories: unsupervised, partially super -
vised (semi-supervised) and supervised. Furthermore, deep reinforcement learning 
(DRL), also known as RL, is another type of learning technique, which is mostly con -
sidered to fall into the category of partially supervised (and occasionally unsupervised) 
learning techniques.
Deep supervised learning
This technique deals with labeled data. When considering such a technique, the environs 
have a collection of inputs and resultant outputs (xt,yt)∼ρ . For instance, the smart 
agent guesses  if the input is xt and will obtain  as a loss value. Next, 
the network parameters are repeatedly updated by the agent to obtain an improved esti -
mate for the preferred outputs. Following a positive training outcome, the agent acquires 
the ability to obtain the right solutions to the queries from the environs. For DL, there 
are several supervised learning techniques, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), 
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and deep neural networks (DNNs). In addition, 
the RNN category includes gated recurrent units (GRUs) and long short-term memory 
(LSTM) approaches. The main advantage of this technique is the ability to collect data 
or generate a data output from the prior knowledge. However, the disadvantage of this 
technique is that decision boundary might be overstrained when training set doesn’t 
own samples that should be in a class. Overall, this technique is simpler than other tech -
niques in the way of learning with high performance.
Deep semi‑supervised learning
In this technique, the learning process is based on semi-labeled datasets. Occasionally, 
generative adversarial networks (GANs) and DRL are employed in the same way as this 
technique. In addition, RNNs, which include GRUs and LSTMs, are also employed for 
partially supervised learning. One of the advantages of this technique is to minimize 
the amount of labeled data needed. On other the hand, One of the disadvantages of this 
technique is irrelevant input feature present training data could furnish incorrect deci -
sions. Text document classifier is one of the most popular example of an application of