Page 60 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
custom floating-point has revealed that lowering the 8-bit is extremely promising; more -
over, it aids in supplying additional advancements to implementing peak performance 
FPGA related to the DNN models.
Evaluation metrics
Evaluation metrics adopted within DL tasks play a crucial role in achieving the opti -
mized classifier [335]. They are utilized within a usual data classification procedure 
through two main stages: training and testing. It is utilized to optimize the classification 
algorithm during the training stage. This means that the evaluation metric is utilized to 
discriminate and select the optimized solution, e.g., as a discriminator, which can gen -
erate an extra-accurate forecast of upcoming evaluations related to a specific classifier. 
For the time being, the evaluation metric is utilized to measure the efficiency of the cre -
ated classifier, e.g. as an evaluator, within the model testing stage using hidden data. As 
given in Eq.  20, TN and TP are defined as the number of negative and positive instances, 
respectively, which are successfully classified. In addition, FN and FP are defined as the 
number of misclassified positive and negative instances respectively. Next, some of the 
most well-known evaluation metrics are listed below. 
1. Accuracy: Calculates the ratio of correct predicted classes to the total number of 
samples evaluated (Eq. 20). 
2. Sensitivity or Recall: Utilized to calculate the fraction of positive patterns that are 
correctly classified (Eq. 21). 
3. Specificity: Utilized to calculate the fraction of negative patterns that are correctly 
classified (Eq. 22). 
4. Precision: Utilized to calculate the positive patterns that are correctly predicted by all 
predicted patterns in a positive class (Eq. 23). 
5. F1-Score: Calculates the harmonic average between recall and precision rates 
(Eq. 24). 
6. J Score: This metric is also called Youdens J statistic. Eq. 25 represents the metric. (20) Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN
(21) Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN
(22) Speciﬁcity =TN
FP+TN
(23) Precision =TP
TP+FP
(24) F1score=2×Precision ×Recall
Precision +Recall