Page 19 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
• Parametric Linear Units: This is mostly the same as Leaky ReLU. The main differ -
ence is that the leak factor in this function is updated through the model training 
process. The parametric linear unit can be represented mathematically as in Eq. 7. 
 Note that the learnable weight is denoted as a.
4. Fully Connected Layer: Commonly, this layer is located at the end of each CNN 
architecture. Inside this layer, each neuron is connected to all neurons of the pre -
vious layer, the so-called Fully Connected (FC) approach. It is utilized as the CNN 
classifier. It follows the basic method of the conventional multiple-layer perceptron 
neural network, as it is a type of feed-forward ANN. The input of the FC layer comes 
from the last pooling or convolutional layer. This input is in the form of a vector, 
which is created from the feature maps after flattening. The output of the FC layer 
represents the final CNN output, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
5. Loss Functions: The previous section has presented various layer-types of CNN 
architecture. In addition, the final classification is achieved from the output layer, 
which represents the last layer of the CNN architecture. Some loss functions are uti -
lized in the output layer to calculate the predicted error created across the training 
samples in the CNN model. This error reveals the difference between the actual out -
put and the predicted one. Next, it will be optimized through the CNN learning pro -
cess.
 However, two parameters are used by the loss function to calculate the error. The 
CNN estimated output (referred to as the prediction) is the first parameter. The 
actual output (referred to as the label) is the second parameter. Several types of loss 
function are employed in various problem types. The following concisely explains 
some of the loss function types. (7) f(x)ParametricLinear =/braceleftbigg
x,if x>0
ax,x≤0/bracerightbigg
Fig. 10 Fully connected layer