Page 11 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
• It assists you to identify which action produces the highest reward over a longer 
period.
• It assists you to discover which situation requires action.
• It also enables it to figure out the best approach for reaching large rewards.
• Reinforcement Learning also gives the learning agent a reward function.
Reinforcement Learning can’t utilize in all the situation such as:
• In case there is sufficient data to resolve the issue with supervised learning tech -
niques.
• Reinforcement Learning is computing-heavy and time-consuming. Specially when 
the workspace is large.
Types of DL networks
The most famous types of deep learning networks are discussed in this section: these 
include recursive neural networks (RvNNs), RNNs, and CNNs. RvNNs and RNNs were 
briefly explained in this section while CNNs were explained in deep due to the impor -
tance of this type. Furthermore, it is the most used in several applications among other 
networks.
Recursive neural networks
RvNN can achieve predictions in a hierarchical structure also classify the outputs uti -
lizing compositional vectors [57]. Recursive auto-associative memory (RAAM) [58] is 
the primary inspiration for the RvNN development. The RvNN architecture is gener -
ated for processing objects, which have randomly shaped structures like graphs or trees. 
This approach generates a fixed-width distributed representation from a variable-size 
recursive-data structure. The network is trained using an introduced back-propagation 
through structure (BTS) learning system [58]. The BTS system tracks the same tech -
nique as the general-back propagation algorithm and has the ability to support a treelike 
structure. Auto-association trains the network to regenerate the input-layer pattern at 
the output layer. RvNN is highly effective in the NLP context. Socher et al.  [59] intro -
duced RvNN architecture designed to process inputs from a variety of modalities. These 
authors demonstrate two applications for classifying natural language sentences: cases 
where each sentence is split into words and nature images, and cases where each image 
is separated into various segments of interest. RvNN computes a likely pair of scores for 
merging and constructs a syntactic tree. Furthermore, RvNN calculates a score related 
to the merge plausibility for every pair of units. Next, the pair with the largest score is 
merged within a composition vector. Following every merge, RvNN generates (a) a larger 
area of numerous units, (b) a compositional vector of the area, and (c) a label for the 
class (for instance, a noun phrase will become the class label for the new area if two units 
are noun words). The compositional vector for the entire area is the root of the RvNN 
tree structure. An example RvNN tree is shown in Fig.  5. RvNN has been employed in 
several applications [60–62].