Page 41 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
this is highly significant in detection and segmentation operations, since the capsule 
involves the weighted features sum from the preceding layer.
In conventional CNNs, a particular cost function is employed to evaluate the global 
error that grows toward the back throughout the training process. Conversely, in such 
cases, the activation of a neuron will not grow further once the weight between two 
neurons turns out to be zero. Instead of a single size being provided with the com -
plete cost function in repetitive dynamic routing alongside the agreement, the signal 
is directed based on the feature parameters. Sabour et al. [139] provides more details 
about this architecture. When using MNIST to recognize handwritten digits, this 
innovative CNN architecture gives superior accuracy. From the application perspec -
tive, this architecture has extra suitability for segmentation and detection approaches 
when compared with classification approaches [140– 142].
High‑resolution network (HRNet)
High-resolution representations are necessary for position-sensitive vision tasks, 
such as semantic segmentation, object detection, and human pose estimation. In the 
present up-to-date frameworks, the input image is encoded as a low-resolution repre -
sentation using a subnetwork that is constructed as a connected series of high-to-low 
resolution convolutions such as VGGNet and ResNet. The low-resolution representa -
tion is then recovered to become a high-resolution one. Alternatively, high-resolu -
tion representations are maintained during the entire process using a novel network, 
referred to as a High-Resolution Network (HRNet) [143, 144]. This network has two 
principal features. First, the convolution series of high-to-low resolutions are con -
nected in parallel. Second, the information across the resolutions are repeatedly 
exchanged. The advantage achieved includes getting a representation that is more 
accurate in the spatial domain and extra-rich in the semantic domain. Moreover, 
HRNet has several applications in the fields of object detection, semantic segmenta -
tion, and human pose prediction. For computer vision problems, the HRNet repre -
sents a more robust backbone. Figure  26 illustrates the general architecture of HRNet.
Challenges (limitations) of deep learning and alternate solutions
When employing DL, several difficulties are often taken into consideration. Those 
more challenging are listed next and several possible alternatives are accordingly 
provided.
Fig. 26 The general architecture of HRNet