Page 47 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
portion of the particular example. Within this solution, back-propagation-based tech -
niques or perturbation-based approaches are used [169]. In the perturbation-based 
approaches, a portion of the input is changed and the effect of this change on the model 
output is observed [170–173]. This concept has high computational complexity, but it is 
simple to understand. On the other hand, to check the score of the importance of vari -
ous input portions, the signal from the output propagates back to the input layer in the 
back-propagation-based techniques. These techniques have been proven valuable in 
[174]. In different scenarios, various meanings can represent the model interpretability.
Uncertainty scaling
Commonly, the final prediction label is not the only label required when employing DL 
techniques to achieve the prediction; the score of confidence for every inquiry from the 
model is also desired. The score of confidence is defined as how confident the model is 
in its prediction [175]. Since the score of confidence prevents belief in unreliable and 
misleading predictions, it is a significant attribute, regardless of the application scenario. 
In biology, the confidence score reduces the resources and time expended in proving 
the outcomes of the misleading prediction. Generally speaking, in healthcare or similar 
applications, the uncertainty scaling is frequently very significant; it helps in evaluating 
automated clinical decisions and the reliability of machine learning-based disease-diag -
nosis [176, 177]. Because overconfident prediction can be the output of different DL 
models, the score of probability (achieved from the softmax output of the direct-DL) is 
often not in the correct scale [178]. Note that the softmax output requires post-scaling 
to achieve a reliable probability score. For outputting the probability score in the cor -
rect scale, several techniques have been introduced, including Bayesian Binning into 
Quantiles (BBQ) [179], isotonic regression [180], histogram binning [181], and the leg -
endary Platt scaling [182]. More specifically, for DL techniques, temperature scaling 
was recently introduced, which achieves superior performance compared to the other 
techniques.
Catastrophic forgetting
This is defined as incorporating new information into a plain DL model, made possible 
by interfering with the learned information. For instance, consider a case where there 
are 1000 types of flowers and a model is trained to classify these flowers, after which 
a new type of flower is introduced; if the model is fine-tuned only with this new class, 
its performance will become unsuccessful with the older classes [183, 184]. The logical 
data are continually collected and renewed, which is in fact a highly typical scenario in 
many fields, e.g. Biology. To address this issue, there is a direct solution that involves 
employing old and new data to train an entirely new model from scratch. This solution 
is time-consuming and computationally intensive; furthermore, it leads to an unstable 
state for the learned representation of the initial data. At this time, three different types 
of ML techniques, which have not catastrophic forgetting, are made available to solve 
the human brain problem founded on the neurophysiological theories [185, 186]. Tech -
niques of the first type are founded on regularizations such as EWC [183] Techniques 
of the second type employ rehearsal training techniques and dynamic neural network