Page 46 of 74 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 However, highly well-behaved solutions for positional biases available within the 
training data are achieved by means of geometric transformations. To separate the 
distribution of the testing data from the training data, several prospective sources 
of bias exist. For instance, when all faces should be completely centered within the 
frames (as in facial recognition datasets), the problem of positional biases emerges. 
Thus, geometric translations are the best solution. Geometric translations are helpful 
due to their simplicity of implementation, as well as their effective capability to dis -
able the positional biases. Several libraries of image processing are available, which 
enables beginning with simple operations such as rotation or horizontal flipping. 
Additional training time, higher computational costs, and additional memory are 
some shortcomings of geometric transformations. Furthermore, a number of geo -
metric transformations (such as arbitrary cropping or translation) should be manu -
ally observed to ensure that they do not change the image label. Finally, the biases 
that separate the test data from the training data are more complicated than transi -
tional and positional changes. Hence, it is not trivial answering to when and where 
geometric transformations are suitable to be applied.
Imbalanced data
Commonly, biological data tend to be imbalanced, as negative samples are much more 
numerous than positive ones [162–164]. For example, compared to COVID-19-positive 
X-ray images, the volume of normal X-ray images is very large. It should be noted that 
undesirable results may be produced when training a DL model using imbalanced data. 
The following techniques are used to solve this issue. First, it is necessary to employ the 
correct criteria for evaluating the loss, as well as the prediction result. In considering 
the imbalanced data, the model should perform well on small classes as well as larger 
ones. Thus, the model should employ area under curve (AUC) as the resultant loss as 
well as the criteria [165]. Second, it should employ the weighted cross-entropy loss, 
which ensures the model will perform well with small classes if it still prefers to employ 
the cross-entropy loss. Simultaneously, during model training, it is possible either to 
down-sample the large classes or up-sample the small classes. Finally, to make the data 
balanced as in Ref. [166], it is possible to construct models for every hierarchical level, 
as a biological system frequently has hierarchical label space. However, the effect of the 
imbalanced data on the performance of the DL model has been comprehensively inves -
tigated. In addition, to lessen the problem, the most frequently used techniques were 
also compared. Nevertheless, note that these techniques are not specified for biological 
problems.
Interpretability of data
Occasionally, DL techniques are analyzed to act as a black box. In fact, they are inter -
pretable. The need for a method of interpreting DL, which is used to obtain the valu -
able motifs and patterns recognized by the network, is common in many fields, such as 
bioinformatics [167]. In the task of disease diagnosis, it is not only required to know the 
disease diagnosis or prediction results of a trained DL model, but also how to enhance 
the surety of the prediction outcomes, as the model makes its decisions based on these 
verifications [168]. To achieve this, it is possible to give a score of importance for every