Page 21 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
1. Dropout: This is a widely utilized technique for generalization. During each training 
epoch, neurons are randomly dropped. In doing this, the feature selection power is 
distributed equally across the whole group of neurons, as well as forcing the model to 
learn different independent features. During the training process, the dropped neu -
ron will not be a part of back-propagation or forward-propagation. By contrast, the 
full-scale network is utilized to perform prediction during the testing process.
2. Drop-Weights: This method is highly similar to dropout. In each training epoch, the 
connections between neurons (weights) are dropped rather than dropping the neu -
rons; this represents the only difference between drop-weights and dropout.
3. Data Augmentation: Training the model on a sizeable amount of data is the easiest 
way to avoid over-fitting. To achieve this, data augmentation is used. Several tech -
niques are utilized to artificially expand the size of the training dataset. More details 
can be found in the latter section, which describes the data augmentation techniques.
4. Batch Normalization: This method ensures the performance of the output activations 
[81]. This performance follows a unit Gaussian distribution. Subtracting the mean 
and dividing by the standard deviation will normalize the output at each layer. While 
it is possible to consider this as a pre-processing task at each layer in the network, it 
is also possible to differentiate and to integrate it with other networks. In addition, it 
is employed to reduce the “internal covariance shift” of the activation layers. In each 
layer, the variation in the activation distribution defines the internal covariance shift. 
This shift becomes very high due to the continuous weight updating through train -
ing, which may occur if the samples of the training data are gathered from numer -
ous dissimilar sources (for example, day and night images). Thus, the model will con -
sume extra time for convergence, and in turn, the time required for training will also 
increase. To resolve this issue, a layer representing the operation of batch normaliza -
tion is applied in the CNN architecture.
 The advantages of utilizing batch normalization are as follows:
• It prevents the problem of vanishing gradient from arising.
• It can effectively control the poor weight initialization.
• It significantly reduces the time required for network convergence (for large-scale 
datasets, this will be extremely useful).
• It struggles to decrease training dependency across hyper-parameters.
Fig. 11 Over ‑fitting and under ‑fitting issues