Page 63 of 74
 Alzubaidi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:53 
 
case of healthcare data). To alleviate this issue, TL and data augmentation have been 
researched over the last few years.
• Although ML slowly transitions to semi-supervised and unsupervised learning to 
manage practical data without the need for manual human labeling, many of the cur -
rent deep-learning models utilize supervised learning.
• The CNN performance is greatly influenced by hyper-parameter selection. Any small 
change in the hyper-parameter values will affect the general CNN performance. 
Therefore, careful parameter selection is an extremely significant issue that should be 
considered during optimization scheme development.
• Impressive and robust hardware resources like GPUs are required for effective CNN 
training. Moreover, they are also required for exploring the efficiency of using CNN 
in smart and embedded systems.
• In the CNN context, ensemble learning [342, 343] represents a prospective research 
area. The collection of different and multiple architectures will support the model 
in improving its generalizability across different image categories through extracting 
several levels of semantic image representation. Similarly, ideas such as new activa -
tion functions, dropout, and batch normalization also merit further investigation.
• The exploitation of depth and different structural adaptations is significantly 
improved in the CNN learning capacity. Substituting the traditional layer configura -
tion with blocks results in significant advances in CNN performance, as has been 
shown in the recent literature. Currently, developing novel and efficient block archi -
tectures is the main trend in new research models of CNN architectures. HRNet is 
only one example that shows there are always ways to improve the architecture.
• It is expected that cloud-based platforms will play an essential role in the future 
development of computational DL applications. Utilizing cloud computing offers 
a solution to handling the enormous amount of data. It also helps to increase effi -
ciency and reduce costs. Furthermore, it offers the flexibility to train DL architec -
tures.
• With the recent development in computational tools including a chip for neural net -
works and a mobile GPU, we will see more DL applications on mobile devices. It will 
be easier for users to use DL.
• Regarding the issue of lack of training data, It is expected that various techniques of 
transfer learning will be considered such as training the DL model on large unlabeled 
image datasets and next transferring the knowledge to train the DL model on a small 
number of labeled images for the same task.
• Last, this overview provides a starting point for the community of DL being inter -
ested in the field of DL. Furthermore, researchers would be allowed to decide the 
more suitable direction of work to be taken in order to provide more accurate alter -
natives to the field.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the professors from the Queensland University of Technology and the University of Information 
Technology and Communications who gave their feedback on the paper.
Authors’ contributions
Conceptualization: LA, and JZ; methodology: LA, JZ, and JS; software: LA, and MAF; validation: LA, JZ, MA, and LF; formal 
analysis: LA, JZ, YD, and JS; investigation: LA, and JZ; resources: LA, JZ, and MAF; data curation: LA, and OA.; writing–origi‑
nal draft preparation: LA, and OA; writing—review and editing: LA, JZ, AJH, AA, YD, OA, JS, MAF, MA, and LF; visualization: