TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 7
for the right action selection, but also will make the training
process very slow. This makes the process of ﬁnding the best
Actor-Critic model very complicated and model convergence
usually requires a lot of tweaks to the models.
IV. D ATASETS
Many different researchers for different tasks use bench-
mark datasets, such as those discussed below. Benchmarking
in machine learning refers to the assessment of methods
and algorithms, comparing those regarding their capability to
learn speciﬁc patterns. Benchmarking aids validation of a new
approach or practice, relative to other existing methods.
Benchmark datasets typically take one of three forms.
1) The ﬁrst is real-world data, obtained from various real-
world experiments.
2) The second is synthetic data, artiﬁcially generated to
mimic real-world patterns. Synthetic data is generated
for use instead of real data. Such datasets are of spe-
cial interest in applications where the amount of data
required is much larger than that which is available, or
where privacy considerations are crucial and strict, such
as in the healthcare domain.
3) The third type are toy datasets, used for demonstration
and visualization purposes. Typically they are artiﬁcially
generated; often there is no need to represent real-world
data patterns.
The foundation of Deep Learning utilization is the avail-
ability of data to teach the system about pattern identiﬁcation.
The effectiveness of the model depends on the quality of
the data. Despite the successful implementation of universal
language modeling techniques such as BERT [79], however,
such models can be used solely for pre-training the models.
Afterward, the model needs to be trained on the data associated
with the desired task. Henceforth, based on the everyday
demands in different machine domains such as NLP, creating
new datasets is crucial.
On the other hand, creating new datasets is not usually an
easy matter. Informally speaking, the newly created dataset
should be: the right data to train on, sufﬁcient for the eval-
uation, and accurate to work on. Answering the questions of
“what is the meaning of right and accurate data” is highly
application-based. Basically, the data should have sufﬁcient
information, which depends on the quality and quantity of the
data.
To create a dataset, the ﬁrst step is always asking “what are
we trying to do and what problem do we need to solve?”
and “what kind of data do we need and how much of it
is required?” The next step is to create training and testing
portions. The training data set is used to train a model to
know how to ﬁnd the connections between the inputs and
the associated outputs. The test data set is used to assess the
intelligence of the machine, i.e., how well the trained model
can operate on the unseen test samples. Next, we must conduct
data preparation to make sure the data and its format is simple
and understandable for human experts. After that, the issue
of data accessibility and ownership may arise. Distribution of
data may need to have speciﬁc authorizations, especially if we
are dealing with sensitive or private data.Given the aforementioned roadmap, creating proper datasets
is complicated and of great importance. That’s why few
datasets are frequently chosen by the researchers and develop-
ers for benchmarking. A summary of widely used benchmark
datasets is provided in Table I.
V. D EEPLEARNING FOR NLP T ASKS
This section describes NLP applications using deep learn-
ing. Fig. 8 shows representative NLP tasks (and the categories
they belong to). A fundamental question is: ”How can we
evaluate an NLP algorithm, model, or system?” In [80],
some of the most common evaluation metrics have been
described. This reference explains the fundamental principles
of evaluating NLP systems.
A. Basic Tasks
1) Part-Of-Speech Tagging: Part-of-Speech tagging is one
of the basic tasks in Natural Language Processing. It is the
process of labeling words with their part of speech categories.
Part of speech is leveraged for many crucial tasks such
as named entity recognition. One commonly used dataset
for Part-of-Speech tagging is the WSJ corpus7. This dataset
contains over a million tokens and has been utilized widely as
a benchmark dataset for the performance assessment of POS
tagging systems. Traditional methods are still performing very
well for this task [16]. However, neural network based methods
have been proposed for Part-of-Speech tagging [81].
For example, the deep neural network architecture named
CharWNN has been developed to join word-level and
character-level representations using convolutional neural net-
works for POS tagging [14]. The emphasis in [14] is the
importance of character-level feature extraction as their exper-
imental results show the necessity of employing hand-crafted
features in the absence of character-level features for achieving
the state-of-the-art. In [82], a wide variety of neural network
based models have been proposed for sequence tagging tasks,
e.g., LSTM networks, bidirectional LSTM networks, LSTM
networks with a CRF8layer, etc. Sequence tagging itself
includes part of speech tagging, chunking, and named entity
recognition. Likewise, a globally normalized transition-based
neural network architecture has been proposed for POS-
tagging [83]. State-of-the-art results are summarized in Table
II. In [17], authors propose a bidirectional LSTM to perform
parts of speech tagging and show that it performs better than
conventional machine learning techniques on the same dataset.
More recently, in [84], authors use a pretrained BERT model
in combination with one bidirectional LSTM layer and train
the latter layer only and outperform the prior state-of-the art
POS architectures.
2) Parsing: Parsing is assigning a structure to a recognized
string. There are different types of parsing. Constituency
Parsing refers in particular to assigning a syntactic structure
to a sentence. A greedy parser has been introduced in [92]
which performs a syntactic and semantic summary of content
7Penn Treebank Wall Street Journal (WSJ-PTB).
8Conditional Random Field.