TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 17
Fig. 18. The framework of a dialogue system. A dialogue system can be task oriented or used for natural language generation based on the user input which
is also known as a chat bot.
For this aim, having predeﬁned tasks is required; this depends
on manually crafted states with different associated slots.
Henceforth, a designed dialogue system would be of limited
or no use for other tasks.
Recent task-oriented dialogue systems have been designed
based on deep reinforcement learning, which provided promis-
ing results regarding performance [211], domain adapta-
tion [212], and dialogue generation [213]. This was due to
a shift towards end-to-end trainable frameworks to design
and deploy task-oriented dialogue systems. Instead of the
traditionally utilized pipeline, an end-to-end framework in-
corporates and uses a single module that deals with external
databases. Despite the tractability of end-to-end dialogue
systems (i.e., easy to train and simple to engineer), due to
their need for interoperability with external databases via
queries, they are not well-suited for task-oriented settings.
Some approaches to this challenge include converting the user
input into internal representations [214], combining supervised
and reinforced learning [215], and extending the memory
network approach [216] for question-answering to a dialog
system [217].
2) Non-task-based Systems: As opposed to task-based dia-
logue systems, the goal behind designing and deploying non-
task-based dialogue systems is to empower a machine with
the ability to have a natural conversation with humans [218].
Typically, chatbots are of one of the following types: retrieval-
based methods andgenerative methods . Retrieval-based mod-
els have access to information resources and can provide more
concise, ﬂuent, and accurate responses. However, they are
limited regarding the variety of responses they can provide
due to their dependency on backend data resources. Generative
models, on the other hand, have the advantage of being ableto produce suitable responses when such responses are not in
the corpus. However, as opposed to retrieval-based models,
they are more prone to grammatical and conceptual mistakes
arising from their generative models.
Retrieval-based methods select an appropriate response
from the candidate responses. Therefore, the key element is the
query-response operation. In general, this problem has been
formulated as a search problem and uses IR techniques for task
completion [219]. Retrieval-based methods usually employ
either Single-turn Response Matching orMulti-turn Response
Matching . In the ﬁrst type, the current query (message) is
solely used to select a suitable response [220]. The latter
type takes the current message and previous utterances as the
system input and retrieves a response based on the instant and
temporal information. The model tries to choose a response
which considers the whole context to guarantee conversation
consistency. An LSTM-based model has been proposed [221]
for context and response vectors creation. In [222], various
features and multiple data inputs have been incorporated to
be ingested using a deep learning framework. Current base
models regarding retrieval-based chatbots rely on multi-turn
response selection augmented by an attention mechanism and
sequence matching [223].
Generative models don’t assume the availability of pre-
deﬁned responses. New responses are produced from scratch
and are based on the trained model. Generative models are
typically based on sequence to sequence models and map an
input query to a target element as the response. In general,
designing and implementing a dialogue agent to be able to
converse at the human level is very challenging. The typical
approach usually consists of learning and imitating human
conversation. For this goal, the machine is generally trained on