TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 1
Natural Language Processing Advancements By
Deep Learning: A Survey
Amirsina Torﬁ, Member, IEEE, Rouzbeh A. Shirvani, Yaser Keneshloo, Nader Tavaf,
and Edward A. Fox, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Natural Language Processing (NLP) helps empower
intelligent machines by enhancing a better understanding of the
human language for linguistic-based human-computer communi-
cation. Recent developments in computational power and the ad-
vent of large amounts of linguistic data have heightened the need
and demand for automating semantic analysis using data-driven
approaches. The utilization of data-driven strategies is pervasive
now due to the signiﬁcant improvements demonstrated through
the usage of deep learning methods in areas such as Computer
Vision, Automatic Speech Recognition, and in particular, NLP.
This survey categorizes and addresses the different aspects and
applications of NLP that have beneﬁted from deep learning. It
covers core NLP tasks and applications, and describes how deep
learning methods and models advance these areas. We further
analyze and compare different approaches and state-of-the-art
models.
Index Terms —Natural Language Processing, Deep Learning,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
I. I NTRODUCTION
NATURAL Language Processing (NLP) is a sub-discipline
of computer science providing a bridge between natural
languages and computers. It helps empower machines to un-
derstand, process, and analyze human language [1]. NLP’s sig-
niﬁcance as a tool aiding comprehension of human-generated
data is a logical consequence of the context-dependency
of data. Data becomes more meaningful through a deeper
understanding of its context, which in turn facilitates text
analysis and mining. NLP enables this with the communication
structures and patterns of humans.
Development of NLP methods is increasingly reliant on
data-driven approaches which help with building more pow-
erful and robust models [2]–[4]. Recent advances in com-
putational power, as well as greater availability of big data,
enable deep learning, one of the most appealing approaches
in the NLP domain [2], [3], [5], especially given that deep
learning has already demonstrated superior performance in
adjoining ﬁelds like Computer Vision [6]–[10] and Speech
Recognition [11]–[13]. These developments led to a paradigm
shift from traditional to novel data-driven approaches aimed
at advancing NLP. The reason behind this shift was simple:
new approaches are more promising regarding results, and are
easier to engineer.
Amirsina Torﬁ, Yaser Keneshloo, and Edward A. Fox were with the
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, V A, 24060 USA e-mail: (amirsina.torﬁ@gmail.com,
yaserkl@vt.edu, fox@vt.edu). Rouzbeh A. Shirvani is an independent re-
searcher, e-mail: (rouzbeh.asghari@gmail.com). Nader Tavaf was with the
University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, 55455 USA e-mail:
(tavaf001@umn.edu).As a sequitur to remarkable progress achieved in adjacent
disciplines utilizing deep learning methods, deep neural net-
works have been applied to various NLP tasks, including part-
of-speech tagging [14]–[17], named entity recognition [18],
[18]–[21], and semantic role labeling [22]–[25]. Most of the
research efforts in deep learning associated with NLP appli-
cations involve either supervised learning1orunsupervised
learning2.
This survey covers the emerging role of deep learning in the
area of NLP, across a broad range of categories. The research
presented in [26] is primarily focused on architectures, with
little discussion of applications. More recent works [4], [27]
are speciﬁc to certain applications or certain sub-ﬁelds of
NLP [21]. Here we build on previous works by describing
the challenges, opportunities, and evaluations of the impact of
applying deep learning to NLP problems.
This survey has six sections, including this introduction.
Section 2 lays out the theoretical dimensions of NLP and
artiﬁcial intelligence, and looks at deep learning as an ap-
proach to solving real-world problems. It motivates this study
by addressing the question: Why use deep learning in NLP?
The third section discusses fundamental concepts necessary
to understand NLP, covering exemplary issues in representa-
tion, frameworks, and machine learning. The fourth section
summarizes benchmark datasets employed in the NLP domain.
Section 5 focuses on some of the NLP applications where deep
learning has demonstrated signiﬁcant beneﬁt. Finally, Section
6provides a conclusion, also addressing some open problems
and promising areas for improvement.
II. B ACKGROUND
NLP has long been viewed as one aspect of artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI), since understanding and generating natural
language are high-level indications of intelligence. Deep learn-
ing is an effective AI tool, so we next situate deep learning in
the AI world. After that we explain motivations for applying
deep learning to NLP.
A. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Deep Learning
There have been “islands of success” where big data are
processed via AI capabilities to produce information to achieve
critical operational goals (e.g., fraud detection). Accordingly,
1Learning from training data to predict the type of new unseen test examples
by mapping them to known pre-deﬁned labels.
2Making sense of data without sticking to speciﬁc tasks and supervisory
signals.arXiv:2003.01200v4  [cs.CL]  27 Feb 2021