TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 3
Fig. 2. A typical CNN architecture for object detection. The network provides a feature representation with attention to the speciﬁc region of an image
(example shown on the left) that contains the object of interest. Out of the multiple regions represented (see an ordering of the image blocks, giving image
pixel intensity, on the right) by the network, the one with the highest score will be selected as the main candidate.
Fig. 3. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), summarized on the left, expanded
on the right, for Ntimesteps, with Xindicating input, hhidden layer, and
Ooutput
with a sequence of inputs such as language modeling [39], i.e.,
representing language in a way that the machine understands.
This concept will be described later in detail.
RNNs can carry rich information from the past. Consider
the sentence: “Michael Jackson was a singer; some people
consider him King of Pop.” It’s easy for a human to identify
himas referring to Michael Jackson. The pronoun himhappens
seven words after Michael Jackson; capturing this dependency
is one of the beneﬁts of RNNs, where the hidden layers in an
RNN act as memory units. Long Short Term Memory Network
(LSTM) [40] is one of the most widely used classes of RNNs.
LSTMs try to capture even long time dependencies between
inputs from different time steps. Modern Machine Translation
and Speech Recognition often rely on LSTMs.
Fig. 4. Schematic of an Autoencoder
Autoencoders: Autoencoders implement unsupervised
methods in deep learning. They are widely used in dimension-
ality reduction3or NLP applications which consist of sequence
3Dimensionality reduction is an unsupervised learning approach which is
the process of reducing the number of variables that were used to represent
the data by identifying the most crucial information.to sequence modeling (see Section III-B [39]. Fig. 4 illustrates
the schematic of an Autoencoder. Since autoencoders are
unsupervised, there is no label corresponding to each input.
They aim to learn a code representation for each input. The
encoder is like a feed-forward neural network in which the
input gets encoded into a vector (code). The decoder operates
similarly to the encoder, but in reverse, i.e., constructing
an output based on the encoded input. In data compression
applications, we want the created output to be as close as
possible to the original input. Autoencoders are lossy , meaning
the output is an approximate reconstruction of the input.
Fig. 5. Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative Adversarial Networks: Goodfellow [41] intro-
duced Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) . As shown in
Fig. 5, a GAN is a combination of two neural networks, a
discriminator and a generator. The whole network is trained
in an iterative process. First, the generator network generates a
fake sample. Then the discriminator network tries to determine
whether this sample (ex.: an input image) is real or fake, i.e.,
whether it came from the real training data (data used for
building the model) or not. The goal of the generator is to fool
the discriminator in a way that the discriminator believes the
artiﬁcial (i.e., generated) samples synthesized by the generator
are real.
This iterative process continues until the generator produces
samples that are indistinguishable by the discriminator. In