TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 16
abstractive summarization, it was [198] which, for the ﬁrst
time, used attention over a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
model for the problem of headline generation. However, since
simple attention models perform worse than extractive models,
therefore more effective attention models such as graph-based
attention [199] and transformers [173] have been proposed for
this task. To further improve abstractive text summarization
models, [200] proposed the ﬁrst pointer-generator model and
applied it to the DeepMind QA dataset [201]. As a result
of this work, the CNN/Daily Mail dataset emerged which is
now one of the widely used datasets for the summarization
task. A copy mechanism was also adopted by [202] for
similar tasks. But their analysis reveals a key problem with
attention-based encoder-decoder models: they often generate
unusual summaries consisting of repeated phrases. Recently,
[62] reached state-of-the-art results on the abstractive text
summarization using a similar framework. They alleviated the
unnatural summaries by avoiding generating unknown tokens
and replacing these words with tokens from the input article.
Later, researchers moved their focus to methods that use
sentence-embedding to ﬁrst select the most salient sentence
in the document and then change them to make them more
abstractive [203], [204]. In these models, salient sentences
are extracted ﬁrst and then a paraphrasing model is used to
make them abstractive. The extraction employs a sentence
classiﬁer or ranker while the abstractor tries to remove the
extra information in a sentence and present it as a shorter
summary. Fast-RL [203] is the ﬁrst framework in this family of
works. In Fast-RL, the extractor is pre-trained to select salient
sentences and the abstractor is pre-trained using a pointer-
generator model to generate paraphrases. Finally, to merge
these two non-differentiable components, they propose using
Actor-Critic Q-learning methods in which the actor receives
a single document and generates the output while the critic
evaluates the output based on comparison with the ground-
truth summary.
Though the standard way to evaluate the performance of
summarization models is with ROUGE [67] and BLEU [68],
there are major problems with such measures. For instance, the
ROUGE measure focuses on the number of shared n-grams
between two sentences. Such a method incorrectly assigns
a low score to an abstractive summary that uses different
words yet provides an excellent paraphrase that humans would
rate highly. Clearly, better automated evaluation methods are
needed in such cases.
There are additional problems with current summarization
models. Shi et al. [205] provides a comprehensive survey on
text summarization.
[206] provides a recent survey on summarization methods.
[207] provides an advanced composite deep learning model,
based on LSTMs and Restricted Boltzmann Machine, for
multi-doc opinion summarization. A very inﬂuential recent
work, [208], introduces H IBERT ( HIerachical Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers) as a pre-trained
initialization for document summarization and report state-of-
the-art performance.H. Dialogue Systems
Dialogue Systems are quickly becoming a principal in-
strument in human-computer interaction, due in part to their
promising potential and commercial value [209]. One appli-
cation is automated customer service, supporting both online
and bricks-and-mortar businesses. Customers expect an ever-
increasing level of speed, accuracy, and respect while dealing
with companies and their services. Due to the high cost of
knowledgeable human resources, companies frequently turn
to intelligent conversational machines. Note that the phrases
conversational machines anddialogue machines are often used
interchangeably.
Dialogue systems are usually task-based ornon-task-
based (Fig. 18). Though there might be Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) and Language-to-Speech (L2S) compo-
nents in a dialogue system, the discussion of this section is
solely about the linguistic components of dialogue systems;
concepts associated with speech technology are ignored.
Despite useful statistical models employed in the backend
of dialogue systems (especially in language understanding
modules), most deployed dialogue systems rely on expensive
hand-crafted and manual features for operation. Furthermore,
the generalizability of these manually engineered systems to
other domains and functionalities is problematic. Hence, recent
attention has focused on deep learning for the enhancement of
performance, generalizability, and robustness. Deep learning
facilitates the creation of end-to-end task-oriented dialogue
systems, which enriches the framework to generalize conver-
sations beyond annotated task-speciﬁc dialogue resources.
1) Task-based Systems: The structure of a task-based dia-
logue system usually consists of the following elements:
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) : This compo-
nent deals with understanding and interpreting user’s
spoken context by assigning a constituent structure to the
spoken utterance (e.g., a sentence) and captures its syn-
tactic representation and semantic interpretation, to allow
the back-end operation/task. NLU is usually leveraged
regardless of the dialogue context.
Dialogue Manager (DM) : The generated representation
by NLU would be handled by the dialogue manager,
which investigates the context and returns a reasonable
semantic-related response.
Natural Language Generation (NLG) : The natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) component produces an utter-
ance based on the response provided by the DM compo-
nent.
The general pipeline is as follows: NLU module (i.e.,
semantic decoder) transforms the output of the speech recog-
nition module to some dialogue elements. Then the DM
processes these dialogue elements and provides a suitable
response which is fed to the NLG for response generation.
The main pipeline in NLU is to classify the user query domain
and user intent, and ﬁll a set of slots to create a semantic
frame. It is usually customary to perform the intent prediction
and the slot ﬁlling simultaneously [210]. Most of the task-
oriented dialogue systems employ slot-ﬁlling approaches to
classify user intent in the speciﬁc domain of the conversation.