TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 4
other words, the probability of classifying a sample as fake
or real becomes like ﬂipping a fair coin for the discriminator.
The goal of the generative model is to capture the distribution
of real data while the discriminator tries to identify the fake
data. One of the interesting features of GANs (regarding being
generative) is: once the training phase is ﬁnished, there is no
need for the discrimination network, so we solely can work
with the generation network. In other words, having access to
the trained generative model is sufﬁcient.
Different forms of GANs has been introduced, e.g., Sim
GAN [8], Wasserstein GAN [42], info GAN [43], and DC
GAN [44]. In one of the most elegant GAN implementations
[45], entirely artiﬁcial, yet almost perfect, celebrity faces are
generated; the pictures are not real, but fake photos produced
by the network. GAN’s have since received signiﬁcant atten-
tion in various applications and have generated astonishing
result [46]. In the NLP domain, GANs often are used for text
generation [47], [48].
B. Motivation for Deep Learning in NLP
Deep learning applications are predicated on the choices
of (1) feature representation and (2) deep learning algo-
rithm alongside architecture. These are associated with data
representation and learning structure, respectively. For data
representation, surprisingly, there usually is a disjunction
between what information is thought to be important for
the task at hand, versus what representation actually yields
good results. For instance, in sentiment analysis, lexicon
semantics, syntactic structure, and context are assumed by
some linguists to be of primary signiﬁcance. Nevertheless,
previous studies based on the bag-of-words (BoW) model
demonstrated acceptable performance [49]. The bag-of-words
model [50], often viewed as the vector space model, involves
a representation which accounts only for the words and
their frequency of occurrence. BoW ignores the order and
interaction of words, and treats each word as a unique feature.
BoW disregards syntactic structure, yet provides decent results
for what some would consider syntax-dependent applications.
This observation suggests that simple representations, when
coupled with large amounts of data, may work as well or better
than more complex representations. These ﬁndings corroborate
the argument in favor of the importance of deep learning
algorithms and architectures.
Often the progress of NLP is bound to effective language
modeling. A goal of statistical language modeling is the prob-
abilistic representation of word sequences in language, which
is a complicated task due to the curse of dimensionality. The
research presented in [51] was a breakthrough for language
modeling with neural networks aimed at overcoming the curse
of dimensionality by (1)learning a distributed representation
of words and (2)providing a probability function for se-
quences.
A key challenge in NLP research, compared to other do-
mains such as Computer Vision, seems to be the complexity
of achieving an in-depth representation of language using
statistical models. A primary task in NLP applications is to
provide a representation of texts, such as documents. This in-volves feature learning, i.e., extracting meaningful information
to enable further processing and analysis of the raw data.
Traditional methods begin with time-consuming hand-
crafting of features, through careful human analysis of a
speciﬁc application, and are followed by development of
algorithms to extract and utilize instances of those features.
On the other hand, deep supervised feature learning methods
are highly data-driven and can be used in more general efforts
aimed at providing a robust data representation.
Due to the vast amounts of unlabeled data, unsupervised
feature learning is considered to be a crucial task in NLP. Un-
supervised feature learning is, in essence, learning the features
from unlabeled data to provide a low-dimensional representa-
tion of a high-dimensional data space. Several approaches such
as K-means clustering and principal component analysis have
been proposed and successfully implemented to this end. With
the advent of deep learning and abundance of unlabeled
data, unsupervised feature learning becomes a crucial task for
representation learning, a precursor in NLP applications. Cur-
rently, most of the NLP tasks rely on annotated data, while a
preponderance of unannotated data further motivates research
in leveraging deep data-driven unsupervised methods.
Given the potential superiority of deep learning approaches
in NLP applications, it seems crucial to perform a com-
prehensive analysis of various deep learning methods and
architectures with particular attention to NLP applications.
III. C ORE CONCEPTS IN NLP
A. Feature Representation
Distributed representations are a series of compact, low
dimensional representations of data, each representing some
distinct informative property. For NLP systems, due to issues
related to the atomic representation of the symbols, it is
imperative to learn word representations.
At ﬁrst, let’s concentrate on how the features are rep-
resented, and then we focus on different approaches for
learning word representations. The encoded input features can
be characters, words [32], sentences [52], or other linguistic
elements. Generally, it is more desirable to provide a compact
representation of the words than a sparse one.
Fig. 6. Considering a given sequence, the skip-thought model generates the
surrounding sequences using the trained encoder. The assumption is that the
surrounding sentences are closely related, contextually.
How to select the structure and level of text representa-
tion used to be an unresolved question. After proposing the
word2vec approach [53], subsequently, doc2vec was proposed
in [52] as an unsupervised algorithm and was called Paragraph