TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 11
D. Sentiment analysis
The primary goal in sentiment analysis is the extraction
of subjective information from text by contextual mining.
Sentiment analysis is considered high-level reasoning based on
source data. Sentiment analysis is sometimes called opinion
mining, as its primary goal is to analyze human opinion,
sentiments, and even emotions regarding products, problems,
and varied subjects. Seminal works on sentiment analysis or
opinion mining include [143], [144]. Since 2000, much atten-
tion has been given to sentiment analysis, due to its relation
to a wide variety of applications [145], its associations with
new research challenges, and the availability of abundant data.
[146] provides a more recent review of the sentiment analysis
methods relying on deep learning and gives an insightful
discussion on the drawbacks as well as merits of deep learning
methods for sentiment analysis.
A critical aspect of research in sentiment analysis is content
granularity. Considering this criterion, sentiment analysis is
generally divided into three categories/levels: document level,
sentence level, and aspect level.
1) Document-level Sentiment Analysis: At the document
level, the task is to determine whether the whole document
reﬂects a positive or negative sentiment about exactly one
entity. This differs from opinion mining regarding multiple
entries. The Gated Recurrent Neural Network architecture
has been utilized successfully for effectively encoding the
sentences’ relations in the semantic structure of the docu-
ment [147]. Domain adaptation has been investigated as well,
to deploy the trained model on unseen new sources [148].
More recently, in [149] authors provide an LSTM-based model
for document-level sentiment analysis that captures semantic
relations between sentences. In [150], authors use a CNN-
bidirectional LSTM model to process long texts.
2) Sentence-level Sentiment Analysis: At the sentence-
level, sentiment analysis determines the positivity, negativity,
or neutrality regarding an opinion expressed in a sentence. One
general assumption for sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation
is the existence of only one opinion from a single opinion
holder in an expressed sentence. Recursive autoencoders have
been employed for sentence-level sentiment label prediction
by learning the vector space representations for phrases [151].
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent models have
also been utilized for tweet sentiment prediction [152]. The
Sentiment Treebank and Recursive Neural Tensor Networks
[153] have shown promise for predicting ﬁne-grained sen-
timent labels. [154] provides a cloud-based hybrid machine
learning model for sentence level sentiment analysis. More
recently in [155], propose A Lexicalized Domain Ontology
and a Regularized Neural Attention model (ALDONAr) for
sentence-level aspect-based sentiment analysis that uses a
CNN classiﬁcation module with BERT word embeddings and
achieves state-of-the art results.
3) Aspect-level Sentiment Analysis: Document-level and
sentence-level sentiment analysis usually focus on the senti-
ment itself, not the target of the sentiment, e.g., a product.
Aspect-level sentiment analysis directly targets an opinion,
with the assumption of the existence of the sentiment and itstarget. A document or sentence may not have a generally posi-
tive or negative sentiment, but may have multiple subparts with
different targets, each with a positive or negative sentiment.
This can make aspect-level analysis even more challenging
than other types of sentiment categorization.
Aspect-level sentiment analysis usually involves Aspect
Sentiment Classiﬁcation and Aspect Extraction . The former
determines opinions on different aspects (positive, neutral,
or negative) while the latter identiﬁes the target aspect for
evaluation in context. As an example consider the following
sentence: “This car is old. It must be repaired and sold!” .
“This car” is what is subject to evaluation and must be
extracted ﬁrst. Here, the opinion about this aspect is negative.
For aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation, attention-based
LSTMs are proposed to connect the aspect and sentence
content for sentiment classiﬁcation [156]. For aspect extrac-
tion, deep learning has successfully been proposed in opinion
mining [157]. State-of-the-art methods rely on converting
aspect-based sentiment analysis to sentence-pair classiﬁcation
tasks [79], post-training approaches [158] on the popular
language model BERT [131], and employment of pre-trained
embeddings [159]. [160] provides a recent comparative review
on aspect-based sentiment analysis. Also recently, [161] pro-
posed a dual-attention model which tries to extract the implicit
relation between the aspect and opinion terms. In [162] authors
propose a novel Aspect-Guided Deep Transition model for
aspect-based sentiment analysis.
E. Machine Translation
Machine Translation (MT) is one of the areas of NLP
that has been profoundly affected by the advances in deep
learning. The ﬁrst subsection below explains methods used in
the pre-deep learning period, as explained in reference NLP
textbooks such as “Speech and Language Processing” [163].
The remainder of this section is dedicated to delving into
recent innovations in MT which are based on neural networks,
started by [164]. [165], [166] provide reviews on various deep
learning architectures used for MT.
1) Traditional Machine Translation: One of the ﬁrst
demonstrations of machine translation happened in 1954 [167]
in which the authors tried to translate from Russian to English.
This translation system was based on six simple rules, but
had a very limited vocabulary. It was not until the 1990s that
successful statistical implementations of machine translation
emerged as more bilingual corpora became available [163].
In [68] the BLEU score was introduced as a new evaluation
metric, allowing more rapid improvement than when the only
approach involved using human labor for evaluation.
2) Neural Machine Translation: It was after the success
of the neural network in image classiﬁcation tasks that re-
searchers started to use neural networks in machine translation
(NMT). Around 2013, research groups started to achieve
breakthrough results in NMT. Unlike traditional statistical
machine translation, NMT is based on an end-to-end neural
network [168]. This implies that there is no need for extensive
preprocessing and word alignments. Instead, the focus shifted
toward network structure.