TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 14
for extracting the input question, and (5) estimating relevance
regarding answering the input question.
IBM’s [185] statistical question answering system consisted
of four major components:
1) Question/Answer Type Classiﬁcation
2) Query Expansion/Information Retrieval
3) Name Entity Making
4) Answer Selection
Some QA systems fail when semantically equivalent re-
lationships are phrased differently. [186] addressed this by
proposing fuzzy relation matching based on mutual informa-
tion and expectation maximization.
2) Question answering in the era of deep learning: Smart-
phones (Siri, Ok Google, Alexa, etc.) and virtual personal
assistants are common examples of QA systems with which
many interact on a daily basis. While earlier such systems
employed rule-based methods, today their core algorithm is
based on deep learning. Table VIII presents some questions
and answers provided by Siri on an iPhone.
TABLE VIII
TYPICAL QUESTION ANSWERING PERFORMANCE BASED ON DEEP
LEARNING .
Question Answer
Who invented polio vaccine? The answer I found is Jonas Salk
Who wrote Harry Potter? J.K.Rowling wrote Harry Potter in
1997
When was Einstein born? Albert Einstein was born March
14, 1879
[188] was one of the ﬁrst machine learning based papers
that reported results on QA for a reading comprehension
test. The system tries to pick a sentence in the database that
has an answer to a question, and a feature vector represents
each question-sentence pair. The main contribution of [188]
is proposing a feature vector representation framework which
is aimed to provide information for learning the model. There
are ﬁve classiﬁers (location, date, etc.), one for each type of
question. They were able to achieve accuracy competitive with
previous approaches.
As illustrated in Fig. 13, [187] uses convolutional neural
networks in order to encode Question-Answer sentence pairs
in the form of ﬁxed length vectors regardless of the length
of the input sentence. Instead of using distance measures like
cosine correlation, they incorporate a non-linear tensor layer to
match the relevance between question and answer. Equation 9
calculates the matching degree between question qand its
corresponding answer a.
s(q;a) =uTf(vT
qM[1:r]va+Vvq
va
+b) (9)
fis the standard element-wise non-linearity function,
M[1:r]2Rnsnsris a tensor, V2Rr2ns,b2Rr,u2Rr.
The model tries to capture the interaction between question
and answer. Inspired by ﬁndings in neuroscience, [81] incorpo-
rated episodic memory11in their Dynamic Memory Network
11A kind of long-term memory that includes conscious recall of previous
activities together with their meaning.(DMN). By processing input sequences and questions, DMN
forms episodic memories to answer relevant questions. As
illustrated in Fig. 14, their system is trained based on raw
Input-Question-Answer triplets.
DMN consists of four modules that communicate with each
other as shown in Fig. 15. The input module encodes raw
input text into a distributed vector representation; likewise
thequestion module encodes a question into its distributed
vector representation. The episodic memory module uses the
attention mechanism in order to focus on a speciﬁc part of
the input module. Through an iterative process, this module
produces a memory vector representation that considers the
question as well as previous memory. The answer module
uses the ﬁnal memory vector to generate an answer. The model
improved upon state-of-the-art results on tasks such as the ones
shown in Fig. 14. DMN is one of the architectures that could
potentially be used for a variety of NLP applications such as
classiﬁcation, question answering, and sequence modeling.
[189] introduced a Dynamic Coattention Network (DCN)
in order to address local maxima corresponding to incorrect
answers; it is considered to be one of the best approaches to
question answering.
3) Visual Question Answering: Given an input image, Vi-
sual Question Answering (VQA) tries to answer a natural
language question about the image [190]. VQN addresses mul-
tiple problems such as object detection, image segmentation,
sentiment analysis, etc. [190] introduced the task of VQA
by providing a dataset containing over 250K images, 760K
questions, and around 10M answers. [191] proposed a neural-
based approach to answer the questions regarding the input
images. As illustrated in Fig. 16, Neural-Image-QA is a deep
network consisting of CNN and LSTM. Since the questions
can have multiple answers, the problem is decomposed into
predicting a set of answer words aq;x=fa1;a2;:::;aN(q;x)g
from a ﬁnite vocabulary set whereN(q;x)represents the
count of answer words regarding a given question.
Do humans and computers look at the same regions to
answer questions about an image? [193] tries to answer this
question by conducting large-scale studies on human attention
in VQA. Their ﬁndings show that VQAs do not seem to
be looking at the same regions as humans. Finally, [192]
incorporates a spatial memory network for VQA. Fig. 17
shows the inference process of their model. As illustrated in
the ﬁgure, the speciﬁc attention mechanism in their system can
highlight areas of interest in the input image. [194] introduces
BLOCK, a bilinear fusion model based on superdiagonal
tensor decomposition for the VQA task, with state-of-the-
art performance and the code made public on github. To
improve the generalization of existing models to test data of
different distribution, [195] introduces a self-critical training
objective to help ﬁnd visual regions of prominent visual/textual
correlation with a focus on recognizing inﬂuential objects and
detecting and devaluing incorrect dominant answers.
G. Document Summarization
Document summarization refers to a set of problems involv-
ing generation of summary sentences given one or multiple
documents as input.