TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 2
scientists and consumers anticipate enhancement across a
variety of applications. However, achieving this requires un-
derstanding of AI and its mechanisms and means (e.g., algo-
rithms). Ted Greenwald, explaining AI to those who are not
AI experts, comments: ”Generally AI is anything a computer
can do that formerly was considered a job for a human” [28].
An AI goal is to extend the capabilities of information
technology (IT) from those to (1) generate, communicate,
and store data, to also (2) process data into the knowledge
that decision makers and others need [29]. One reason is
that the available data volume is increasing so rapidly that
it is now impossible for people to process all available data.
This leaves two choices: (1) much or even most existing data
must be ignored or (2) AI must be developed to process the
vast volumes of available data into the essential pieces of
information that decision-makers and others can comprehend.
Deep learning is a bridge between the massive amounts of
data and AI.
1) Deﬁnitions: Deep learning refers to applying deep neu-
ral networks to massive amounts of data to learn a procedure
aimed at handling a task . The task can range from simple
classiﬁcation to complex reasoning. In other words, deep
learning is a set of mechanisms ideally capable of deriving an
optimum solution to any problem given a sufﬁciently extensive
and relevant input dataset. Loosely speaking, deep learning
is detecting and analyzing important structures/features in the
data aimed at formulating a solution to a given problem. Here,
AI and deep learning meet. One version of the goal or ambition
behind AI is enabling a machine to outperform what the human
brain does . Deep learning is a means to this end.
2) Deep Learning Architectures: Numerous deep learning
architectures have been developed in different research areas,
e.g., in NLP applications employing recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [30], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [31], and
more recently, recursive neural networks [32]. We focus our
discussion on a review of the essential models, explained in
relevant seminal publications.
Multi Layer Perceptron: Amultilayer perceptron (MLP)
has at least three layers (input, hidden, and output layers). A
layer is simply a collection of neurons operating to transform
information from the previous layer to the next layer. In the
MLP architecture, the neurons in a layer do not communicate
with each other. An MLP employs nonlinear activation func-
tions. Every node in a layer connects to all nodes in the next
layer, creating a fully connected network (Fig. 1). MLPs are
the simplest type of Feed-Forward Neural Networks (FNNs).
FNNs represent a general category of neural networks in which
the connections between the nodes do not create any cycle, i.e.,
in a FNN there is no cycle of information ﬂow.
Convolutional Neural Networks: Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), whose architecture is inspired by the human
visual cortex, are a subclass of feed-forward neural networks.
CNNs are named after the underlying mathematical operation,
convolution , which yields a measure of the interoperability of
its input functions. Convolutional neural networks are usually
employed in situations where data is or needs to be represented
with a 2D or 3D data map. In the data map representation,
the proximity of data points usually corresponds to their
Fig. 1. The general architecture of a MLP.
information correlation.
In convolutional neural networks where the input is an
image, the data map indicates that image pixels are highly cor-
related to their neighboring pixels. Consequently, the convolu-
tional layers have 3 dimensions: width, height, and depth. That
assumption possibly explains why the majority of research
efforts dedicated to CNNs are conducted in the Computer
Vision ﬁeld [33].
A CNN takes an image represented as an array of numeric
values. After performing speciﬁc mathematical operations, it
represents the image in a new output space. This operation is
also called feature extraction, and helps to capture and rep-
resent key image content. The extracted features can be used
for further analysis, for different tasks. One example is image
classiﬁcation, which aims to categorize images according to
some predeﬁned classes. Other examples include determining
which objects are present in an image and where they are
located. See Fig. 2.
In the case of utilizing CNNs for NLP, the inputs are sen-
tences or documents represented as matrices. Each row of the
matrix is associated with a language element such as a word
or a character. The majority of CNN architectures learn word
or sentence representations in their training phase. A variety
of CNN architectures were used in various classiﬁcation tasks
such as Sentiment Analysis and Topic Categorization [31],
[34]–[36]. CNNs were employed for Relation Extraction and
Relation Classiﬁcation as well [37], [38].
Recurrent Neural Network: If we line up a sequence of
FNNs and feed the output of each FNN as an input to the next
one, a recurrent neural network (RNN) will be constructed.
Like FNNs, layers in an RNN can be categorized into input,
hidden, and output layers. In discrete time frames, sequences
of input vectors are fed as the input, one vector at a time,
e.g., after inputting each batch of vectors, conducting some
operations and updating the network weights, the next input
batch will be fed to the network. Thus, as shown in Fig. 3,
at each time step we make predictions and use parameters of
the current hidden layer as input to the next time step.
Hidden layers in recurrent neural networks can carry infor-
mation from the past, in other words, memory. This character-
istic makes them speciﬁcally useful for applications that deal