TORFI et. al., NLP ADV ANCEMENTS BY DEEP LEARNING 5
Vector (PV). The goal behind PV is to learn ﬁxed-length rep-
resentations from variable-length text parts such as sentences
and documents. One of the main objectives of doc2vec is
to overcome the drawbacks of models such as BoW and to
provide promising results for applications such as text classi-
ﬁcation and sentiment analysis. A more recent approach is the
skip-thought model which applies word2vec at the sentence-
level [54]. By utilizing an encoder-decoder architecture, this
model generates the surrounding sentences using the given
sentence (Fig. 6). Next, let’s investigate different kinds of
feature representation.
1) One-Hot Representation: In one-hot encoding, each
unique element that needs to be represented has its dimen-
sion which results in a very high dimensional, very sparse
representation. Assume the words are represented with the
one-hot encoding method. Regarding representation structure,
there is no meaningful connection between different words in
the feature space. For example, highly correlated words such
as ‘ocean’ and ‘water’ will not be closer to each other (in the
representation space) compared to less correlated pairs such as
‘ocean’ and ‘ﬁre.’ Nevertheless, some research efforts present
promising results using one-hot encoding [2].
2) Continuous Bag of Words: Continuous Bag-of-Words
model (CBOW) has frequently been used in NLP applica-
tions. CBOW tries to predict a word given its surrounding
context, which usually consists of a few nearby words [55].
CBOW is neither dependent on the sequential order of words
nor necessarily on probabilistic characteristics. So it is not
generally used for language modeling. This model is typi-
cally trained to be utilized as a pre-trained model for more
sophisticated tasks. An alternative to CBOW is the weighted
CBOW (WCBOW) [56] in which different vectors get different
weights reﬂective of relative importance in context. The sim-
plest example can be document categorization where features
are words and weights are TF-IDF scores [57] of the associated
words.
3) Word-Level Embedding: Word embedding is a learned
representation for context elements in which, ideally, words
with related semantics become highly correlated in the rep-
resentation space. One of the main incentives behind word
embedding representations is the high generalization power
as opposed to sparse, higher dimensional representations [58].
Unlike the traditional bag-of-words model in which different
words have entirely different representations regardless of their
usage or collocations, learning a distributed representation
takes advantage of word usage in context to provide similar
representations for semantically correlated words. There are
different approaches to create word embeddings. Several re-
search efforts, including [53], [55], used random initialization
by uniformly sampling random numbers with the objective of
training an efﬁcient representation of the model on a large
dataset. This setup is intuitively acceptable for initialization
of the embedding for common features such as part-of-speech
tags. However, this may not be the optimum method for rep-
resentation of less frequent features such as individual words.
For the latter, pre-trained models, trained in a supervised or
unsupervised manner, are usually leveraged for increasing the
performance.4) Character-Level Embedding: The methods mentioned
earlier are mostly at higher levels of representation. Lower-
level representations such as character-level representation
require special attention as well, due to their simplicity of
representation and the potential for correction of unusual
character combinations such as misspellings [2]. For generat-
ing character-level embeddings, CNNs have successfully been
utilized [14].
Character-level embeddings have been used in different
NLP applications [59]. One of the main advantages is the
ability to use small model sizes and represent words with
lower-level language elements [14]. Here word embeddings
are models utilizing CNNs over the characters. Another mo-
tivation for employing character-level embeddings is the out-
of-vocabulary word (OOV) issue which is usually encountered
when, for the given word, there is no equivalent vector in
the word embedding. The character-level approach may sig-
niﬁcantly alleviate this problem. Nevertheless, this approach
suffers from a weak correlation between characters and se-
mantic and syntactic parts of the language. So, considering
the aforementioned pros and cons of utilizing character-level
embeddings, several research efforts tried to propose and im-
plement higher-level approaches such as using sub-words [60]
to create word embeddings for OOV instances as well as
creating a semantic bridge between the correlated words [61].
B. Seq2Seq Framework
Most underlying frameworks in NLP applications rely on
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models in which not only the
input but also the output is represented as a sequence. These
models are common in various applications including machine
translation4, text summarization5, speech-to-text, and text-to-
speech applications6.
The most common seq2seq framework is comprised of an
encoder and a decoder. The encoder ingests the sequence of
input data and generates a mid-level output which is subse-
quently consumed by the decoder to produce the series of ﬁnal
outputs. The encoder and decoder are usually implemented via
a series of Recurrent Neural Networks or LSTM [40] cells.
The encoder takes a sequence of length T,X=
fx1;x2;;xTg, wherext2V=f1;;jVjgis the
representation of a single input coming from the vocabulary
V, and then generates the output state ht. Subsequently, the
decoder takes the last state from the encoder, i.e., ht, and
starts generating an output of size L,Y0=fy0
1;y0
2;;y0
Lg,
based on its current state, st, and the ground-truth output yt.
In different applications, the decoder could take advantage
of more information such as a context vector [62] or intra-
attention vectors [63] to generate better outputs.
One of the most widely training approaches for seq2seq
models is called Teacher Forcing [64]. Let us deﬁne y=
4The input is a sequence of words from one language (e.g., English) and
the output is the translation to another language (e.g., French).
5The input is a complete document (sequence of words) and the output is
a summary of it (sequence of words).
6The input is an audio recording of a speech (sequence of audible elements)
and the output is the speech text (sequence of words).