zb=g(hb). Following the anchoring based method, we
usezw
bandzs
bto denote the embedding from the weakly
and strongly augmented view. Now, lets assume we have
Kweakly augmented embeddings for a bunch of different
samples {zk:k∈(1, ..., K )}, we calculate the similarities
between zwandi-th instance by using a similarity function
sim(·), which represents the dot product between L2nor-
malized vectors sim(u,v) =uTv/∥u∥∥v∥. A softmax
layer can be adopted to process the calculated similarities,
which then produces a distribution:
qw
i=exp(sim(zw
b,zi)/t)PK
k=1exp(sim(zw
b,zk)/t)(3)
Where tis the temperature parameter that controls the
sharpness of the distribution. On the other hand, we can
calculate the similarities between the strongly augmented
viewzsandziassim(zs
b,zi). The resulting similarity dis-
tribution can be written as:
qs
i=exp(sim(zs
b,zi)/t)PK
k=1exp(sim(zs
b,zk)/t)(4)
Finally, the consistency regularization can be achieved
by minimizing the different between qsandqw. Here, we
adopt the cross entropy loss, which can be formulated as:
Lin=1
µBX
H(qw, qs) (5)
Please noted that the instance consistency regularization
will only be applied on the unlabeled examples. The overall
training objective for our model will be:
Loverall =Ls+λuLu+λinLin (6)
where λuandλinare the balancing factors that control the
weights of the two losses.
3.3. Label Propagation through SimMatch
Although our overall training objective also considers
the consistency regularization on instance-level, however,
the generation of the instance pseudo-labels qware still in
a fully unsupervised manner, which is absolutely a waste
of the labeled information. To improve the quality of the
pseudo-labels, in this section, we will illustrate how to
leverage the labeled information on instance-level and also
introduce a way that allows semantic similarity and instance
similarity to interact with each other.
We instantiated a labeled memory buffer to keep all the
annotated examples as we have shown in Figure 2 (red
branch). In this way, each zkthat we used in Eq.(3) and
Eq.(4) could be assigned to a specific class. If we interpret
the vectors in ϕas the “centered” class references, the em-
beddings in our labeled memory buffer can be viewed as a
set of “individual” class references.By given a weakly augmented sample, we first compute
the semantic similarity pw∈R1×Land instance similarity
qw∈R1×K. (Noted that Lis generally much smaller than
Ksince we need at least one sample for each class.) To
calibrate qwwithpw, we need to unfold pwintoKdimen-
sional space which we denote it as punfold. we achieved
this by matching the corresponding semantic similarity for
each labeled embedding:
punfold
i =pw
j, where class (qw
j) =class (pw
i) (7)
where class (·)is the function that returns the ground
truth class. Specifically, class (qw
j)represent the label for
thejthelement in memory buffer and class (pw
i)means
theithclass. Now, we regenerate the calibrated instance
pseudo-labels by scaling qwwithpunfold, which can be ex-
pressed as the following:
bqi=qw
ipunfold
iPK
k=1qw
kpunfold
k(8)
The calibrated instance pseudo-label bqwill be served as
a new target and replace the old one qwin Eq.(5). On the
other hand, we can also use the instance similarity to adjust
the semantic similarity. To do this, we first need to aggre-
gateqintoLdimensional space which we denote it as qagg.
We achieved this by sum over the instance similarities that
share the same ground truth labels:
qagg
i=KX
j=01(class (pw
i) =class (qw
j))qw
j (9)
Now, we regenerate the adjusted semantic pseudo-label
bysmoothing pwwithqagg, which can be written as:
bpi=αpw
i+ (1−α)qagg
i (10)
where αis the hyper-parameter that controls the weight of
the semantic and instance information. Similarly, The ad-
justed semantic pseudo-label will replace the old one pw
iin
Eq.(2). In this way, the pseudo-label bpandbqwill both con-
tains the semantic-level and instance-level information. As
we have shown in Figure 3, when semantic and instance
similarities are similar, which means these two distribu-
tions agree with the prediction of each other, then the re-
sult pseudo-label will be much sharper and produce high
confidence for some classes. On the other hand, if these
two similarities are different, the result pseudo-label will
be much flatter and not contain high probability values. In
SimMatch, we adopt the scaling and smoothing strategy for
bqandbprespectively, we also have tried different combina-
tion for these two strategies, please see more details in our
ablation study section.
14474