SimMatch: Semi-supervised Learning with Similarity Matching
Mingkai Zheng1,2Shan You2*
Lang Huang3Fei Wang4Chen Qian2Chang Xu1
1School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2SenseTime Research3The University of Tokyo
4University of Science and Technology of China
Abstract
Learning with few labeled data has been a longstanding
problem in the computer vision and machine learning re-
search community. In this paper, we introduced a new semi-
supervised learning framework, SimMatch, which simulta-
neously considers semantic similarity and instance similar-
ity. In SimMatch, the consistency regularization will be ap-
plied on both semantic-level and instance-level. The differ-
ent augmented views of the same instance are encouraged
to have the same class prediction and similar similarity re-
lationship respected to other instances. Next, we instanti-
ated a labeled memory buffer to fully leverage the ground
truth labels on instance-level and bridge the gaps between
the semantic and instance similarities. Finally, we pro-
posed the unfolding and aggregation operation which al-
lows these two similarities be isomorphically transformed
with each other. In this way, the semantic and instance
pseudo-labels can be mutually propagated to generate more
high-quality and reliable matching targets. Extensive ex-
perimental results demonstrate that SimMatch improves the
performance of semi-supervised learning tasks across dif-
ferent benchmark datasets and different settings. Notably,
with 400 epochs of training, SimMatch achieves 67.2%, and
74.4% Top-1 Accuracy with 1% and 10% labeled examples
on ImageNet, which significantly outperforms the baseline
methods and is better than previous semi-supervised learn-
ing frameworks.
1. Introduction
Benefiting from the availability of large-scale annotated
datasets and growing computational resources in the last
decades, deep neural networks have demonstrated their suc-
cess on a variety of visual tasks [19, 20, 22, 23, 27, 38, 50,
58–60]. However, a large volume of labeled data is very
expensive to collect in a real-world scenario. Learning
with few labeled data has been a longstanding problem in
*Correspondence to: Shan You <youshan@sensetime.com >.
Encoder…SamplesMLPFC
Labeled EmbeddingsClass CentersFigure 1. A sketch of SimMatch. The Fully-Connected layer vec-
tors can be viewed as a semantic representative or class center for
each category. However, due to the limited labeled samples, the
semantic-level information is not always reliable. In SimMatch,
we consider the instance-level and semantic-level information si-
multaneously and adopt a labeled memory buffer to fully leverage
the ground truth label on instance-level.
the computer vision and machine learning research com-
munity. Among various methods, semi-supervised learning
(SSL) [12, 46, 53, 67] serves as an effective solution by dint
of the help of massive unlabeled data, and achieves remark-
able performance.
A simple but very effective semi-supervised learning
method is to pretrain a model on a large-scale dataset and
then transfer the learned representation by fine-tuning the
pretrained model with a few labeled samples. Thanks to
the recent advances in self-supervised learning [10, 14, 15,
21, 25, 26, 30, 54], such pretraining and fine-tuning pipeline
have demonstrated its promising performance in SSL. Most
self-supervised learning frameworks focus on the design of
pretext tasks. For example, instance discrimination [55] en-
courages different views of the same instance to share the
same features, and different instances should have distinct
features. Deep clustering based methods [3, 9, 10] expect
different augmented views of the same instance should be
classified into the same cluster. However, most of these pre-
text tasks are designed in a completely unsupervised man-
ner, without considering the few labeled data at hand.
Instead of standalone two-stage pretraining and fine-
14471