tuning, current popular methods directly involve the la-
beled data in a joint feature learning paradigm with pseudo-
labeling [35] or consistency regularization [47]. The main
idea behind these methods is to train a semantic classifier
with labeled samples and use the predicted distribution as
the pseudo label for the unlabeled samples. In this way, the
pseudo-labels are generally produced by the weakly aug-
mented views [5, 48] or the averaged predictions of mul-
tiple strongly augmented views [6]. The objective will be
constructed by the cross entropy loss between an different
strongly augmented views and the pseudo-labels. It might
also be noted that the pseudo-labels will generally be sharp-
ened or operated by argmax since every instance is ex-
pected to be classified into a category. However, when there
are only very limited annotated data, the semantic classi-
fier is no longer reliable; applying the pseudo-label method
will cause the “overconfidence” issue [13,63], which means
the model will fit on the confident but wrong pseudo-labels,
resulting in poor performance.
In this paper, we introduce a novel semi-supervised
learning framework, SimMatch, which has been shown in
Figure 1. In SimMatch, we bridge both sides and propose
to match the similarity relationships of both semantic and
instance levels simultaneously for different augmentations.
Specifically, we first require the strongly augmented view
to have the same semantic similarity ( i.e. label prediction)
with a weak augmented view; besides, we also encourage
the strong augmentation to have the same instance charac-
teristics ( i.e. similarity between instances) with the weak
one for more intrinsic feature matching. Moreover, different
from the previous works that simply regard the predictions
of the weakly augmented views as pseudo-labels. In Sim-
Match, the semantic and instance pseudo-labels are allowed
to interact by instantiating a memory buffer that keeps all
the labeled examples. In this way, these two similarities
can be isomorphically transformed with each other by in-
troducing aggregating andunfolding techniques. Thus the
semantic and instance pseudo-labels can be mutually prop-
agated to generate more high-quality and reliable matching
targets. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effective-
ness of SimMatch across different settings. Our contribu-
tion can be summarized as follows:
• We proposed SimMatch, a novel semi-supervised
learning framework that simultaneously considers se-
mantics similarity and instance similarity.
• To channel both similarities, we leverage a labeled
memory buffer so that semantic and instance pseudo-
labels can be mutually propagated with the aggregat-
ingandunfolding techniques.
• SimMatch establishes a new state-of-the-art perfor-
mance for semi-supervised learning. With only 400
epochs of training, SimMatch achieves 67.2% and74.4% Top-1 accuracy with 1% and 10% labeled ex-
amples on ImageNet.
2. Related Work
2.1. Semi-Supervised Learning
Consistency Regularization is a widely adopted method
in semi-supervised learning. The main idea is to enforce the
model to output a consistent prediction for the different per-
turbed versions of the same instance. For example, [34, 47]
achieved such consistency requirement by minimizing the
mean square difference between the predicted probability
distribution of the two transformed views. In this case, the
transformation could be either domain-specific data aug-
mentations [5, 6, 48], or some regularization techniques in
the network ( e.g. drop out [49] and random max-pooling
[47]). Moreover, [34] also proposed a temporal ensemble
strategy to aggregate the predictions of multiple previous
networks, which makes the predicted distribution more re-
liable. Mean Teacher [52] further extends this idea which
replaced the aggregated predictions with the output of an
exponential moving average (EMA) model.
MixMatch [6], ReMixMatch [5], and FixMatch [48]
are three augmentation anchoring based methods that fully
leverage the augmentation consistency. Specifically, Mix-
Match adopts a sharpened averaged prediction of multi-
ple strongly augmented views as the pseudo label and uti-
lizes the MixUp trick [64] to further enhance the pseudo
label. ReMixMatch improved this idea by generating the
pseudo label with weakly augmented views and also in-
troduced a distribution alignment strategy that encourages
the pseudo label distribution to match the marginal distribu-
tion of ground-truth class labels. FixMatch simplified these
ideas, where the unlabeled images are only retained if the
model produces a high-confidence pseudo label. Despite its
simplicity, FixMatch achieved state-of-the-art performance
among the augmentation anchoring-based methods.
2.2. Self-supervised Pretraining
Apart from the typical semi-supervised learning method,
self-supervised and contrastive learning [14, 26, 55] has
gained much attention in this research community since
fine-tuning the pre-trained model with labeled samples has
shown promising classification results, especially SimCLR
v2 [15] shows that a big (deep and wide) pre-trained model
is a strong semi-supervised learner. Most of the contrastive
learning framework adopts the instance discrimination [55]
as the pretext task, which defines different augmented views
of the same instance as positive pairs, while negative pairs
are formed by sampling views from different instances.
However, because of the existence of similar samples, treat-
ing different instances as negative pairs will result in a class
collision problem [2], which is not conducive to the down-
14472