Generating Diverse Structure for Image Inpainting With Hierarchical VQ-V AE
Jialun Peng1Dong Liu1* Songcen Xu2Houqiang Li1
1University of Science and Technology of China2Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
pjl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu, lihq }@ustc.edu.cn, xusongcen@huawei.com
Abstract
Given an incomplete image without additional con-
straint, image inpainting natively allows for multiple solu-
tions as long as they appear plausible. Recently, multiple-
solution inpainting methods have been proposed and shown
the potential of generating diverse results. However, these
methods have difﬁculty in ensuring the quality of each so-
lution, e.g. they produce distorted structure and/or blurry
texture. We propose a two-stage model for diverse inpaint-
ing, where the ﬁrst stage generates multiple coarse results
each of which has a different structure, and the second stage
reﬁnes each coarse result separately by augmenting texture.
The proposed model is inspired by the hierarchical vector
quantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-VAE), whose hi-
erarchical architecture disentangles structural and textural
information. In addition, the vector quantization in VQ-
VAE enables autoregressive modeling of the discrete distri-
bution over the structural information. Sampling from the
distribution can easily generate diverse and high-quality
structures, making up the ﬁrst stage of our model. In
the second stage, we propose a structural attention mod-
ule inside the texture generation network, where the mod-
ule utilizes the structural information to capture distant
correlations. We further reuse the VQ-VAE to calculate
two feature losses, which help improve structure coherence
and texture realism, respectively. Experimental results on
CelebA-HQ, Places2, and ImageNet datasets show that our
method not only enhances the diversity of the inpainting
solutions but also improves the visual quality of the gen-
erated multiple images. Code and models are available
at:https://github.com/USTC-JialunPeng/
Diverse-Structure-Inpainting .
1. Introduction
Image inpainting refers to the task of ﬁlling in the miss-
ing region of an incomplete image so as to produce a com-
plete and visually plausible image. Inpainting beneﬁts a se-
*This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62036005 and 62022075. (Corresponding author: Dong
Liu.)
Figure 1. (Top) Input incomplete image, where the missing region
is depicted in gray. (Middle) Visualization of the generated diverse
structures. (Bottom) Output images of our method.
ries of applications including object removal, photo restora-
tion, and transmission error concealment. As an ill-posed
problem, inpainting raises a great challenge especially when
the missing region is large and contains complex content.
As such, inpainting has attracted much research attention.
Recently, a series of deep learning-based methods are
proposed for inpainting [ 10,19]. They usually employ
encoder-decoder architectures and train the networks with
the combinations of reconstruction and adversarial losses.
To enhance the visual quality of the results, a number of
studies [ 23,26,32,34,36] adopt the contextual attention
mechanisms to use the available content for generating the
missing content. Also, several studies [ 13,33,35] propose
modiﬁed convolutions in replacement of normal convolu-
tions to reduce the artifacts.
The aforementioned methods all learn a deterministic
mapping from an incomplete image to a complete im-
10775