ods only generate one optimal result for each incomplete in-
put. They focus on reconstructing ground truth rather than
creating plausible results.
To obtain multiple inpainting solutions, Zheng et al. [39]
propose a V AE-based model with two parallel paths, which
trades off between reconstructing ground truth and main-
taining the diversity of the inpainting results. Zhao et al.
[38] propose a similar V AE-based model which uses in-
stance images to improve the diversity. However, these
methods do not effectively separate the structural and tex-
tural information, they often produce distorted structures
and/or blurry textures.
2.2. VQ­V AE and Autoregressive Networks
The vector quantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-
V AE) [ 29] is a discrete latent V AE model which relies on
vector quantization layers to model discrete latent variables.
The discrete latent variables allow a powerful autoregres-
sive network such as PixelCNN [ 6,18,25,28] to model la-
tents without worrying about the posterior collapse prob-
lem [ 29]. Razavi et al. [20] propose a hierarchical VQ-V AE
which uses a hierarchy of discrete latent variables to sepa-
rate the structural and textural information. Then they use
two PixelCNNs to model structural and textural informa-
tion, respectively. However, the PixelCNNs are conditioned
on the class label for image generation, while there is no
class label in the image inpainting task. Besides, the gener-
ated textures of the PixelCNNs lack ﬁne-grained details due
to the lossy nature of VQ-V AE. It relieves the generation
model from modeling negligible information, but it hinders
the inpainting model from generating realistic textures con-
sistent with the known regions. The PixelCNNs are thus not
practical for image inpainting.
3. Method
As shown in Figure 2, the pipeline of our method con-
sists of three parts: hierarchical VQ-V AE Evq-Dvq, diverse
structure generator Gsand texture generator Gt. The hi-
erarchical encoder Evqdisentangles discrete structural fea-
tures and discrete textural features of the ground truth Igt
and the decoder Dvqoutputs the reconstructed image Ir.
The diverse structure generator Gsproduces diverse dis-
crete structural features given an input incomplete image
Iin. The texture generator Gtsynthesizes the image texture
given the discrete structural features and outputs the com-
pletion result Icomp . We also use the pre-trained Evqas
an auxiliary evaluator to deﬁne two novel feature losses for
better visual quality of the completion result.
3.1. Hierarchical VQ­V AE
In order to disentangle structural and textural informa-
tion, we pre-train a hierarchical VQ-V AE Evq-Dvqfollow-
ing [ 20]. The hierarchical encoder Evqmaps ground truthIgtonto structural features sgtand textural features tgt. The
processing of Evqcan be written as (sgt,tgt) =Evq(Igt).
These features are then quantized to discrete features by two
vector quantization layers. Each vector quantization layer
hasK= 512 prototype vectors in its codebook and the vec-
tor dimensionality is D= 64. As such, each vector of fea-
tures is replaced by the nearest prototype vector based on
Euclidean distance. The processing of vector quantization
can be written as ¯sgt=VQs(sgt)and¯tgt=VQt(tgt).
Finally, the decoder Dvqreconstructs image from these two
sets of discrete features. The processing of Dvqcan be writ-
ten asIr=Dvq(¯sgt,¯tgt).
The reconstruction loss of Evq-Dvqis deﬁned as:
Lℓ2=/bardblIr−Igt/bardbl2
2(1)
To back-propagate the gradient of the reconstruction loss
through vector quantization, we use the straight-through
gradient estimator [ 3]. The codebook prototype vectors are
updated using the exponential moving average of the en-
coder output. As proposed in [ 29], we also use two commit-
ment losses LscandLtcto align the encoder output with the
codebook prototype vectors for stable training. The com-
mitment loss of structural features is deﬁned as:
Lsc=/bardblsgt−sg[¯sgt]/bardbl2
2(2)
wheresgdenotes the stop-gradient operator [ 29]. The com-
mitment loss of textural features (denoted as Ltc) is similar
toLsc. The total loss of Evq-Dvqis deﬁned as:
Lvq=αℓ2Lℓ2+αc(Lsc+Ltc) (3)
whereαℓ2andαcare loss weights.
For 256×256 images, the size of structural features is
32×32 and that of textural features is 64 ×64. We visu-
alize their discrete representations using the decoder Dvq.
The visualized results can be written as Dvq(¯sgt,0)and
Dvq(0,¯tgt), where 0is a zero tensor. As shown in Fig-
ure2, the structural features model global information such
as shapes and colors, and the textural features model local
information such as details and textures.
3.2. Diverse Structure Generator
Previous multiple-solution inpainting methods [ 38,39]
often produce distorted structures and/or blurry textures,
suggesting that these methods struggle to recover the struc-
ture and the texture simultaneously. Therefore, we ﬁrst pro-
pose a diverse structure generator Gswhich uses an au-
toregressive network to formulate a conditional distribution
over the discrete structural features. Sampling from the dis-
tribution can produce diverse structural features.
Similar to the PixelCNN in [ 20], our autoregressive net-
work consists of 20 residual gated convolution layers and
10777