age. However, in practice, the solution to inpainting is not
unique. Without additional constraint, multiple inpainting
results are equally/similarly plausible for an incomplete im-
age, especially when the missing region is large and con-
tains complex content ( e.g. Figure 1). Moreover, for typi-
cal applications, providing multiple inpainting results may
enable the user to select from them according to his/her
own preference. It then motivates the design for multiple-
solution inpainting.
In contrast to single-solution methods, multiple-solution
inpainting shall build a probabilistic model of the missing
content conditioned on the available content. Several recent
studies [ 38,39] employ variational auto-encoder (V AE) ar-
chitectures and train the networks with the combinations of
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergences and adversarial losses.
V AE-based methods [ 38,39] assume a Gaussian distribution
over continuous latent variables. Sampling from the Gaus-
sian distribution presents diverse latent features and leads to
diverse inpainted images. Although these methods can gen-
erate multiple solutions, some of their solutions are of low
quality due to distorted structures and/or blurry textures. It
may be attributed to the limitation of the parametric ( e.g.
Gaussian) distribution when we try to model the complex
natural image content. In addition, recent studies more and
more demonstrate the importance of structural information,
e.g. segmentation maps [ 12,27], edges [ 17,30], and smooth
images [ 14,21], for guiding image inpainting. Such struc-
tural information is yet to be incorporated into multiple-
solution inpainting. Thus, V AE-based methods [ 38,39] tend
to produce multiple results with limited structural diversity,
which is called posterior collapse in [ 29].
In this paper we try to address the limitations of the ex-
isting multiple-solution inpainting methods. First, instead
of parametric distribution modeling of continuous variables,
we resort to autoregressive modeling of discrete variables.
Second, we want to generate multiple structures in an ex-
plicit fashion, and then base the inpainting upon the gen-
erated structure. We ﬁnd that the hierarchical vector quan-
tized V AE (VQ-V AE) [ 20] is suitable for our study1. First,
there is a vector quantization step in VQ-V AE making the
latent variables to be all discrete; as noted in [ 29], these dis-
crete latent variables allow the usage of powerful decoders
to avoid the posterior collapse. Second, the hierarchical lay-
out encourages the split of the image information into global
and local parts; with proper design, it may disentangle struc-
tural features from textural features of an image.
Based on the hierarchical VQ-V AE, we propose a two-
stage model for multiple-solution inpainting. The ﬁrst
stage is known as diverse structure generator, where sam-
pling from a conditional autoregressive distribution pro-
1In this paper we use the basic model in [ 20], which is called VQ-
V AE-2. Note that our method can use other hierarchical VQ-V AE models
as well.duces multiple sets of structural features. The second stage
is known as texture generator, where an encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture is used to produce a complete image based on the
guidance of a set of structural features. Note that each set of
the generated structural features leads to a complete image
(see Figure 1).
The main contributions we have made in this paper can
be summarized as follows:
•We propose a multiple-solution image inpainting
method based on hierarchical VQ-V AE. The method
has two distinctions from previous multiple-solution
methods: ﬁrst, the model learns an autoregressive dis-
tribution over discrete latent variables; second, the
model splits structural and textural features.
•We propose to learn a conditional autoregressive net-
work for the distribution over structural features. The
network manages to generate reasonable structures
with high diversity.
•For texture generation we propose a structural atten-
tion module to capture distant correlations of structural
features. We also propose two new feature losses to
improve structure coherence and texture realism.
•Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets in-
cluding CelebA-HQ, Places2, and ImageNet demon-
strate the superiority of our proposed method in both
quality and diversity.
2. Related Work
2.1. Image Inpainting
Traditional image inpainting methods such as diffusion-
based methods [ 1,4] and patch-based methods [ 2,5,7,8]
borrow image-level patches from source images to ﬁll in the
missing regions. They are unable to generate unique content
not found in the source images. Furthermore, these meth-
ods often generate unreasonable results without considering
high-level semantics of the images.
Recently, learning-based methods which use deep con-
volutional networks are proposed to semantically predict
the missing regions. Pathak et al . [19] ﬁrst apply adver-
sarial learning to the image inpainting. Iizuka et al. [10]
introduce an extra discriminator to enforce the local con-
sistency. Yan et al. [32] and Yu et al. [34] propose patch-
swap and contextual attention to make use of distant feature
patches for the higher inpainting quality. Liu et al. [13] and
Yuet al. [35] introduce partial convolutions and gated con-
volutions to reduce visual artifacts caused by normal con-
volutions. In order to generate reasonable structures and
realistic textures, Nazeri et al. [17] and Xu et al. [31] use
edge maps as structural information to guide image inpaint-
ing. Ren et al. [21] propose to use edge-preserved smooth
images instead of edge maps. Liu et al. [14] propose feature
equalizations to improve the consistency between the struc-
ture and the texture. However, these learning-based meth-
10776