existing inpainting methods, our texture generator Gtuti-
lizes the given structural features as guidance. The struc-
tural features are not only input to the ﬁrst few layers of
Gt, but also input to our structural attention module. The
proposed structural attention module borrows distant infor-
mation based on the correlations of the structural features.
It thus ensures that the synthesized texture is consistent with
the generated structure.
LetIoutdenote the output of Gt. The ﬁnal completion
resultIcomp is the output Ioutwith the non-masked pixels
directly set to ground truth. During training, Gttakes the
ground truth structural features ¯sgtas input so that Icomp
is the reconstruction of ground truth. During inference, Gt
takes the generated structural features ¯sgenas input so that
Icomp is the inpainting result.
Structural Attention Module. Attention modules are
widely used in the existing image inpainting methods. They
generally calculate the attention scores on a low-resolution
intermediate feature map of the network. However, due to
the lack of direct supervision on the attention scores, the
learned attention is insufﬁciently reliable [ 41]. These atten-
tion modules may refer to unsuitable features, resulting in
poor inpainting quality. To address this problem, we pro-
pose a structural attention module which directly calculates
the attention scores on the structural features. Intuitively,
regions with similar structures should have similar textures.
Calculating the attention scores on the structural features
can model accurate long-range correlations of structural in-
formation, thereby improving the consistency between the
synthesized texture and the generated structure.
In addition, the attention modules in the existing im-
age inpainting methods distinguish the foreground features
and the background features using the down-sampled mask.
This hand-crafted design may incorrectly divide the feature
map and produce artifacts in the inpainting result. There-
fore, our structural attention module calculates full attention
scores on the structural features. Unlike the foreground-
background cross attention that only models correlations
between the foreground and the background, our full atten-
tion learns full correlations regardless of the feature divi-
sion. It thus maintains the global consistency of the inpaint-
ing result. Moreover, our full attention does not increase the
amount of calculation compared to the cross attention.
Like [ 33], our structural attention module consists of an
attention computing step and an attention transfer step. The
attention computing step extracts 3 ×3 patches from the in-
put structural features. Then, the truncated distance similar-
ity score [ 23] between the patches at (x,y)and(x′,y′)is
deﬁned as:
˜d(x,y),(x′,y′)= tanh(−(d(x,y),(x′,y′)−m
σ)) (5)
whered(x,y),(x′,y′)is the Euclidean distance, mandσare
the mean value and the standard deviation of d(x,y),(x′,y′).The truncated distance similarity scores are applied by a
scaled sotfmax layer to output full attention scores:
s∗
(x,y),(x′,y′)= softmax( λ1˜d(x,y),(x′,y′)) (6)
whereλ1= 50. After obtaining the full attention scores
from the structural features, the attention transfer step re-
constructs lower-level feature maps ( Pl) by using the full
attention scores as weights:
ql
(x′,y′)=/summationdisplay
x,ys∗
(x,y),(x′,y′)pl
(x,y) (7)
wherel∈(1,2)is the layer number and pl
(x,y)is the patch
ofPl, andql
(x′,y′)is the patch of the reconstructed feature
map. The size of patches varies according to the size of fea-
ture map like [ 33]. Finally, the reconstructed feature maps
supplement the decoder of Gtvia skip connections.
Training Losses. The total loss of Gtconsists of a
reconstruction loss, an adversarial loss, and two feature
losses. The reconstruction loss of Gtis deﬁned as:
Lℓ1=/bardblIout−Igt/bardbl1(8)
We use SN-PatchGAN [ 35] as our discriminator Dt. The
hinge version of the adversarial loss for Dtis deﬁned as:
Ld=EIgt∼pdata[ReLU(1 −Dt(Igt))]
+EIcomp∼pz[ReLU(1+ Dt(Icomp))](9)
wherepzdenotes the distribution of the inpainting results.
The adversarial loss for Gtis deﬁned as:
Ladv=−EIcomp∼pz[Dt(Icomp)] (10)
Some inpainting methods such as [ 13,14] use the pre-
trained VGG-16 as an auxiliary evaluator to improve the
perceptual quality of the results. They deﬁne a perceptual
loss and a style loss based on the VGG features to train the
generator. Inspired by these feature losses, we propose two
novel feature losses by reusing our pre-trained hierarchical
encoderEvqas an auxiliary evaluator. As shown in Fig-
ure2,EvqmapsIcomp onto structural features scomp and
textural features tcomp . The structural feature loss of Gtis
deﬁned as the multi-class cross-entropy between scomp and
¯sgt:
Lsf=−/summationdisplay
i,jIijlog(softmax( λ2˜dij)) (11)
Here, we set λ2= 10.˜dijdenotes the truncated distance
similarity score between the ithfeature vector of scomp and
thejthprototype vector of the structural codebook. Iijis
an indicator of the prototype vector class. Iij= 1 when
theithfeature vector of ¯sgtbelongs to the jthclass of the
structural codebook, otherwise Iij= 0. The textural feature
loss (denoted as Ltf) is similar to Lsf. The total loss of Gt
is deﬁned as:
Ltg=αℓ1Lℓ1+αadvLadv+αf(Lsf+Ltf) (12)
whereαℓ1,αadv, andαfare loss weights.
10779