256×256256×256
256×25664×64
32×32
Gated Convolution
Dilated Convolution
Skip Connection
Attention Computing
Attention TransferConvolution
Vector Quantization
Autoregressive Network
32×32
Pl=2Pl=1Inference Pipeline
Diverse Structure Generator
Texture GeneratorHierarchical Encoder Decoder
Hierarchical Encoder
32×32
Figure 2. Overview of the proposed method. (Top) Hierarchical vector quantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-V AE) consists of hierar-
chical encoder Evqand decoder Dvq.Evqextracts discrete structural features ¯sgtand discrete textural features ¯tgt.Dvqreconstructs
the image from these two sets of discrete features. (Middle) Diverse structure generator Gsmodels the conditional distribution over the
discrete structural features by using an autoregressive network, where ¯sgtis used to calculate the loss LNLL. During inference, sampling
from the distribution can generate multiple possible structural features ¯sgen. (Bottom) Texture generator Gtsynthesizes the image texture
given the discrete structural features ( ¯sgtin the training and ¯sgenin the inference). The pre-trained Evqis used as an auxiliary evaluator to
improve image quality, where ¯sgtand¯tgtare used to calculate the losses LsfandLtf. During training, the hierarchical VQ-V AE is ﬁrstly
trained, and then GsandGtare trained individually. During inference, only GsandGtare used.
4 casual multi-headed attention layers. Since the PixelCNN
in [20] is conditioned on the class label for the image gener-
ation task, we make two modiﬁcations to make it practical
for the image inpainting task. First, we stack gated con-
volution layers to map the input incomplete image Iinand
its binary mask Mto a condition. The condition is injected
into each residual gated convolution layer of the autoregres-
sive network. Second, we use a light-weight autoregressive
network by reducing both the hidden units and the residual
units to 128 for efﬁciency.
During training, Gsutilizes the input incomplete im-
age as the condition and models the conditional distribution
over¯sgt. This distribution can be written as pθ(¯sgt|Iin,M),
whereθdenotes network parameters of Gs. The training
loss ofGsis deﬁned as the negative log likelihood of ¯sgt:
LNLL=−EIgt∼pdata[logpθ(¯sgt|Iin,M)] (4)
wherepdata denotes the distribution of training dataset.
During inference, Gsutilizes the input incomplete imageas condition and outputs a conditional distribution for gen-
erating structural features. This distribution can be written
aspθ(¯sgen|Iin,M). Sampling from pθ(¯sgen|Iin,M)sequen-
tially can generate diverse discrete structural features ¯sgen.
Due to the low-resolution of structural features, our di-
verse structure generator can better capture global informa-
tion. It thus helps generate reasonable global structures. In
addition, the training objective of our diverse structure gen-
erator is to maximize likelihood of all samples in the train-
ing set without any additional loss. Thus, the generated
structures do not suffer from GAN’s known shortcomings
such as mode collapse and lack of diversity.
3.3. Texture Generator
Network Architecture. After obtaining the generated
structural features ¯sgen, our texture generator Gtsynthe-
sizes the image texture based on the guidance of ¯sgen. The
network architecture of Gtis similar to the reﬁne network
in [33]. As shown in Figure 2, the network architecture con-
sists of gated convolutions and dilated convolutions. Unlike
10778