HA WQ: Hessian A Ware Quantization of Neural Networks with Mixed-Precision
Zhen Dong∗, Zhewei Yao∗, Amir Gholami∗, Michael W. Mahoney, Kurt Keutzer
University of California, Berkeley
{zhendong, zheweiy, amirgh, mahoneymw, and keutzer }@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Model size and inference speed/power have become a
major challenge in the deployment of neural networks for
many applications. A promising approach to address these
problems is quantization. However, uniformly quantizing
a model to ultra low precision leads to signiﬁcant accu-
racy degradation. A novel solution for this is to use mixed-
precision quantization, as some parts of the network may
allow lower precision as compared to other layers. How-
ever, there is no systematic way to determine the precision
of different layers. A brute force approach is not feasible
for deep networks, as the search space for mixed-precision
is exponential in the number of layers. Another challenge
is a similar factorial complexity for determining block-wise
ﬁne-tuning order when quantizing the model to a target pre-
cision. Here, we introduce Hessian AWare Quantization
(HAWQ ), a novel second-order quantization method to ad-
dress these problems. HAWQ allows for the automatic se-
lection of the relative quantization precision of each layer,
based on the layer’s Hessian spectrum. Moreover, HAWQ
provides a deterministic ﬁne-tuning order for quantizing
layers. We show the results of our method on Cifar-10 using
ResNet20, and on ImageNet using Inception-V3, ResNet50
and SqueezeNext models. Comparing HAWQ with state-of-
the-art shows that we can achieve similar/better accuracy
with8×activation compression ratio on ResNet20, as com-
pared to DNAS [39], and up to 1%higher accuracy with
up to14% smaller models on ResNet50 and Inception-V3,
compared to recently proposed methods of RVQuant [27]
and HAQ [38]. Furthermore, we show that we can quantize
SqueezeNext to just 1MB model size while achieving above
68% top1 accuracy on ImageNet.
1. Introduction
There has been a signiﬁcant increase in the computa-
tional resources required for Neural Network (NN) train-
ing and inference. This is mainly due to larger input sizes
∗Equal contribution.(e.g., higher image resolution) as well as larger NN mod-
els requiring more FLOPs and signiﬁcantly larger memory
footprint. For example, in 1998 the state-of-the-art NN was
LeNet-5 [19] applied to MNIST dataset with an input image
size of1×28×28. Twenty years later, a common bench-
mark dataset is ImageNet, with an input resolution that is
200×larger than MNIST, and with NN models that have
orders of magnitude higher memory footprint.
In fact, ImageNet resolution is now considered “small”
for many applications such as autonomous driving where
input resolutions are signiﬁcantly larger (more than 40×in
certain cases).
This combination of larger models and higher resolution
images has created a major challenge in the deployment of
NNs in application environments with computationally con-
strained resources such as surveillance systems or ADAS
systems in passenger cars. This trend is going to accelerate
further in the near future.
There has been a signiﬁcant effort taken by many re-
searchers to address these issues. These could be broadly
categorized as follows. (i) Finding NNs that provide the re-
quired accuracy, while remaining compact by design ( i.e.,
with small memory footprint) and requiring relatively small
FLOPs. SqueezeNet [15] was an early effort here, followed
by more efﬁcient NNs such as [32, 22]. (ii) Co-designing
NN architecture and hardware together. This can allow sig-
niﬁcant speed-ups as well as savings in power consumption
of the hardware without losing accuracy. SqueezeNext [7]
is an example work here where the neural network and asso-
ciated accelerator are co-designed. (iii) Pruning redundant
ﬁlters of NN layers. Seminal works here are [9, 26, 21, 23].
(iv) Using quantization (reduced precision) instead of ﬂoat
or double precision, which can signiﬁcantly speed up in-
ference time and reduce power consumption. (v) Apply-
ing AutoML for both hardware aware NN design as well
as quantization. Notable works here are DNAS [39] and
HAQ [38]. This paper exclusively focuses on quantization,
but other approaches could be used in conjunction of our
method to allow for further possible reduction on the model
size.
Quantization needs to be performed for both NN pa-
293