Algorithm 1: Power Iteration for Hessian Eigenvalue
Computation
Input: Block Parameter: Wi.
Compute the gradient of Wiby backpropagation, i.e.,
gi=dL
dWi.
Draw a random vector v(same dimension as Wi).
Normalize v,v=v
/bardblv/bardbl
fori= 1,2,...,n do // Power Iteration
Compute gv=gT
iv // Inner product
Compute Hvby backpropagation, Hv=d(gv)
dWi
// Get Hessian vector product
Normalize and reset v,v=Hv
/bardblHv/bardbl
irrespective of the value of a. However, this does not mean
that the function is not sensitive to perturbation in x. We can
get a better metrics for sensitivity by using second-order in-
formation, based on the Hessian matrix. This clearly shows
that higher values of aresult in more sensitivity to input
perturbations.
For the case of high dimensions, the second order infor-
mation is stored in the Hessian matrix, of size ni×nifor
each block. For this case, we can compute the eigenvalues
of the Hessian to measure sensitivity, as described next.
3.1. Second­Order Information
We compute the eigenvalues of the Hessian ( i.e., the
second-order operator) of each block in the network. Note
that it is not possible to explicitly form the Hessian since
the size of a block (denoted by nifor ithblock) can be
quite large. However, it is possible to compute the Hessian
eigenvalues without explicitly forming it, using a matrix-
free power iteration algorithm [43, 24, 42]. This method re-
quires computation of the so-called Hessian matvec , which
is the result of multiplication of the Hessian matrix with a
given (possibly random) vector v. To illustrate how this can
be done for a deep network, let us ﬁrst denote gias the gra-
dient of loss Lwith respect to the ithblock parameters,
gi=∂L
∂Wi. (3)
For a random vector v(which has the same dimension as
gi), we have:
∂(gT
iv)
∂Wi=∂gT
i
∂Wiv+gT
i∂v
∂Wi=∂gT
i
∂Wiv=Hiv, (4)
whereHiis the Hessian matrix of Lwith respect to Wi.
We can then use power-iteration method to compute the
top eigenvalue of Hi, as shown in Algorithm 1. Intuitively
the algorithm requires multiple evaluations of the Hessian
matvec, which can be computed using Eq. 4.Algorithm 2: Hessian AWare Quantization
Input: Block-wise Hessian eigenvalues λi(computed
from Algorithm 1), and block parameter size
nifori= 1,···,m.
fori= 1,2,...,m do // Quantization Precision
Si=λi/ni // See Eq. 5
OrderSiin descending order and determine relative
quantization precision for each block.
Compute ∆Wibased on Eq. 2.
fori= 1,2,...,m do // Fine-Tuning Order
Ωi=λi/bardbl∆Wi/bardbl2// See Eq. 6
OrderΩiin descending order and perform block-wise
ﬁne-tuning
It is well known, based on the theory of Minimum De-
scription Length (MDL), that fewer bits are required to
specify a ﬂat region up to a given threshold, and vice versa
for a region with sharp curvature [30, 12]. The intuition
for this is that the noise created by imprecise location of a
ﬂat region is not magniﬁed for a ﬂat region, making it more
amenable to aggressive quantization. The opposite is true
for sharp regions, in that even small round off errors may be
ampliﬁed. Therefore, it is expected that layers with higher
Hessian spectrum ( i.e., larger eigenvalues) are more sensi-
tive to quantization. The distribution of these eigenvalues
for different blocks are shown in Figure 1 for ResNet20 on
CIFAR-10 and Inception-V3 on ImageNet. As one can see,
different blocks exhibit orders of magnitude difference in
the Hessian spectrum. For instance, ResNet20 is an order of
magnitude more sensitive to perturbations to its 9thblock,
than its last block.
To further illustrate this, we provide 1D visualizations of
the loss landscape as well. To this end, we ﬁrst compute
the Hessian eigenvector of each block, and we perturb each
block individually along the eigenvector and compute how
the loss changes. This is illustrated in Figure 2 and 3 for
ResNet20 (on Cifar-10) and Inception-V3 (on ImageNet),
respectively. It can be clearly seen that blocks with larger
Hessian eigenvalue ( i.e., sharper curvature) exhibit larger
ﬂuctuations in the loss, as compared to those with smaller
Hessian eigenvalue ( i.e., ﬂatter curvature). A correspond-
ing 3D plot is also shown in Figure 1, where instead of just
considering the top eigenvector, we also compute the sec-
ond top eigenvector and visualize the loss by perturbing the
weights along these two directions. These surface plots are
computed for the 9thand last blocks of ResNet20, as well
as 2nd and last blocks of Inception-V3 (the loss landscape
for other blocks is shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7 in the
Appendix).
296