sults in signiﬁcantly better accuracy (74.26% as compared
to 66.72%) than the reverse method (labeled as “HAWQ-
Reverse-Precision”). This is despite the fact that the latter
approach only has a compression ratio of 7.2×, whereas
HAWQ has a compression ratio of 12.0×.
Another interesting observation is that the convergence
speed of the Hessian aware approach is signiﬁcantly faster
than the reverse method. Here, HAWQ converges in about
30 epochs, whereas the HAWQ-Reverse-Precision case
takes 50 epochs before converging to a sub-optimal value
(Figure 4).
5.2. Block­Wise Fine­Tuning
Here we perform the ablation study for the Hessian based
ﬁne-tuning part of HAWQ. The block-wise ﬁne tuning is
performed based on Ωi(Eq. 6) of each block. The blocks
are ﬁne-tuned based on the descending order of Ωi. Simi-
lar to the above, we compare the quantization performance
when a reverse ordering is used ( i.e., we use the ascending
order ofΩiand refer to this as “HAWQ-Reverse-Tuning”).
We test this ablation study using Inception-V3 on Ima-
geNet, as shown in Figure 5. As one can see, the ﬁne-tuning
for HAWQ method quickly converges in just 25 epochs,
allowing it to switch to ﬁne-tuning the next block. How-
ever, “HAWQ-Reverse-Tuning” takes more than 50 epochs
to converge for this block.
6. Conclusions
We have introduced HAWQ, a new quantization method
for neural network training. Our method is based on ex-
ploiting second-order (Hessian) information to systemati-
cally select both quantization precision as well as the or-
der for block-wise ﬁne-tuning. We performed an ablation
study for both the relative quantization bit-order for differ-
ent blocks, as well as the ﬁne-tuning order. We showed that
HAWQ can achieve good testing performance with high
compression-ratio, as compared to state-of-the-art. In par-
ticular, we showed results for ResNet20 on Cifar-10, where
we can achieve similar testing performance as [39], but
with8×higher compression ratio for activations. We also
showed results for Inception-V3 on ImageNet, for which
we showed ultra low precision quantization results with 2-
bit for weights and 4-bit for activations, with only 1.93%
accuracy drop. For ResNet50 model, our approach re-
sults in higher accuracy of 75.48% with smaller model size
of 7.96MB, as compared to HAQ method with top-1 of
75.30% and 9.22MB [38]. Furthermore, our method ap-
plied to SqueezeNext can result in an unprecedented 1MB
model size with 68.02% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet.
Limitations and Future Work. We believe it is critical
for every work to clearly state its limitations, especially in
this area. An important limitation is that computing thesecond-order information adds some computational over-
head. However, we only need to compute the top eigen-
value of the Hessian, which can be found using the matrix-
free method presented in Algorithm 1. (The total compu-
tational overhead is equivalent to about 20 gradient back-
propogations to compute top Hessian eigenvalue of each
block). Another limitation is that in this work we solely
focused on image classiﬁcation, but it would be interest-
ing to see how HAWQ would perform for more complex
tasks such as segmentation, object detection, or natural lan-
guage processing. Furthermore, one has to consider that
implementation of a NN with mixed-precision inference
for embedded processors is not as straightforward as the
case with uniform quantization precision. Practical solu-
tions have been proposed in recent works [33]. Another
limitation is that we can only determine the relative order-
ing for quantization precision, and not the absolute value of
the bits. However, the search space for this is signiﬁcantly
smaller than the original exponential complexity. Finally,
even though we showed beneﬁts of HAWQ as compared
to DNAS [39] or HAQ [38], it may be possible to combine
these methods for more efﬁcient AutoML search. We leave
this as part of future work.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a gracious fund from In-
tel corporation, Berkeley Deep Drive (BDD), and Berkeley
AI Research (BAIR) sponsors. We would like to thank the
Intel VLAB team for providing us with access to their com-
puting cluster. We also gratefully acknowledge the support
of NVIDIA Corporation for their donation of two Titan Xp
GPU used for this research. We would also like to acknowl-
edge ARO, DARPA, NSF, and ONR for providing partial
support of this work.
References
[1] Krste Asanovic and Nelson Morgan. Experimental determi-
nation of precision requirements for back-propagation train-
ing of artiﬁcial neural networks . International Computer Sci-
ence Institute, 1991.
[2] Jungwook Choi, Zhuo Wang, Swagath Venkataramani,
Pierce I-Jen Chuang, Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan, and Kailash
Gopalakrishnan. Pact: Parameterized clipping activa-
tion for quantized neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.06085 , 2018.
[3] Franc ¸ois Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise
separable convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages
1251–1258, 2017.
[4] Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre
David. Binaryconnect: Training deep neural networks with
binary weights during propagations. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 3123–3131, 2015.
300