4
A. Proposed SecFed Scheme
The key idea of the SecFed scheme is that multi-clients
co-train a FDIA detection model while keeping the data
locally. This scheme is a combination of the federated learning
and the Paillier cryptosystem. Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1 show
the ﬂowchart of the SecFed-Transformer and the details of
the scheme, respectively. To be speciﬁc, the SecFed scheme
consists of the following ﬁve steps:
1) Initialization: After all clients are enumerated by the
trustee, the model parameters are initialized for each client,
such as the number of encoder blocks Nenc, the number of
communication rounds R, the number of local epochs E,
size of minibatch B, learn rate lr, loss function L, initial
weightw0, the communication round index r, the time step
e, the ﬁrst moment vector f, the second moment vector s,
exponential decay rates for moment estimates 1and2, a
small constant used for numerical stabilization ". Generate
public key PK = (n;g)and private key CK(;)based
on the Paillier cryptosystem through KeyGeneration (see
Appendix for the details).
2) Training of local models deployed on each client: After
initialization, each client locally trains a Transformer-based
FDIA detection model using their respective local data.
3) Encryption of model weights: When the training of
each client’s local Transformer model is completed, each
client extracts and encrypts the respective model weights by
Encryption (w;PK ), and then uploads the encrypted model
weights to the cloud.
4) Aggregation of model weights: According to the received
encrypted model weights from each client, the cloud server
aggregates them through Aggregation (ctd), and then the
aggregated ciphertext is sent back to each client.
5) Update of local models: By using the method of
Decryption (ad;CK ), the ciphertext cis decrypted, and each
client obtains the updated model weights. And then, the local
deep learning model is updated.
Initial 
global 
model
Deploy 
parame -
ters to 
clients
Data
Processing
Average 
weights 
Multi -
Head
Self-
Attention
Add&
Norm
Add&
Norm
Feed
Forward
ClientsFederated Learning Framework
local Transformer Model
In a Client
Global epoch
Local
epochLocal
epoch
...Nenc×
Local
epoch
Clients
Fig. 1. Flow Chart of the SecFed-Transformer.
To facilitate the analysis, we make the following three as-
sumptions: i) all clients use the same initial global framework
to train their Transformer models; ii) all local models have thesame hyperparameters and the same optimization algorithms;
iii) the computing power of each client is similar. It should
be noted that this paper does not consider dropped packets
in the communication process, while realistic situations need
to consider these issues. Referring to our previous study [26],
we set the federated learning related parameters. It is noted
that the cloud server itself does not train the model, and the
knowledge of the weights of the global model is derived by
aggregating the weights of each local model.
B. Distributed Detector Based on Transformer
As a cutting-edge deep learning model, Transformer ﬁrstly
proposed in 2017 has shown great success in the area of
language recognition in recent years [31]. Unlike most of the
current major sequence transduction models that are based on
complex neural networks recursion or convolution of neural
networks, Transformer eschews recursion and convolution and
forms its network structure through attention mechanisms and
neural networks. In addition, traditional deep learning models
perform feature extraction based on the sequential ordering of
data [32], while Transformer focuses more on the global data
feature relationships, which makes it more suitable for dealing
with FDIA detection issues. In this section, a deep learning
model based on Transformer is presented to detect stealthy
FDIA in smart grid, and a diagram of the proposed detector
is depicted in Fig. 2.
1) The input and output of the detector: In this work, active
and reactive power injections of nodes and power ﬂows of
branches are adopted as the input of the detection model, while
the judgment of whether a FDIA occurs as the output. We
formulate the problem for detecting stealthy FDIA represented
by the attack vector as a binary classiﬁcation problem with
the detection indicator .
=(
0;Normal data
1;Compromised data.(11)
In the Transformer-based detection model, the measurement
vectorz, comprising power injections and power ﬂows, is
gathered as the inputs of Transformer, which is labeled with
= 1 or= 0 . In comparison to the traditional WLS
detection approach, our detection method is totally data-driven
and does not need the model and parameters of the analyzed
system, i.e., h(x). In addition, we train the Transformer
model to deeply extract attack features from normal and
compromised data, and thereby detect the presence of stealthy
FDIAs.
2) Transformer architecture: A Transformer model mainly
consists of a positional encoding, encoder blocks and a sig-
moid layer, where a encoder block includes a multi-head self-
attention module, Add&Norm layers and feedforward neural
networks.
a) Positional encoding: In order to learn the intrinsic laws
obeyed by the feature quantities of different positions under
normal and compromised conditions, the Transformer must
record the position information of each feature quantity in
sample sets. The data is ﬁrst processed for recording the