2
work, based on that an FDIA detection method is proposed. J.
J. Q. Yu et al. [19] use GRU and wavelet transform to detect
FDIA in power system. Y . Zhang et al . [20] combine GAN
with self-encoder for FDIA detection. X. Luo et al. [21] detect
and locate FDIA in smart grid by interval observer. All these
traditional methods are centralized detection methods. With
the development of smart grids, power systems are becoming
larger and larger and generating more and more data, the
traditional centralized processing methods cannot cope with
the explosive growth of data volume in smart grid. The above
methods require all data from each node in the grid to be
transmitted to a data center for inspection. Such centralized
detection methods have the following problems: 1) these meth-
ods are reliant on a central work station which has powerful
calculation and storage capabilities; 2) limited communication
and storage resources make the grid less capable of processing
data in real time, which can result in some critical operations
of the grid not being executed in a timely manner; 3) the way
that data is stored at the central workstation can easily lead
to data breaches and cyber attacks; 4) most importantly, since
one independent system operator (ISO) typically only has a
limited number of attack samples and these samples are always
related to highly-sensitive information, the owners are usually
reluctant to share such attack instances considering privacy
preservation. These issues make it a very challenging problem
to train a data-driven FDIA detection model with desirable
performance in a privacy-preserving manner for smart grids.
To solve the above problems, distributed detection methods
emerges, and there are very few studies on distributed FDIA
detection in the existing literature. Speciﬁcally, reference [22]
proposes a FDIA detection method based on sub-grid-oriented
microservice framework. Reference [23] proposes a distributed
detection with adaptive sampling sequence, which can reduce
communication overhead and improve detection efﬁciency
while ensuring robustness; however, data fusion between
neighboring sub-areas must be performed to train a wide-area
cyber-attack detector in this approach.
As a representative of distributed machine learning methods,
federated learning has been successfully applied in industrial
internet of things. For instance, reference [24] combines fed-
erated learning and AMCNN-LSTM to detect anomalies using
data from time series. Reference [25] integrates federated
learning and CNN-GRU and used it to detect cyber attacks
in industrial internet of things. Reference [26] combines
federated learning with LSGAN together and used to model
renewable energy sources. Reference [27] integrates federated
learning and attentive aggregation to do FDIA detection in
industry 4.0. Unfortunately, federated learning has so far rarely
been used for detecting stealthy FDIA in smart grids.
In order to bridge this gap, based on our existing work
in [26], a federated learning-based FDIA detection method is
proposed in this paper by setting up a edge node detector at
each node of power system to collect, store and detect data di-
rectly instead of an original central workstation, transforming
traditional centralized detection methods into a distributed de-
tection approach. By building a detector based on Transformer
model, the proposed approach can fully extract data features
via self-attention mechanism. The main contributions of thispaper are as follows:
1) We propose a federated learning-based FDIA detection
approach. By keeping the data locally during training,
this approach protects the data privacy of each node in
a power system while utilizing the data from all nodes
to collaboratively train a detection model. Moreover, as
the detection model is deployed on each node locally,
the communication delays caused by transferring data
between each node and dispatch center are avoided during
online detection, thus enabling efﬁcient data detection.
2) We build a new Transformer-based FDIA detection
model. By using its unique multi-head self-attention
mechanism, the Transformer is able to delve deep into
the connection between individual electrical quantities,
thus effectively detecting FDIA with various intensities.
3) We combine the Paillier cryptosystem with federated
learning to build SecFed scheme. The cryptosystem en-
crypts the data exchanged by federated learning, pre-
venting hackers from using the weights generated during
training to deduce the original data information, which
greatly improves the security of federated learning. To our
knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst report on leveraging secure
federated learning for FDIA detection in smart grids.
4) We perform extensive experiments to examine the effec-
tiveness and superiority of the presented secure federated
deep learning-based FDIA detection method. In addition,
we also add noises on the measurement data to test the
robustness of our method.
II. P RELIMINARY
A. Bad Data Detection
Since measurement data in the power grid usually suffers
from data incompleteness and data anomalies, state estimation
is necessary to accurately and efﬁciently monitor state infor-
mation to offer support for system security evaluation [28].
Existing bad data detection mechanisms for detecting state
information in the EMS have the ability to resist some
common less stealthy cyber attacks. However, there are still
serious vulnerabilities in the bad data detection mechanism.
Liu’s team found that by following certain conditions, it is
possible to construct spurious measurement data to be injected
into SCADA without increasing the estimate residuals, which
is stealthy to BDD mechanisms [7].
As one of the basic analysis tools for EMS to achieve
reliable monitoring of the power system, state estimation
provides feedback to the system on the operating status of the
network based on measurement data and network information.
Currently, AC state estimation is commonly used in smart
grids, which uses a nonlinear function between the measure-
ment values and the system states. The corresponding model
for state estimation is described as follows:
z=h(x) +e; (1)
wherez=fz1;z2;;zIgis the measurement vector, which
represents the power injection of each bus and the power
ﬂow of each branch; x=fx1;x2;;xJgis the state