6
normalization to normalize the activation values of each layer.
The speciﬁc operations in this layer are given as follows:
LayerNorm( X+ MultiHeadAttention( X)); (15)
LayerNorm( X+ FeedForward( X)); (16)
where Xis the input of multi-head self-attention module or
feedforward neural network module. The Add operation refers
toX+ MultiHeadAttention( X)orX+ FeedForward( X),
which is used to solve the problem of multi-layer network
training such as gradient dispersion and gradient explosion;
while the Norm operation refers to layer normalization, which
can speed up the convergence process by converting the input
of each layer to have the same mean-variance.
d) Feedforward neural network module: This module con-
sists of two parts, a fully connected layer in the front as well
as a dropout layer in the back. The fully connected layer
corresponds to the following equation:
max(0;XW1+b1)W2+b2; (17)
where Xis the input, and FeedForward ends up with an output
matrix whose dimensions are consistent with X.
And then, we apply dropout to the output of feedforward
neural network module. The role of the dropout layer is to
prevent overﬁtting of the model.
e) Sigmoid layer: This layer consists of two fully connected
layers in series, and sigmoid function is used as the activation
function of the last fully connected layer. The Sigmoid layer
is used to map the output of the Transformer to a classiﬁcation
result.
C. Proposed Framework Based on Federated Learning
Federated learning, initially studied and proposed by the
Google team [33], is a machine learning framework that
accomplishes multi-client collaboratively modeling without
data sharing. This paper assumes that there are Tclients (e.g.,
edge devices) and each client has a separate piece of data. A
traditional centralized training approach builds a large dataset
by collecting data from all clients in a central workstation,
which trains the large dataset to obtain a global model. With
the centralized approach, each client exposes its data to each
workstation and other clients, which makes it very vulnerable
to data leakage. In contrast, federated learning simply uploads
the weights of each client to a central server for aggregation,
with the original data for each client stored locally and not
exchanged or transferred, and the weights are aggregated and
updated to achieve learning goals. Although federated learning
does not require original data in data sharing, participants
still need to upload model weights to construct a federated
model, which are essentially a mapping of raw data, and cloud
servers or hackers can invert the data of each client through
model weights. To address this problem, we introduce the
Paillier cryptosystem [34], a homomorphic encryption method,
to protect the weights of the models in federated learning.
...
Client 1 Client 2 Client TTrusteeCloud Server
Fig. 3. The structure of server-client-trustee in SecFed
The speciﬁc steps of the Paillier cryptosystem are shown in
Appendix.
Combining the Paillier cryptosystem with traditional feder-
ated learning, we propose a secure federated learning approach
for communication over multiple edge devices for collabora-
tive training of multiple models. As shown in Fig. 3, it is
generally composed of the following components:
Cloud server: A cloud server is usually a cloud aggregator
which has powerful computing power and abundant com-
puting resources. The main functions of cloud aggregator
are as follows: (1) initializes the global model before the
ﬁrst run of the global model; (2) sends the global model to
all clients after each communication round; (3) aggregates
the weights which are uploaded by the clients until the
model converges.
Clients: Each client is responsible for modeling a
Transformer-based local FDIA detector, which is based
on its own gathered measurement data (time-section
electrical data collected by SCADA at each node) on
behalf of each client, and helps to update the weights
of the detector by repeatedly interoperating with the
cloud server until the detector converges. Note that, the
presented method is also suitable for WAMS data or
mixed measurement data of WAMS and SCADA, besides
SCADA data.
Trustee: Based on the Pillier cryptosystem, trustee gen-
erates public keys as well as private keys, and uses them
to encrypt the weights which are uploaded by each client
to the server, and decrypt the weights distributed by the
server to each client.
IV. E XAMPLE ANALYSIS
In this section, we conduct a large number of experiments
to evaluate the performance of SecFed-Transformer method.
In Section IV-A, we describe the data generation. In Sec-
tion IV-B, we introduce the implementation details and hy-
perparameter settings. In Section IV-C, we conduct numerous