1
Detection of False Data Injection Attacks in Smart
Grid: A Secure Federated Deep Learning Approach
Yang Li, Senior Member, IEEE , Xinhao Wei, Yuanzheng Li, Member, IEEE ,
Zhaoyang Dong, Fellow, IEEE , and Mohammad Shahidehpour, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —As an important cyber-physical system (CPS), smart
grid is highly vulnerable to cyber attacks. Amongst various types
of attacks, false data injection attack (FDIA) proves to be one of
the top-priority cyber-related issues and has received increasing
attention in recent years. However, so far little attention has been
paid to privacy preservation issues in the detection of FDIAs in
smart grids. Inspired by federated learning, a FDIA detection
method based on secure federated deep learning is proposed in
this paper by combining Transformer, federated learning and
Paillier cryptosystem. The Transformer, as a detector deployed
in edge nodes, delves deep into the connection between individual
electrical quantities by using its multi-head self-attention mech-
anism. By using federated learning framework, our approach
utilizes the data from all nodes to collaboratively train a detection
model while preserving data privacy by keeping the data locally
during training. To improve the security of federated learning,
a secure federated learning scheme is designed by combing
Paillier cryptosystem with federated learning. Through extensive
experiments on the IEEE 14-bus and 118-bus test systems, the
effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method are veriﬁed.
Index Terms —Secure federated learning, Transformer, false
data injection attack, smart grid, privacy preservation, Paillier
cryptosystem.
ABBREVIATION
FDIA false data injection attack
CPS cyber-physical system
ISO independent system operator
BDD bad data detection
DC direct current
AC alternating current
CNN convolutional neural network
GAN generative adversarial network
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant U2066208, the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province,
China under Grant YDZJ202101ZYTS149, and Open Project of Key Labora-
tory of Modern Power System Simulation and Control and Renewable Energy
Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Electric Power University under
Grant MPSS2022-04. (Corresponding author: Yuanzheng Li.)
Y . Li, X. Wei are with the Key Laboratory of Modern Power System
Simulation and Control and Renewable Energy Technology, Ministry of
Education, Northeast Electric Power University, Jilin 132012, China (e-mail:
liyang@neepu.edu.cn; 779058643@qq.com)
Y . Z. Li is with the School of Artifcial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-
mail: Yuanzheng Li@hust.edu.cn).
Z. Y . Dong is with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail:
zy.dong@ntu.edu.sg).
Mohammad Shahidehpour is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, 60616, USA. He
is also a Research Professor in the ECE Department at the King Abdulaziz
University in Saudi Arabia (e-mail: ms@iit.edu).LSTM long short-term memory
SecFed secure federated learning
EMS energy management system
GRU gate recurrent unit
LSGAN least square generative adversarial networks
SCADA supervisory control and data acquisition
WLS weighted least square
AMCNN attention mechanism-based convolutional
neural network
DG distributed generation
MTD moving target defense
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS power system is a critical infrastructure of a country,
its safe operation is vital to national security. The au-
tomation of the entire power system is an important feature
of the development of the electrical industry [1]. To achieve
this goal, a modern power system is developing into a type
of CPSs that is deeply integrated by sensing, communication,
computing, decision-making, and control [2]. Due to the
open communication environment and increasingly complex
information-physical coupling of smart grid, cyber security
has become an important factor affecting the secure operation
of smart grids [3]. In December 2015, Ukrainian power grid
suffered catastrophic consequences due to a massive blackout
caused by a hacker attack [4]. As a new type of cyber attacks,
FDIA seriously threatens the secure operation of smart grids,
so it is crucial to establish an effective and efﬁcient FDIA
detection mechanism.
Up to date, many researchers have conducted research
from the perspective of FDIA detection and achieved certain
results [5], [6]. The study in [7] is one of the seminal studies
investigating the vulnerability of DC state estimators about
FDIA. And many studies on methods for DC state estimation
have subsequently emerged, such as DC FDIA detetion by
Kalman ﬁltering [8], network theory [9], [10], and machine
learning [11]. In [12], a CNN-based method is proposed for de-
tecting and locating FDIA in DC-model power system. In [13],
Deng et al . put forward a countermeasure, named moving
target defense, against FDIAs with limited meter information.
In [14], Deng et al. analyze MTD against FDIAs on electrical
grids. These methods show satisfactory performance in the
detection of DC FDIA, but the DC model makes a large
number of simpliﬁcations compared to the AC model, making
it different from the AC model used in real life. Therefore
some studies on AC state estimation of FDIA emerge [15]–
[17]. In [18], graph theory is introduced into FDIA detectionarXiv:2209.00778v2  [cs.CR]  6 Sep 2022