In this work, we present an extensive study of method-
ologies that allow for training very deep GCNs. We
adapt concepts that were successful in training deep CNNs,
mainly residual connections, dense connections, and dilated
convolutions. We show how we can incorporate these layers
into a graph framework, and present an extensive analysis
of the effect of these additions to the accuracy and stabil-
ity of deep GCNs. To showcase these layer adaptations, we
apply them to the popular task of point cloud semantic seg-
mentation. We show that adding a combination of residual
and dense connections, and dilated convolutions, enables
successful training of GCNs up to 56layers deep (refer to
Figure 1). This very deep GCN improves the state-of-the-art
on the challenging S3DIS [ 1] point cloud dataset by 3.7%.
Contributions. We summarize our contributions as three
fold. (1)We adapt residual/dense connections, and dilated
convolutions to GCNs. (2)We present extensive experi-
ments on point cloud data, showing the effect of each of
these new layers to the stability and performance of train-
ing deep GCNs. We use point cloud semantic segmentation
as our experimental testbed. (3)We show how these new
concepts help build a 56-layer GCN, the deepest GCN ar-
chitecture by a large margin, and achieve close to 4%boost
in state-of-the-art performance on the S3DIS dataset [ 1].
2. Related Work
A large number of real-world applications deal with non-
Euclidean data, which cannot be systematically and reliably
processed by CNNs in general. To overcome the shortcom-
ings of CNNs, GCNs provide well-suited solutions for non-
Euclidean data processing, leading to greatly increasing in-
terest in using GCNs for a variety of applications. In social
networks [ 36], graphs represent connections between indi-
viduals based on mutual interests/relations. These connec-
tions are non-Euclidean and highly irregular. GCNs help
better estimate edge strengths between the vertices of social
network graphs, thus leading to more accurate connections
between individuals. Graphs are also used to model chem-
ical molecule structures [ 53,40]. Understanding the bio-
activities of these molecules can have substantial impact on
drug discovery. Another popular use of graphs is in rec-
ommendation engines [ 24,49], where accurate modelling
of user interactions leads to improved product recommen-
dations. Graphs are also popular modes of representation in
natural language processing [ 2,23], where they are used to
represent complex relations between large text units.
GCNs also ﬁnd many applications in computer vision.
In scene graph generation, semantic relations between ob-
jects are modelled using a graph. This graph is used to
detect and segment objects in images, and also to predict
semantic relations between object pairs [ 30,44,47,20].
Scene graphs also facilitate the inverse process, where animage is reconstructed given a graph representation of the
scene [ 17]. Graphs are also used to model human joints
for action recognition in video [ 46,16]. GCNs are a per-
fect candidate for 3D point cloud processing, especially
since the unstructured nature of point clouds poses a rep-
resentational challenge for systematic research. Several at-
tempts in creating structure from 3D data exist by either
representing it with multiple 2D views [ 35,9,3,22], or by
voxelization [ 5,28,32,37]. More recent work focuses on
directly processing unordered point cloud representations
[27,29,8,14,48]. The recent EdgeConv method by Wang
et al. [42] applies GCNs to point clouds. In particular, they
propose a dynamic edge convolution algorithm for semantic
segmentation of point clouds. The algorithm dynamically
computes node adjacency at each graph layer using the dis-
tance between point features. This work demonstrates the
potential of GCNs for point cloud related applications and
beats the state-of-the-art in the task of point cloud segmen-
tation. Unlike most other works, EdgeConv does not rely on
RNNs or complex point aggregation methods.
Current GCN algorithms including EdgeConv are lim-
ited to shallow depths. Recent works attempt to train deeper
GCNs. For instance, Kipf et al. trained a semi-supervised
GCN model for node classiﬁcation and showed how perfor-
mance degrades when using more than 3 layers [ 18]. Pham
et al. [26] proposed Column Network (CLN) for collective
classiﬁcation in relational learning and showed peak perfor-
mance with 10 layers with the performance degrading for
deeper graphs. Rahimi et al . [31] developed a Highway
GCN for user geo-location in social media graphs, where
they add “highway” gates between layers to facilitate gra-
dient ﬂow. Even with these gates, the authors demonstrate
performance degradation after 6 layers of depth. Xu et al.
[45] developed a Jump Knowledge Network for represen-
tation learning and devised an alternative strategy to select
graph neighbors for each node based on graph structure. As
with other works, their network is limited to a small num-
ber of layers ( 6). Recently, Li et al. [19] studied the depth
limitations of GCNs and showed that deep GCNs can cause
over-smoothing, which results in features at vertices within
each connected component converging to the same value.
Other works [ 43,52] also show the limitations of stacking
multiple GCN layers, which lead to highly complex back-
propagation and the common vanishing gradient problem.
Many difﬁculties facing GCNs nowadays ( e.g. vanishing
gradients and limited receptive ﬁeld) were also present in
the early days of CNNs [ 11,50]. We bridge this gap and
show that the majority of these drawbacks can be remedied
by borrowing several orthogonal tricks from CNNs. Deep
CNNs achieved a huge boost in performance with the in-
troduction of ResNet [ 11]. By adding residual connections
between inputs and outputs of layers, ResNet tends to alle-
viate the vanishing gradient problem. DenseNet [ 13] takes
9268