DeepGCNs: Can GCNs Go as Deep as CNNs?
https://sites.google.com/view/deep-gcns
Guohao Li∗Matthias M ¨uller∗Ali Thabet Bernard Ghanem
Visual Computing Center, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{guohao.li, matthias.mueller.2, ali.thabet, bernard.ghanem }@kaust.edu.sa
Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve impres-
sive performance in a wide variety of ﬁelds. Their success
beneﬁted from a massive boost when very deep CNN models
were able to be reliably trained. Despite their merits, CNNs
fail to properly address problems with non-Euclidean data.
To overcome this challenge, Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) build graphs to represent non-Euclidean data, bor-
row concepts from CNNs, and apply them in training. GCNs
show promising results, but they are usually limited to very
shallow models due to the vanishing gradient problem (see
Figure 1). As a result, most state-of-the-art GCN models are
no deeper than 3or4layers. In this work, we present new
ways to successfully train very deep GCNs. We do this by
borrowing concepts from CNNs, speciﬁcally residual/dense
connections and dilated convolutions, and adapting them to
GCN architectures. Extensive experiments show the posi-
tive effect of these deep GCN frameworks. Finally, we use
these new concepts to build a very deep 56-layer GCN, and
show how it signiﬁcantly boosts performance ( +3.7%mIoU
over state-of-the-art) in the task of point cloud semantic seg-
mentation. We believe that the community can greatly ben-
eﬁt from this work, as it opens up many opportunities for
advancing GCN-based research.
1. Introduction
GCNs have been gaining a lot of momentum in the last
few years. This increased interest is attributed to two main
factors: the increasing proliferation of non-Euclidean data
in real-world applications, and the limited performance of
CNNs when dealing with such data. GCNs operate directly
on non-Euclidean data and are very promising for applica-
tions that depend on this information modality. GCNs are
currently used to predict individual relations in social net-
works [ 36], model proteins for drug discovery [ 53,40], en-
hance predictions of recommendation engines [ 24,49], efﬁ-
ciently segment large point clouds [ 42], among other ﬁelds.
∗equal contribution
0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
7 layers w/o residual
14 layers w/o residual
28 layers w/o residual
56 layers w/o residual
0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
7 layers w/ residual
14 layers w/ residual
28 layers w/ residual
56 layers w/ residualFigure 1. Training Deep GCNs . (left) We show the training loss
for GCNs with 7, 14, 28, and 56 layers, with and without residual
connections. We note how adding more layers without residual
connections translates to substantially higher loss. ( right ) In con-
trast, training GCNs with residual connections results in consistent
stability across all depths.
A key reason behind the success of CNNs is the abil-
ity to design and reliably train very deep CNN models. In
contrast, it is not yet clear how to properly train deep GCN
architectures, where several works have studied their limi-
tations [ 19,43,52]. Stacking more layers into a GCN leads
to the common vanishing gradient problem. This means
that back-propagating through these networks causes over-
smoothing, eventually leading to features of graph vertices
converging to the same value [ 19]. Due to these limitations,
most state-of-the-art GCNs are no deeper than 4layers [ 52].
Vanishing gradients is not a foreign phenomenon in the
world of CNNs. It also posed limitations on the depth
growth of these types of networks. ResNet [ 11] provided
a big step forward in the pursuit of very deep CNNs when
it introduced residual connections between input and output
layers. These connections massively alleviated the vanish-
ing gradient problem. Today, ResNets can reach 152 layers
and beyond. Further extension came with DenseNet [ 13],
where more connections are introduced across layers. More
layers could potentially mean more spatial information loss
due to pooling. This issue was also addressed, with Dilated
Convolutions [ 50]. The introductions of these key concepts
had substantial impact on the progress of CNNs, and we be-
lieve they can have a similar effect if well adapted to GCNs.
9267