14
3
26
75
8
911 1210
13
14
1516
14
3
26
75
8
911 1210
13
14
1516
14
3
26
75
8
911 1210
13
14
1516
Figure 3. Dilated Convolution in GCNs . Visualization of dilated
convolution on a structured graph arranged in a grid ( e.g. 2D im-
age) and on a general structured graph. ( top) 2D convolution with
kernel size 3 and dilation rate 1, 2, 4 (left to right). ( bottom ) Dy-
namic graph convolution with dilation rate 1, 2, 4 (left to right).
Therefore, the edges E(d)of the output graph are deﬁned
on the set of d-dilated vertex neighbors N(d)(v). Speciﬁ-
cally, there exists a directed edge e∈ E(d)from vertex vto
every vertex u∈ N(d)(v). The GCN aggregation and up-
date functions are applied, as in Equation (1), by using the
edgesE(d)created by the Dilatedk-NN, so as to generate
the feature h(d)
vof each output vertex in V(d). We denote
this layer operation as a dilated graph convolution with di-
lation rate d, or more formally: G(d)= (V(d),E(d)). To
improve generalization, we use stochastic dilation in prac-
tice. During training, we perform the aforementioned di-
lated aggregations with a high probability (1−ǫ)leaving a
small probability ǫto perform random aggregation by uni-
formly sampling kneighbors from the set of k×dneighbors
{u1,u2,...,uk×d}. At inference time, we perform deter-
ministic dilated aggregation without stochasticity.
4. Experiments
We propose ResGCN andDenseGCN to handle the van-
ishing gradient problem of GCNs. To enlarge the receptive
ﬁeld, we deﬁne a dilated graph convolution operator for
GCNs. To evaluate our framework, we conduct extensive
experiments on the task of large-scale point cloud segmen-
tation and demonstrate that our methods signiﬁcantly im-
prove performance. In addition, we also perform a compre-
hensive ablation study to show the effect of different com-
ponents of our framework.
4.1. Graph Learning on 3D Point Clouds
Point cloud segmentation is a challenging task because
of the unordered and irregular structure of 3D point clouds.
Normally, each point in a point cloud is represented by its
3D spatial coordinates and possibly auxiliary features suchas color and surface normal. We treat each point as a vertex
vin a directed graph Gand we use k-NN to construct the
directed dynamic edges between points at every GCN layer
(refer to Section 3.1). In the ﬁrst layer, we construct the
input graph G0by executing a dilated k-NN search to ﬁnd
the nearest neighbor in 3D coordinate space. At subsequent
layers, we dynamically build the edges using dilated k-NN
in feature space. For the segmentation task, we predict the
categories of all the vertices at the output layer.
4.2. Experimental Setup
We use the overall accuracy (OA) and mean intersection
over union (mIoU) across all classes as evaluation metrics.
For each class, the IoU is computed asTP
TP+T−P, where
TPis the number of true positive points, Tis the number of
ground truth points of that class, and Pis the number of pre-
dicted positive points. To motivate the use of deep GCNs,
we do a thorough ablation study on area 5 to analyze each
component and provide insights. We then evaluate our pro-
posed reference model (backbone of 28 layers with resid-
ual graph connections and stochastic dilated graph convolu-
tions) on all 6 areas and compare it to the shallow DGCNN
baseline [ 42] and other state-of-the-art methods.
4.3. Network Architectures
As shown in Figure 2, all the network architectures in
our experiments have three blocks: a GCN backbone block,
a fusion block and an MLP prediction block. The GCN
backbone block is the only part that differs between experi-
ments. For example, the only difference between PlainGCN
and ResGCN is the use of residual skip connections for
all GCN layers in ResGCN . Both have the same number
of parameters. We linearly increase the dilation rate dof
dilatedk-NN with network depth. For fair comparison,
we keep the fusion and MLP prediction blocks the same
for all architectures. In the S3DIS semantic segmentation
task, the GCN backbone block takes as input a point cloud
with 4096 points, extracts features by applying consecutive
GCN layers to aggregate local information, and outputs a
learned graph representation with 4096 vertices. The fusion
and MLP prediction blocks follow a similar architecture as
PointNet [ 27] and DGCNN [ 42]. The fusion block is used
to fuse the global and multi-scale local features. It takes as
input the extracted vertex features from the GCN backbone
block at every GCN layer and concatenates those features,
then passes them through a 1 ×1 convolution layer followed
by max pooling. The latter layer aggregates the vertex fea-
tures of the whole graph into a single global feature vector,
which in return is concatenated with the feature of each ver-
tex from all previous GCN layers (fusion of global and local
information). The MLP prediction block applies three MLP
layers to the fused features of each vertex/point to predict
its category. In practice, these layers are 1 ×1 convolutions.
9271