PlainGCN. This baseline model consists of a PlainGCN
backbone block, a fusion block, and a MLP prediction
block. The backbone stacks 28 EdgeConv [ 42] layers with
dynamick-NN, each of which is similar to the one used in
DGCNN [ 42]. No skip connections are used here.
ResGCN. We construct ResGCN by adding dynamic di-
latedk-NN and residual graph connections to PlainGCN .
These connections between all GCN layers in the GCN
backbone block do not increase the number of parameters.
DenseGCN. Similarly, DenseGCN is built by adding dy-
namic dilated k-NN and dense graph connections to the
PlainGCN . As described in Section 3.3, dense graph con-
nections are created by concatenating all the intermediate
graph representations from previous layers. The dilation
rate schedule of our DenseGCN is the same as ResGCN .
4.4. Implementation
We implement all our models using Tensorﬂow. For fair
comparison, we use the Adam optimizer with the same ini-
tial learning rate 0.001and the same learning rate schedule;
the learning rate decays 50% every3×105gradient decent
steps. The networks are trained with two NVIDIA Tesla
V100 GPUs using data parallelism. The batch size is set
to8for each GPU. Batch Normalization is applied to every
layer. Dropout with a rate of 0.3is used at the second MLP
layer of the MLP prediction block. As mentioned in Section
3.4, we use dilated k-NN with a random uniform sampling
probability ǫ= 0.2for GCNs with dilations. In order to iso-
late the effect of the proposed deep GCN architectures, we
do not use any data augmentation or post processing tech-
niques. We train our models end-to-end from scratch.
4.5. Results
For convenient referencing, we use the naming conven-
tion BackboneBlock-#Layers to denote the key models in
our analysis and we provide all names in Table 1. We fo-
cus on residual graph connections for our analysis, since
ResGCN-28 is easier and faster to train, but we expect that
our observations also hold for dense graph connections.
We investigate the performance of different ResGCN ar-
chitectures, e.g. with dynamic dilated k-NN, with regular
dynamick-NN (without dilation), and with ﬁxed edges. We
also study the effect of different parameters, e.g. number of
k-NN neighbors (4, 8, 16, 32), number of ﬁlters (32, 64,
128), and number of layers (7, 14, 28, 56). Overall, we
conduct 20 experiments and show their results in Table 1.
Effect of residual graph connections. Our experiments in
Table 1 ( Reference ) show that residual graph connections
play an essential role in training deeper networks, as they
tend to result in more stable gradients. This is analogous to
the insight from CNNs [ 11]. When the residual graph con-
nections between layers are removed ( i.e. inPlainGCN-28 ),performance dramatically degrades (-12% mIoU). In the
supplement , we show similar performance gains by com-
bining residual graph connections and dilated graph convo-
lutions with other types of GCN layers.
Effect of dilation. Results in Table 1 ( Dilation ) [50] show
that dilated graph convolutions account for a 2.85% im-
provement in mean IoU ( row 3 ), motivated primarily by
the expansion of the network’s receptive ﬁeld. We ﬁnd that
adding stochasticity to the dilated k-NN does help perfor-
mance but not to a signiﬁcant extent. Interestingly, our re-
sults in Table 1 also indicate that dilation especially helps
deep networks when combined with residual graph connec-
tions ( rows 1,8 ). Without such connections, performance
can actually degrade with dilated graph convolutions. The
reason for this is probably that these varying neighbors re-
sult in ‘worse’ gradients, which further hinder convergence
when residual graph connections are not used.
Effect of dynamic k-NN. While we observe an improve-
ment when updating the knearest neighbors after every
layer, we would also like to point out that it comes at a rel-
atively high computational cost. We show different variants
without dynamic edges in Table 1 ( Fixedk-NN).
Effect of dense graph connections. We observe sim-
ilar performance gains with dense graph connections
(DenseGCN-28 ) in Table 1 ( Connections ). However, with
a naive implementation, the memory cost is prohibitive.
Hence, the largest model we can ﬁt into GPU memory uses
only32ﬁlters and 8nearest neighbors, as compared to 64
ﬁlters and 16neighbors in the case of its residual counter-
partResGCN-28 . Since the performance of these two deep
GCN variants is similar, residual connections are more prac-
tical for most use cases and, hence we focus on them in our
ablation study. Yet, we do expect the same insights to trans-
fer to the case of dense graph connections.
Effect of nearest neighbors. Results in Table 1 ( Neigh-
bors) show that a larger number of neighbors helps in gen-
eral. As the number of neighbors is decreased by a factor of
2 and 4, the performance drops by 2.5% and 3.3% respec-
tively. However, a large number of neighbors only results in
a performance boost, if the network capacity is sufﬁciently
large. This becomes apparent when we increase the number
of neighbors by a factor of 2 and decrease the number of
ﬁlters by a factor of 2.
Effect of network depth. Table 1 ( Depth ) shows that in-
creasing the number of layers improves network perfor-
mance, but only if residual graph connections and dilated
graph convolutions are used, as in Table 1 ( Connections ).
Effect of network width. Results in Table 1 ( Width ) show
that increasing the number of ﬁlters leads to a similar in-
crease in performance as increasing the number of layers.
In general, a higher network capacity enables learning nu-
ances necessary for succeeding in corner cases.
9272