JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     33
VviewpointsIMAGE BY ANDRIJ BORYS ASSOCIATES, USING SHUTTERSTOCKadopted by the research community to 
the point that previous approaches tend 
to be regarded as obsolete. Researchers 
and practitioners have extended the use 
of DP beyond the interactive setting it 
was designed for. Extended uses include: 
data release, where privacy of respon -
dents versus data analysts is the goal, 
and collection of personal information, 
where privacy of respondents versus the 
data collector is claimed. Google, Apple, 
and Facebook have seen the chance to 
collect or release microdata (individual 
respondent data) from their users under 
the privacy pledge “don’t worry, whatever 
you tell us will be DP-protected.”
However, applying DP to record-
level data release or collection (which THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH  
to statistical disclosure con -
trol (SDC) for privacy protec -
tion is utility-first. Since the 
1970s, national statistical 
institutes have been using anonymiza -
tion methods with heuristic parameter 
choice and suitable utility preservation 
properties to protect data before re -
lease. Their goal is to publish analyti -
cally useful data that cannot be linked 
to specific respondents or leak confi -
dential information on them.
In the late 1990s, the computer sci -
ence community took another angle 
and proposed privacy-first data protec -
tion. In this approach a privacy model 
specifying an ex ante privacy condition is 
enforced using one or several SDC meth -
ods, such as noise addition, generaliza -
tion, or microaggregation. The param -
eters of the SDC methods depend on the 
privacy model parameters, and too strict 
a choice of the latter may result in poor 
utility. The first widely accepted privacy 
model was k-anonymity, whereas differ -
ential privacy (DP) is the model that cur -
rently attracts the most attention.
DP was originally proposed for inter -
active statistical queries to a database.5 
A randomized query function κ (that 
returns the query answer plus some 
noise) satisfies -DP if for all datasets D1 
and D2 that differ in one record and all S 
⊂ Range  (κ), it holds that Pr( κ(D1) ∈ S) ≤ 
exp( ) × Pr( κ(D2) ∈ S). In other words, the 
presence or absence of any single record must not be noticeable from the query 
answers, up to an exponential factor of . 
The smaller , the higher the protection. 
The noise to be added to the answer to 
enforce a certain  depends on the global 
sensitivity of the query to the presence or 
absence of any single record. Mild noise 
may suffice for statistical queries such 
as the mean, while a very large noise is 
needed for identity queries returning 
the contents of a specific record.
DP offers a very neat privacy guar -
antee and, unlike privacy models in 
the k-anonymity family, does not make 
assumptions on the intruder’s back -
ground knowledge (although it assumes 
all records in the database are indepen -
dent.3,10 For this reason, DP was rapidly Viewpoint  
The Limits of Differential Privacy 
(and Its Misuse in Data Release 
and Machine Learning) 
Differential privacy is not a silver bullet for all privacy problems. DOI:10.1145/3433638  Josep Domingo-Ferrer, David Sánchez, and Alberto Blanco-Justicia