34    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7viewpoints
introduced previously, publishing use -
ful record-level microdata under DP is 
exceedingly difficult. This is only logi -
cal: releasing DP-microdata, that is, 
individual-level data derived from real 
people, contradicts the core idea of DP, 
namely that the presence or absence 
of any individual should not be notice -
able from the DP output.
A further shortcoming arises when 
trying to use DP to protect continuous 
data collection like Apple and Google 
do. DP is subject to sequential compo -
sition: if a dataset collected at time t1 is 
DP-protected with 1 and a dataset col -
lected at time t2 on a non-disjoint group 
of respondents is DP-protected with 2, 
the dataset obtained by composing the 
two collected datasets is DP-protected 
only with 1 + 2. Therefore, to enforce a 
certain  after n data collections on the 
same set of individuals, each collection 
should be DP-protected with /n, there -
by very substantially reducing the utility 
of the collected data. Strictly speaking, 
it is impossible to collect DP-protected 
data from a community of respondents 
an indefinite number of times with 
a meaningful privacy guarantee. As a 
remedy, Apple made the simplifica -
tion that sequential composition only 
applies to the data collected on an in -
dividual during the same day but not 
in different days.9 Google took a differ -
ent way out: they use sequential com -
position only for values that have not 
changed from the previous collection.4 
Both fixes are severely flawed: the data 
of an individual collected across con -
secutive days or that may have changed 
still refer to the same individual, rather 
than to disjoint individuals. Ignoring 
this and conducting a systematic data 
collection for long periods increases 
the effective  and thus reduces the ef -
fective level of protection by several or -
ders of magnitude. This issue is signifi -
cantly more privacy-harming than the 
previously mentioned large values of  
declared by Apple and Google.
Machine learning (ML) has also seen 
applications of DP. In Abadi et al.,1 DP 
is used to ensure deep learning models 
do not expose private information con -
tained in the datasets they have been 
trained on. Such a privacy guarantee is 
interesting to facilitate crowdsourcing of 
representative training data from indi -
vidual respondents. The paper describes 
the impact of sequential composition is equivalent to answering identity 
queries) requires employing a large 
amount of noise to enforce a safe 
enough . As a result, if  ≤ 1 is used, 
as recommended in Dwork and Roth5 
to obtain a meaningful privacy guaran -
tee, the analytical utility of DP outputs 
is likely to be very poor.2,7 This problem 
arose as soon as DP was moved outside 
the interactive setting. A straightfor -
ward way to mitigate the utility prob -
lem is to use unreasonably large .
Let us look at data collection. Apple 
reportedly uses  = 6 in MacOS and  = 14 
in iOS 10 (with some beta versions using 
even  = 43).9 In their RAPPOR technol -
ogy, Google uses  up to 9. According to 
Frank McSherry, one of the co-inventors 
of DP, using  values as high as 14 is 
pointless in terms of privacy.9 Indeed, 
the privacy guarantee of DP completely 
fades away for such large values of .5
As to data release, Facebook has re -
cently released DP-protected datasets for 
social science research, but it is unclear 
which  value they have used. As pointed 
out in Mervis,12 this makes it difficult 
both to understand the privacy guaran -
tees being offered and to assess the trust -
worthiness of the results obtained on the 
data. The first released version of this DP 
dataset had all demographic informa -
tion about respondents and most of the 
time and location information removed, 
and event counts had been added noise 
with σ = 200.6 The second version looks 
better, but is still analytically poorer than 
the initial version released in 2018 un -
der utility-first anonymization based on 
removal of identifiers and data aggrega -
tion. In fact, Facebook researchers have 
acknowledged the difficulties of imple -
menting (and verifying) DP in real-world 
applications.11
The U.S. Census Bureau has also an -
nounced the use of DP to disseminate 
Census 2020 results.8 A forecast of the 
negative impact of DP on the utility of 
the current Census is given in Santos-
Lazoda et al.14 Additionally, Ruggles et 
al.13 have remarked that DP “is a radi -
cal departure from established Cen -
sus Bureau confidentiality laws and 
precedents”: the Census must take 
care of preventing respondent re-iden -
tification, but masking respondent 
characteristics—as DP does—is not 
required. A more fundamental objec -
tion in Ruggles et al.13 is against the 
very idea of DP-protected microdata. As speakers.acm.orgStudents and faculty 
can take advantage of 
ACM’s Distinguished 
Speakers Program 
to invite renowned 
thought leaders in 
academia, industry 
and government to 
deliver compelling and 
insightful talks on the 
most important topics 
in computing and IT 
today. ACM covers the 
cost of transportation 
for the speaker to 
travel to your event.
A great speaker 
can make the 
difference between 
a good event and 
a WOW event!Distinguished 
Speakers 
Program