Block
1
Block 
2
Block
3
Block
4
Block
5
Block
6
Block
7
Layer
2-1Input
imageoutput
Layer
2-N2Layer
4-1Layer
4-N4
conv
1x1dconv
5x5conv
1x1
+
... ...
conv
3x3
Blocks are predefined Skeletons. 
Search Space Per Block i:
● ConvOp: dconv, conv, ...
● KernelSize: 3x3, 5x5
● SERatio:  0, 0.25, ...
● SkipOp: identity, pool, ...
● FilterSize: Fi
● #Layers: Ni
Contents in blue are searchedF2 F4 
SE
0.25
Figure 4: Factorized Hierarchical Search Space. Network layers are grouped into a number of predeﬁned skeletons, called
blocks, based on their input resolutions and ﬁlter sizes. Each block contains a variable number of repeated identical layers
where only the ﬁrst layer has stride 2 if input/output resolutions are different but all other layers have stride 1. For each block,
we search for the operations and connections for a single layer and the number of layers N, then the same layer is repeated
Ntimes (e.g., Layer 4-1 to 4-N 4are the same). Layers from different blocks (e.g., Layer 2-1 and 4-1) can be different.
H∗W∗M∗(K∗K+N) (4)
Here we need to carefully balance the kernel size Kand
ﬁlter size Nif the total computation is constrained. For in-
stance, increasing the receptive ﬁeld with larger kernel size
Kof a layer must be balanced with reducing either the ﬁlter
sizeNat the same layer, or compute from other layers.
Figure 4 shows the baseline structure of our search space.
We partition a CNN model into a sequence of pre-deﬁned
blocks, gradually reducing input resolutions and increasing
ﬁlter sizes as is common in many CNN models. Each block
has a list of identical layers, whose operations and con-
nections are determined by a per-block sub search space.
Speciﬁcally, a sub search space for a block iconsists of the
following choices:
•Convolutional ops ConvOp : regular conv (conv), depthwise
conv (dconv), and mobile inverted bottleneck conv [29].
•Convolutional kernel size KernelSize : 3x3, 5x5.
•Squeeze-and-excitation [13] ratio SERatio : 0, 0.25.
•Skip opsSkipOp : pooling, identity residual, or no skip.
•Output ﬁlter size Fi.
•Number of layers per block Ni.
ConvOp ,KernelSize ,SERatio ,SkipOp ,Fidetermines
the architecture of a layer, while Nidetermines how many
times the layer will be repeated for the block. For exam-
ple, each layer of block 4 in Figure 4 has an inverted bot-
tleneck 5x5 convolution and an identity residual skip path,
and the same layer is repeated N4times. We discretize all
search options using MobileNetV2 as a reference: For #lay-
ers in each block, we search for {0, +1, -1}based on Mo-
bileNetV2; for ﬁlter size per layer, we search for its relative
size in{0.75, 1.0, 1.25 }to MobileNetV2 [29].Our factorized hierarchical search space has a distinct
advantage of balancing the diversity of layers and the size
of total search space. Suppose we partition the network into
Bblocks, and each block has a sub search space of size S
with average Nlayers per block, then our total search space
size would be SB, versing the ﬂat per-layer search space
with size SB∗N. A typical case is S= 432,B= 5,N= 3,
where our search space size is about 1013, versing the per-
layer approach with search space size 1039.
4.2. Search Algorithm
Inspired by recent work [35, 36, 25, 20], we use a re-
inforcement learning approach to ﬁnd Pareto optimal solu-
tions for our multi-objective search problem. We choose
reinforcement learning because it is convenient and the re-
ward is easy to customize, but we expect other methods like
evolution [26] should also work.
Concretely, we follow the same idea as [36] and map
each CNN model in the search space to a list of tokens.
These tokens are determined by a sequence of actions a1:T
from the reinforcement learning agent based on its parame-
tersθ. Our goal is to maximize the expected reward:
J=EP(a1:T;θ)[R(m)] (5)
wheremis a sampled model determined by action a1:T, and
R(m)is the objective value deﬁned by equation 2.
As shown in Figure 1, the search framework consists of
three components: a recurrent neural network (RNN) based
controller, a trainer to obtain the model accuracy, and a
mobile phone based inference engine for measuring the la-
tency. We follow the well known sample-eval-update loop
to train the controller. At each step, the controller ﬁrst sam-
ples a batch of models using its current parameters θ, by
2823