In this paper, we propose an automated neural architec-
ture search approach for designing mobile CNN models.
Figure 1 shows an overview of our approach, where the
main differences from previous approaches are the latency
aware multi-objective reward and the novel search space.
Our approach is based on two main ideas. First, we formu-
late the design problem as a multi-objective optimization
problem that considers both accuracy and inference latency
of CNN models. Unlike in previous work [36, 26, 21] that
use FLOPS to approximate inference latency, we directly
measure the real-world latency by executing the model on
real mobile devices. Our idea is inspired by the observa-
tion that FLOPS is often an inaccurate proxy: for exam-
ple, MobileNet [11] and NASNet [36] have similar FLOPS
(575M vs. 564M), but their latencies are signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent (113ms vs. 183ms, details in Table 1). Secondly, we
observe that previous automated approaches mainly search
for a few types of cells and then repeatedly stack the same
cells through the network. This simpliﬁes the search pro-
cess, but also precludes layer diversity that is important for
computational efﬁciency. To address this issue, we propose
a novel factorized hierarchical search space , which allows
layers to be architecturally different yet still strikes the right
balance between ﬂexibility and search space size.
We apply our proposed approach to ImageNet classiﬁca-
tion [28] and COCO object detection [18]. Figure 2 sum-
marizes a comparison between our MnasNet models and
other state-of-the-art mobile models. Compared to the Mo-
bileNetV2 [29], our model improves the ImageNet accuracy
by 3.0% with similar latency on the Google Pixel phone.
On the other hand, if we constrain the target accuracy, then
our MnasNet models are 1.8×faster than MobileNetV2
and2.3×faster thans NASNet [36] with better accuracy.
Compared to the widely used ResNet-50 [9], our MnasNet
model achieves slightly higher (76.7%) accuracy with 4.8×
fewer parameters and 10×fewer multiply-add operations.
By plugging our model as a feature extractor into the SSD
object detection framework, our model improves both the
inference latency and the mAP quality on COCO dataset
over MobileNetsV1 and MobileNetV2, and achieves com-
parable mAP quality (23.0 vs 23.2) as SSD300 [22] with
42×lessmultiply-add operations.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce a multi-objective neural architecture
search approach that optimizes both accuracy and real-
world latency on mobile devices.
2. We propose a novel factorized hierarchical search
space to enable layer diversity yet still strike the right
balance between ﬂexibility and search space size.
3. We demonstrate new state-of-the-art accuracy on both
ImageNet classiﬁcation and COCO object detection
under typical mobile latency constraints.2. Related Work
Improving the resource efﬁciency of CNN models has
been an active research topic during the last several years.
Some commonly-used approaches include 1) quantizing the
weights and/or activations of a baseline CNN model into
lower-bit representations [8, 16], or 2) pruning less impor-
tant ﬁlters according to FLOPs [6, 10], or to platform-aware
metrics such as latency introduced in [32]. However, these
methods are tied to a baseline model and do not focus on
learning novel compositions of CNN operations.
Another common approach is to directly hand-craft more
efﬁcient mobile architectures: SqueezeNet [15] reduces the
number of parameters and computation by using lower-
cost 1x1 convolutions and reducing ﬁlter sizes; MobileNet
[11] extensively employs depthwise separable convolution
to minimize computation density; ShufﬂeNets [33, 24] uti-
lize low-cost group convolution and channel shufﬂe; Con-
densenet [14] learns to connect group convolutions across
layers; Recently, MobileNetV2 [29] achieved state-of-the-
art results among mobile-size models by using resource-
efﬁcient inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. Unfortu-
nately, given the potentially huge design space, these hand-
crafted models usually take signiﬁcant human efforts.
Recently, there has been growing interest in automating
the model design process using neural architecture search.
These approaches are mainly based on reinforcement learn-
ing [35, 36, 1, 19, 25], evolutionary search [26], differen-
tiable search [21], or other learning algorithms [19, 17, 23].
Although these methods can generate mobile-size models
by repeatedly stacking a few searched cells, they do not in-
corporate mobile platform constraints into the search pro-
cess or search space. Closely related to our work is MONAS
[12], DPP-Net [3], RNAS [34] and Pareto-NASH [4] which
attempt to optimize multiple objectives, such as model size
and accuracy, while searching for CNNs, but their search
process optimizes on small tasks like CIFAR. In contrast,
this paper targets real-world mobile latency constraints and
focuses on larger tasks like ImageNet classiﬁcation and
COCO object detection.
3. Problem Formulation
We formulate the design problem as a multi-objective
search, aiming at ﬁnding CNN models with both high-
accuracy and low inference latency. Unlike previous ar-
chitecture search approaches that often optimize for indi-
rect metrics, such as FLOPS, we consider direct real-world
inference latency , by running CNN models on real mobile
devices, and then incorporating the real-world inference la-
tency into our objective. Doing so directly measures what
is achievable in practice: our early experiments show it is
challenging to approximate real-world latency due to the
variety of mobile hardware/software idiosyncrasies.
2821