20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0.2
0.4
0.6Objective
α= 0
β=−1
 Acc(m)=0.5, T=80
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Model Latency (ms)
0.2
0.4
0.6Objective
α=−0.07
β=−0.07
 Acc(m)=0.5, T=80Figure 3: Objective Function Deﬁned by Equation
2, assuming accuracy ACC(m)=0.5 and target latency
T=80ms: (top) show the object values with latency as a
hard constraint; (bottom) shows the objective values with
latency as a soft constraint.
Given a model m, letACC(m)denote its accuracy on
the target task, LAT(m)denotes the inference latency on
the target mobile platform, and Tis the target latency. A
common method is to treat Tas a hard constraint and max-
imize accuracy under this constraint:
maximize
mACC(m)
subject to LAT(m)≤T(1)
However, this approach only maximizes a single metric and
does not provide multiple Pareto optimal solutions. Infor-
mally, a model is called Pareto optimal [2] if either it has
the highest accuracy without increasing latency or it has the
lowest latency without decreasing accuracy. Given the com-
putational cost of performing architecture search, we are
more interested in ﬁnding multiple Pareto-optimal solutions
in a single architecture search.
While there are many methods in the literature [2], we
use a customized weighted product method1to approximate
Pareto optimal solutions, with optimization goal deﬁned as:
maximize
mACC(m)×/bracketleftbiggLAT(m)
T/bracketrightbiggw
(2)
wherewis the weight factor deﬁned as:
w=/braceleftBigg
α, ifLAT(m)≤T
β, otherwise(3)
1We pick the weighted product method because it is easy to customize,
but we expect methods like weighted sum should be also ﬁne.whereαandβare application-speciﬁc constants. An empir-
ical rule for picking αandβis to ensure Pareto-optimal so-
lutions have similar reward under different accuracy-latency
trade-offs. For instance, we empirically observed doubling
the latency usually brings about 5% relative accuracy gain.
Given two models: (1) M1 has latency land accuracy a; (2)
M2 has latency 2land 5% higher accuracy a·(1 + 5%) ,
they should have similar reward: Reward(M2) =a·(1+
5%)·(2l/T)β≈Reward(M1) =a·(l/T)β. Solving this
givesβ≈ −0.07. Therefore, we use α=β=−0.07in
our experiments unless explicitly stated.
Figure 3 shows the objective function with two typical
values of (α,β). In the top ﬁgure with ( α= 0,β=−1),
we simply use accuracy as the objective value if measured
latency is less than the target latency T; otherwise, we
sharply penalize the objective value to discourage mod-
els from violating latency constraints. The bottom ﬁgure
(α=β=−0.07) treats the target latency Tas a soft con-
straint, and smoothly adjusts the objective value based on
the measured latency.
4. Mobile Neural Architecture Search
In this section, we will ﬁrst discuss our proposed novel
factorized hierarchical search space, and then summarize
our reinforcement-learning based search algorithm.
4.1. Factorized Hierarchical Search Space
As shown in recent studies [36, 20], a well-deﬁned
search space is extremely important for neural architecture
search. However, most previous approaches [35, 19, 26]
only search for a few complex cells and then repeatedly
stack the same cells. These approaches don’t permit layer
diversity, which we show is critical for achieving both high
accuracy and lower latency.
In contrast to previous approaches, we introduce a novel
factorized hierarchical search space that factorizes a CNN
model into unique blocks and then searches for the oper-
ations and connections per block separately, thus allowing
different layer architectures in different blocks. Our intu-
ition is that we need to search for the best operations based
on the input and output shapes to obtain better accurate-
latency trade-offs. For example, earlier stages of CNNs
usually process larger amounts of data and thus have much
higher impact on inference latency than later stages. For-
mally, consider a widely-used depthwise separable convo-
lution [11] kernel denoted as the four-tuple (K,K,M,N )
that transforms an input of size (H,W,M)2to an output of
size(H,W,N), where(H,W)is the input resolution and
M,N are the input/output ﬁlter sizes. The total number of
multiply-adds can be described as:
2We omit batch size dimension for simplicity.
2822