14 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
no augmentation one augmentation all augmentations
a child’s drawing of a cathedral
Random Affine Transformation
the universal library,
rendered in the Unreal Engine
Random Perspective
a cityscape at night,
rendered in the 8k resolution.
Random Noise
Figure 9: Examples of the impacts of various augmentations. Left the right:
unaugmented, only the named augmentation, all augmentations.
commercial GPUs such as K80s. This GPU is particularly important from an
accessibility standpoint, as it is the largest GPU that can be easily obtained
using a free account on Google Colaboratory. The full generative process takes
less than 3 minutes in a Google Colab notebook, making this a viable approach
for anyone with access to the internet and a Google account.
Researchers with significantly more resources can obtain higher quality im-
ages using various augmentations left out of this paper, such as using an ensemble
or additional auxiliary models to regularize the generations. While pushing the
performance of our methodology to the maximum is a worthwhile endeavour, the
fact that we can outperform the current state-of-the-art while running on freely
available resources is something that we view as particularly worth highlighting.
We leave determining the optimal framework with unbound resources to future
work.
6.2 Runtime Analysis
DALL-E [41], GLIDE [36], and Open-Edit [26] all also incorporate image gener-
ators and joint text-image encoders into their architecture. Unlike our method
however, they require computationally intensive training and finetuning. This
invites the question of trade-offs between training and inference time. Unfortu-
nately, none of the aforementioned papers report their training requirements in
enough detail to estimate their training requirements. We are however able to es-
timate how long minDALL-E [20], the current state-of-the-art DALL-E model,
takes to train at 504 V100-hours for the base model plus an additional 288
V100-hours to finetune on ImageNet [9]. Through private communication with