VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation
and Editing with Natural Language Guidance
Katherine Crowson⋆1, Stella Biderman∗1,2, Daniel Kornis3, Dashiell Stander1,
Eric Hallahan1, Louis Castricato1,4, and Edward Raff2
1EleutherAI
2Booz Allen Hamilton
3AIDock
4Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract Generating and editing images from open domain text prompts
is a challenging task that heretofore has required expensive and specially
trained models. We demonstrate a novel methodology for both tasks
which is capable of producing images of high visual quality from text
prompts of significant semantic complexity without any training by us-
ing a multimodal encoder to guide image generations. We demonstrate
on a variety of tasks how using CLIP [40] to guide VQGAN [12] pro-
duces higher visual quality outputs than prior, less flexible approaches
like minDALL-E [20], GLIDE [36] and Open-Edit [26], despite not be-
ing trained for the tasks presented. Our code is available in a public
repository.
Keywords: generative adversarial networks; grounded language; image
manipulation
1 Introduction
Using free-form text to generate or manipulate high-quality images is a challeng-
ing task, requiring a grounded learning between visual and textual representa-
tions. Manipulating images in an open domain context was first proposed by the
seminal Open-Edit [26], which allowed text prompts to alter an image’s content.
This was done mostly with semantically simple transformations (e.g., turn a red
apple green), and does not allow generation of images. Soon after DALL-E [41]
and GLIDE [36] were developed, both of which can perform generation (and
inpainting) from arbitrary text prompts, but do not themselves enable image
manipulation.
In this work we propose the first a unified approach to semantic image gener-
ation and editing, leveraging a pretrained joint image-text encoder [40] to steer
an image generative model [12]. Our methodology works by using the multimodal
encoder to define a loss function evaluating the similarity of a (text, image) pair
and backpropagating to the latent space of the image generator. We iteratively
⋆Co-first authorsarXiv:2204.08583v2  [cs.CV]  4 Sep 2022