16 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
generation. In the domain of affective computing and HCI, Galanos, Liapis, and
Yannakakis [15] has further found vqgan-clip able to elicit targeted emotions
from viewers.
This last example helps explain the widespread commercial adoption of vqgan-
clip, with over a dozen commercial apps built to provide it as a service and over
500 NFTs produced using our method sold8. A sampling of commercial websites
using vqgan-clip include NightCafe, Wombo Art, snowpixel.app, starryai.com,
neuralblender.com, and hypnogram.xyz. Collectively, across these sites, vqgan-
clip has been used over 10 million times, showing the veracity of our approach
to handle unstructured and diverse user content.
8 Conclusion
We have presented vqgan-clip , a method of generating and manipulating im-
ages based on only human written text prompts. The quality of our model’s
generations have high visual fidelity and remain faithful to the textual prompt,
outperforming prior approaches like DALL-E and GLIDE. The fidelity has been
externally validated by commercial success and use by multiple companies. Com-
pared to the only comparable approach to text based image editing, vqgan-clip
continues to produce higher quality visual images — especially when the textual
prompt and image content have low semantic similarity. Our ablation studies
show the use of augmented images during the optimization process is a key fac-
tor to our method’s success and that a code-book approach would sacrifice both
speed and quality in our approach.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge Ryan Murdock, who developed a very similar
technique for combining VQGAN and CLIP simultaneously to us [33, 34] but did
not release his approach. Ryan was invited to coauthor this paper and declined.
We are also indebted to the thousands of people who have used and built upon
our methods and given us feedback that has allowed us to continue to improve
our techniques.
Many of the experiments in this paper were made possible by CoreWeave.
CoreWeave also provides compute for a free public demo in the EleutherAI
Discord server which enabled the methods described in this paper to be iterated
on rapidly by a great many people. The bot that runs the demo was created by
Discord user BoneAmputee.
References
1. Ali, S., and Parikh, D.: Telling Creative Stories Using Generative Visual Aids,
(2021). arXiv: 2110.14810v1 [cs.HC]
8https://twitter.com/quasimondo/status/1438601395087753217