VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 3
candidate and the embedding of the text prompt as a loss function, and differ-
entiating through CLIP with respect to the GAN’s latent vector representation
of the image, which we refer to as the “z-vector” following Oord, Vinyals, and
Kavukcuoglu [38]. This process is outlined in Fig. 1
Figure 1: Diagram showing how augmentations are added to stabilize and im-
prove the optimization. Multiple crops, each with different random augmenta-
tions, are applied to produce an average loss over a single source generation.
This improves the results with respect to a single latent Z-vector.
To generate an image, the “initial image” contains random pixel values. The
optimization process is repeated to alter the image, until the output image grad-
ually improves such that it semantically matches the target text. We can also
edit existing images by starting with the image-to-edit as the “initial image”.
The text prompt used to describe how we want the image to change is used
identically to the text prompt for generating an image, and no changes to the
architecture exist between generation and manipulation besides how the ‘initial
image” is selected.
We use Adam [21] to do the actual optimization, a learning rate of 0 .15,
β= (0.9,0.999), and run for 400 iterations for the experiments in this paper.
2.1 Discrete Latent Spaces for Images
Unlike the naturally discrete nature of text, the space of naturally occurring im-
ages is inherently continuous and not trivially discretized. Prior work by Oord,
Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu [38] borrows techniques from vector quantization
(VQ) to represent a variety of modalities with discrete latent representations by
building a codebook vocabulary with a finite set of learned embeddings. Given a
codebook of vocabulary size Kwith embedding dimension nk,Z={zi}K
k∈Rnk.
This is applied to images by constructing a convolutional autoencoder with
encoder Eand decoder G. An input image x∈Iis first embedded with the
encoder z=E(x). We can then compute the vector quantized embedding xas
zq= argmin
zk∈Z∥zi,j−zk∥