4 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
which we can then multiply back through the vocabulary in order to perform
reconstruction. We can then use a straight-through estimator on the quantization
step in order to allow the CNN and codebook to be jointly trained end-to-end.
We use the popular VQGAN [12] model for the experiments in this paper.
2.2 Contrastive Text-Image Models
To guide the generative model, we need a way to adjust the similarity of a
candidate generation with the guidance text. To achieve this, we use CLIP, [40],
a joint text-image encoder trained by using contrastive learning. We use CLIP to
embed text prompts and candidate generated images independently and measure
the cosine similarity between the embeddings. This similarity is then reframed
as a loss that we can use gradient descent to minimize.
2.3 Augmentations
One challenge of using vqgan-clip is that gradient updates from the CLIP loss
are quite noisy if calculated on a single image. To overcome this we take the
generated candidate image and modify it many times, producing a large number
of augmented images. We take random crops of the candidate image and then
apply further augmentations such as flipping, color jitter, noising, etc. [42]. Most
high level semantic features of an image are relatively invariant to these changes,
so averaging the CLIP loss with respect to all of the augmented images reduces
the variance of each update step. There is a risk that a random crop might
dramatically change the semantic content of an image (e.g. by cropping out an
important object), but we find that in practice this does not cause any issues.
For the results presented in this paper we used an augmentation pipeline
consisting of: random horizontal flips, random affine projections, random per-
spective projections, random color jitter, and adding random Gaussian noise.
2.4 Regularizing the Latent Vector
When using an unconstrained VQGAN for image generation, we found that
outputs tended to be unstructured. Adding augmentations helps with general
coherence, but the final output will often still contain patches of unwanted tex-
tures. To solve this problem we apply a weighted L2regularization to the the
z-vector.
This produces a regularized loss function given by the equation
Loss =LCLIP +α·1
NNX
i=0Z2
i
where αis the regularization weight. This encourages parsimony in the represen-
tation, sending low information codes in VQGAN’s codebook to zero. In practice
we note that regularization appears to improve the coherence of the output and
produces a better structured image. We decay the regularization term by 0 .005
over the course of generation.