2 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
update the candidate generation until it is sufficiently similar to the target text.
The difference between using our technique for generation and editing is merely
a matter of initializing the generator with a particular image (for editing) or
with random noise (for generation).
A significant advantage of our methodology is the lack of additional training
required. Only a pretrained image generator and a joint image-text encoder are
necessary, while all three of Liu et al. [26], Ramesh et al. [41], and Nichol et al.
[36] require training similar models from scratch. Additionally Ramesh et al. [41]
and Nichol et al. [36] train generators from scratch.
We demonstrate several significant contributions, including:
1. High visual quality for both generation and manipulation of images.
2. High semantic fidelity between text and generation, especially when seman-
tically unlikely content co-occurs.
3. Efficiency in that our method requires no additional training beyond the pre-
trained models, using only a small amount of optimization per inference.
4. The value of open development and research. This technique was developed
in public and open collaboration has been integral to its rapid real-world
success. Non-authors have already extended our approach to other modalities
(e.g., replacing text for audio) and commercial applications.
The rest of our manuscript is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss
how of how our methodology works, resulting in a simple and easy-to-apply
approach for combing multiple modalities for generation or manipulation. The
efficacy of vqgan-clip in generating high quality and semantically relevant
images is shown in Section 3, followed by superior manipulation ability in Sec-
tion 4. The design choices of vqgan-clip to obtain both high image quality and
fast generation are validated by ablations in Section 5, and Section 6 discusses
resource usage and efficiency considerations. As our approach has been public
since April 2021, we are able to show further validation by external groups in
Section 7. This use includes extensions to other modalities, showing the flexibil-
ity of our approach, as well as commercial use of vqgan-clip that demonstrate
its success at handling open-domain prompts and images to a satisfying degree.
Finally we conclude in Section 8.
2 Our Methodology
To demonstrate our method’s effectiveness we apply it using VQGAN [12] and
CLIP [40] as pre-trained models, and so refer to our approach as vqgan-clip .
We stress, however, that our approach is not specific to either model and that
subsequent work has already shown success that builds on our work using other
models [6, 13, 30, 50], and even in other modalities [19, 54].
We start with a text prompt and use a GAN to iteratively generate candi-
date images, at each step using CLIP to improve the image. We optimize the
image by treating the squared spherical distance between the embedding of the