20 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
55. Yang, Z., and Buehler, M.J.: Words to Matter: De novo Architected Materials
Design Using Transformer Neural Networks. Frontiers in Materials 8, 417 (2021)
56. Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Nguyen, A., Fuchs, T., and Lipson, H.: Understanding Neu-
ral Networks Through Deep Visualization, (2015). arXiv: 1506.06579v1 [cs.CV]
A Author Contributions
Katherine Crowson: Originated the idea of combining VQGAN withCLIP and
lead the development of the approach.
Stella Biderman: Lead the experimentation and writing of the paper.
Daniel Kornis: developed latent vector regularization and carried out experi-
ments on Open-Edit.
Dashiell Stander: Assisted with generative experiments and the writing of the
paper.
Eric Hallahan: Assisted with generative experiments and the writing of the
paper.
Louis Castricato: Developed semantic image editing and masking techniques.
Edward Raff: Advised the project, proposed ablation experiments, and assisted
in the writing of the paper.
B Additional Related Work
B.1 Image Generation and Editing
While there is a significant literature on semantic image generation and editing
beyond those cited in the main body of the paper, it is overwhelmingly work that
imposes strong constraints on and assumptions about the inputs it work with.
Closed domain work such as Dong et al. [10], Nam, Kim, and Kim [35], Li et al.
[25], and Patashnik et al. [39] achieves much higher quality images, but comes
at the cost of being afunctional outside the domain the model was trained on.
Other authors simplify the problem by using non-textual auxiliary inputs [46,
37] or filtering the inputs to a small, pre-defined vocabulary [18].
B.2 CNN Visualisation and Interpretability
Our approach is surprisingly similar to older work on visualizing and interpreting
convolutional neural networks. Techniques for identifying what region(s) of an
image lead to it being assigned a label by a classifier such as Simonyan, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman [47], Selvaraju et al. [44], and Yosinski et al. [56] operate on
similar principles to our backpropagating of the CLIP loss, and DeepDream [32]
uses the same core idea of iteratively updating an image to match a label.