VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 21
B.3 Building Multimodal Models Cheaply
Due to the high cost of training large, state-of-the-art transformer models [45, 5],
methodologies that allow one to build off of previously trained models cheaply
are highly valuable. The bulk of the existing literature on this topic focuses
on editing or updating existing (typically unimodal) models in both computer
vision [3] and natural language processing [8, 31, 28].
Another thread of research aims to leverage prompting to efficiently produce
multimodal models from unimodal ones. Tsimpoukelli et al. [51] shows that
an input-dependent version of prompt tuning [24] enables them to convert a
7 billion parameter language model into a multimodal model by only training
68 million of the parameters. Building on their success, Eichenberg et al. [11]
replace the prompt tuning with adapters [17] and incorporate CLIP embeddings,
enabling them to train a state-of-the-art visual question answering transformer
at a fraction of the cost of doing so from scratch. Our work continues in this
theme by removing the training entirely, at the cost of a modest increase in
generation time.
C Observations of Public Use
As our models have been public for nearly a year at time-of-writing, we have
had the opportunity to study how people use vqgan-clip in the wild. While a
systematic study is far outside the scope of this paper, we summarize our main
observations in the hopes of guiding future human-computer interaction inves-
tigations. These observations are largely informed by casual conversations and
interviews with users of our methodology, and by in situ observation of people
interacting with the model. For further discussion of the HCI and sociological
influences on generative modeling, we direct an interested reader to Snell [48],
Underwood [52], and Ali and Parikh [1].
Human-AI Co-Creation The overwhelming feedback we have gotten from users
is that they view vqgan-clip not as an AI working in a vacuum but as an AI
and a human working together to generate art. Users have also created new (and
unintended) ways of working with vqgan-clip that increase their direct agency
over the art created. The most prominent example of this is that many users
halt generation early to edit the partial generations directly, before restarting
generation from their newly edited image. In this way users can remove arti-
facts, discourage undesirable components of an image, and try alternative paths
through the optimization landscape.
Notebook-based development The overwhelming majority of people who have
picked up and iterated on the methodologies described in this paper use note-
books such as Jupyter Notebook and Google Colab to do their work, instead of
traditional repositories and scripts. Based on our conversations with users, the
cause of this appears to be two-fold: widespread popularity among people who
do not identify as computer scientists or developers and a lack of the necessary