VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 5
2.5 Additional Components
Our methodology is highly flexible and can be extended straightforwardly de-
pending on the use-case and context due to the ease of integrating additional
interventions on the intermediate steps of image generation. Researchers using
our framework have introduced a number of additional components, ranging
from using ensembles [7], to using B´ ezier curves for latent representations [14,
6], to using perturbations to make the results more robust to adversaries [27].
Although they aren’t used in the main experiments of this paper, we wish to call
attention to two in particular that we use frequently: “prompt addition” and
masked image editing. We give an overview of both here, and provide additional
experiments and information in Appendix G
Prompt Addition: We have found that our users are often interested in applying
multiple text prompts at the same time. This can be achieved by computing
the loss against multiple target texts simultaneously and adding the results. In
Appendix G.1 we use this tool to explore the semantic cohesion of vqgan-clip ’s
generations.
Masking: A common technique in image generation and editing is masking , where
a portion of an image is identified ahead of time as being where a model should
edit5vqgan-clip is compatible with masking by zeroing out the gradients in
parts of the latent vector that one wishes to not change. However vqgan-clip
can also leverage the semantic knowledge of CLIP to perform self-masking with-
out any non-textual human input.
3 Semantic Image Generation
The primary application of our methodology is for generating images from text.
In contrast to previous work on this topic [41, 36, 53], we do not perceive creat-
ing photo-realistic images or images that could convince a human that they are
real photographs as our primary goal. Our focus is on producing images of high
visual quality that are semantically meaningful in relation to a natural language
prompt, which we demonstrate in this section. This in fact requires abandoning
photo-realism when prompts may ask for artistic or explicitly unrealistic gener-
ations and edits. A loosely curated set of example generations is presented in
Fig. 2.
Asvqgan-clip has been publicly available for almost a year, we have had the
opportunity to observe people experimenting with and building off of vqgan-
clip in the wild. In Appendix D we show a sample of artwork created by people
other than the authors of this paper are included to demonstrate the power and
range of vqgan-clip .
5In the context of image this is often referred to as “infilling,” but we will use “mask-
ing” as a general term to refer to both.