Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2971
Literaturesurvey
Raﬁq et al. [ 23] suggested transfer learning (TL) for sports
video summarization from scene classiﬁcation. This paper
focused on practical implementations in existing approachesand provided a way to obtain a high-grade scene catego-rization. Cricket was considered a case study that classiﬁes
ﬁve categories, i.e., batting, bowling, bordering, crowding,
and close-up for scene categorization using the previouslytrained AlexNet. The suggested technique used encoder-like
new, completely linked layers. They increased the data by
99.26% over lesser data sets to attain high accuracy. Finally,they compared the results to basic techniques to demonstrate
the superiority of the strategy and the latest models. Their
performance results were evaluated on cricketing videos andcompared several professional learning models like InceptionV3, VGGNet16, and AlexNet. Their studies showed that the
AlexNet technique delivers superior outcomes than current
suggestions.
Li et al. [ 24] proposed the neutrosophy theory (NT) to
visualize sports news data. This paper selected two types
of large sporting events of different types and sizes andused Excel data statistics techniques, Newtonian analysis
of mechanical systems, messy dynamics, etc., to identify
and classify events in sports media, and research visualiza-tion reports on sports rules media development. Sport mediaevents have a beneﬁcial impact on the scope of sporting activ-
ities. Evolution comprises three times, such as a "beginning
period," the "high-tide period," and the "decent period," acomparable period of process and evident chaos, such as
starting values, innate randomness, fractal resemblance, etc.
Finally, the visualization of the data of the sporting newsbased on the idea of neutrosophy was applied in the news
sector.
Fenil et al. [ 25] introduced the Histogram of Oriented Gra-
dients and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (HOG-BDLSTM) for real-time violence detection in a football
stadium. A system for perceiving violence in real-time was
suggested in this work, in which vast information could beprocessed, and human intelligence simulation recognized the
aggression. The system’s input is the huge number of real-
time video feeds of diverse sources analyzed by Spark. TheSpark Frames separated the frames and extracted features
from each frame by utilizing the HOG algorithm. The frames
were then labeled based on a violent model, a model for thehuman aspect of the person, and a negative model used totrain the BDLSTM network to identify violent situations.
The output, was therefore, created in connection with infor-
mation both past and future.
Pavitt et al. [ 26] discussed the natural language processing
and conversational interfaces (NLP-CI) for supporting match
analysis and scouting through artiﬁcial intelligence. Here,they explained how sports professionals could give analyti-cal help in exploring and insight into traditional data sources
in some frequently available AI applications. In particular,they focused on leveraging natural language processing and
conversational interfaces so that users could explore their
data sets and the results derived from the analyses done onthem with a simple and time-saving toolbox. They demon-strated the beneﬁt of the presentation to domain experts of
powerful AI and analytic techniques that show the potential
for an impact on the sport’s elite, where AI and analysis areavailable, and on the more popular level, where access to
specialist resources is generally limited.
ShuttleSpace [ 27] was developed by Ye et al. to help
badminton experts in evaluating trajectory data. Sports tra-
jectory data, such as the movement of players and balls, has a
wealth of information on player behavior. As a result, coachesand analysts used it extensively to enhance the performanceof their players’. Researchers had progressively been able
to experience these 3D trajectories using immersive tech-
nologies such as virtual reality thanks to recent advances inimmersive technologies such as virtual reality.
A web server named SGDB, which stands for Sports Gene
DataBase, was built by Cao et al. [ 28] after combining eight
published gene expression datasets from human skeletal mus-
cle. Searching for genes that were expressed after exercise
and without exercise was possible using the SGDB database.While allowing for the visualization of changes in femalesand males, it is possible to identify the effects of physical
activity on gene expression by analyzing the data. Additional
information can be found on different types of exercise andthe link between activity and age.
Based on the survey, there are several challenges in imple-
menting sports data visualization. Hence, in this paper, theVEVF model has been suggested. The following section dis-
cusses the proposed VEVF model brieﬂy.
Video-basedeﬀectivevisualization
framework(VEVF)
Sports analytics and data visualization offered player selec-
tors, managers, and players a broader platform to enhance
performance on the ﬁeld. In the following section of theframework, policymakers and analysis use statistical instru-ments and algorithms for data to get insight into the future.
Data visualization is one of the most important results
in the ﬁeld of sports analytics. The virtual representationof data is easier to grasp than numbers and words. Big
data analysis principles include learning analytics, gam-
ing analytics, productive analysis, and data viewing toevaluate signiﬁcant user-generated data game analytics. Arti-
ﬁcial and real-world datasets comprise several visualization
techniques: uncertainty visualization, data collections, andmultidimensional/multivariate data viewing. Differences in
123