2970 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
[9]. A CNN or convolutional neural network-based model
has been extensively utilized to efﬁciently solve complexmachine translation, signal processing, and computer vision
tasks [ 10]. However, computer vision is presently ﬂuctuating
from mathematical methods to machine learning approachesdue to its effectiveness in extracting compound features with-out human involvement [ 11]. In this expanding ﬁeld of study,
there is a tremendous opportunity to start innovation and
development. For example, predictive analysis by artiﬁcialintelligence can be applied to enhance health and ﬁtness [ 12].
Wearable applications can offer information on player tear
and strain, reducing damage to sportspeople. In addition, AIcan discover trends in gaming tactics, plans, and weaknesses
[13].
Data are a signiﬁcant part of the sports industry for train-
ers, performers, management, sports medicine employees,and supporters [ 14]. Data analytics can aid teams to vic-
tory games, and these data can help enhances sportsperson’s
performance, reduce injuries and inspire fans to join games[15]. In addition, big data helps us to develop improved sports
strategies. Whether it is an individual or a team sport, strate-
gic management is essential for any sport. These methodsare depending upon the professional athletes and teams to
compete against their opponents. Modern coaching leverages
large data sets to develop successful tactics for individual andteam athletes [ 16]. People will indeed follow credible lead-
ers, and famous coaches have the edge over younger ones
since they have access to a far greater data bank of informa-
tion. As a coach, the most obvious application of data is in thecollection of ﬁgures and statistics. Sports industry data are
vital to players, coaches and management, and sports medical
professionals and spectators. While data analytics can assista team win games and enhance player performance, the same
numbers can also motivate spectators to attend games. Data
science enables coaches of professional teams to build hyper-personalized athlete matches and other plans for each matchplayed by the team in particular. The strategies of the team
are left unexpected yet efﬁcient [ 17].
Analyzing performance in sports helps coaches and play-
ers reach their goals by identifying activities that can guide
decision-making, maximize performance, and assist them
on their road to excellence. They often include tacticalevaluation, movement analysis, video, and statistical databas-
ing/models, and coach/player data displays. Due to the
obvious improvements in technology, data collecting, stor-age, and coaching requirements for data presentation havechanged where analysts now require a lot more knowledge
in many tracking devices and software. A video recording of
a game can help eliminate such biases and give a more impar-tial perspective of what transpired on the ﬁeld. For players
and coaches to understand what went well and what went
wrong, performance analysts collect data from all eventsoccurring on-ﬁeld.Sports like baseball, soccer, football, basketball, and
ﬁelds like fantasy have expanded players’ effectivenessand forecast future performance according to the big data
[18]. Whether it is historical data, vital scorekeeping, algo-
rithm forecasts, or clear player statistics, big data are anindispensable element of the sports industry [ 19]. Big data
permits teams and corporations to stay updated on perfor-
mance, carry out forecasts, and be big data enables teams
and organizations to stay relevant on performance, to fore-cast, and be determined in the world of sports [ 20]. Beyond
that, all parties involved in the industry, including analysts,
experts, and supporters, continuously alter data to updateplay-by-play or make predictions [ 21]. Big data analytics and
artiﬁcial intelligence have revolutionized the sports sector by
clarifying statistical information and managing quantitativeand qualitative data into understandable and stable content[22].
The ﬁrst step towards making sense of data is visualiz-
ing it. Using data visualization, users can make stories byorganizing data into a form that is simpler to grasp, high-
lighting patterns and outliers. In addition to eliminating the
noise from the data and displaying the relevant information,excellent visualizations create a story. It takes a careful bal-
ance between design and function to create an effective data
visualization. As a result, data analysts utilize a wide rangeof tools such as graphs and diagrams, and maps, among oth-ers, to translate and show data and data connections. To make
data comprehensible, the proper approach and its setup are
typically required.
The major contribution of the study is:
•Designing the VEVF model for sports data visualization
based on AI and big data analytics.
•Assessing the mathematical model of convolutional neural
network for sports video classiﬁcation.
•The numerical results have been performed. The recom-
mended model enhances classiﬁcation accuracy, precision,sports performance, and prediction ratio and reduces errorrate and computation time compared to other existing mod-
els.
The rest of the study is arranged as follows: “ Literature
survey ” discusses the existing models and frameworks of
sports data visualization and sports monitoring. Then, in
“Video-based effective visualization framework (VEVF) ”,
the proposed VEVF model design has been discussed with
signiﬁcant theoretical validation and statistical modeling.
Next, in “ Performance analysis ”, the experimental results
have been implemented with critical discussion, and ﬁnally,“Conclusion ” concludes the research paper.
123