Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-021-00557-w
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Hybrid design for sports data visualization using AI and big data
analytics
Aijun Liu1·Rajendra Prasad Mahapatra2·A. V. R. Mayuri3
Received: 15 July 2021 / Accepted: 24 September 2021 / Published online: 29 October 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In sports data analysis and visualization, understanding collective tactical behavior has become an integral part. Interactive
and automatic data analysis is instrumental in making use of growing amounts of compound information. In professional
team sports, gathering and analyzing sportsperson monitoring data are common practice, intending to evaluate fatigue andsucceeding adaptation responses, analyze performance potential, and reduce injury and illness risk. Data visualization
technology born in the era of big data analytics provides a good foundation for further developing ﬁtness tools based on
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Hence, this study proposed a video-based effective visualization framework (VEVF) based onartiﬁcial intelligence and big data analytics. This study uses the machine learning method to categorize the sports video by
extracting both the videos’ temporal and spatial features. Our system is based on convolutional neural networks united with
temporal pooling layers. The experimental outcomes demonstrate that the recommended VEVF model enhances the accuracyratio of 98.7%, recall ratio of 94.5%, F1-score ratio of 97.9%, the precision ratio of 96.7%, the error rate of 29.1%, theperformance ratio of 95.2%, an efﬁciency ratio of 96.1% compared to other existing models.
Keywords Sports data visualization ·Artiﬁcial intelligence ·Big data analytics ·Video classiﬁcation ·Hybrid design
Introductiontosportsdatavisualization
The primary objective of competitive sports is to achieve
greater sporting performance and eventually help win
the competitions through encouraging higher standards of
achievement, empowering physical activity, building disci-pline, teaching how to lose well/deal with disappointment,
and building camaraderie and teamwork [ 1]. The data are
the athlete and his behavior at the center of competitive
B Aijun Liu
hnust12345l@sina.com
Rajendra Prasad Mahapatra
mahapatra.rp@gmail.com
A. V . R. Mayuri
drmayuriavr@gmail.com
1School of Physical Education, Hunan University of Scienceand Technology, Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SRMInstitute of Science and Technology, Delhi NCR Campus,
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 201204, India
3School of Computing Science and Engineering, VIT Bhopal
University, Bhopal, Indiasports. Sports contain players’ physical activity, and behav-
ioral actions between athletes allow time, description, andcount data on action to be recorded [ 2]. The advent of compet-
itive data, has therefore, given fuel to research in competitive
sports and offers a platform to investigate the law of human
life and human inclinations [ 3]. The big data age has had an
unparalleled inﬂuence on sport’s development [ 4]. Mostly
connected big data services like health data, exercise, statis-
tics on training, and analysis may successfully assist athletesin creating game plans and becoming vital ways to win
contests [ 5]. Advanced big data technology has changed
the realm of sports. The increase in sports data has creatednew difﬁculties in big sports data and opportunities [ 6]. The
growth of the Internet and sports are the result of big sports
data. For all major sports, analysts may frequently extract
enormous numbers of data that media, fans, athletes, andorganizations can use [ 7]. These efforts frequently go hand
in hand with top technology providers that have realized the
enormous beneﬁts of sports analytics. The ubiquity, diver-sity, and easy accessibility of sports data make it especially
appealing to many visual researchers [ 8].
Artiﬁcial intelligence and computer vision technologies
are becoming trendy in analyzing videos in the sports ﬁeld
123