as a triplet loss employing time-based negative sampling, taking advantage of the encoder resilience
to time series of unequal lengths. To our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst fully unsupervised triplet loss in the
literature of time series.
We assess the quality of the learned representations on various datasets to ensure their universality.
In particular, we test how our representations can be used for classiﬁcation tasks on the standard
datasets in the time series literature, compiled in the UCR repository (Dau et al., 2018). We show
that our representations are general andtransferable , and that our method outperforms concurrent
unsupervised methods and even matches the state of the art of non-ensemble supervised classiﬁcation
techniques. Moreover, since UCR time series are exclusively univariate and mostly short, we also
evaluate our representations on the recent UEA multivariate time series repository (Bagnall et al.,
2018), as well as on a real-life dataset including very long time series, on which we demonstrate
scalability ,performance and generalization ability across different tasks beyond classiﬁcation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines previous works on unsupervised representation
learning, triplet losses and deep architectures for time series in the literature. Section 3 describes the
unsupervised training of the encoder, while Section 4 details the architecture of the latter. Finally,
Section 5 provides results of the experiments that we conducted to evaluate our method.
2 Related Work
Unsupervised learning for time series. To our knowledge, apart from those dealing with videos
or high-dimensional data (Srivastava et al., 2015; Denton & Birodkar, 2017; Villegas et al., 2017;
Oord et al., 2018), few recent works tackle unsupervised representation learning for time series.
Fortuin et al. (2019) deal with a related but different problem to this work, by learning temporal
representations of time series that represent well their evolution. Hyvarinen & Morioka (2016) learn
representations on evenly sized subdivisions of time series by learning to discriminate between those
subdivisions from these representations. Lei et al. (2017) expose an unsupervised method designed
so that the distances between learned representations mimic a standard distance (Dynamic Time
Warping, DTW) between time series. Malhotra et al. (2017) design an encoder as a recurrent neural
network, jointly trained with a decoder as a sequence-to-sequence model to reconstruct the input
time series from its learned representation. Finally, Wu et al. (2018a) compute feature embeddings
generated in the approximation of a carefully designed and efﬁcient kernel.
However, these methods either are not scalable nor suited to long time series (due to the sequential
nature of a recurrent network, or to the use of DTW with a quadratic complexity with respect to the
input length), are tested on no or very few standard datasets and with no publicly available code, or
do not provide sufﬁcient comparison to assess the quality of the learned representations. Our scalable
model and extensive analysis aim at overcoming these issues, besides outperforming these methods.
Triplet losses. Triplet losses have recently been widely used in various forms for representation
learning in different domains (Mikolov et al., 2013; Schroff et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2018b) and have
also been theoretically studied (Arora et al., 2019), but have not found much use for time series apart
from audio (Bredin, 2017; Lu et al., 2017; Jansen et al., 2018), and never, to our knowledge, in a
fully unsupervised setting, as existing works assume the existence of class labels or annotations in
the training data. Closer to our work even though focusing on a different, more speciﬁc task, Turpault
et al. (2019) learn audio embeddings in a semi-supervised setting, while partially relying on speciﬁc
transformations of the training data to sample positive samples in the triplet loss; Logeswaran & Lee
(2018) train a sentence encoder to recognize, among randomly chosen sentences, the true context of
another sentence, which is a difﬁcult method to adapt to time series. Our method instead relies on a
more natural choice of positive samples, learning similarities using subsampling.
Convolutional networks for time series. Deep convolutional neural networks have recently been
successfully applied to time series classiﬁcation tasks (Cui et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017), showing
competitive performance. Dilated convolutions, popularized by WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016) for
audio generation, have been used to improve their performance and were shown to perform well as
sequence-to-sequence models for time series forecasting (Bai et al., 2018) using an architecture that
inspired ours. These works particularly show that dilated convolutions help to build networks for
sequential tasks outperforming recurrent neural networks in terms of both efﬁciency and prediction
performance.
2