Figure 3: Boxplot of the ratio of the accuracy
versus maximum achieved accuracy (higher is
better) for compared methods on the ﬁrst 85 UCR
datasets.
1 10 100
Percentage of labeled data0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
Ours (K= 5)
ResNet
Most represented classFigure 4: Accuracy of ResNet and our method
with respect to the ratio of labeled data on TwoPat-
terns. Error bars correspond to the standard devi-
ation over ﬁve runs per point for each method.
training procedure encourages representations of different time series to be separable, observing the
classiﬁcation performance of a simple SVM on these features allows to check their quality (Wu et al.,
2018a). Using SVMs also allows, when the encoder is trained, an efﬁcient training both in terms of
time (training is a matter of minutes in most cases) and space.
AsKhas a signiﬁcant impact on the performance, we present a combined version of our method,
where representations computed by encoders trained with different values of K(see Section S2 for
more details) are concatenated. This enables our learned representations with different parameters to
complement each other, and to remove some noise in the classiﬁcation scores.
5.1.1 Univariate Time Series
We present accuracy scores for all 128 datasets of the new iteration of the UCR archive (Dau et al.,
2018), which is a standard set of varied univariate datasets. We report in Table 1 scores for only some
UCR datasets, while scores for all datasets are reported in the supplementary material, Section S3.
We ﬁrst compare our scores to the two concurrent methods of this work, TimeNet (Malhotra et al.,
2017) and RWS (Wu et al., 2018a), which are two unsupervised methods also training a simple
classiﬁer on top of the learned representations, and reporting their results on a few UCR datasets. We
also compare on the ﬁrst 85 datasets of the archive5to the four best classiﬁers of the supervised state
of the art studied by Bagnall et al. (2017): COTE – replaced by its improved version HIVE-COTE
(Lines et al., 2018) –, ST (Bostrom & Bagnall, 2015), BOSS (Schäfer, 2015) and EE (Lines & Bagnall,
2015). HIVE-COTE is a powerful ensemble method using many classiﬁers in a hierarchical voting
structure; EE is a simpler ensemble method; ST is based on shapelets and BOSS is a dictionary-based
classiﬁer.6We also add DTW (one-nearest-neighbor classiﬁer with DTW as measure) as a baseline.
HIVE-COTE includes ST, BOSS, EE and DTW in its ensemble, and is thus expected to outperform
them. Additionally, we compare our method to the ResNet method of Wang et al. (2017), which is
the best supervised neural network method studied in the review of Ismail Fawaz et al. (2019).
Performance. Comparison with the unsupervised state of the art (Section S3, Table S3 of the
supplementary material), indicates that our method consistently matches or outperforms both unsu-
pervised methods TimeNet and RWS (on 11 out of 12 and 10 out of 11 UCR datasets), showing its
5The new UCR archive includes 43 new datasets on which no reproducible results of state-of-the-art methods
have been produced yet. Still, we provide complete results for our method on these datasets in the supplementary
material, Section S3, Table S4, along with those of DTW, the only other method for which they were available.
6While ST and BOSS are also ensembles of classiﬁers, we chose not to qualify both of them as ensembles
since their ensemble only includes variations of the same novel classiﬁcation method.
6