Unsupervised Scalable Representation Learning
for Multivariate Time Series
Jean-Yves Franceschi
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
jean-yves.franceschi@lip6.fr
Aymeric Dieuleveut
MLO, EPFL, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
aymeric.dieuleveut@polytechnique.edu
Martin Jaggi
MLO, EPFL, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch
Abstract
Time series constitute a challenging data type for machine learning algorithms,
due to their highly variable lengths and sparse labeling in practice. In this paper,
we tackle this challenge by proposing an unsupervised method to learn universal
embeddings of time series. Unlike previous works, it is scalable with respect to
their length and we demonstrate the quality, transferability and practicability of
the learned representations with thorough experiments and comparisons. To this
end, we combine an encoder based on causal dilated convolutions with a novel
triplet loss employing time-based negative sampling, obtaining general-purpose
representations for variable length and multivariate time series.
1 Introduction
We investigate in this work the topic of unsupervised general-purpose representation learning for time
series. In spite of the increasing amount of work about representation learning in ﬁelds like natural
language processing (Young et al., 2018) or videos (Denton & Birodkar, 2017), few articles explicitly
deal with general-purpose representation learning for time series without structural assumption on
non-temporal data.
This problem is indeed challenging for various reasons. First, real-life time series are rarely or
sparsely labeled. Therefore, unsupervised representation learning would be strongly preferred.
Second, methods need to deliver compatible representations while allowing the input time series to
have unequal lengths. Third, scalability and efﬁciency both at training and inference time is crucial,
in the sense that the techniques must work for both short and long time series encountered in practice.
Hence, we propose in the following an unsupervised method to learn general-purpose representations
formultivariate time series that comply with the issues of varying and potentially high lengths of the
studied time series. To this end, we introduce a novel unsupervised loss training a scalable encoder,
shaped as a deep convolutional neural network with dilated convolutions (Oord et al., 2016) and
outputting ﬁxed-length vector representations regardless of the length of its output. This loss is built
Work partially done while studying at ENS de Lyon and MLO, EPFL.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.