TimeDilation 21= 2
Dilation 20= 1Dilation 22= 4
InputOutput
(a)
Causal Convolution 1
Dilation 2iCausal Convolution 2
Dilation 2iWeight Norm
Weight NormLeaky ReLU
Leaky ReLU
Convolution
Kernel size 1
(if needed for
up- or down-
sampling)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Illustration of three stacked dilated causal convolutions. Lines between each sequence
represent their computational graph. Red solid lines highlight the dependency graph for the computa-
tion of the last value of the output sequence, showing that no future value of the input time series is
used to compute it. (b) Composition of the i-th layer of the chosen architecture.
i-th layer). The output of this causal network is then given to a global max pooling layer squeezing
the temporal dimension and aggregating all temporal information in a ﬁxed-size vector (as proposed
by Wang et al. (2017) in a supervised setting with full convolutions). A linear transformation of this
vector is then the output of the encoder, with a ﬁxed, independent from the input length, size.
5 Experimental Results
We review in this section experiments conducted to investigate the relevance of the learned repre-
sentations. The code corresponding to these experiments is attached in the supplementary material
and is publicly available.4The full training process and hyperparameter choices are detailed in the
supplementary material, Sections S1 and S2. We used Python 3 for implementation, with PyTorch
0.4.1 (Paszke et al., 2017) for neural networks and scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) for SVMs.
Each encoder was trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) on a single Nvidia Titan
Xp GPU with CUDA 9.0, unless stated otherwise.
Selecting hyperparameters for an unsupervised method is challenging since the plurality of down-
stream tasks is usually supervised. Therefore, as Wu et al. (2018a), we choose for each considered
dataset archive a single set of hyperparameters regardless of the downstream task. Moreover, we
highlight that we perform no hyperparameter optimization of the unsupervised encoder architecture
and training parameters for any task, unlike other unsupervised works such as TimeNet (Malhotra
et al., 2017). Particularly, for classiﬁcation tasks, no label was used during the encoder training.
5.1 Classiﬁcation
We ﬁrst assess the quality of our learned representations on supervised tasks in a standard manner (Xu
et al., 2003; Dosovitskiy et al., 2014) by using them for time series classiﬁcation. In this setting, we
show that (1) our method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, and notably achieves
performance close to the supervised state of the art, (2) strongly outperforms supervised deep learning
methods when data is only sparsely labeled, (3) produces transferable representations.
For each considered dataset with a train / test split, we unsupervisedly train an encoder using its train
set. We then train an SVM with radial basis function kernel on top of the learned features using the
train labels of the dataset, and output the corresponding classiﬁcation score on the test set. As our
4https://github.com/White-Link/UnsupervisedScalableRepresentationLearningTimeSeries.
5