30 La radiologia medica (2021) 126:29–39
1 3
Introduction
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) has been indicated the virus responsible 
of SARS-CoV-2 disease (COVID-19), which has spread 
worldwide since December 2019 [1 –4].
COVID-19 diagnosis is made using “reverse transcrip-
tion real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction” 
(RT-PCR) test obtained by respiratory tract or blood 
specimens.
Triage of the COVID-19 patients is based on clinical 
and laboratory parameters, whilst chest imaging might be 
required for second-level triage by means of chest radi-
ography as the first step and supplementary computed 
tomography (CT) in more severe cases or in case of dis-
crepancy between clinical and radiographic findings [ 5, 6]. 
Although CT examinations can be used for lung involve-
ment monitoring and several publications attempted to 
show that CT could identify COVID-19 viral pneumonia, 
the field is highly debated and several radiological organi-
zations not have recommended the CT as a routine screen -
ing tool in the COVID-19 pneumonia [7 –16]. However, 
CT examination was used to evaluate the grade and the 
extension of the viral pneumonia by COVID-19 [12, 13].
Li et al. have reported that visual quantitative analysis 
of CT abnormalities reproduces clinical characteristics of 
COVID-19 infection [10]. Moreover, lung involvement of 
COVID-19 pneumonia could be quantified automatically 
by artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning-based 
algorithms on baseline chest CT [ 11–13]. CT quantifica -
tion of healthy residual lung parenchyma was shown to be 
helpful either to estimate the alveolar recruitment during 
ventilation or to predict the patient’s prognosis of patients 
with acute respiratory distress syndrome [14, 15].
The aim of the study was to evaluate by means of 
regression models the relationships between baseline 
clinical and laboratory data and lung involvement on base-
line chest CT, to quantify the thoracic disease using an 
artificial intelligence tool and to assess a visual scoring 
system to predict prognosis in patients with COVID-19 
pneumonia.
Materials and methods
Patient characteristics
In relation to the ongoing epidemic emergency, the institu-
tional review board (IRB) of “AORN Giuseppe Moscati” 
approved the study and waived written informed consent 
for this retrospective study that evaluated anonymized data and involved no potential risk to patients. Our cohort was 
composed of 103 (41 women and 62 men; 68.8 years of 
mean age—range, 29–93 years) subjected to the RT-PCR 
test for suspicious COVID-19 disease, between March 6, 
2020, and March 31, 2020. The virus investigation for 
etiological diagnosis was executed by the current gold 
standard test in the clinical laboratory of “AORN Giuseppe 
Moscati.”
Therefore, chest CT was performed based on high clini-
cal suspicion in addition to clinical and laboratory find-
ings recording in a setting of high pre-test probability of 
COVID-19.
In order to select chest CT scans for analysis, our exclu-
sion criteria were RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 that was 
ultimately determined to be negative. Figure  1 shows the 
patient’s enrollment flowchart.
Clinical and laboratory findings of each patient were 
recorded at admission. All CT examinations were performed 
within 2 days from the clinical evaluation and laboratory 
findings.
Patients were categorized in 3 groups: patients discharged 
at home, patients hospitalized in stable conditions and 
patient hospitalized in critical conditions or who died.
CT technique
CT scan was performed at the time of patient admission 
in hospital. All scans were performed with the patient in 
the supine position during inspiration without intrave-
nous contrast on two CT scanners (SOMATOM Sensation 
16, Erlangen, Germany, and Toshiba Aquilion 64 Slices, 
Tokyo, Japan) dedicated to COVID-19 patients. The scan-
ning range was from the apex to lung base. All images were 
obtained with a standard dose scanning protocol, recon-
structed at 1.0 mm slice thickness, with 1 mm increment, 
512 mm × 512 mm, 120 kV and 100–250 mAs. Images were 
reconstructed with a sharp reconstruction kernel for paren-
chyma (B80f on Somatom Sensation and FC13 on Toshiba). 
Lung window setting was with a window level of − 600 
Hounsfield units (HU) and window width of 1600 HU.
CT evaluation
All chest CT examinations were reviewed using a structured 
report defined by Italian Society of Medical Radiology and 
Interventional Radiology (SIRM, Milan, Italy) in collabora-
tion with the Exprivia Healtcare company (Bari, Italy) [17]. 
The presence of GGO and consolidations were assessed by 
defining their localization (unilateral and bilateral), axial dis-
tribution (diffuse, predominantly peripheral, mainly central, 
declivous, anti-declivous), distribution on the cranio-caudal 
plane (diffuse, multifocal/patching, prevalent in the upper 
lobes, prevalent in the lower lobes, gravitational) and the