Vol.:(0123456789)1 3La radiologia medica (2021) 126:29–39 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11547-020-01293-w
CHEST RADIOLOGY
Clinical and laboratory data, radiological structured report findings 
and quantitative evaluation of lung involvement on baseline chest CT 
in COVID‑19 patients to predict prognosis
Cappabianca Salvatore1 · Fusco Roberta2 · de Lisio Angela3 · Paura Cesare3 · Clemente Alfredo1 · 
Gagliardi Giuliano3 · Lombardi Giulio3 · Giacobbe Giuliana1 · Russo Gaetano Maria1 · Belfiore Maria Paola1 · 
Urraro Fabrizio1 · Grassi Roberta1 · Feragalli Beatrice4 · Miele Vittorio5
Received: 8 May 2020 / Accepted: 16 August 2020 / Published online: 12 October 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Objective To evaluate by means of regression models the relationships between baseline clinical and laboratory data and 
lung involvement on baseline chest CT and to quantify the thoracic disease using an artificial intelligence tool and a visual 
scoring system to predict prognosis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
Materials and methods This study included 103 (41 women and 62 men; 68.8 years of mean age—range, 29–93 years) with 
suspicious COVID-19 viral infection evaluated by reverse transcription real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) test. All patients underwent CT examinations at the time of admission in addition to clinical and laboratory find-
ings recording. All chest CT examinations were reviewed using a structured report. Moreover, using an artificial intelligence 
tool we performed an automatic segmentation on CT images based on Hounsfield unit to calculate residual healthy lung 
parenchyma, ground-glass opacities (GGO), consolidations and emphysema volumes for both right and left lungs. Two expert 
radiologists, in consensus, attributed at the CT pulmonary disease involvement a severity score using a scale of 5 levels; the 
score was attributed for GGO and consolidation for each lung, and then, an overall radiological severity visual score was 
obtained summing the single score. Univariate and multivariate regression analysis was performed.
Results Symptoms and comorbidities did not show differences statistically significant in terms of patient outcome. Instead, 
SpO2 was significantly lower in patients hospitalized in critical conditions or died while age, HS CRP, leukocyte count, 
neutrophils, LDH, d-dimer, troponin, creatinine and azotemia, ALT, AST and bilirubin values were significantly higher. 
GGO and consolidations were the main CT patterns (a variable combination of GGO and consolidations was found in 87.8% 
of patients). CT COVID-19 disease was prevalently bilateral (77.6%) with peripheral distribution (74.5%) and multiple 
lobes localizations (52.0%). Consolidation, emphysema and residual healthy lung parenchyma volumes showed statistically 
significant differences in the three groups of patients based on outcome (patients discharged at home, patients hospitalized 
in stable conditions and patient hospitalized in critical conditions or died) while GGO volume did not affect the patient’s 
outcome. Moreover, the overall radiological severity visual score (cutoff ≥ 8) was a predictor of patient outcome. The high-
est value of R -squared (R2 = 0.93) was obtained by the model that combines clinical/laboratory findings at CT volumes. The 
highest accuracy was obtained by clinical/laboratory and CT findings model with a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy, 
respectively, of 88%, 78% and 81% to predict discharged/stable patients versus critical/died patients.
Conclusion In conclusion, both CT visual score and computerized software-based quantification of the consolidation, emphy -
sema and residual healthy lung parenchyma on chest CT images were independent predictors of outcome in patients with 
COVID-19 pneumonia.
Keywords COVID-19 · Chest CT · Outcome · Regression model
 * Fusco Roberta 
 r.fusco@istitutotumori.na.it
Extended author information available on the last page of the article