37 La radiologia medica (2021) 126:29–39 
1 3
and multilobar [26]. Guan et al. [27] reported as main 
CT patterns GGO (56.4%) and bilateral patchy shadowing 
(51.8%). In our cohort, GGO and consolidations were the 
main CT patterns: a variable combination of GGO and 
consolidations was found in 87.8% of patients. Moreover, 
CT COVID-19 disease was prevalently bilateral (77.6%) 
with peripheral distribution (74.5%) and localizations in 
multiple lobes (52.0%) were found. Crazy paving pattern 
was reported in the 56.1% of patients and “reversed halo” 
sign in the 20.4% of patients.
As for the visual quantification of the GGO and the 
consolidation extension, our data document a correlation 
between the radiological severity visual score (≥ 8) and the 
outcome while no correlation was found considering indi-
vidually the patients groups mild, moderate, severe and criti-
cal due to the similar percentage of radiological score in all 
groups.
Several methods of disease extent quantification at chest 
CT have been proposed, including the extent of emphysema, 
pulmonary fibrosis and acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS) [30– 35]. CT score of the burden of lung disease was 
previously reported as a risk factor for mortality in ARDS 
[30]. However, there are scarce data on the prognostic value 
of CT in COVID-19. A visual semi-quantitative quantifica-
tion of disease extent at CT correlated with clinical severity 
[36].
Colombi et al. [37] reported that in patients with con-
firmed COVID-19 pneumonia, visual or software quantifi-
cation the extent of CT lung abnormality was predictors of 
ICU admission or death. They reported that the proportion 
of well-aerated lung assessed by chest CT obtained in the 
emergency department was associated with better progno-
sis for patients with COVID-19 pneumonia independent of 
other clinical parameters.
Considering the substantial rate of ARDS in COVID-19 
patients, we assessed by means of regression models the 
relationships between baseline clinical data and disease 
lung involvement on baseline chest CT and we quantified the residual healthy lung parenchyma volume to predict 
prognosis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
In our study, we reported that no  symptoms and 
no comorbidities determined differences statistically signifi-
cant in terms of patient outcome. SpO2 was significantly 
lower in patients hospitalized in critical conditions or died 
while age, HS CRP, Leukocyte count, neutrophils, LDH, 
d-dimer, troponin, creatinine and azotemia, ALT, AST and 
bilirubin values were significantly higher. The results of the 
present study showed that the proportion of residual healthy 
lung parenchyma volume ≤ 70.20% with a proportion of 
emphysema volume  > 0.10% and a proportion of consolida -
tion volume > 1.40% reached a sensitivity, a specificity and 
an accuracy of 73%, 75% and 89% to predict discharged/
stable patients versus critical/died patients.
Instead, clinical/laboratory and CT findings model 
obtained a sensitivity, a specificity and an accuracy, respec-
tively, of 88%, 78% and 81% to predict discharged/stable 
patients versus critical/died patients.
Our results were in accordance with the findings of 
Raun et al. [38] that reported a significant difference in age 
between the death group and the discharge group (p  < 0.001) 
and significant differences in white blood cell counts, abso-
lute values of lymphocytes, platelets, albumin, total biliru-
bin, blood urea nitrogen, blood creatinine, myoglobin, car -
diac troponin, C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 
(IL-6) between the two groups.
The main limitation of the present study is the nature 
retrospective and monocentric of the study conducted on a 
cohort of symptomatic hospitalized patients from an area 
of high epidemiological risk and with a high pre-test prob-
ability of COVID-19 infection.
In conclusion, our results suggest that software-based 
quantification of the consolidation, emphysema and resid-
ual healthy lung parenchyma on chest CT was independent 
predictors of COVID-19 patient’s outcome. Moreover, also 
a visual radiological severity visual score ≥ 8 was predictor 
of patient’s outcome. Both CT visual quantitative analysis 
Fig. 3  ROC curve for Clinical/Laboratory findings model (A), CT volumes model (B), clinical/laboratory ad CT findings model