32 La radiologia medica (2021) 126:29–39
1 3
Statistical analysis
Continuous data were expressed in terms of median value 
and range. Categorical data are expressed as counts and per -
centages. Kruskal–Wallis test was used to verify differences 
between groups of continuous variables. Chi-square test with 
Yates’s correction was used to assess statistically difference 
between percentage values among groups. Spearman cor -
relation coefficient was calculated to assess the correlation 
between the volumes of residual healthy lung parenchyma, 
of GGO and consolidations with the radiological severity 
visual score.
The outcome was defined by discharging at home, hospi-
talization in stable conditions and hospitalization in critical 
conditions or death. Categories from continuous variables were obtained using as threshold the median value of the 
overall sample. Univariable and backward stepwise mul-
tivariable logistic regression analysis was used to test the 
association between potential predictors and the outcome. 
Factors for which p values were less than 0.1 in univariable 
analysis were used as candidate variables for multivariable 
approach.
Therefore, was obtained a model using only clinical 
parameters, a model using CT parameters and a model using 
clinical parameters combined to CT volumes. The R -squared 
(R2) of each model was then reported for comparison.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis 
was performed for each model, and the area under the ROC 
(AUC) was used to assess the performance of the discrimi-
nation models based on independent predictors.Fig. 2  Example of lung volumes 
calculated by automatic seg-
mentation tool on CT images by 
pre-setting a threshold value of 
Hounsfield Units and a color in 
order to obtain a segmentation 
of both lungs and a quantita-
tive evaluation of emphysema 
(− 1024/− 977; blue), healthy 
residual lung parenchyma 
(− 977/− 703; yellow), GGO 
(− 703/− 368; pink) and con-
solidation (− 100/5; red)