Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for Medical Conversations , pages 22–30
Online, 10, 2020. c
2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P1722Generating Medical Reports from Patient-Doctor Conversations using
Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Seppo Enarvi1, Marilisa Amoia1, Miguel Del-Agua Teba1, Brian Delaney1,
Frank Diehl1, Guido Gallopyn1, Stefan Hahn1, Kristina Harris1, Liam McGrath1,
Yue Pan1, Joel Pinto1, Luca Rubini1, Miguel Ruiz1, Gagandeep Singh1,
Fabian Stemmer1, Weiyi Sun1, Paul Vozila1, Thomas Lin2, Ranjani Ramamurthy2
1Nuance Communications, 1 Wayside Road, Burlington, MA 01803
firstname.lastname@nuance.com
2Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052
ftlin,ranjanir g@microsoft.com
Abstract
We discuss automatic creation of medical re-
ports from ASR-generated patient-doctor con-
versational transcripts using an end-to-end
neural summarization approach. We ex-
plore both recurrent neural network (RNN)
and Transformer-based sequence-to-sequence
architectures for summarizing medical con-
versations. We have incorporated enhance-
ments to these architectures, such as the
pointer-generator network that facilitates copy-
ing parts of the conversations to the reports,
and a hierarchical RNN encoder that makes
RNN training three times faster with long
inputs. A comparison of the relative im-
provements from the different model architec-
tures over an oracle extractive baseline is pro-
vided on a dataset of 800k orthopedic encoun-
ters. Consistent with observations in literature
for machine translation and related tasks, we
ﬁnd the Transformer models outperform RNN
in accuracy, while taking less than half the
time to train. Signiﬁcantly large wins over a
strong oracle baseline indicate that sequence-
to-sequence modeling is a promising approach
for automatic generation of medical reports, in
the presence of data at scale.
1 Introduction
There has been an increase in medical documen-
tation requirements over the years owing to in-
creased regulatory requirements, compliance for
insurance reimbursement, caution over litigation
risk, and more recently towards increased patient
participation. According to a study on 57 U.S.
physicians, for every hour with a patient, a physi-
cian takes an additional hour of personal time do-
ing clerical work (Sinsky et al., 2016). Increased
documentation burden has been identiﬁed as one
of the main contributing factors for physician
burnout (Wright and Katz, 2018). In another, larger
study, U.S. physicians who used electronic healthrecords (EHRs) or computerized physician order
entry (CPOE) were found to be less satisﬁed with
the time spent on administrative work (Shanafelt
et al., 2016).
Increased physician burnout not only affects the
health and well-being of the physicians, it can
also lead to increased medical errors, increased job
turnover, reduced productivity, and reduced qual-
ity of patient care (Panagioti et al., 2017). Factors
related to physician burnout and its consequences
have been studied in detail in the literature (Patel
et al., 2018b).
Use of automatic speech recognition (ASR) to
dictate medical documentation has contributed sig-
niﬁcantly to the efﬁciency of physicians in creating
narrative reports (Payne et al., 2018). However the
content of the report has already been discussed
with the patient during the encounter. Medication
list and orders entered into the EHRs are also dis-
cussed with the patient. In other words, creation
of medical documentation by the physician may be
viewed as a redundant task given that the content
is already discussed with the patient.
There has been a surge in research on automatic
creation of medical documentation from patient-
doctor conversations. A lot of it is focused on
extracting medical information and facts from the
patient-doctor conversation (Happe et al., 2003;
Quiroz et al., 2019). This could involve extracting
clinical standard codes (Leroy et al., 2018), clin-
ical entities such as symptoms, medications, and
their properties (Du et al., 2019a,b), or medical reg-
imen (Selvaraj and Konam, 2020). This extracted
information could then be used to generate a re-
port (Finley et al., 2018a,b). Such information
extraction systems require creating an annotated
conversation corpus (Patel et al., 2018a; Shafran
et al., 2020).
For example, the NLP pipeline described by Fin-
ley et al. (2018a) ﬁrst extracts knowledge from an