23ASR transcript and then generates the report. The
knowledge extraction consists of tagging speaker
turns and sentences with certain classes using RNN-
based models, and using techniques such as string
matching, regular expressions, and data-driven su-
pervised and unsupervised approaches to extract
information from the tagged sentences. This is
followed by data-driven templates and ﬁnite state
grammars for report generation.
We take a different approach where the problem
is cast as translation (source language is conversa-
tional in nature and target language is clinical) and
summarization (input contains redundant and irrele-
vant information, and target is a concise and precise
note) at the same time. Given recent advances in
neural transduction technology (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; See et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017), we ex-
plore the end-to-end paradigm for generating medi-
cal reports from ASR transcripts. This eliminates
the need for annotated corpora that are required for
training intermediate processing steps. As a result
this approach is scalable across various medical
specialties.
Sequence-to-sequence models have been used
for summarizing radiology notes into the short Im-
pressions section, possibly incorporating also other
domain-speciﬁc information (Zhang et al., 2018;
MacAvaney et al., 2019). In contrast, our system
creates a report directly from the conversation tran-
script. Disadvantages of the end-to-end approach
include that it limits the ability to inject prior knowl-
edge and audit system output, and may potentially
result in inferior performance.
2 Dataset
We use data consisting of ambulatory orthopedic
surgery encounters. Speaker-diarized conversation
transcripts corresponding to the audio ﬁles were ob-
tained using an automatic speech recognizer. The
reports for orthopedic surgery are organized un-
der four sections—history of present illness (HPI),
physical examination (PE), assessment and plan
(AP), and diagnostic imaging results (RES). The
HPI section captures the reason for visit, and the
relevant clinical and social history. The PE section
captures both normal and abnormal ﬁndings from
a physical examination. The RES section outlines
impressions from diagnostics images such as X-ray
and CT scans. Finally, the AP section captures the
assessment by the doctor and treatment plan e.g.
medications, physical therapy etc.Size Source Target
Avg Max Avg Max
Ortho HPI 802k 961 7,008 116 2,920
Ortho RES 444k 993 6,873 48 878
Ortho PE 769k 970 7,008 128 1,456
Ortho AP 811k 967 7,008 160 2,639
CNN&DM 287k 681 2,496 48 1,248
XSum 204k 431 33,161 23 432
Table 1: Statistics of our orthopedic report creation
task and two other summarization tasks. Number of
training examples and average and maximum number
of tokens in the source and target sequence.
Experimental results are reported on a dataset
that consists of around 800k encounters from 280
doctors. The dataset is partitioned chronologically
(date of collection) into train, validation and evalu-
ation partitions. The evaluation partition includes
4,000 encounters from 80 doctors. The doctors
present in the evaluation set are present in the train
set. Since the models do not require supervision
outside the workﬂow, this paradigm is scalable,
though future work will assess generalization to
unseen doctors. We only use non-empty examples
for training and evaluation. The RES section is
empty in about 50 % of the examples.
Table 1 shows more detailed statistics of our
dataset in terms of the number of training exam-
ples and source and target sequence lengths. The
table also shows corresponding statistics for two
prominent datasets for abstractive summarization
that were not used in this study: CNN and Daily
Mail, as processed by Nallapati et al. (2016), and
XSum (Narayan et al., 2018). As shown in the table
both the source and target sequences in our data are
signiﬁcantly longer than in the standard databases.
3 Modeling
We use neural sequence-to-sequence models for
summarizing the doctor-patient conversations. The
input to the model is a sequence of tokens gener-
ated by the speech recognizer. The medical reports
consist of four sections, and we produce each sec-
tion using a separate sequence-to-sequence model.
The task closely resembles machine translation,
so we use models that are similar to neural machine
translation models. There are, however, several
differences from a typical machine translation task:
1.The source and target sequences are in the
same language, thus we can use the same vo-