25Source ConversationBLSTM BLSTM BLSTMBLSTM BLSTM BLSTMBLSTM
Partial SummaryLSTMLSTMAttention
DistributionContext
VectorV ocabulary
Distribution+Final Distribution
Figure 1: Illustration of the RNN sequence-to-
sequence model with hierarchical encoder and pointer-
generator copy mechanism. Segments of source con-
versation are encoded independently using two bidirec-
tional LSTM layers, and a third layer runs over the ﬁnal
segment embeddings. The attention distribution is com-
puted using both the token-level and segment-level out-
puts. The ﬁnal distribution is interpolated from the at-
tention distribution and the vocabulary distribution us-
ing a predicted coefﬁcient.
although the connections for predicting the interpo-
lation coefﬁcient have been omitted from the ﬁgure
for clarity.
The authors also introduce a coverage loss for
training. They deﬁne coverage as the sum of at-
tention weights over previous decoding steps. The
coverage loss penalizes for attending to positions
where the coverage is already high. The purpose
is to encourage the model to attend to all input
positions while decoding a sequence, and reduce
repetition. We found the coverage loss to be some-
what helpful with a small weight (0.001).
3.4 Transformer
Transformer uses self-attention (Vaswani et al.,
2017) in the encoder and decoder to create context-
dependent representations of the inputs. In our
experiments both encoder and decoder consist of
six layers of self-attention. Each decoder layer
attends to the top of the encoder stack after the
self-attention. Additionally each encoder and de-
coder layer contains a position-wise feed-forward
or convolutional network that consists of two trans-
formations and a ReLU activation in between. TheSource ConversationSelf-AttentionFFN FFN FFNSelf-AttentionFFN FFN FFNSelf-AttentionFFN FFN FFN
SummarySelf-AttentionEncoder AttentionFFN FFN FFNSelf-AttentionEncoder AttentionFFN FFN FFNSelf-AttentionEncoder AttentionFFN FFN FFNV ocabulary Distribution+Final Distribution
Figure 2: Illustration of the Transformer sequence-to-
sequence model with pointer-generator copy mecha-
nism. Each encoder layer consists of self-attention and
a position-wise feed-forward network. Decoder layers
also attend to the top of the encoder stack. We take
one attention distribution from the penultimate decoder
layer and interpolate it with the vocabulary distribution
using a predicted coefﬁcient. The ﬁnal distribution in-
cludes the vocabulary tokens and the present source to-
kens. Layer normalization and residual connections are
omitted for clarity.
fact that these layers can be computed in parallel
for every position makes training more efﬁcient
than training RNN models.
Following Vaswani et al. (2017), we use the base
model size, i.e. 8 attention heads with a total of
512 outputs and a 2048-dimensional feed-forward
network. Following Domhan (2018), we apply
layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) before the self-
attention and feed-forward sub-layers. This greatly
stabilizes training and speeds up convergence with
long inputs, conﬁrming observations earlier made
with deep networks (Wang et al., 2019).
Since the output of attention is independent
of the order of the inputs, we inject position-
dependent information into the inputs. In the origi-