24cabulary for input and output.
2.Report generation may require reasoning over
a long span of sentences. The sequences, espe-
cially the source sequences, are signiﬁcantly
longer, since we cannot translate sentences
separately.
3.Information may be incomplete (patient ges-
turing where it hurts), redundant (patient or
doctor repeating information), or irrelevant
conversation. In translation the semantic con-
tent in both the source and the target sequence
is the same.
The models that we use are based on the encoder-
decoder architecture that is well known from neural
machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). All the
models rely on attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015).
The encoder creates context-dependent representa-
tions of the input tokens, and the decoder produces
the next-token probability from those representa-
tions. During inference the output is generated
autoregressively using the next-token probabilities.
Very long sequences increase the memory usage
and training time, and make it more difﬁcult to
learn the model parameters. We truncate the source
sequences to 2,000 tokens and the target sequences
to 500 tokens during training. 10 % of the source
sequences and 0.1 % of the target sequences were
above this threshold. During inference we truncate
the inputs to 3,000 tokens. Only 4 % of the test
examples were originally longer than this limit.
In this work we compare models that are based
on recurrent neural networks and models based on
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). The following
sections describe these models and the enhance-
ments that we have implemented.
3.1 RNN with Attention
The RNN sequence-to-sequence model with atten-
tion was introduced by Bahdanau et al. (2015). The
encoder creates context-dependent input represen-
tations using a bidirectional RNN. The decoder
produces the next-token probability using a uni-
directional RNN, since future information is not
available. We used LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber, 1997) as the recurrency mechanism.
We included in the model some of the enhance-
ments from the RNMT+ model (Chen et al., 2018)—
dropout, residual connections, layer normalization,
and label smoothing. We also increased the number
of encoder and decoder layers to two, but furtherincreasing the number of layers did not give any
beneﬁt. We did not see signiﬁcant beneﬁt from
using multi-head attention.
3.2 Hierarchical Encoder
Training the RNN model is slow due to their in-
herently sequential form precluding parallelization
within the long input and output sequences. With
longer input sequences it also becomes increasingly
difﬁcult for the model to learn to attend to relevant
parts of the input.
Inspired by Cohan et al. (2018), we split the
input sequence into 8 equal-length segments that
are encoded independently. The segments can be
processed in parallel, speeding up training consid-
erably. The ﬁnal LSTM hidden state from forward
and backward directions of each segment are con-
catenated and projected into a segment embedding.
After a stack of segment encoders, one more bidi-
rectional LSTM runs over the segment embeddings
of the previous layer (see Figure 1). The attention
distribution is computed using both the token-level
(second layer) and segment-level (third layer) out-
puts similar to Cohan et al. (2018)—the token-level
scores are weighted by the normalized segment-
level scores.
The hierarchical encoder sped up training by
a factor of three with little to no impact on the
summarization accuracy.
3.3 Pointer-Generator
To facilitate effective copying of parts of conver-
sations to the output we implemented the pointer-
generator network from See et al. (2017). It reuses
the encoder-decoder attention distribution as a
pointer for the copy mechanism. The same at-
tention distribution is still used for computing the
context vector and a probability distribution over
the output vocabulary. The attention distribution
is taken as a probability distribution over the in-
put tokens and interpolated with the vocabulary
distribution. The interpolation coefﬁcient is learnt
from the context vector, decoder LSTM state, and
decoder input embedding. This mechanism also
enables handling of words that are not present in
the decoder vocabulary.
The pointer-generator network is illustrated in
Figure 1. The context vector from attention is fed
into a linear layer with the decoder state to produce
the vocabulary distribution. The attention distribu-
tion is interpolated with the vocabulary distribution,