28tokens long. Table 4 shows the repetition rates in
model outputs as the percentage of tokens that fall
into either of these categories. The table shows that
the problem diminishes when training longer.
In the reference reports there are only a few in-
stances of tokens that we consider repetitive, and
these appear to be mistakes by the writer of the
report. We should then aim at 0 % repetition rate.
Note that the purpose of this metric is not to de-
tect language where for example the same frequent
words are used more often than in natural language.
We rather wanted to assess how widely the models
suffer from artiﬁcial and clearly erroneous repeti-
tion of word sequences.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we compared RNN and Transformer-
based sequence-to-sequence architectures for med-
ical report generation from patient-doctor conver-
sations. This study demonstrates the ability of
sequence-to-sequence models, in particular Trans-
former, to not only extract relevant clinical conver-
sation excerpts, but abstractively summarize in a
relatively ﬂuent and factually correct medical re-
port. Especially when working within compute and
time budgets, Transformer is superior to traditional
RNN-based models, and scalable to large datasets.
Visual inspection showed that commonly occur-
ring problems in the generated reports included
repeated sentences and hallucinated clinically con-
sistent sentences unfounded by the conversations.
Minimally a human would need to be in the loop
to verify or correct these machine-generated re-
ports. Future work includes comparing end-to-end
approaches with a pipeline of clinical information
extraction and natural language generation meth-
ods.
References
Lei Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hin-
ton. 2016. Layer normalization. In NIPS 2016 Deep
Learning Symposium , Barcelona, Spain.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings .
Mia Xu Chen, Orhan Firat, Ankur Bapna, Melvin John-
son, Wolfgang Macherey, George F. Foster, Llion
Jones, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar,Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz Kaiser,
Zhifeng Chen, Yonghui Wu, and Macduff Hughes.
2018. The best of both worlds: Combining recent
advances in neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2018, Mel-
bourne, Australia, July 15-20, 2018, Volume 1: Long
Papers , pages 76–86. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Arman Cohan, Franck Dernoncourt, Doo Soon Kim,
Trung Bui, Seokhwan Kim, Walter Chang, and Na-
zli Goharian. 2018. A discourse-aware attention
model for abstractive summarization of long docu-
ments. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 615–621,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Tobias Domhan. 2018. How much attention do you
need? A granular analysis of neural machine trans-
lation architectures. In Proceedings of the 56th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1799–
1808, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Nan Du, Kai Chen, Anjuli Kannan, Linh Tran, Yuhui
Chen, and Izhak Shafran. 2019a. Extracting symp-
toms and their status from clinical conversations. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 915–
925, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Nan Du, Mingqiu Wang, Linh Tran, Gang Lee, and
Izhak Shafran. 2019b. Learning to infer entities,
properties and their relations from clinical conver-
sations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
4979–4990, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Gregory Finley, Erik Edwards, Amanda Robinson,
Michael Brenndoerfer, Najmeh Sadoughi, James
Fone, Nico Axtmann, Mark Miller, and David
Suendermann-Oeft. 2018a. An automated medi-
cal scribe for documenting clinical encounters. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Demonstrations , pages 11–15,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Gregory Finley, Erik Edwards, Amanda Robinson,
Najmeh Sadoughi, James Fone, Mark Miller,
David Suendermann-Oeft, Michael Brenndoerfer,
and Nico Axtmann. 2018b. An automated assistant
for medical scribes. In Proceedings of Interspeech
2018 , pages 3212–3213.