to design ensemble by combining NNs based on either the
accuracy or the diversity [ 25,36,37]. There are evidences
that accurate and diverse NNs can produce a good
ensemble that distribute errors over different regions of theinput space [ 38,39]. Rosen [ 40] proposed an ensemble
learning algorithm that also trains individual NNs
sequentially where the individual NNs minimize trainingerrors as well as de-correlate previous training errors.
Sequential training of an NN does not affect the NNs that
were previously trained, which is a major disadvantage in
ensemble learning. Consequently, there is no correlation
between the errors of the individual NNs [ 41]. The topol-
ogy of the mixtures-of-experts (ME) [ 27] can produce
biased individual NNs which may be negatively correlated
[32]. The disadvantage of ME is that it needs a separate
gating NN and also can not provide a balance control over
the bias–variance–covariance tradeoff [ 34].
A two-stage design approach is employed in most of the
architectures mentioned above where individual NNs are
generated ﬁrst followed by combining them. As the com-
bination stage does not provide any feedback to designstage, some individual NNs designed independently may
not contribute signiﬁcantly to the ensemble [ 34]. There-
fore, some researchers proposed a one-stage design processand used a penalty term into the error function of each NN.
The researchers also proposed the simultaneous and inter-
active training for all NNs in the ensemble instead of theindependent and sequential training [ 41]. NNs with nega-
tive correlation can be created by reassuring specialization
and cooperation among the NNs in an ensemble. This willenable NNs to learn the different regions of training data
space and ensure the ensemble learns the whole data space.
To ensure interaction between NNs and simultaneous
learning in an ensemble, some researchers employed evo-
lutionary computing [ 32]. Liu et al. [ 32] applied evolu-
tionary algorithm for ensemble learning of NNs withnegative correlation. This approach can determine the
optimal number of NNs and the combinations of NNs in an
ensemble using ﬁtness sharing mechanism.
Chen and Yao [ 33] employed multi-objective genetic
algorithm [ 42] for regularized negative correlation learning
(NCL) optimizing errors of the base NNs and their diver-sity in ensemble. Mousavi and Eftekhari [ 43] proposed
static ensemble selection and deployed the popular multi-
objective genetic algorithm NSGA-II [ 42]. This combina-
tion of static ensemble selection and NSGA-II ensures
selecting the best classiﬁers and their optimal combination.
There are two other widely popular approaches to
ensemble learning, namely constructive NN ensemble
(CNNE) [ 44] and pruning NN ensemble (PNNE) [ 45].
CNNE determines the number of NNs in the ensemble andthe hidden neurons of the individual NNs by employing
NCL [ 34,41] in an incremental fashion. On the other hand,PNNE employs a competitive decay approach. PNNE uses
a neuron cooperation function in each NN for the hidden
neurons and a selective deletion of NNs in the ensemble
based on the criterion of over-ﬁtting. PNNE employs NCLto ensure diversity of the NNs in the ensemble.
Islam et al. [ 29] proposed two incremental learning
algorithms for NNs in ensemble using NCL: NegBagg andNegBoost. NegBagg ﬁxes the number of hidden neurons of
NNs in ensemble by constructive method. NegBoost also
uses constructive method to ﬁx the number of hidden
neurons of NNs as well as the number of NNs in the
ensemble.
Yin et al. [
46] proposed a two-stage hierarchical
approach to ensemble learning called dynamic ensemble of
ensembles (DE2). DE2comprises component classiﬁers and
interim ensembles. The ﬁnal DE2is obtained by weighted
averaging. Cruz et al. [ 47] used a two-phase dynamic
ensemble selection (DES) framework. In the ﬁrst phase,DES extracts meta-features from training data. In the sec-
ond phase, DES uses a meta-classiﬁer to estimate the
competence of the base classiﬁer to be added to theensemble.
Chen and Yao [ 48] show that NCL considers the entire
ensemble as a single machine with the objective of mini-mizing the mean square error (MSE) and NCL does not
employ regularization while training. They proposed a
regularized NCL (RNCL) incorporating a regularizationterm for the ensemble which enables the RNCL decom-
posing the training objectives into sub-objectives each of
which is implemented by an individual NN. RNCL showsimproved performance over the NCL even when noise
level is higher in datasets.
Semi-supervised learning is the mechanism of learning
using a large amount of unlabelled data and a small amount
of labelled data. Chen and Wang [ 49] proposed a semi-
supervised boosting framework taking three assumptionssuch as smoothness, cluster and manifold into considera-
tion where they used a cost function comprising the margin
cost on labelled data and the regularization penalty onunlabelled data. Experiments on benchmarks and real-
world classiﬁcation reveal constant improvement by the
algorithm. Semi-supervised learning is a widely popularmethod due to its higher accuracy at a lower effort.
The generalization of an ensemble is related to the
accuracy of the base NNs and the diversity among NNs[37,38]. Higher accuracy for the base NNs leads to the
lower diversity among them. To strike a balance of the
dilemma between accuracy and diversity in an ensemble,Chen et al. [ 50] proposed a semi-supervised NCL
(SemiNCL) where a correlation penalty term on labelled
and unlabeled data is incorporated into the cost function ofeach individual NNs in the ensemble.Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:8675–8690 8677
123