(N1,N2,N3, and N4). The sizes of the correct responses are
S1= 37, S2= 33, S3= 36, and S4= 36. The large varia-
tions in accuracies are caused by the incremental learning
used by DEL. The ensemble started with N1andN2and
trained them. When the two failed to achieve a successful
ensemble, DEL added N3andN4at a ﬁnal step. The size of
S1\S2\S3\S4was only 29 resulting in diversity 1=8
among N1,N2,N3, and N4.
It is demonstrated here that the DEL uses a smaller
number of training cycles to ﬁnd the dynamic ensemble
architecture with a small classiﬁcation error. For example,
for the glass dataset DEL with dynamic architecture pro-duces a ﬁnal ensemble with only four individual networks.
Only ﬁve hidden nodes were added to individual networks
training with constructive algorithm, and two hidden nodeswere deleted from individual networks’ while training with
a pruning algorithm. DEL achieved a classiﬁcation error of
26.415% for this dataset. According to the comparison withother algorithms shown in Table 5, DEL achieves the
lowest percentage of classiﬁcation error.
To demonstrate how a hidden neuron’s output changes
during the entire training period, the hidden neurons’ out-
put for the cancer dataset is shown in Fig. 3. Constructive
algorithm was used for training one network. The indi-vidual network started the training with one node in its ﬁrst
hidden layer and two nodes in its second hidden layer.
During the training period, four nodes were added to theﬁrst hidden layer of the network and nodes in second
hidden layer were kept ﬁxed at two nodes. The outputs
stabilize and the convergence curve becomes smooth afterabout 100 iterations, indicating that the learning may not
require a very large number of iterations.
Figure 4shows the training error proﬁle of ensemble for
cancer, heart disease, glass, and soybean datasets. Two
from medical and two from non-medical datasets are
chosen. During the intermediate period of the training,individual networks were added to the ensemble by con-
structive strategy and hidden nodes were added as well as
deleted from corresponding individual networks using ahybrid constructive–pruning strategy. For example, for
cancer dataset in Fig. 4, the ensemble started with two
individual networks with architecture (9-4-2-2) and (9-12-2-2). The NN architecture (9-4-2-2) has 9 inputs, two
hidden layers with 4 and 2 neurons, respectively, and 2
outputs. The NN architecture (9-12-2-2) has 9 inputs, twohidden layers with 12 and 2 neurons, respectively, and 2
outputs. Constructive algorithms for individual network (9-
4-2-2) and pruning algorithm for individual network (9-12-2-2) were applied during training. During the training,
individual NNs with architectures (9-4-2) and (9-12-2)
were added to the ensemble. Hidden nodes were added toindividual networks (9-4-2-2) and (9-4-2) as constructive
algorithms were used to train them. Hidden nodes weredeleted from individual networks (9-12-2-2) and (9-4-2) as
these two were trained using pruning algorithm. After
addition of individual networks and hidden nodes by con-
structive strategy and deletion of hidden nodes by pruningstrategy, the ﬁnal ensemble with individual NN architec-
tures of (9-8-2-2), (9-10-2-2), (9-8-2), and (9-10-2) was
attained.
Figure 5a, b shows the training error proﬁles of indi-
vidual NNs with constructive algorithm. For example,
Fig. 5a shows the curves of individual networks for which
constructive algorithms were applied starting with archi-
tectures (9-4-2-2) (indicated by solid line) and (9-4-2)(indicated by dash line) for cancer dataset. At the inter-
mediate period of training, hidden nodes were added to
individual networks by the dynamic node creation (DNC)method until this node addition increased the performance
of the ensemble. Finally, all these constructive networks in
the ensemble completed training with (9-8-2-2) and (9-8-2)architectures. Solid lines indicate NNs with 2 hidden lay-
ers, and dash lines indicate NN with single hidden layer
from Figs. 5,6,7and8.
Figure 6a, b shows training error proﬁles of individual
NNs with pruning algorithm. The pruning algorithm has an
impact on error proﬁles which is visible from the non-smooth curves. Figure 6a shows the curves of individual
NNs applied to cancer dataset starting with (9-12-2-2) and
(9-12-2) architectures. At the intermediate training period,hidden nodes were deleted from individual networks by the
sensitivity calculation method until this node deletion
increased the performance of the ensemble. Finally, allthese pruning networks in the ensemble ended up training
with (9-10-2-2) and (9-10-2) architectures.
Figure 7a, b shows the curves of hidden nodes addition
to the individual NNs training applying constructive algo-
rithm. In this case, individual networks with small archi-
tecture started training and at the intermediate trainingperiod, hidden nodes were added to the ﬁrst hidden layer of
the individual network sensitivity by the dynamic node
creation method. For example, Fig. 7a shows the curves of
the hidden nodes addition to individual networks trained
using constructive algorithm for cancer dataset. Here, the
individual network started training with (9-4-2-2) and (9-4-2) architectures and ﬁnally ended up training with (9-8-2-2)
and (9-8-2) architectures.
Figure 8a, b shows the curves of the hidden nodes
deletion from the individual NNs training applying pruning
algorithm. Individual networks with architecture largerthan necessary started training in this case and at theintermediate training period, hidden nodes that deem not
necessary were deleted from the ﬁrst hidden layer of the
individual network by the sensitivity calculation method.
Hidden node with the lowest sensitivity was deleted. If
the deleted node does not possess the lowest sensitivity,Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:8675–8690 8683
123