new knowledge mitigating forgetting phenomena where
tasks can be subdivided [ 24]. Instead of employing a large
NN for a complex problem, the researchers are impressed
by the idea of decomposing the problem into smallersubtasks leading to smaller architecture, shorter training
time and increased performance [ 24,25]. NN ensemble-
based classiﬁer can also improve generalization ability[25,26]. The structure of an NN ensemble is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Each NN in the ensemble (1 through n) is ﬁrst
trained on the training instances. The output of the
ensembles is calculated from the predicted outputs,
O
i;i¼1;2;... ;n, of the individual NNs [ 26]. The chal-
lenge here is to design a learning algorithm for ensemble
NN. The initial weights, topology of NNs, training datasets,
and training algorithms also play decisive roles in thedesign of ensembles [ 23,25]. In general, NN ensembles are
designed by mostly varying these parameters.
Many algorithms similar to NN ensembles [ 25] have
been reported in the literature such as mixer of experts
[27], boosting [ 28] and bagging [ 29]. The main drawbacks
of these algorithms are manual design and predeﬁnednumber of neurons in the hidden layer and the number of
NNs in an ensemble.
In general, ensemble and modular approaches are
employed for combining NNs. The ensemble approach
attempts to generate a reliable and accurate output by
combining the outputs of a set of trained NNs rather thanselecting the best NN, whereas the modular approach
strives to have each NN as self-contained or autonomous
[14,24]. In modular approach, the problem is divided into
a number of tasks. Each task is assigned to an individual
NN to be accomplished. It is not possible to know the best
size of NN a priori. The size of NN is deﬁned by thenumber of layers and the number of neurons in each layer.
Moreover, the backpropagation (BP) [ 30,31] algorithm isnot useful for training NN unless the topology is known.
Therefore, ﬁnding the correct topology is the foremost
design issue. In order to deﬁne the topology of an NN, a
number of parameters such as the number of layers, thenumber of hidden neurons, activation functions, and degree
of connectivity have to be determined. A second issue is to
determine the training parameters that include the initialweights of the NN, the learning rate, acceleration term,
momentum term and weight update rule. The choice of the
topological and training parameters has signiﬁcant impact
on the training time and the performance of the NN.
Unfortunately, there is no straightforward method ofselecting the parameters; rather the designer has to depend
on the expert knowledge or employ empirical method.
The performance of NNs in an ensemble is dependent on
a number of factors such as (1) the topology of the NNs and
the initial structure; (2) the training method; (3) the
learning rate; (4) the input and output representations; and(5) the content of the training sample [ 32]. Eventually, the
numbers of NNs and the number of neurons in the hidden
layers in NNs determine the performance of an ensemble.In most of the cases, these are predeﬁned by human experts
based on available a priori information. Formal learning
theory is used to estimate the size of the ensemble systembased on the complexity, and the examples required
learning the particular function. In such cases, the gener-
alization error becomes high if the number of examples issmall. Consequently, choosing appropriate NN topology is
still something of an art. The data examples play a crucial
role in learning where learning is sensitive to initialweights and learning parameters [ 33–35].
The purpose of this research is to design an NN
ensemble that addresses the following issues: (1) automaticdetermination of NN ensemble architecture (i.e. the num-
ber of NNs in the ensemble), (2) automatic determination
of the size of individual NNs (i.e. the number of hiddenneurons in individual NNs), and (3) variation of training
examples for each individual NN’s better learning. Real-
world classiﬁcation problems are used to verify the effec-tiveness and the generalization ability of the ensemble.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2presents the
related works. Section 3contains the description of DEL
algorithm. Section 4presents the datasets description,
experimental results and comparison. Section 5presents a
discussion. Some conclusions are made in Sect. 6
.
2 Related works
In ensemble learning, the individual NNs are called base
learners. They are single classiﬁers, which are trained andcombined together to ease individual errors and crop gen-
eralization independently. Hitherto, efforts have been madeCombined network outputEnsemble output
InputO1
NN 1O2 Onô
…
NN 2 NNn
Fig. 1 A neural networks ensemble8676 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:8675–8690
123