acceptable, then either the ensemble architecture or the indi-
vidual base learner NNs undergo change.
Step 6 Check the neuron addition and/or deletion criterion
of individual NNs. In this criterion, hidden neurons are
added or deleted if the error of individual NNs does not
change after a speciﬁed number of epochs chosen by theuser (see Sect. 3.2). If the criterion is not met, then the
individual NNs are not good enough and the ensemble
undergoes addition of new learner NN.
Step 7 Add and/or delete hidden neurons to/from the NNs
to meet the addition and/or deletion criterion (see Sect. 3.2)
and continue training using NCL.
Step 8 Add a new NN to the ensemble (see Sect. 3.3) if the
previous NN addition improves the performance of the
ensemble. Initialize and create different training sets forthe new NN as in step 2. Go to step 3 for further training of
the ensemble.
The above-mentioned procedure (steps 1–8) is imple-
mented in DEL that determines the architecture of
ensemble. For example, the networks in Fig. 1work as
follows: network 1 has 2 hidden layers, uses constructivealgorithm for node addition, and trains examples from ﬁrst
to last. On the contrary, network 2 has 2 hidden layers, uses
pruning algorithm for node deletion, and trains examplesfrom last to ﬁrst. Then, network 3 has a single hidden layer,
uses constructive algorithm for node addition, and trains
using examples from ﬁrst to last. Similarly, network 4 has asingle hidden layer, uses pruning algorithm for node
deletion, and trains using examples from last to ﬁrst and so
on. The idea of varying the training examples is to enablethe NNs to learn different regions of the data distribution.
Major components of DEL are the addition/deletion of
hidden neurons to/from learners NNs and addition of NN toensemble described in Sects. 3.2–3.4.
3.2 Nodes addition/deletion to/from individual
NNs
Both constructive and pruning algorithms provide some
beneﬁts as well as some drawbacks. At the training period
of individual NNs, there may be some portions which maybe critical or stable either for constructive or pruning
algorithms. If all the NNs in the ensemble learn either only
by constructive or only by pruning algorithm, then theirlearning will be very similar.
Even though NCL forces the NNs to learn from different
regions of the data space, the learning will not be perfect ifthe NNs in the ensemble have the same architecture. Dif-
ferent architectures of the NNs in the ensemble will pro-
vide a different weight on the accuracy and diversity,which justiﬁes the deployment of the hybrid ‘constructive–
pruning strategy’ in DEL.
3.3 NN addition to the ensemble
In DEL, constructive algorithm is used to add NNs inthe ensemble. New NNs are added to the ensemble if theprevious addition improves the performance of the
ensemble. This addition process continues until the mini-
mum ensemble error criterion has been met.
3.4 Different training sets for individual NNs
Varying the examples into different training sets enablesefﬁcient learning and can help the ensemble learning fromthe whole training examples. Training sets are varied by
maintaining one important criterion, i.e. training sets
should have appropriate number of examples so that indi-vidual NNs obtain the necessary information for learning.
In DEL, if the ﬁrst NN in the ensemble learns from odd-
positioned training examples, the second one learns fromeven-positioned training examples, and the third one learns
from other training examples in a similar fashion. In some
cases, subsets of training examples are created just bypartitioning or by randomly selecting. The pseudocode of
DEL algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: DEL algorithm
Step 1: Create ensemble with minimum architecture
1. Create an ensemble comprising 2 NNs with minimum 
architecture of 1 input -2 hidden-1 output layers
2. Number of neurons in input and output layer is 
determined by the system
3. Apply Ash’s constructive algorithm for dynamic node 
creation for the first NN training
4. Apply Reed’s pruning algorithm for the second NN 
training
Step 2: Create training examples
1 Create separate training examples for each NN
Step 3: Training NNs in ensemble
1. Train NNs partially for fixed number of epochs using 
NCL
Step 4: Compute training error
1. Compute the training error Eifor the ith NN using Eq. 
(1)
Step 5: Compute ensembl e error
1. Compute the ensemble error E
2.If E < acceptable 
3. Output final ensemble
Endif
Step 6: Check node addition/deletion criterion
1.If (addition/deletion criterion is not met)
2. Add NN to ensemble 
3. Go to Step 2
4.Else
5. Add/delete hidden nodes to NN
6. Go to Step 3
7.EndifNeural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:8675–8690 8679
123