Though the semi-supervised learning has been very
successful for labelled and unlabelled data, its generaliza-
tion ability is sensitive to incorrect labelled data. To miti-
gate this limitation, Soares et al. [ 51] proposed a cluster-
based boosting (CBoost) with cluster regularization. In
CBoost, the base NNs in the ensemble jointly perform a
cluster-based semi-supervised optimization. Extensiveexperimentation shows that the CBoost has signiﬁcant
generalization ability over the other ensembles.
Recently, Raﬁei and Adeli [ 52] reported a new neural
dynamic classiﬁcation algorithm. A comprehensive review
of multiple classiﬁer systems based on the dynamicselection of classiﬁers was reported by Britto et al. [ 53].
Recent developments in ensemble methods are analysed by
Ren et al. [ 54]. Cruz et al. [ 55] reported a review on the
recent advances on dynamic classiﬁer selection techniques.
Dynamic mechanism is used in the generalization phase in
those studies, while the dynamic mechanism is employedin the training phase in DEL.
3 Dynamic ensemble learning (DEL)
3.1 Main steps of the algorithm
Unlike ﬁxed ensemble architecture, DEL automaticallydetermines the number of base learner NNs and theirarchitectures in an ensemble during the training phase. The
DEL algorithm is presented in 8 steps in the sequel. The
ﬂow diagram of the DEL algorithm is shown in Fig. 2.
Step 1 Create an ensemble with minimum architecture
comprising two NNs. Each NN consists of an input layer,
two hidden layers, and an output layer. The number ofneurons in the input and output layers is determined by the
system. Next, apply a constructive algorithm [ 56] based on
Ash’s [ 57] dynamic node creation method for the ﬁrst (later
on the odd number of NNs in sequence in the ensemble)
NN training. Initially, this NN starts with a small archi-
tecture containing one node in each hidden layer. For thesecond (later on even number of NNs in sequence in the
ensemble) NN training, apply Reed’s pruning algorithm
[58]. In the pruning phase of NN training, the number of
neurons in the hidden layer is larger than necessary (i.e. it
starts with a bulky architecture). Initialize the connection
weights for each NN randomly within a small interval.
Step 2 Create separate training examples for each NN of
the ensemble. In general, subsets of training examples for
individual NNs are created by randomly picking from themain set of the training examples. In this work, training
sets are created in such a way that if one NN learns from
training examples from the ﬁrst to the last, other NN learns
from the last to the ﬁrst of the same training examples.Step 3 Train the NNs in the ensemble partially on the
examples for a ﬁxed number of epochs speciﬁed by theuser using NCL [ 34,41] regardless of whether the NNs
converge or not [ 59].
Step 4 Compute the training error E
ifor the ith NN in the
ensemble according to the following rule:
Ei¼100Omax/C0Omin
N:SXN
n¼1XS
S¼1ðdðn;sÞ/C0Fiðn;sÞÞ2þkPiðn;sÞhi
ð1Þ
where Omaxis the maximum value and Ominis the minimum
value of the target outputs, respectively, Nis the total
number of examples, Sis the number of output neurons, d(n,
s) is the desired output, and Fi(n,s) is the actual output of
the neuron sin the nth training data. The rule in Eq. ( 1)i sa
combination of the rule proposed by Reed [ 58] and NCL for
an NN error. The error Eiis independent of the size of the
training examples and the number of output neurons.
Step 5 Compute the ensemble error Ewhere Eis the average of
Eiof the base learner NNs. If Eis small and acceptable, the
ensemble architecture is believed to have the highest gener-
alization ability and output the ﬁnal ensemble. If Eis notChange 
architecture?NoFinal 
ensemble 
architectureCreate initial 
ensemble 
architecture
Create different 
training sets for 
NNs
Training NNs 
using Negative 
Correlation 
learning
Compute 
ensemble error
Add NN to
ensembleYes
Add and /or 
delete hidden 
nodesYes
NoSuccessful?
Fig. 2 Flow diagram of the DEL algorithm8678 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:8675–8690
123