1.6. Learning in Fully Observed Models with Neural Nets 11
assigned to the data by the model. With i.i.d. dataset Dof sizeND,
the maximum likelihood objective is to maximize the log-probability
given by equation (1.10).
Using calculus’ chain rule and automatic diﬀerentiation tools, we can
eﬃciently compute gradients of this objective, i.e. the ﬁrst derivatives
of the objective w.r.t. its parameters θ. We can use such gradients to
iteratively hill-climb to a local optimum of the ML objective. If we
compute such gradients using all datapoints, ∇θlogpθ(D), then this
is known as batchgradient descent. Computation of this derivative is,
however, an expensive operation for large dataset size ND, since it scales
linearly with ND.
A more eﬃcient method for optimization is stochastic gradient
descent(SGD) (section A.3), which uses randomly drawn minibatches
of dataM⊂D of sizeNM. With such minibatches we can form an
unbiased estimator of the ML criterion:
1
NDlogpθ(D)/similarequal1
NMlogpθ(M) =1
NM/summationdisplay
x∈Mlogpθ(x)(1.11)
The/similarequalsymbol means that one of the two sides is an unbiased estimator
of the other side. So one side (in this case the right-hand side) is a
random variable due to some noise source, and the two sides are equal
when averaged over the noise distribution. The noise source, in this case,
is the randomly drawn minibatch of data M. The unbiased estimator
logpθ(M)is diﬀerentiable, yielding the unbiased stochastic gradients:
1
ND∇θlogpθ(D)/similarequal1
NM∇θlogpθ(M) =1
NM/summationdisplay
x∈M∇θlogpθ(x)
(1.12)
Thesegradientscanbepluggedintostochasticgradient-basedoptimizers;
see section A.3for further discussion. In a nutshell, we can optimize the
objective function by repeatedly taking small steps in the direction of
the stochastic gradient.
1.6.3 Bayesian inference
From a Bayesian perspective, we can improve upon ML through maxi-
mum a posteriori (MAP) estimation (section section A.2.1), or, going
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056