6 Introduction
1.2 Aim
Theframeworkof variational autoencoders (VAEs)(KingmaandWelling,
2014; Rezende et al.,2014) provides a principled method for jointly
learningdeep latent-variable models and corresponding inference models
using stochastic gradient descent. The framework has a wide array
of applications from generative modeling, semi-supervised learning to
representation learning.
This work is meant as an expanded version of our earlier work
(Kingma and Welling, 2014), allowing us to explain the topic in ﬁner
detail and to discuss a selection of important follow-up work. This is
notaimed to be a comprehensive review of all related work. We assume
that the reader has basic knowledge of algebra, calculus and probability
theory.
In this chapter we discuss background material: probabilistic models,
directed graphical models, the marriage of directed graphical models
with neural networks, learning in fully observed models and deep latent-
variable models (DLVMs). In chapter 2we explain the basics of VAEs.
In chapter 3we explain advanced inference techniques, followed by an
explanation of advanced generative models in chapter 4. Please refer to
sectionA.1for more information on mathematical notation.
1.3 Probabilistic Models and Variational Inference
In the ﬁeld of machine learning, we are often interested in learning prob-
abilistic models of various natural and artiﬁcial phenomena from data.
Probabilistic models are mathematical descriptions of such phenomena.
They are useful for understanding such phenomena, for prediction of
unknowns in the future, and for various forms of assisted or automated
decision making. As such, probabilistic models formalize the notion of
knowledge and skill, and are central constructs in the ﬁeld of machine
learning and AI.
As probabilistic models contain unknowns and the data rarely paints
a complete picture of the unknowns, we typically need to assume some
level of uncertainty over aspects of the model. The degree and nature
of this uncertainty is speciﬁed in terms of (conditional) probability dis-
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056