1.1. Motivation 3
and interpretable and by testing them against observations we can
conﬁrm or reject our theories about how the world works.
Another reason for trying to understand the generative process of
data is that it naturally expresses causal relations of the world. Causal
relations have the great advantage that they generalize much better to
new situations than mere correlations. For instance, once we understand
the generative process of an earthquake, we can use that knowledge
both in California and in Chile.
To turn a generative model into a discriminator, we need to use
Bayes rule. For instance, we have a generative model for an earthquake
of type A and another for type B, then seeing which of the two describes
the data best we can compute a probability for whether earthquake A
or B happened. Applying Bayes rule is however often computationally
expensive.
In discriminative methods we directly learn a map in the same
direction as we intend to make future predictions in. This is in the
opposite direction than the generative model. For instance, one can
argue that an image is generated in the world by ﬁrst identifying the
object, then generating the object in 3D and then projecting it onto an
pixel grid. A discriminative model takes these pixel values directly as
input and maps them to the labels. While generative models can learn
eﬃciently from data, they also tend to make stronger assumptions on
the data than their purely discriminative counterparts, often leading
to higher asymptotic bias (Banerjee, 2007) when the model is wrong.
For this reason, if the model is wrong (and it almost always is to some
degree!), if one is solely interested in learning to discriminate, and
one is in a regime with a suﬃciently large amount of data, then purely
discriminative models typically will lead to fewer errors in discriminative
tasks. Nevertheless, depending on how much data is around, it may pay
oﬀ to study the data generating process as a way to guide the training
of the discriminator, such as a classiﬁer. For instance, one may have
few labeled examples and many more unlabeled examples. In this semi-
supervised learning setting, one can use the generative model of the data
to improve classiﬁcation (Kingma et al.,2014; Sønderby et al.,2016a).
Generative modeling can be useful more generally. One can think
of it as an auxiliary task. For instance, predicting the immediate future
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056