1.3. Probabilistic Models and Variational Inference 7
tributions. Models may consist of both continuous-valued variables and
discrete-valued variables. The, in some sense, most complete forms of
probabilistic models specify all correlations and higher-order dependen-
cies between the variables in the model, in the form of a joint probability
distribution over those variables.
Let’s use xas the vector representing the set of all observed variables
whose joint distribution we would like to model. Note that for notational
simplicity and to avoid clutter, we use lower case bold (e.g. x) to denote
the underlying set of observed random variables, i.e. ﬂattened and
concatenated such that the set is represented as a single vector. See
sectionA.1for more on notation.
We assume the observed variable xis a random sample from an
unknown underlying process , whose true (probability) distribution p∗(x)
is unknown. We attempt to approximate this underlying process with a
chosen model pθ(x), with parameters θ:
x∼pθ(x) (1.1)
Learning is, most commonly, the process of searching for a value of
the parameters θsuch that the probability distribution function given
by the model, pθ(x), approximates the true distribution of the data,
denoted by p∗(x), such that for any observed x:
pθ(x)≈p∗(x) (1.2)
Naturally, we wish pθ(x)to be suﬃciently ﬂexibleto be able to
adapt to the data, such that we have a chance of obtaining a suﬃciently
accurate model. At the same time, we wish to be able to incorporate
knowledge about the distribution of data into the model that is known
a priori.
1.3.1 Conditional Models
Often, such as in case of classiﬁcation or regression problems, we are not
interested in learning an unconditional model pθ(x), but a conditional
modelpθ(y|x)thatapproximatestheunderlyingconditionaldistribution
p∗(y|x): a distribution over the values of variable y, conditioned on the
value of an observed variable x. In this case, xis often called the input
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056