8 Introduction
of the model. Like in the unconditional case, a model pθ(y|x)is chosen,
and optimized to be close to the unknown underlying distribution, such
that for any xandy:
pθ(y|x)≈p∗(y|x) (1.3)
A relatively common and simple example of conditional modeling is
image classiﬁcation, where xis an image, and yis the image’s class, as
labeled by a human, which we wish to predict. In this case, pθ(y|x)is
typically chosen to be a categorical distribution, whose parameters are
computed from x.
Conditional models become more diﬃcult to learn when the pre-
dicted variables are very high-dimensional, such as images, video or
sound. One example is the reverse of the image classiﬁcation prob-
lem: prediction of a distribution over images, conditioned on the class
label. Another example with both high-dimensional input, and high-
dimensional output, is time series prediction, such as text or video
prediction.
To avoid notational clutter we will often assume unconditional mod-
eling, but one should always keep in mind that the methods introduced
in this work are, in almost all cases, equally applicable to conditional
models. The data on which the model is conditioned, can be treated as
inputs to the model, similar to the parameters of the model, with the
obvious diﬀerence that one doesn’t optimize over their value.
1.4 ParameterizingConditionalDistributionswithNeuralNetworks
Diﬀerentiable feed-forward neural networks, from here just called neural
networks, are a particularly ﬂexible and computationally scalable type
of function approximator. Learning of models based on neural networks
with multiple ’hidden’ layers of artiﬁcial neurons is often referred to
asdeep learning (Goodfellow et al.,2016; LeCun et al.,2015). A
particularly interesting application is probabilistic models, i.e. the use of
neural networks for probability density functions (PDFs) or probability
mass functions (PMFs) in probabilistic models. Probabilistic models
based on neural networks are computationally scalable since they allow
for stochastic gradient-based optimization which, as we will explain,
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056