4 Introduction
may help us build useful abstractions of the world that can be used
for multiple prediction tasks downstream. This quest for disentangled,
semantically meaningful, statistically independent and causal factors
of variation in data is generally known as unsupervised representation
learning, and the variational autoencoder (VAE) has been extensively
employed for that purpose. Alternatively, one may view this as an
implicit form of regularization: by forcing the representations to be
meaningfulfordatageneration,webiastheinverseofthatprocess,which
maps from input to representation, into a certain mould. The auxiliary
task of predicting the world is used to better understand the world at
an abstract level and thus to better make downstream predictions.
The VAE can be viewed as two coupled, but independently parame-
terized models: the encoder or recognition model, and the decoder or
generative model. These two models support each other. The recogni-
tion model delivers to the generative model an approximation to its
posterior over latent random variables, which it needs to update its
parameters inside an iteration of “expectation maximization” learning.
Reversely, the generative model is a scaﬀolding of sorts for the recogni-
tion model to learn meaningful representations of the data, including
possibly class-labels. The recognition model is the approximate inverse
of the generative model according to Bayes rule.
One advantage of the VAE framework, relative to ordinary Varia-
tional Inference (VI), is that the recognition model (also called inference
model) is now a (stochastic) function of the input variables. This in
contrast to VI where each data-case has a separate variational distribu-
tion, which is ineﬃcient for large data-sets. The recognition model uses
one set of parameters to model the relation between input and latent
variables and as such is called “amortized inference”. This recognition
model can be arbitrary complex but is still reasonably fast because
by construction it can be done using a single feedforward pass from
input to latent variables. However the price we pay is that this sampling
induces sampling noise in the gradients required for learning. Perhaps
the greatest contribution of the VAE framework is the realization that
we can counteract this variance by using what is now known as the
“reparameterization trick”, a simple procedure to reorganize our gradient
computation that reduces variance in the gradients.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056