1.1. Motivation 5
The VAE is inspired by the Helmholtz Machine (Dayan et al.,1995)
which was perhaps the ﬁrst model that employed a recognition model.
However, its wake-sleep algorithm was ineﬃcient and didn’t optimize a
single objective. The VAE learning rules instead follow from a single
approximation to the maximum likelihood objective.
VAEs marry graphical models and deep learning. The generative
model is a Bayesian network of the form p(x|z)p(z), or, if there are
multiple stochastic latent layers, a hierarchy such as p(x|zL)p(zL|zL−1)
...p(z1|z0).Similarly,therecognitionmodelisalsoaconditionalBayesian
network of the form q(z|x)or as a hierarchy, such as q(z0|z1)...q(zL|X).
But inside each conditional may hide a complex (deep) neural network,
e.g.z|x∼f(x,/epsilon1), withfa neural network mapping and /epsilon1a noise
random variable. Its learning algorithm is a mix of classical (amortized,
variational) expectation maximization but through the reparameteri-
zation trick ends up backpropagating through the many layers of the
deep neural networks embedded inside of it.
Since its inception, the VAE framework has been extended in many
directions, e.g. to dynamical models (Johnson et al.,2016), models with
attention (Gregor et al.,2015), models with multiple levels of stochastic
latent variables (Kingma et al.,2016), and many more. It has proven
itself as a fertile framework to build new models in. More recently,
another generative modeling paradigm has gained signiﬁcant attention:
the generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,2014).
VAEs and GANs seem to have complementary properties: while GANs
can generate images of high subjective perceptual quality, they tend
to lack full support over the data (Grover et al.,2018), as opposed to
likelihood-based generative models. VAEs, like other likelihood-based
models, generate more dispersed samples, but are better density models
in terms of the likelihood criterion. As such many hybrid models have
been proposed to try to represent the best of both worlds (Dumoulin
et al.,2017; Grover et al.,2018; Rosca et al.,2018).
As a community we seem to have embraced the fact that generative
models and unsupervised learning play an important role in building
intelligent machines. We hope that the VAE provides a useful piece of
that puzzle.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000056