33
Figure 7 Clustering thousands of possible ice structures based on machine-learned descriptors identiﬁes observed forms and
groups similar structures together. Reproduced from (Engel et al., 2018).
the ML functional must also be used to ﬁnd the appro-
priate ground state electron distribution. Using kernel
ridge regression without further modiﬁcation can lead to
noisy derivatives, but projecting the resulting energies
back onto the learned space using PCA resolves this is-
sue (Liet al., 2015). A NN-based approach to learning
the exchange-correlation potential has also been demon-
strated for 1D systems (Nagai et al., 2018). In this case,
the ML method makes direct use of the derivatives gen-
erated during the NN training steps.
It is also possible to bypass the functional derivative
entirely by using ML to generate the appropriate ground
state electron density that corresponds to a nuclear po-
tential (Brockherde et al., 2017), as shown in Fig. 6(b).
Furthermore, this work demonstrated that the energy of
a molecularsystemcan also be learned with electronden-
sities as an input, enabling reactive MD simulations of
proton transfer events based on DFT energies. Intrigu-
ingly, an approximate electron density, such as a sum of
densities from isolated atoms, has also been successfully
employed as the input for predicting molecular energies(Eickenberg et al., 2018). A related approach for peri-
odic crystalline solids used local electron densities from
an embedded atom method to train Bayesian ML mod-
els to return total system energies (Schmidt et al., 2018).
Since the total energy is an extensive property, a scalable
NN model based on summation of local electron densities
has also been developed to run large DFT-based simula-
tions for 2D porous graphene sheets (Mills et al., 2019).
With these successes, it has become clear that given den-
sity functional, machine learning oﬀers new ways to learn
both the electron density and the corresponding system
energy.
Many human-based approaches to improving the ap-
proximate functionals in use today rely on imposing
physically-motivated constraints. So far, including these
types of restrictions on ML-based methods has met with
only partial success. For example, requiring that a ML
functional fulﬁll more than one constraint, such as a
scaling law and size-consistency, improves overall per-
formance in a system-dependent manner (Hollingsworth
et al., 2018). Obtaining accurate derivatives, particu-