11
this, compression is achieved with any units nonlinearity
by reducing the SNR of the irrelevant dimensions, layer
bylayer, throughthediﬀusionoftheweights. Anintrigu-
ing prediction of this insight is that the time to converge
to good generalization scales like a negative power-law
of the number of layers. The theory also predicts a con-
nection between the hidden layers and the bifurcations,
or phase transitions, of the Information Bottleneck rep-
resentations.
While the mutual information of the internal represen-
tations is intrinsically hard to compute directly in large
neural networks, none of the above predictions depend
on explicit estimation of mutual information values.
A related line of work in statistical physics aims to pro-
vide reliable scalable approximations and models where
the mutual information is tractable. The mutual infor-
mation can be computed exactly in linear networks (Saxe
et al., 2018). It can be reliably approximated in models
of neural networks where after learning the matrices of
weights are close enough to rotationally invariant, this
is then exploited within the replica theory in order to
compute the desired mutual information (Gabrié et al.,
2018).
4. Landscapes and glassiness of deep learning
Training a deep neural network is usually done via
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the non-convex
landscape of a loss function. Statistical physics has long
experience in studies of complex energy landscapes and
and their relation to dynamical behaviour. Gradient de-
scent algorithms are closely related to the Langevin dy-
namics that is often considered in physics. Some physics-
inspired works (Choromanska et al., 2015) became pop-
ular but were somewhat naive in exploring this analogy.
Interesting insight on the relation between glassy dy-
namics and learning in deep neural networks is pre-
sented in (Baity-Jesi et al., 2018). In particular the role
of over-parameterization in making the landscape look
less glassy is highlighted and contrasted with the under-
parametrized networks.
Another intriguing line of work that relates learning in
neural networks to properties of landscapes is explored
in (Baldassi et al., 2016, 2015). This work is based on
realization that in the simple model of binary perceptron
learning dynamics ends in a part of the weight-space that
has many low-loss close-by conﬁgurations. It goes on
to suggest that learning favours these wide parts in the
space of weights, and argues that this might explain why
algorithmsareattractedtowidelocalminimaandwhyby
doing so their generalization properties improve. An in-
terestingspin-oﬀofthistheoryisavariantofthestochas-
tic gradient descent algorithm suggested in (Chaudhari
et al., 2016).E. Applications of ML in Statistical Physics
When a researcher in theoretical physics encounters
deep neural networks where the early layers are learn-
ing to represent the input data at a ﬁner scale than the
later layers, she immediately thinks about renormaliza-
tion group as used in physics in order to extract macro-
scopic behaviour from microscopic rules. This analogy
was explored for instance in (Bény, 2013; Mehta and
Schwab,2014). Analogiesbetweenrenormalizationgroup
and the principle component analysis were reported in
(Bradde and Bialek, 2017).
A natural idea is to use neural networks in order
to learn new renormalization schemes. First attempts
in this direction appeared in (Koch-Janusz and Ringel,
2018; Li and Wang, 2018). However, it remains to be
shown whether this can lead to new physical discoveries
in models that were not well understood previously.
Phase transitions are boundaries between diﬀerent
phases of matter. They are usually determined using
order parameters. In some systems it is not a priori clear
how to determine the proper order parameter. A natu-
ral idea is that a neural networks may be able to learn
appropriate order parameters and locate the phase tran-
sition without a priori physical knowledge. This idea
was explored in (Carrasquilla and Melko, 2017; Morn-
ingstar and Melko, 2018; Tanaka and Tomiya, 2017a;
Van Nieuwenburg et al., 2017) in a range of models us-
ing conﬁgurations sampled uniformly from the model of
interest (obtained using Monte Carlo simulations) in dif-
ferent phases or at diﬀerent temperatures and using su-
pervised learning in order to classify the conﬁgurations
to their phases. Extrapolating to conﬁgurations not used
in the training set plausibly leads to determination of the
phase transitions in the studied models. These general
guiding principles have been used in a large number of
applications to analyze both synthetic and experimental
data. Speciﬁc cases in the context of many-body quan-
tum physics are detailed in Section IV.C.
Detailed understanding of the limitations of these
methods in terms of identifying previously unknown or-
der parameters, as well as understanding whether they
can reliably distinguish between a true thermodynamic
phase transitions and a mere cross-over are yet to be
clariﬁed. Experiments presented on the Ising model in
(Mehtaet al., 2018) provide some preliminary thoughts
in that direction. Some underlying mechanisms are dis-
cussed in (Kashiwa et al., 2019). Kernel based learning
method for learning phases in frustrated magnetic mate-
rials that is more easily interpretable and able to identify
complex order parameters is introduced and studied in
(Greitemann et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019).
Disordered and glassy solids where identiﬁcations of
the order parameter is particularly challenging were also
studied. In particular (Nussinov et al., 2016; Ronhovde
et al., 2011) use multi-scale network clustering meth-
ods to identify spatial and spatio-temporal structures in
glasses, (Cubuk et al., 2015) learn to identify structural