7
models.
Gardner’smethodenabledtoexplicitlycalculate learn-
ing curves , i.e. the typical training and generalization
errors as a function of the number of training examples,
forveryspeciﬁconeandtwo-layerneuralnetworks(Györ-
gyi and Tishby, 1990; Seung et al., 1992a; Sompolinsky
et al., 1990). These analytic statistical physics calcula-
tions demonstrated that the learning dynamics can ex-
hibit much richer behavior than predicted by the worse-
case distribution free PAC bounds (PAC stands for prov-
ably approximately correct ) (Valiant, 1984). In partic-
ular, learning can exhibit phase transitions from poor
to good generalization (Györgyi, 1990). This rich learn-
ing dynamics and curves can appear in many machine
learning problems, as was shown in various models, see
e.g. more recent review (Zdeborová and Krzakala, 2016).
The statistical physics of learning reached its peak in the
early 1990s, but had rather minor inﬂuence on machine-
learning practitioners and theorists, who were focused
on general input-distribution-independent generalization
bounds, characterized by e.g. the Vapnik-Chervonenkis
dimension or the Rademacher complexity of hypothesis
classes.
B. Theoretical puzzles in deep learning
Machine learning in the new millennium was marked
by much larger scale learning problems, in input/pattern
sizes which moved from hundreds to millions in di-
mensionality, in training data sizes, and in number of
adjustable parameters. This was dramatically demon-
strated by the return of large scale feed-forward neural
network models, with many more hidden layers, known
as deep neural networks. These deep neural networks
were essentially the same feed-forward convolution neu-
ral networks proposed already in the 80s. But some-
how with the much larger scale inputs and big and
clean training data (and a few more tricks and hacks),
these networks started to beat the state-of-the-art in
many diﬀerent pattern recognition and other machine
learning competitions, from roughly 2010 and on. The
amazing performance of deep learning, trained with the
same old stochastic gradient descent (SGD) error-back-
propagation algorithm, took everyone by surprise.
One of the puzzles is that the existing learning theory
(basedontheworst-casePAC-likegeneralizationbounds)
is unable to explain this phenomenal success. The exist-
ing theory does not predict why deep networks, where
the number/dimension of adjustable parameters/weights
is way higher than the number of training samples, have
good generalization properties. This lack of theory was
coined in now a classical article (Zhang et al., 2016),
where the authors show numerically that state-of-the-art
neural networks used for classiﬁcation are able to classify
perfectly randomly generated labels. In such a case exist-
ing learning theory does not provide any useful bound on
the generalization error. Yet in practice we observe goodgeneralization of the same deep neural networks when
trained on the true labels.
Continuing with the open question, we do not have
good understanding of which learning problems are com-
putationally tractable. This is particularly important
since from the point of view of computational complexity
theory, most of the learning problems we encounter are
NP-hard in the worst case. Another open question that
is central to current deep learning concern the choice of
hyper-parameters and architectures that is so far guided
by a lot of trial-and-error combined by impressive expe-
rience of the researchers. At the same time as applica-
tions of ML are spreading into many domains, the ﬁeld
calls for more systematic and theory-based approaches.
In current deep-learning, basic questions such as what is
the minimal number of samples we need in order to be
able to learn a given task with a good precision is entirely
open.
At the same time the current literature on deep learn-
ing is ﬂourishing with interesting numerical observations
and experiments that call for explanation. For a physics
audience the situation could perhaps be compared to the
state-of-the-art in fundamental small-scale physics just
before quantum mechanics was developed. The ﬁeld was
full of unexplained experiments that were evading exist-
ing theoretical understanding. This clearly is the perfect
time for some of physics ideas to study neural networks
to resurrect and revisit some of the current questions and
directions in machine learning.
Given the long history of works done on neural net-
works in statistical physics, we will not aim at a complete
review of this direction of research. We will focus in a se-
lective way on recent contributions originating in physics
that, in our opinion, are having important impact in cur-
rent theory of learning and machine learning. For the
purpose of this review we are also putting aside a large
volume of work done in statistical physics on recurrent
neural networks with biological applications in mind.
C. Statistical physics of unsupervised learning
1. Contributions to understanding basic unsupervised methods
One of the most basic tools of unsupervised learning
across the sciences are methods based on low-rank de-
composition of the observed data matrix. Data cluster-
ing, principal component analysis (PCA), independent
component analysis (ICA), matrix completion, and other
methods are examples in this class.
In mathematical language the low-rank matrix decom-
position problem is stated as follows: We observe nsam-
ples ofp-dimensional data xi2Rp,i= 1;:::;n. De-
notingXthenpmatrix of data, the idea underly-
ing low-rank decomposition methods assumes that X(or
some component-wise function of X) can be written as a
noisy version of a rank rmatrix where rp;rn, i.e.
the rank is much lower that the dimensionality and the