17
fects in the spectroscopic survey and subtleties in the
photometric surveys. The Dark Energy Survey consid-
ered a number of these approaches and established a
validation process to evaluate them critically (Bonnett
et al., 2016). Recently there has been work to use hi-
erarchical models to build in additional causal structure
in the models to be robust to these diﬀerences. In the
language of machine learning, these new models aid in
transfer learning and domain adaptation. The hierar-
chical models also aim to combine the interpretability of
traditional template ﬁtting approaches and the ﬂexibility
of the machine learning models (Leistedt et al., 2018).
2. Gravitational lens ﬁnding and parameter estimation
One of the most striking eﬀects of general relativity
is gravitatioanl lensing, in which a massive foreground
object warps the image of a background object. Strong
gravitational lensing occurs, for example, when a mas-
sive foreground galaxy is nearly coincident on the sky
with a background source. These events are a powerful
probe of the dark matter distribution of massive galaxies
and can provide valuable cosmological constraints. How-
ever, these systems are rare, thus a scalable and reli-
able lens ﬁnding system is essential to cope with large
surveys such as LSST, Euclid, and WFIRST. Simple
feedfoward, convolutional and residual neural networks
(ResNets) have been applied to this supervised classi-
ﬁcation problem (Estrada et al., 2007; Lanusse et al.,
2018; Marshall et al., 2009). In this setting, the train-
ing data came from simulation using PICS (Pipeline for
Images of Cosmological Strong) lensing (Li et al., 2016)
for the strong lensing ray-tracing and LensPop (Collett,
2015) for mock LSST observing. Once identiﬁed, charac-
terizing the lensing object through maximum likelihood
estimation is a computationally intensive non-linear op-
timization task. Recently, convolutional networks have
been used to quickly estimate the parameters of the Sin-
gularIsothermalEllipsoiddensityproﬁle, commonlyused
to model strong lensing systems (Hezaveh et al., 2017).
3. Other examples
Inadditiontotheexamplesabove, inwhichtheground
truth for an object is relatively unambiguous with a more
labor-intensiveapproach,cosmologistsarealsoleveraging
machine learning to infer quantities that involve unob-
servable latent processes or the parameters of the funda-
mental cosmological model.
For example, 3D convolutional networks have been
trained to predict fundamental cosmological parameters
based on the dark matter spatial distribution (Ravan-
bakhshet al., 2017) (see Fig. 1). In this proof-of-concept
work, the networks were trained using computationally
intensiveN-body simulations for the evolution of dark
matter in the universe assuming speciﬁc values for the 10parameters in the standard CDM cosmology model. In
real applications of this technique to visible matter, one
would need to model the bias and variance of the visible
tracers with respect to the underlying dark matter distri-
bution. In order to close this gap, convolutional networks
have been trained to learn a fast mapping between the
dark matter and visible galaxies (Zhang et al., 2019), al-
lowing for a trade-oﬀ between simulation accuracy and
computational cost. One challenge of this work, which
is common to applications in solid state physics, lattice
ﬁeld theory, and many body quantum systems, is that
the simulations are computationally expensive and thus
there are relatively few statistically independent realiza-
tions of the large simulations X. As deep learning tends
to require large labeled training data-sets, various types
of subsampling and data augmentation approaches have
been explored to ameliorate the situation. An alternative
approachtosubsamplingistheso-calledBackdrop,which
provides stochastic gradients of the loss function even on
individual samples by introducing a stochastic masking
in the backpropagation pipeline (Golkar and Cranmer,
2018).
Inference on the fundamental cosmological model also
appears in a classiﬁcation setting. In particular, mod-
iﬁed gravity models with massive neutrinos can mimic
the predictions for weak-lensing observables predicted by
the standard CDM model. The degeneracies that exist
when restricting the Xto second-order statistics can be
broken by incorporating higher-order statistics or other
rich representations of the weak lensing signal. In par-
ticular, the authors of (Peel et al., 2018) constructed a
novel representation of the wavelet decomposition of the
weak lensing signal as input to a convolutional network.
The resulting approach was able to discriminate between
previously degenerate models with 83%–100% accuracy.
Deep learning has also been used to estimate the mass
of galaxy clusters, which are the largest gravitationally
bound structures in the universe and a powerful cosmo-
logical probe. Much of the mass of these galaxy clusters
comes in the form of dark matter, which is not directly
observable. Galaxy cluster masses can be estimated via
gravitational lensing, X-ray observations of the intra-
cluster medium, or through dynamical analysis of the
cluster’s galaxies. The ﬁrst use of machine learning for
a dynamical cluster mass estimate was performed using
Support Distribution Machines (Póczos et al., 2012) on
a dark-matter-only simulation (Ntampaka et al., 2015,
2016). A number of non-neural network algorithms in-
cluding Gaussian process regression (kernel ridge regres-
sion), support vector machines, gradient boosted tree re-
gressors, and others have been applied to this problem
using the MACSIS simulations (Henson et al., 2016) for
training data. This simulation goes beyond the dark-
matter-only simulations and incorporates the impact of
various astrophysical processes and allows for the devel-
opment of a realistic processing pipeline that can be ap-
plied to observational data. The need for an accurate,
automatedmassestimationpipelineismotivatedbylarge