36
Figure 8 Illustrations of the methods discussed in the text. 1. Optical components such as interferometers and ampliﬁers
can emulate a neural network that layer-wise maps an input xto'(Wx)where Wis a learnable weight matrix and 'a
nonlinear activation. Using quantum optics components such as displacement and squeezing, one can encode information into
quantum properties of light and turn the neural net into a universal quantum computer. 2. Random embedding with an Optical
Processing Unit. Data is encoded into the laser beam through a spatial light modulator (here, a DMD), after which a diﬀusive
medium generates the random features. 3. A quantum computer can be used to compute distances between data points, or
“quantum kernels”. The ﬁrst part of the quantum algorithm uses routines Sx,Sx0to embed the data in Hilbert space, while
the second part reveals the inner product of the embedded vectors. This kernel can be further processed in standard kernel
methods such as support vector machines.
depend on parameters that can be trained with data.
Measurements on the “trained device” represent new out-
puts, such as artiﬁcially generated data samples of a gen-
erative model, or classiﬁcations of a supervised classiﬁer.
Another idea of how to use quantum computers to en-
hance learning is inspired by kernel methods (Hofmann
et al., 2008) (see Figure 8 bottom right). By associating
the parameters of a quantum algorithm with an input
data sample x, one eﬀectively embeds xinto a quan-
tum statej (x)idescribed by a vector in Hilbert space
(Havlicek et al., 2018; Schuld and Killoran, 2018). A
simple interference routine can measure overlaps between
two quantum states prepared in this way. An overlap is
an inner product of vectors in Hilbert space, which in
the machine literature is known as a kernel, a distance
measure between two data points. As a result, quantum
computers can compute rather exotic kernels that may
be classically intractable, and it is an active area of re-
search to ﬁnd interesting quantum kernels for machine
learning tasks.
Beyond quantum kernels and variational circuits,
quantum machine learning presents many other ideas
that use quantum hardware as AI accelerators, for exam-
ple as a sampler for training and inference in graphical
models (Adachi and Henderson, 2015; Benedetti et al.,
2017), or for linear algebra computations (Lloyd et al.,2014)2. Another interesting branch of research investi-
gates how quantum devices can directly analyze the data
produced by quantum experiments, without making the
detour of measurements (Cong et al., 2018). In all these
explorations, a major challenge is the still severe limita-
tions in current-day NISQ devices which reduce numer-
ical experiments on the hardware to proof-of-principle
demonstrations, while theoretical analysis remains noto-
riously diﬃcult in machine learning.
E. Outlook and Challenges
The above examples demonstrate a way of how physics
research can contribute to machine learning, namely by
investigatingnewhardwareplatformstoexecutetiresome
computations. While standard von Neumann technolo-
gies struggle to keep pace with Moore’s law, this opens a
number of opportunities for novel computing paradigms.
In their simplest embodiment, these take the form of
specialized accelerator devices, plugged onto standard
2Many quantum machine learning algorithms based on linear al-
gebra acceleration have recently been shown to make unfounded
claims of exponential speedups (Tang, 2018), when compared
against classical algorithms for analysing low-rank datasets with
strong sampling access. However, they are still interesting in this
context where even constant speedups make a diﬀerence.