3
is largely perceived as one of the main disruptive tech-
nologies of our ages, as much as computers have been
in the 1980’s and 1990’s. The general goal of ML is to
recognize patterns in data, which inform the way unseen
problems are treated. For example, in a highly complex
system such as a self-driving car, vast amounts of data
coming from sensors have to be turned into decisions of
how to control the car by a computer that has “learned”
to recognize the pattern of “danger”.
The success of ML in recent times has been marked
at ﬁrst by signiﬁcant improvements on some existing
technologies, for example in the ﬁeld of image recogni-
tion. To a large extent, these advances constituted the
ﬁrst demonstrations of the impact that ML methods can
have in specialized tasks. More recently, applications tra-
ditionally inaccessible to automated software have been
successfully enabled, in particular by deep learning tech-
nology. The demonstration of reinforcement learning
techniques in game playing, for example, has had a deep
impact in the perception that the whole ﬁeld was moving
a step closer to what expected from a general artiﬁcial
intelligence.
InparalleltotheriseofMLtechniquesinindustrialap-
plications, scientists have increasingly become interested
in the potential of ML for fundamental research, and
physics is no exception. To some extent, this is not too
surprising, since both ML and physics share some of their
methods as well as goals. The two disciplines are both
concerned about the process of gathering and analyzing
data to design models that can predict the behaviour of
complex systems. However, the ﬁelds prominently diﬀer
in the way their fundamental goals are realized. On the
one hand, physicists want to understand the mechanisms
of Nature, and are proud of using their own knowledge,
intelligence and intuition to inform their models. On
the other hand, machine learning mostly does the oppo-
site: models are agnostic and the machine provides the
’intelligence’ by extracting it from data. Although of-
ten powerful, the resulting models are notoriously known
to be as opaque to our understanding as the data pat-
terns themselves. Machine learning tools in physics are
therefore welcomed enthusiastically by some, while being
eyed with suspicions by others. What is diﬃcult to deny
is that they produce surprisingly good results in some
cases.
In this review, we attempt at providing a coherent se-
lected account of the diverse intersections of ML with
physics. Speciﬁcally, we look at an ample spectrum of
ﬁelds (ranging from statistical and quantum physics to
high energy and cosmology) where ML recently made a
prominentappearance, anddiscusspotentialapplications
and challenges of ‘intelligent’ data mining techniques in
the diﬀerent contexts. We start this review with the ﬁeld
of statistical physics in Section II where the interaction
with machine learning has a long history, drawing on
methods in physics to provide better understanding of
problems in machine learning. We then turn the wheel in
the other direction of using machine learning for physics.Section III treats progress in the ﬁelds of high-energy
physics and cosmology, Section IV reviews how ML ideas
are helping to understand the mysteries of many-body
quantum systems, Section V brieﬂy explore the promises
of machine learning within quantum computations, and
in Section VI we highlight some of the amazing advances
in computational chemistry and materials design due to
ML applications. In Section VII we discuss some ad-
vances in instrumentation leading potentially to hard-
ware adapted to perform machine learning tasks. We
conclude with an outlook in Section VIII.
A. Concepts in machine learning
For the purpose of this review we will brieﬂy explain
some fundamental terms and concepts used in machine
learning. For further reading, we recommend a few re-
sources, some of which have been targeted especially for
a physics audience. For a historical overview of the
development of the ﬁeld we recommend Refs. (LeCun
et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2014). An excellent recent
introduction to machine learning for physicists is Ref.
(Mehtaet al.,2018), whichincludesnotebookswithprac-
tical demonstrations. A very useful online resource is
Florian Marquardt’s course “Machine learning for physi-
cists”1. Useful textbooks written by machine learning
researchers are Christopher Bishop’s standard textbook
(Bishop, 2006), as well as (Goodfellow et al., 2016) which
focuses on the theory and foundations of deep learning
and covers many aspects of current-day research. A vari-
ety of online tutorials and lectures is useful to get a basic
overview and get started on the topic.
To learn about the theoretical progress made in statis-
ticalphysicsofneuralnetworksinthe1980s-1990swerec-
ommend the rather accessible book Statistical Mechan-
ics of Learning (Engel and Van den Broeck, 2001). For
learning details of the replica method and its use in com-
puter science, information theory and machine learning
we would recommend the book of Nishimori (Nishimori,
2001). For the more recent statistical physics methodol-
ogythetextbookofMézardandMontanariisanexcellent
reference (Mézard and Montanari, 2009).
To get a basic idea of the type of problems that ma-
chine learning is able to tackle it is useful to deﬁned three
large classes of learning problems: Supervised learning,
unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. This
will also allow us to state the basic terminology, build-
ing basic equipment to expose some of the basic tools of
machine learning.
1Seehttps://machine-learning-for-physicists.org/ .