21
E. Generative Models
An active area in machine learning research involves
using unsupervised learning to train a generative model
to produce a distribution that matches some empirical
distribution. This includes generative adversarial net-
works (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), variational au-
toencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014), autoregressive models, and models based
on normalizing ﬂows (Larochelle and Murray, 2011; Pa-
pamakarios et al., 2017; Rezende and Mohamed, 2015).
Interestingly, the same issue that motivates likelihood-
free inference, the intractability of the density implicitly
deﬁnedbythesimulatoralsoappearsingenerativeadver-
sarial networks (GANs). If the density of a GAN were
tractable, GANs would be trained via standard maxi-
mum likelihood, but because their density is intractable
a trick was needed. The trick is to introduce an adver-
sary – i.e. the discriminator network used to classify the
samples from the generative model and samples taken
from the target distribution. The discriminator is ef-
fectively estimating the likelihood ratio between the two
distributions, which provides a direct connections to the
approaches to likelihood-free inference based on classi-
ﬁers (Cranmer and Louppe, 2016).
Operationally, these models play a similar role as tra-
ditional scientiﬁc simulators, though traditional simula-
tion codes also provide a causal model for the underlying
data generation process grounded in physical principles.
However, traditional scientiﬁc simulators are often very
slow as the distributions of interest emerge from a low-
level microphysical description. For example, simulat-
ing collisions at the LHC involves atomic-level physics
of ionization and scintillation. Similarly, simulations in
cosmology involve gravitational interactions among enor-
mous numbers of massive objects and may also include
complex feedback processes that involve radiation, star
formation, etc. Therefore, learning a fast approximation
to these simulations is of great value.
Within particle physics early work in this direction
included GANs for energy deposits from particles in
calorimeters (Paganini et al., 2018a,b), which is being
studied by the ATLAS collaboration (ATLAS Collabora-
tion, 2018). In Cosmology, generative models have been
used to learn the simulation for cosmological structure
formation (Rodríguez et al., 2018). In an interesting hy-
brid approach, a deep neural network was used to predict
the non-linear structure formation of the universe from
as a residual from a fast physical simulation based on
linear perturbation theory (He et al., 2018).
In other cases, well-motivated simulations do not al-
ways exist or are impractical. Nevertheless, having a
generative model for such data can be valuable for the
purpose of calibration. An illustrative example in this di-
rectioncomesfrom(Ravanbakhsh et al.,2016), seeFig.3.
The authors point out that the next generation of cos-
mological surveys for weak gravitational lensing rely on
accurate measurements of the apparent shapes of distantgalaxies. However, shape measurement methods require
a precise calibration to meet the accuracy requirements
of the science analysis. This calibration process is chal-
lenging as it requires large sets of high quality galaxy
images, which are expensive to collect. Therefore, the
GAN enables an implicit generalization of the paramet-
ric bootstrap.
F. Outlook and Challenges
While particle physics and cosmology have a long his-
tory in utilizing machine learning methods, the scope
of topics that machine learning is being applied to has
grown signiﬁcantly. Machine learning is now seen as
a key strategy to confronting the challenges of the up-
graded High-Luminosity LHC (Albertsson et al., 2018;
Apollinari et al., 2015) and is inﬂuencing the strategies
for future experiments in both cosmology and particle
physics (Ntampaka et al., 2019). One area in particular
that has gathered a great deal of attention at the LHC
is the challenge of identifying the tracks left by charged
particles in high-luminostiy environments (Farrell et al.,
2018), which has been the focus of a recent kaggle chal-
lenge.
In almost all areas where machine learning is being ap-
plied to physics problems, there is a desire to incorporate
domain knowledge in the form of hierarchical structure,
compositional structure, geometrical structure, or sym-
metries that are known to exist in the data or the data-
generation process. Recently, there has been a spate of
work from the machine learning community in this direc-
tion(Bronstein et al.,2017;CohenandWelling,2016;Co-
henet al.,2018;Cohen et al.,2019;Kondor,2018;Kondor
et al., 2018; Kondor and Trivedi, 2018). These develop-
ments are being followed closely by physicists, and al-
ready being incorporated into contemporary research in
this area.
IV. MANY-BODY QUANTUM MATTER
The intrinsic probabilistic nature of quantum mechan-
ics makes physical systems in this realm an eﬀectively
inﬁnite source of big data, and a very appealing play-
ground for ML applications. Paradigmatic example of
this probabilistic nature is the measurement process in
quantum physics. Measuring the position rof an elec-
tron orbiting around the nucleus can only be approxi-
mately inferred from measurements. An inﬁnitely pre-
cise classical measurement device can only be used to
record the outcome of a speciﬁc observation of the elec-
tron position. Ultimately, a complete characterization of
the measurement process is given by the wave function
	(r), whose square modulus ultimately deﬁnes the prob-
abilityP(r) =j	(r)j2ofobservingtheelectronatagiven
position in space. While in the case of a single electron
both theoretical predictions and experimental inference