8
number of samples, therefore the name low-rank. A par-
ticularly challenging, yet relevant and interesting regime,
iswhenthedimensionality piscomparabletothenumber
of samplesn, and when the level of noise is large in such a
way that perfect estimation of the signal is not possible.
It turns out that the low-rank matrix estimation in the
high-dimensional noisy regime can be modelled as a sta-
tistical physics model of a spin glass withr-dimensional
vector variables and a special plantedconﬁguration to be
found.
Concretely, this model can be deﬁned in the teacher-
student scenario in which the teacher generates r-
dimensional latent variables u
i2Rr,i= 1;:::;n,
taken from a given probability distribution Pu(u
i), and
r-dimensional latent variables v
j2Rr,j= 1;:::;p,
taken from a given probability distribution Pv(v
i). Then
the teacher generates components of the data matrix
Xfrom some given conditional probability distribution
Pout(Xijju
iv
j). The goal of the student is then to re-
cover the latent variables uandvas precisely as possi-
ble from the knowledge of X, and the distributions Pout,
Pu,Pv.
Spin glass theory can be used to obtain rather com-
plete understanding of this teacher-student model for
low-rank matrix estimation in the limit p;n! 1,
n=p== 
(1);r= 
(1). One can compute with the
replica method what is the information-theoretically best
error in estimation of u, andvthe student can possibly
achieve, asdone decades agofor some special choices of r,
Pout,PuandPvin (Barkai and Sompolinsky, 1994; Biehl
and Mietzner, 1993; Watkin and Nadal, 1994). The im-
portance of these early works in physics is acknowledged
in some of the landmark papers on the subject in statis-
tics, see e.g. (Johnstone and Lu, 2009). However, the
lack of mathematical rigor and limited understanding of
algorithmic tractability caused the impact of these works
in machine learning and statistics to remain limited.
A resurrection of interest in statistical physics ap-
proach to low-rank matrix decompositions came with the
study of the stochastic block model for detection of clus-
ters/communities in sparse networks. The problem of
community detection was studied heuristically and al-
gorithmically extensively in statistical physics, for a re-
view see (Fortunato, 2010). However, the exact solu-
tion and understanding of algorithmic limitations in the
stochastic block model came from the spin glass theory
in (Decelle et al., 2011a,b). These works computed (non-
rigorously) the asymptotically optimal performance and
delimited sharply regions of parameters where this per-
formance is reached by the belief propagation (BP) al-
gorithm (Yedidia et al., 2003). Second order phase tran-
sitions appearing in the model separate a phase where
clustering cannot be performed better than by random
guessing, from a region where it can be done eﬃciently
with BP. First order phase transitions and one of their
spinodal lines then separate regions where clustering is
impossible, possible but not doable with the BP algo-
rithm, and easy with the BP algorithm. Refs. (Decelleet al., 2011a,b) also conjectured that when the BP algo-
rithm is not able to reach the optimal performance on
large instances of the model, then no other polynomial
algorithm will. These works attracted a large amount of
follow-up work in mathematics, statistics, machine learn-
ing and computer science communities.
The statistical physics understanding of the stochastic
block model and the conjecture about belief propagation
algorithm being optimal among all polynomial ones in-
spired the discovery of a new class of spectral algorithms
for sparse data (i.e. when the matrix Xis sparse) (Krza-
kalaet al., 2013b). Spectral algorithms are basic tools
in data analysis (Ng et al., 2002; Von Luxburg, 2007),
based on the singular value decomposition of the matrix
Xor functions of X. Yet for sparse matrices X, the
spectrum is known to have leading singular values with
localized singular vectors unrelated to the latent underly-
ingstructure. Amorerobustspectralmethodisobtained
by linearizing the belief propagation, thus obtaining a so-
called non-backtracking matrix (Krzakala et al., 2013b).
A variant on this spectral method based on algorithmic
interpretationoftheHessianoftheBethefreeenergyalso
originated in physics (Saade et al., 2014).
This line of statistical-physics inspired research is
merging into the mainstream in statistics and machine
learning. This is largely thanks to recent progress in:
(a) our understanding of algorithmic limitations, due
to the analysis of approximate message passing (AMP)
algorithms (Bolthausen, 2014; Deshpande and Monta-
nari, 2014; Javanmard and Montanari, 2013; Matsushita
and Tanaka, 2013; Rangan and Fletcher, 2012) for low-
rank matrix estimation that is a generalization of the
Thouless-Anderson-Palmer equations (Thouless et al.,
1977) well known in the physics literature on spin glasses.
And (b) progress in proving many of the corresponding
results in a mathematically rigorous way. Some of the
inﬂuential papers in this direction (related to low-rank
matrixestimation)are(Barbier et al.,2016;Coja-Oghlan
et al.,2018;DeshpandeandMontanari,2014;Lelargeand
Miolane, 2016) for the proof of the replica formula for the
information-theoretically optimal performance.
2. Restricted Boltzmann machines
BoltzmannmachinesandinparticularrestrictedBoltz-
mann machines are another method for unsupervised
learning often used in machine learning. As apparent
from the very name of the method, it had strong relation
with statistical physics. Indeed the Boltzmann machine
is often called the inverse Ising model in the physics lit-
erature and used extensively a range of area, for a re-
cent review on the physics of Boltzmann machines see
(Nguyen et al., 2017).
Concerning restricted Boltzmann machines, there are
number of studies in physics clarifying how these ma-
chines work and what structures can they learn. Model
of random restricted Boltzmann machine, where the