34
larly for molecules with conformational changes, is still
an open question for physics-informed ML functionals
and potentials that have not been explicitly trained with
this goal (Bereau et al., 2018; Snyder et al., 2012).
E. Data set generation
As for other applications of machine learning, com-
parison of various methods requires standardized data
sets. For quantum chemistry, these include the 134,000
molecules in the QM9 data set (Ramakrishnan et al.,
2014) and the COMP6 benchmark data set composed of
randomly-sampled subsets of other small molecule and
peptide data sets, with each entry optimized using the
same computational method (Smith et al., 2018).
In chemistry and materials research, computational
dataareoftenexpensivetogenerate, soselectionoftrain-
ing data points must be carefully considered. The in-
put and output representations also inform the choice
of data. Inspection of ML-predicted molecular energies
for most of the QM9 data set showed the importance
of choosing input data structures that convey conformer
changes (Faber et al., 2017). In addition, dense sampling
of the chemical composition space is not always neces-
sary. For example, the initial ANI training set of 20 mil-
lion molecules could be replaced with 5.5 million train-
ing points selected using an active learning method that
added poorly predicted molecular examples from each
training cycle (Smith et al., 2018). Alternate sampling
approaches can also be used to more eﬃciently build up
a training set. These range from active learning meth-
odsthatestimateerrorsfrommultipleNNevaluationsfor
new molecules(Gastegger et al., 2017) to generating new
atomic conﬁgurations based on MD simulations using a
previously-generated model (Zhang et al., 2018b). Inter-
esting, statistical-physics-based, insight into theoretical
aspects of such active learning was presented in (Seung
et al., 1992b).
Further work in this area is needed to identify the
atomic compositions and conﬁgurations that are most
important to diﬀerentiating candidate structures. While
NN’s have been shown to generate accurate energies, the
amount of data required to prevent over-ﬁtting can be
prohibitively expensive in many cases. For speciﬁc tasks,
such as predicting the anharmonic contributions to vi-
brational frequencies of the small molecule formaldehye,
Gaussian process methods were more accurate, and used
fewer points than a NN, although these points need to be
selected more carefully (Kamath et al., 2018). Balancing
the computational cost of data generation, ease of model
training, and model evaluation time continues to be an
important consideration when choosing the appropriate
ML method for each application.F. Outlook and Challenges
Going forward, ML models will beneﬁt from includ-
ing methods and practices developed for other problems
in physics. While some of these ideas are already being
explored, such as exploiting input data symmetries for
molecular conﬁgurations, there are still many opportu-
nities to improve model training eﬃciency and regular-
ization. Some of the more promising (and challenging)
areas include applying methods for exploration of high-
dimensional landscapes for parameter/hyper-parameter
optimization and identifying how to include boundary
behaviors or scaling laws in ML architectures and/or in-
put data formats. To connect more directly to exper-
imental data, future physics-based ML methods should
account for uncertainties and/or errors from calculations
and measured properties to avoid over-ﬁtting and im-
prove transferability of the models.
VII. AI ACCELERATION WITH CLASSICAL AND
QUANTUM HARDWARE
There are areas where physics can contribute to ma-
chine learning by other means than tools for theoretical
investigationsanddomain-speciﬁcproblems. Novelhard-
ware platforms may help with expensive information pro-
cessing pipelines and extend the number crunching facil-
ities of CPUs and GPUs. Such hardware-helpers are also
known as “AI accelerators”, and physics research has to
oﬀer a variety of devices that could potentially enhance
machine learning.
A. Beyond von Neumann architectures
When we speak of computers, we usually think of uni-
versal digital computers based on electrical circuits and
Boolean logic. This is the so-called "von Neumann"
paradigm of modern computing. But any physical sys-
tem can be interpreted as a way to process information,
namely by mapping the input parameters of the experi-
mental setup to measurement results, the output. This
way of thinking is close to the idea of analog comput-
ing, which has been – or so it seems (Ambs, 2010; Lund-
berg, 2005) – dwarfed by its digital cousin for all but
very few applications. In the context of machine learn-
ing however, where low-precision computations have to
be executed over and over, analog and special-purpose
computing devices have found a new surge of interest.
The hardware can be used to emulate a full model, such
as neural-network inspired chips (Ambrogio et al., 2018),
or it can outsource only a subroutine of a computation,
as done by Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs)
and Application-Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits (ASICs) for
fast linear algebra computations (Jouppi et al., 2017;
Markidis et al., 2018).
In the following, we present selected examples from
variousresearchdirectionsthatinvestigatehowhardware