25
quantum applications. Several approaches in this direc-
tion have been proposed, and leverage the ability of un-
supervised learning to well approximate the target dis-
tribution being sampled from in the underlying Monte
Carlo scheme. Relatively simple energy-based generative
models have been used in early applications for classi-
cal systems (Huang and Wang, 2017; Liu et al., 2017b).
"Self-learning" Monte Carlo techniques have then been
generalized also to fermionic systems (Chen et al., 2018a;
Liuet al., 2017c; Nagai et al., 2017). Overall, it has been
found that such approaches are eﬀective at reducing the
autocorrelation times, especially when compared to fami-
lies of less eﬀective Markov Chain Monte Carlo with local
updates. More recently, state-of-the-art generative ML
models have been adopted to speed-up sampling in spe-
ciﬁc tasks. Notably, (Wu et al., 2018) have used deep au-
toregressivemodelsthatmayenableamoreeﬃcientsam-
pling from hard classical problems, such as spin glasses.
The problem of ﬁnding eﬃcient sampling schemes for the
underlying classical models is then transformed into the
problem of ﬁnding an eﬃcient corresponding autoregres-
sive deep network representation. This approach has
also been generalized to the quantum cases in (Sharir
et al., 2019), where an autoregressive representation of
the wave-function is introduced. This representation is
automatically normalized and allows to bypass Markov
Chain Monte Carlo in the variational learning discussed
above.
While exact for a large family of bosonic and spin sys-
tems, QMC techniques typically incur in a severe sign
problem when dealing with several interesting fermionic
models, as well as frustrated spin Hamiltonians. In this
case, itistemptingtouseMLapproachestoattemptadi-
rectorindirectreductionofthesignproblem. Whileonly
initsﬁrststages,thisfamilyofapplicationshasbeenused
to infer information about fermionic phases through hid-
den information in the Green’s function (Broecker et al.,
2017b).
Similarly, ML techniques can help reduce the burden
of more subtle manifestations of the sign problem in dy-
namical properties of quantum models. In particular,
the problem of reconstructing spectral functions from
imaginary-time correlations in imaginary time is also a
ﬁeld in which ML can be used as an alternative to tradi-
tional maximum-entropy techniques to perform analyti-
cal continuations of QMC data (Arsenault et al., 2017;
Fournier et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018).
C. Classifying many-body quantum phases
The challenge posed by the complexity of many-body
quantum states manifests itself in many other forms.
Speciﬁcally, several elusive phases of quantum matter are
often hard to characterize and pinpoint both in numeri-
cal simulations and in experiments. For this reason, ML
schemes to identify phases of matter have become partic-
ularly popular in the context of quantum phases. In thefollowing we review some of the speciﬁc applications to
the quantum domain, while a more general discussion on
identifying phases and phase transitions is to be found in
II.E.
1. Synthetic data
Following the early developments in phase classiﬁ-
cations with supervised approaches (Carrasquilla and
Melko, 2017; Van Nieuwenburg et al., 2017; Wang, 2016),
manystudieshavesincethenfocusedonanalyzingphases
of matter in synthetic data, mostly from simulations of
quantum systems. While we do not attempt here to pro-
vide an exhaustive review of the many studies appeared
in this direction, we highlight two large families of prob-
lems that have so-far largely served as benchmarks for
new ML tools in the ﬁeld.
A ﬁrst challenging test bench for phase classiﬁcation
schemes is the case of quantum many-body localization.
This is an elusive phase of matter showing characteris-
tic ﬁngerprints in the many-body wave-function itself,
but not necessarily emerging from more traditional or-
der parameters [see for example (Alet and Laﬂorencie,
2018) for a recent review on the topic]. First studies in
this direction have focused on training strategies aim-
ing at the Hamiltonian or entanglement spectra (Hsu
et al., 2018; Huembeli et al., 2018b; Schindler et al., 2017;
Venderley et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). These works
have demonstrated the ability to very eﬀectively learn
the MBL phase transition in relatively small systems ac-
cessible with exact diagonalization techniques. Other
studies have instead focused on identifying signatures
directly in experimentally relevant quantities, most no-
tably from the many-body dynamics of local quantities
(Doggen et al., 2018; van Nieuwenburg et al., 2018). The
latter schemes appear to be at present the most promis-
ingforapplicationstoexperiments, whiletheformerhave
been used as a tool to identify the existence of an unex-
pected phase in the presence of correlated disorder (Hsu
et al., 2018).
Another very challenging class of problems is found
when analyzing topological phases of matter. These are
largely considered a non-trivial test for ML schemes, be-
cause these phases are typically characterized by non-
local order parameters. In turn, these non-local order
parameters are hard to learn for popular classiﬁcation
schemes used for images. This speciﬁc issue is already
present when analyzing classical models featuring topo-
logical phase transitions. For example, in the presence of
a BKT-type transition, learning schemes trained on raw
MonteCarloconﬁgurationsarenoteﬀective(Beach et al.,
2018; Hu et al., 2017). These problems can be circum-
vented devising training strategies using pre-engineered
features (Broecker et al., 2017a; Cristoforetti et al., 2017;
WangandZhai,2017;Wetzel,2017)insteadofrawMonte
Carlo samples. These features typically rely on some im-
portant a-priori assumptions on the nature of the phase