27
D. Tensor networks for machine learning
The research topics reviewed so far are mainly con-
cerned with the use of ML ideas and tools to study prob-
lems in the realm of quantum many-body physics. Com-
plementary to this philosophy, an interesting research
direction in the ﬁeld explores the inverse direction, in-
vestigating how ideas from quantum many-body physics
can inspire and devise new powerful ML tools. Central
tothesedevelopmentsaretensor-networkrepresentations
of many-body quantum states. These are very successful
variational families of many-body wave functions, nat-
urally emerging from low-entanglement representations
of quantum states (Verstraete et al., 2008). Tensor net-
works can serve both as a practical and a conceptual tool
for ML tasks, both in the supervised and in the unsuper-
vised setting.
These approaches build on the idea of providing
physics-inspired learning schemes and network structures
alternativetothemoreconventionallyadoptedstochastic
learning schemes and FFNN networks. For example, ma-
trix product state (MPS) representations, a work-horse
for the simulation of interacting one-dimensional quan-
tum systems (White, 1992), have been re-purposed to
perform classiﬁcation tasks, (Liu et al., 2018; Novikov
et al., 2016; Stoudenmire and Schwab, 2016), and also
recently adopted as explicit generative models for un-
supervised learning (Han et al., 2018b; Stokes and Ter-
illa, 2019). It is worth mentioning that other related
high-order tensor decompositions, developed in the con-
text of applied mathematics have been used for ML pur-
poses (Acar and Yener, 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2014).
Tensor-train decompositions (Oseledets, 2011), formally
equivalent to MPS representations, have been introduced
in parallel as a tool to perform various machine learn-
ing tasks (Gorodetsky et al., 2019; Izmailov et al., 2017;
Novikov et al., 2016). Networks closely related to MPS
have also been explored for time-series modeling (Guo
et al., 2018).
In the eﬀort of increasing the amount of entanglement
encoded in these low-rank tensor decompositions, recent
works have concentrated on tensor-network representa-
tions alternative to the MPS form. One notable exam-
ple is the use of tree tensor networks with a hierarchi-
cal structure (Hackbusch and Kühn, 2009; Shi et al.,
2006), which have been applied to classiﬁcation (Liu
et al., 2017a; Stoudenmire, 2018) and generative mod-
eling (Cheng et al., 2019) tasks with good success. An-
other example is the use of entangled plaquette states
(Changlani et al., 2009; Gendiar and Nishino, 2002; Mez-
zacapoet al., 2009) and string bond states (Schuch et al.,
2008), both showing sizable improvements in classiﬁca-
tion tasks over MPS states (Glasser et al., 2018b).
On the more theoretical side, the deep connection be-
tween tensor networks and complexity measures of quan-
tum many-body wave-functions, such as entanglement
entropy, can be used to understand, and possible inspire,
successful network designs for ML purposes. The tensor-network formalism has proven powerful in interpreting
deep learning through the lens of renormalization group
concepts. Pioneeringworkinthisdirectionhasconnected
MERA tensor network states (Vidal, 2007) to hierarchi-
cal Bayesian networks (Bény, 2013). In later analysis,
convolutional arithmetic circuits (Cohen et al., 2016),
a family of convolutional networks with product non-
linearities, havebeenintroducedasaconvenientmodelto
bridge tensor decompositions with FFNN architectures.
Beside their conceptual relevance, these connections can
help clarify the role of inductive bias in modern and com-
monly adopted neural networks (Levine et al., 2017).
E. Outlook and Challenges
Applications of ML to quantum many-body problems
have seen a fast-pace progress in the past few years,
touching a diverse selection of topics ranging from nu-
merical simulation to data analysis. The potential of ML
techniques has already surfaced in this context, already
showing improved performance with respect to existing
techniques on selected problems. To a large extent, how-
ever, the real power of ML techniques in this domain
has been only partially demonstrated, and several open
problems remain to be addressed.
In the context of variational studies with NQS, for ex-
ample, the origin of the empirical success obtained so
far with diﬀerent kind of neural network quantum states
is not equally well understood as for other families of
variational states, like tensor networks. Key open chal-
lengesremainalsowiththerepresentationandsimulation
of fermionic systems, for which eﬃcient neural-network
representation are still to be found.
Tensor-network representations for ML purposes, as
well as complex-valued networks like those used for NQS,
play an important role to bridge the ﬁeld back to the
arena of computer science. Challenges for the future of
this research direction consist in eﬀectively interfacing
with the computer-science community, while retaining
the interests and the generality of the physics tools.
For what concerns ML approaches to experimental
data, the ﬁeld is largely still in its infancy, with only a
few applications having been demonstrated so far. This
is in stark contrast with other ﬁelds, such as High-Energy
and Astrophysics, in which ML approaches have matured
to a stage where they are often used as standard tools for
data analysis. Moving towards achieving the same goal
in the quantum domain demands closer collaborations
between the theoretical and experimental eﬀorts, as well
as a deeper understanding of the speciﬁc problems where
ML can make a substantial diﬀerence.
Overall, given the relatively short time span in which
applications of ML approaches to many-body quantum
matter have emerged, there are however good reasons
to believe that these challenges will be energetically
addressed–and some of them solved– in the coming years.