35
platforms from physics labs, such as optics, nanophoton-
ics and quantum computers, can become novel kinds of
AI accelerators.
B. Neural networks running on light
Processing information with optics is a natural and ap-
pealingalternative-oratleastcomplement-toall-silicon
computers: it is fast, it can be made massively parallel,
and requires very low power consumption. Optical inter-
connects are already widespread, to carry information on
short or long distances, but light interference properties
also can be leveraged in order to provide more advanced
processing. In the case of machine learning there is one
more perk. Some of the standard building blocks in op-
tics labs have a striking resemblance with the way infor-
mation is processed with neural networks (Killoran et al.,
2018;Lin et al.,2018;Shen et al.,2017), aninsightthatis
by no means new (Lu et al., 1989). An example for both
large bulk optics experiments and on-chip nanophoton-
ics are networks of interferometers . Interferometers are
passive optical elements made up of beam splitters and
phase shifters (Clements et al., 2016; Reck et al., 1994).
If we consider the amplitudes of light modes as an incom-
ing signal, the interferometer eﬀectively applies a unitary
transformation to the input (see Figure 8 left). Ampli-
fying or damping the amplitudes can be understood as
applying a diagonal matrix. Consequently, by means of
a singular value decomposition, an ampliﬁer sandwiched
by two interferometers implements an arbitrary matrix
multiplication on the data encoded into the optical am-
plitudes. Adding a non-linear operation – which is usu-
ally the hardest to precisely control in the lab – can turn
the device into an emulator of a standard neural network
layer (Lin et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2017), but at the speed
of light.
An interesting question to ask is: what if we use quan-
tuminstead of classical light? For example, imagine the
informationisnowencodedinthe quadratures oftheelec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld. The quadratures are - much like po-
sition and momentum of a quantum particle - two non-
commuting operators that describe light as a quantum
system. We now have to exchange the setup to quantum
optics components such as squeezers and displacers, and
get a neural network encoded in the quantum properties
of light (Killoran et al., 2018). But there is more: Using
multiple layers, and choosing the ‘nonlinear operation’
as a “non-Gaussian” component (such as an optical “Kerr
non-linearity” which is admittedly still an experimental
challenge), the optical setup becomes a universal quan-
tum computer . As such, it can run any computations a
quantum computer can perform - a true quantum neural
network. There are other variations of quantum opti-
cal neural nets, for example when information is encoded
into discrete rather than continuous-variable properties
of light (Steinbrecher et al., 2018). Investigations into
what these quantum devices mean for machine learning,for example whether there are patterns in data that can
be easier recognized, have just begun.
C. Revealing features in data
One does not have to implement a full machine learn-
ing model on the physical hardware, but can outsource
single components. An example which we will highlight
as a second application is data preprocessing or feature
extraction. This includes mapping data to another space
where it is either compressed or ‘blown up’, in both cases
revealing its features for machine learning algorithms.
One approach to data compression or expansion with
physical devices leverages the very statistical nature of
many machine learning algorithms. Multiple light scat-
tering can generate the very high-dimensional random-
ness needed for so-called random embeddings (see Figure
8 top right). In a nutshell, the multiplication of a set
of vectors by the same random matrix is approximately
distance-preserving (Johnson and Lindenstrauss, 1984).
This can be used for dimensionality reduction, i.e., data
compression, inthespiritof compressed sensing (Donoho,
2006) or for eﬃcient nearest neighbor search with local-
ity sensitive hashing. This can also be used for dimen-
sionality expansion, where in the limit of large dimen-
sion it approximates a well-deﬁned kernel(Saadeet al.,
2016). Such devices can be built in free-space optics,
with coherent laser sources, commercial light modulators
and CMOSsensors, anda well-chosenscattering material
(see Fig.8 2a). Machine learning applications range from
transfer learning for deep neural networks, time series
analysis - with a feedback loop implementing so-called
echo-state networks (Donget al., 2018), or change-point
detection (Keriven et al., 2018). For large-dimensional
data, these devices already outperform CPUs or GPUs
both in speed and power consumption.
D. Quantum-enhanced machine learning
A fair amount of eﬀort in the ﬁeld of quantum machine
learning, a ﬁeld that investigates intersections of quan-
tum information and intelligent data mining (Biamonte
et al., 2017; Schuld and Petruccione, 2018b), goes into
applications of near-term quantum hardware for learn-
ing tasks (Perdomo-Ortiz et al., 2017). These so-called
Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum or ‘NISQ’ devices are
not only hoped to enhance machine learning applications
in terms of speed, but may lead to entirely new algo-
rithms inspired by quantum physics. We have already
mentioned one such example above, a quantum neural
network that can emulate a classical neural net, but go
beyond. This model falls into a larger class of varia-
tionalorparametrized quantum machine learning algo-
rithms (McClean et al., 2016; Mitarai et al., 2018). The
idea is to make the quantum algorithm, and thereby the
device implementing the quantum computing operations,