26
transition to be looked for, thus diminishing their eﬀec-
tiveness when looking for new phases of matter. Deeper
in the quantum world, there has been research activity
along the direction of learning, in a supervised fashion,
topological invariants. Neural networks can be used for
example to classify families of non-interacting topological
Hamiltonians, using as an input their discretized coeﬃ-
cients, eitherinreal(OhtsukiandOhtsuki,2016,2017)or
momentum space (Sun et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018c).
In these cases, it is found that neural networks are able
to reproduce the (already known beforehand) topological
invariants, such as winding numbers, Berry curvatures
and more. The context of strongly-correlated topologi-
cal matter is, to a large extent, more challenging than
the case of non-interacting band models. In this case,
a common approach is to deﬁne a set of carefully pre-
engineered features to be used on top of the raw data.
One well known example is the case of of the so-called
quantum loop topography (ZhangandKim,2017), trained
on local operators computed on single shots of sampled
wave-function walkers, as for example done in variational
Monte Carlo. It has been shown that this very speciﬁc
choice of local features is able to distinguish strongly in-
teracting fraction Chern insulators, and also Z2quan-
tum spin liquids (Zhang et al., 2017). Similar eﬀorts
have been realized to classify more exotic phases of mat-
ter, including magnetic skyrmion phases (Iakovlev et al.,
2018), and dynamical states in antiskyrmion dynamics
(Ritzmann et al., 2018).
Despite the progress seen so far along the many di-
rection described here, it is fair to say that topological
phases of matter, especially for interacting systems, con-
stitute one of the main challenges for phase classiﬁca-
tion. While some good progress has already been made
(Huembeli et al., 2018a; Rodriguez-Nieva and Scheurer,
2018), future research will need to address the issue of
ﬁnding training schemes not relying on pre-selection of
data features.
2. Experimental data
Beyond extensive studies on data from numerical sim-
ulations, supervised schemes have found their way also as
a tool to analyze experimental data from quantum sys-
tems. In ultra-cold atoms experiments, supervised learn-
ing tools have been used to map out both the topological
phases of non-interacting particles, as well the onset of
Mott insulating phases in ﬁnite optical traps (Rem et al.,
2018). In this speciﬁc case, the phases where already
known and identiﬁable with other approaches. How-
ever, ML-based techniques combining a-priori theoretical
knowledge with experimental data hold the potential for
genuine scientiﬁc discovery.
For example, ML can enable scientiﬁc discovery in the
interesting cases when experimental data has to be at-
tributed to one of many available and equally likely a-
priory theoretical models, but the experimental informa-
16			 
Figure 5 Example of machine learning approach to the classi-
ﬁcation of experimental images from scanning tunneling mi-
croscopy of high-temperature superconductors. Images are
classiﬁed according to the predictions of distinct types of pe-
riodic spatial modulations. Reproduced from (Zhang et al.,
2018d)
tion at hand is not easily interpreted. Typically inter-
esting cases emerge for example when the order param-
eter is a complex, and only implicitly known, non-linear
function of the experimental outcomes. In this situa-
tion, ML approaches can be used as a powerful tool to
eﬀectively learn the underlying traits of a given theory,
and provide a possibly unbiased classiﬁcation of experi-
mental data. This is the case for incommensurate phases
in high-temperature superconductors, for which scanning
tunneling microscopy images reveal complex patters that
are hard to decipher using conventional analysis tools.
Using supervised approaches in this context, recent work
(Zhanget al., 2018d) has shown that is possible to infer
the nature of spatial ordering in these systems, also see
Fig. 5.
A similar idea has been also used for another pro-
totypical interacting quantum systems of fermions, the
Hubbard model, as implemented in ultra-cold atoms ex-
periments in optical lattices. In this case the reference
models provide snapshots of the thermal density matrix
that can be pre-classiﬁed in a supervised learning fash-
ion. The outcome of this study (Bohrdt et al., 2018),
is that the experimental results are with good conﬁdence
compatible with one of the theories proposed, in this case
a geometric string theory for charge carriers.
In the last two experimental applications described
above, the outcome of the supervised approaches are to a
large extent highly non-trivial, and hard to predict a pri-
ori on the basis of other information at hand. The inner
bias induced by the choice of the theories to be classiﬁed
is however one of the current limitations that these kind
of approaches face.