10
changes.
This line of work was pioneered by Elisabeth Gard-
ner (Gardner and Derrida, 1989) and actively studied
in physics in the past for special cases of PoutandPW,
see e.g. (Györgyi and Tishby, 1990; Seung et al., 1992a;
Sompolinsky et al., 1990). The replica method can be
used to compute the mutual information between Xand
yin this teacher-student model, which is related to the
free energy in physics. One can then deduce the optimal
estimation error of the vector w, as well as the opti-
mal generalization error. A remarkable recent progress
was made in (Barbier et al., 2019) where it has been
proven that the replica method yields the correct results
for the GLM with random inputs for generic Poutand
PW. Combining these results with the analysis of the ap-
proximate message passing algorithms (Javanmard and
Montanari, 2013), one can deduce cases where the AMP
algorithm is able to reach the optimal performance and
regions where it is not. The AMP algorithm is conjec-
tured to be the best of all polynomial algorithm for this
case. The teacher-student model could thus be used by
practitioners to understand how far from optimality are
general purpose algorithms in cases where only very lim-
ited number of samples is available.
2. Physics results on multi-layer neural networks
Statistical physics analysis of learning and generaliza-
tion properties in deep neural networks is a challenging
task. Progress had been made in several complementary
directions.
One of the inﬂuential directions involved studies of lin-
ear deep neural networks. While linear neural networks
do not have the expressive power to represent generic
functions, the learning dynamics of the gradient descent
algorithm bears strong resemblance with the learning dy-
namics on non-linear networks. At the same time the dy-
namics of learning in deep linear neural networks can be
described via a closed form solution (Saxe et al., 2013).
The learning dynamics of linear neural networks is also
able to reproduce a range of facts about generalization
and over-ﬁtting as observed numerically in non-linear
networks, see e.g. (Advani and Saxe, 2017).
Another special case that has been analyzed in great
detail is called the committee machine, for a review see
e.g. (Engel and Van den Broeck, 2001). Committee
machine is a fully-connected neural network learning a
teacher-rule on random input data with only the ﬁrst
layer of weights being learned, while the subsequent ones
are ﬁxed. The theory is restricted to the limit where
the number of hidden neurons k=O(1), while the di-
mensionality of the input pand the number of samples
nare both diverge, with n=p ==O(1). Both the
stochastic gradient descent (aka online) learning (Saad
andSolla,1995a,b)andtheoptimalbatch-learninggener-
alization error can be analyzed in closed form in this case
(Schwarze, 1993). Recently the replica analysis of the op-timal generalization properties has been established rig-
orously(Aubin et al.,2018). Akeyfeatureofthecommit-
tee machine is that it displays the so-called specialization
phase transition. When the number of samples is small,
the optimal error is achieved by a weight-conﬁguration
that is the same for every hidden unit, eﬀectively im-
plementing simple regression. Only when the number
of hidden units exceeds the specialization threshold the
diﬀerent hidden units learn diﬀerent weights resulting in
improvement of the generalization error. Another inter-
esting observation about the committee machine is that
the hard phase where good generalization is achievable
information-theoretically but not tractably gets larger
as the number of hidden units grows. Committee ma-
chine was also used to analyzed the consequences of
over-parametrization in neural networks in (Goldt et al.,
2019a,b).
Another remarkable limit of two-layer neural networks
was analysed in a recent series of works (Mei et al., 2018;
Rotskoﬀ and Vanden-Eijnden, 2018). In these works the
networks are analysed in the limit where the number of
hidden units is large, while the dimensionality of the in-
put is kept ﬁxed. In this limit the weights interact only
weakly – leading to the term mean ﬁeld – and their evo-
lution can be tracked via an ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tion analogous to those studied in glassy systems (Dean,
1996). A related, but diﬀerent, treatment of the limit
when the hidden layers are large is based on lineariza-
tion of the dynamics around the initial condition leading
to relation with Gaussian processes and kernel methods,
see e.g. (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018)
3. Information Bottleneck
Information bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000) is another
concept stemming in statistical physics that has been in-
ﬂuential in the quest for understanding the theory be-
hind the success of deep learning. The theory of the in-
formation bottleneck for deep learning (Shwartz-Ziv and
Tishby, 2017; Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015) aims to quan-
tify the notion that layers in a neural networks are trad-
ing oﬀ between keeping enough information about the
input so that the output labels can be predicted, while
forgettingasmuchoftheunnecessaryinformationaspos-
sible in order to keep the learned representation concise.
One of the interesting consequences of this informa-
tion theoretic analysis is that the traditional capacity, or
expressivity dimension of the network, such as the VC
dimension, is replaced by the exponent of the mutual in-
formation between the input and the compressed hid-
den layer representation. This implies that every bit of
representation compression is equivalent to doubling the
training data in its impact on the generalization error.
The analysis of (Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby, 2017) also
suggeststhatsuchrepresentationcompressionisachieved
by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) through diﬀusion
in the irrelevant dimensions of the problem. According to