29
lowed to demonstrate QST of highly entangled states up
to about 100 qubits, unfeasible for full QST techniques.
Thistomographyapproachcanbesuitablygeneralizedto
the case of mixed states introducing parameterizations of
the density matrix based either on puriﬁed NQS (Torlai
and Melko, 2018) or on deep normalizing ﬂows (Cran-
meret al., 2019). The former approach has been also
demonstrated experimentally with Rydberg atoms (Tor-
laiet al., 2019). An interesting alternative to the NQS
representationfortomographicpurposeshasalsobeenre-
cently suggested (Carrasquilla et al., 2019). This is based
on parameterizing the density matrix directly in terms
of positive-operator valued measure (POVM) operators.
This approach therefore has the important advantage of
directly learning the measurement process itself, and has
been demonstrated to scale well on rather large mixed
states. A possible inconvenient of this approach is that
the density matrix is only implicitly deﬁned in terms of
generative models, as opposed to explicit parameteriza-
tions found in NQS-based approaches.
Other approaches to QST have explored the use of
quantum states parameterized as ground-states of local
Hamiltonians (Xin et al., 2018), or the intriguing pos-
sibility of bypassing QST to directly measure quantum
entanglement (Gray et al., 2018). Extensions to the more
complex problem of quantum process tomography are
also promising (Banchi et al., 2018), while the scalability
of ML-based approaches to larger systems still presents
challenges.
Finally, the problem of learning quantum states from
experimental measurements has also profound implica-
tions on the understanding of the complexity of quan-
tum systems. In this framework, the PAC learnabil-
ity of quantum states (Aaronson, 2007), experimen-
tally demonstrated in (Rocchetto et al., 2017), and
the ‘’shadow tomography” approach (Aaronson, 2017),
showed that even linearly sized training sets can pro-
vide suﬃcient information to succeed in certain quantum
learning tasks. These information-theoretic guarantees
come with computational restrictions and learning is ef-
ﬁcient only for special classes of states (Rocchetto, 2018)
B. Controlling and preparing qubits
A central task of quantum control is the following:
Given an evolution U()that depends on parameters
and maps an initial quantum state j 0itoj ()i=
U()j 0i, which parameters minimise the overlap or
distance between the prepared state and the target state,
jh ()j targetij2? To facilitate analytic studies, the space
of possible control interventions is often discretized, so
thatU() =U(s1;:::;sT)becomes a sequence of steps
s1;:::;sT. For example, a control ﬁeld could be applied
at only two diﬀerent strengths h1andh2, and the goal
is to ﬁnd an optimal strategy st2fh1;h2g,t= 1;:::;T
to bring the initial state as close as possible to the target
state using only these discrete actions.This setup directly generalizes to a reinforcement
learning framework (Sutton and Barto, 2018), where an
agent picks “moves” from the list of allowed control inter-
ventions, such as the two ﬁeld strengths applied to the
quantum state of a qubit. This framework has proven to
be competitive to state-of-the-art methods in various set-
tings, such as state preparation in non-integrable many-
body quantum systems of interacting qubits (Bukov
et al., 2018), or the use of strong periodic oscillations
to prepare so-called “Floquet-engineered” states (Bukov,
2018). A recent study comparing (deep) reinforcement
learning with traditional optimization methods such as
Stochastic Gradient Descent for the preparation of a sin-
gle qubit state shows that learning is of advantage if
the “action space” is naturally discretized and suﬃciently
small (Zhang et al., 2019).
The picture becomes increasingly complex in slightly
more realistic settings, for example when the control is
noisy (Niu et al., 2018). In an interesting twist, the con-
trol problem has also been tackled by predicting future
noise using a recurrent neural network that analyses the
time series of past noise. Using the prediction, the an-
ticipated future noise can be corrected (Mavadia et al.,
2017).
An altogether diﬀerent approach to state preparation
with machine learning tries to ﬁnd optimal strategies for
evaporative cooling to create Bose-Einstein condensates
(Wigleyet al., 2016). In this online optimization strat-
egy based on Bayesian optimization (Frazier, 2018; Jones
et al., 1998), a Gaussian process is used as a statistical
model that captures the relationship between the con-
trol parameters and the quality of the condensate. The
strategy discovered by the machine learning model al-
lows for a cooling protocol that uses 10times fewer itera-
tions than pure optimization techniques. An interesting
feature is that - contrary to the common reputation of
machine learning - the Gaussian process allows to deter-
mine which control parameters are more important than
others.
Another angle is captured by approaches that ‘learn’
the sequence of optical instruments in order to pre-
pare highly entangled photonic quantum states (Mel-
nikovet al., 2018).
C. Error correction
One of the major challenges in building a universal
quantum computer is error correction. During any com-
putation, errors are introduced by physical imperfections
of the hardware. But while classical computers allow
for simple error correction based on duplicating infor-
mation, the no-cloning theorem of quantum mechanics
requires more complex solutions. The most well-known
proposal of surface codes prescribes to encode one “log-
ical qubit” into a topological state of several “physical
qubits”. Measurements on these physical qubits reveal a
“footprint” of the chain of error events called a syndrome .