16
the data.
4. Triggering
Enormous amounts of data must be collected by col-
lider experiments such as the LHC, because the phenom-
ena being targeted are exceedingly rare. The bulk of the
collisions involve phenomena that have previously been
studied and characterized, and the data volume asso-
ciated with the full data stream is impractically large.
As a result, collider experiments use a real-time data-
reduction system referred to as a trigger. The trigger
makes the critical decision of which events to keep for
future analysis and which events to discard. The AT-
LAS and CMS experiments retain only about 1 out of
every 100,000 events. Machine learning techniques are
used to various degrees in these systems. Essentially, the
same particle identiﬁcation (classiﬁcation) tasks appears
in this context, though the computational demands and
performance in terms of false positives and negatives are
diﬀerent in the real-time environment.
The LHCb experiment has been a leader in using ma-
chine learning techniques in the trigger. Roughly 70%
of the data selected by the LHC trigger is selected by
machine learning algorithms. Initially, the experiment
used a boosted decision tree for this purpose (Gligorov
andWilliams,2013), whichwaslaterreplacedbytheMa-
trixNet algorithm developed by Yandex (Likhomanenko
et al., 2015).
The Trigger systems often use specialized hardware
and ﬁrmware, such as ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs). Recently, tools have been developed to
streamline the compilation of machine learning models
for FPGAs to target the requirements of these real-time
triggering systems (Duarte et al., 2018; Tsaris et al.,
2018).
5. Theoretical particle physics
While the bulk of machine learning in particle physics
and cosmology are focused on analysis of observational
data, there are also examples of using machine learning
as a tool in theoretical physics. For instance, machine
learning has been used to characterize the landscape of
string theories (Cariﬁo et al., 2017), to identify the phase
transitions of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) (Pang
et al., 2018), and to study the the AdS/CFT correspon-
dence (Hashimoto et al., 2018a,b). Some of this work is
morecloselyconnectedtotheuseofmachinelearningasa
toolincondensedmatterormany-bodyquantumphysics.
Speciﬁcally, deep learning has been used in the context
of lattice QCD (LQCD). In an exploratory work in this
direction, deep neural networks were used to predict the
parameters in the QCD Lagrangian from lattice conﬁg-
urations (Shanahan et al., 2018). This is needed for a
numberofmulti-scaleaction-matchingapproaches,whichaim to improve the eﬃciency of the computationally in-
tensive LQCD calculations. This problem was setup as a
regressiontask, andoneofthechallengesisthatthereare
relatively few training examples. Additionally, machine
learning techniques are being used to reduce the auto-
correlation time in the Markov Chains (Albergo et al.,
2019; Tanaka and Tomiya, 2017b) In order to solve this
task with few training examples it is important to lever-
age the known space-time and local gauge symmetries
in the lattice data. Data augmentation is not a scalable
solution given the richness of the symmetries. Instead
the authors performed feature engineering that imposed
gauge symmetry and space-time translational invariance.
While this approach proved eﬀective, it would be desir-
able to consider a richer class of networks, that are equiv-
ariant (or covariant) to the symmetries in the data (such
approaches are discussed in Sec. III.F). A continuation
of this work is being supported by the Argon Leadership
Computing Facility. The a new Intel-Cray system Au-
rora, will be capable of over 1 exaﬂops and speciﬁcally
is aiming at problems that combine traditional high per-
formance computing with modern machine learning tech-
niques.
C. Classiﬁcation and regression in cosmology
1. Photometric Redshift
Due to the expansion of the universe the distant lu-
minous objects are redshifted, and the distance-redshift
relationisafundamentalcomponentofobservationalcos-
mology. Very precise redshift estimates can be obtained
through spectroscopy; however, such spectroscopic sur-
veys are expensive and time consuming. Photometric
surveys based on broadband photometry or imaging in a
few color bands give a coarse approximation to the spec-
tral energy distribution. Photometric redshift refers to
the regression task of estimating redshifts from photo-
metric data. In this case, the ground truth training data
comes from precise spectroscopic surveys.
The traditional approaches to photometric redshift is
based on template ﬁtting methods (Benítez, 2000; Bram-
meret al., 2008; Feldmann et al., 2006). For more than
a decade cosmologists have also used machine learning
methods based on neural networks and boosted decision
trees for photometric redshift (Carrasco Kind and Brun-
ner, 2013; Collister and Lahav, 2004; Firth et al., 2003).
One interesting aspect of this body of work is the eﬀort
that has been placed to go beyond a point estimate for
the redshift. Various approaches exist to determine the
uncertainty on the redshift estimate and to obtain a pos-
terior distribution.
While the training data are not generated from a sim-
ulation, there is still a concern that the distribution of
the training data may not be representative of the distri-
bution of data that the models will be applied to. This
type of covariate shift results from various selection ef-