32
Figure 6 Several representations are currently used to describe molecular systems in ML models, including (a) atomic coordi-
nates, with symmetry functions encoding local bonding environments, as inputs to element-based neural networks (Reproduced
from (Gastegger et al., 2017)) and (b) nuclear potentials approximated by a sum of Gaussian functions as inputs kernel ridge
regression models for electron densities (Modiﬁed from (Brockherde et al., 2017)).
rectly. Boltzmann generators can sample the equilib-
rium distribution of a collective variable space and sub-
sequently provide a set of states that represent the dis-
tribution of states on the FES (Noé et al., 2019).
Furthermore, the long history of ﬁnding relationships
between minima on complex energy landscapes may also
be useful as welearn to understand why ML models ex-
hibit such general success. Relationships between the
methods and ideas currently used to describe molecular
systems and the corresponding are reviewed in (Ballard
et al., 2017). Going forward, the many tools developed
by physicists to explore and quantify features on energy
landscapes may be helpful in creating new algorithms to
eﬃciently optimize model weights during training. (See
also the related discussion in Sec. II.D.4.) This area of
interdisciplinary research promises to yield methods that
will be useful in both machine learning and physics ﬁelds.
C. Materials properties
Using learned interatomic potentials based on local en-
vironments has also aﬀorded improvement in the calcula-
tion of materials properties. Matching experimental data
typically requires sampling from the ensemble of possible
conﬁgurations, which comes at a considerable cost when
using large simulation cells and conventional methods.
Recently, the structure and material properties of amor-
phous silicon were predicted using molecular dynamics
(MD) with a ML potential trained on density functional
theory (DFT) calculations for only small simulation cells
(Deringer et al., 2018). Related applications of using ML
potentials to model the phase change between crystalline
and amorphous regions of materials such as GeTe and
amorphous carbon are reviewed by Sosso et al.(2018).
Generating a computationally-tractable potential that is
suﬃciently accurate to describe phase changes and the
relative energies of defects on both an atomistic and ma-
terial scale is quite diﬃcult, however the recent success
for silicon properties indicates that ML methods are up
to the challenge (Bartók et al., 2018).
Ideally, experimental measurements could also be in-
corporated in data-driven ML methods that aim to pre-dict material properties. However, reported results are
too often limited to high-performance materials with no
counter examples for the training process. In addition,
noisy data is coupled with a lack of precise structural in-
formation needed for input into the ML model. For for
organic molecular crystals, these challenges were over-
come for predictions of NMR chemical shifts, which are
very sensitive to local environments, by using a Gaussian
process regression framework trained on DFT-calculated
valuesofknownstructures(Paruzzo et al.,2018). Match-
ing calculated values with experimental results prior to
training the ML model enabled the validation of a pre-
dicted pharmaceutical crystal structure.
Other intriguing directions include identiﬁcation of
structurally similar materials via clustering and using
convex hull construction to determine which of the many
predicted structures should be most stable under certain
thermodynamic constraints (Anelli et al., 2018). Using
kernel-PCA descriptors for the construction of the con-
vexhullhasbeenappliedtoidentifycrystallineicephases
and was shown to cluster thousands structures which dif-
feronlybyprotondisorderorstackingfaults(Engel et al.,
2018) (see Fig. 7). Machine-learned methods based on a
combination of supervised and unsupervised techniques
certainly promises to be a fruitful research area in the
future. In particular, it remains an exciting challenge to
identify, predict, or even suggest materials that exhibit a
particular desired property.
D. Electron densities for density functional theory
In many of the examples above, density functional the-
ory calculations have been used as the source of training
data. It is ﬁtting that machine learning is also playing a
role in creating new density functionals. Machine learn-
ing is a natural choice for situations such as DFT where
we do not have knowledge of the functional form of an
exact solution. The beneﬁt of this approach to identify-
ing a density functional was illustrated by approximating
the kinetic energy functional of an electron distribution
in a 1D potential well (Snyder et al., 2012). For use in
standard Kohn-Sham based DFT codes, the derivative of