28
V. QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum computing uses quantum systems to process
information. In the most popular framework of gate-
based quantum computing (Nielsen and Chuang, 2002),
a quantum algorithm describes the evolution of an initial
statej 0iof a quantum system of ntwo-level systems
calledqubitsto a ﬁnal statej fithrough discrete trans-
formations or quantum gates . The gates usually act only
on a small number of qubits, and the sequence of gates
deﬁnes the computation.
The intersection of machine learning and quantum
computing has become an active research area in the
last couple of years, and contains a variety of ways to
merge the two disciplines (see also (Dunjko and Briegel,
2018)forareview). Quantum machine learning askshow
quantum computers can enhance, speed up or innovate
machine learning (Biamonte et al., 2017; Ciliberto et al.,
2018; Schuld and Petruccione, 2018a) (see also Sections
VII and V). Quantum learning theory highlights theo-
retical aspects of learning under a quantum framework
(Arunachalam and de Wolf, 2017).
In this Section we are concerned with a third angle,
namely how machine learning can help us to build and
study quantum computers. This angle includes topics
ranging from the use of intelligent data mining methods
to ﬁnd physical regimes in materials that can be used as
qubits (Kalantre et al., 2019), to the veriﬁcation of quan-
tum devices (Agresti et al., 2019), learning the design of
quantum algorithms (Bang et al., 2014; Wecker et al.,
2016), facilitating classical simulations of quantum cir-
cuits (Jónsson et al., 2018), automated design on quan-
tum experiments (Krenn et al., 2016; Melnikov et al.,
2018), and learning to extract relevant information from
measurements (Seif et al., 2018).
We focus on three general problems related to quan-
tum computing which were targeted by a range of ML
methods: the problem of reconstructing en benchmark-
ing quantum states via measurements; the problem of
preparing a quantum state via quantum control ; the
problem of maintaining the information stored in the
state through quantum error correction . The ﬁrst prob-
lem is known as quantum state tomography, and it is es-
pecially useful to understand and improve upon the lim-
itations of current quantum hardware. Quantum control
and quantum error corrections solve related problems,
however usually the former refers to hardware-related so-
lutions while the latter uses algorithmic solutions to the
problem of executing a computational protocol with a
quantum system.
Similar to the other disciplines in this review, machine
learning has shown promising results in all these areas,
and will in the longer run likely enter the toolbox of
quantum computing to be used side-by-side with other
well-established methods.A. Quantum state tomography
The general goal of quantum state tomography (QST)
is to reconstruct the density matrix of an unknown quan-
tum state, through experimentally available measure-
ments. QST is a central tool in several ﬁelds of quantum
information and quantum technologies in general, where
it is often used as a way to assess the quality and the
limitations of the experimental platforms. The resources
needed to perform full QST are however extremely de-
manding, and the number of required measurements
scales exponentially with the number of qubits/quantum
degrees of freedom [see (Paris and Rehacek, 2004) for a
review on the topic, and (Haah et al., 2017; O’Donnell
and Wright, 2016) for a discussion on the hardness of
learning in state tomography].
ML tools have been identiﬁed already several years ago
as a tool to improve upon the cost of full QST, exploit-
ing some special structure in the density matrix. Com-
pressed sensing (Gross et al., 2010) is one prominent ap-
proach to the problem, allowing to reduce the number
of required measurements from d2toO(rdlog(d)2), for
a density matrix of rank rand dimension d. Success-
ful experimental realization of this technique has been
for example implemented for a six-photon state (Tóth
et al., 2010) or a seven-qubit system of trapped ions (Ri-
ofríoet al., 2017). On the methodology side, full QST
has more recently seen the development of deep learning
approaches. For example, using a supervised approach
based on neural networks having as an output the full
density matrix, and as an input possible measurement
outcomes (Xu and Xu, 2018). The problem of choosing
optimal measurement basis for QST has also been re-
cently addressed using a neural-network based approach
that optimizes the prior distribution on the target den-
sity matrix, using Bayes rule (Quek et al., 2018). In
general, while ML approaches to full QST can serve as
a viable tool to alleviate the measurement requirements,
they cannot however provide an improvement over the
intrinsic exponential scaling of QST.
Theexponentialbarriercanbetypicallyovercomeonly
in situations when the quantum state is assumed to have
some speciﬁc regularity properties. Tomography based
on tensor-network paremeterizations of the density ma-
trix has been an important ﬁrst step in this direction,
allowing for tomography of large, low-entangled quan-
tum systems (Lanyon et al., 2017). ML approaches
to parameterization-based QST have emerged in recent
times as a viable alternative, especially for highly entan-
gled states. Speciﬁcally, assuming a NQS form (see Eq.
3 in the case of pure states) QST can be reformulated
as an unsupervised ML learning task. A scheme to re-
trieve the phase of the wave-function, in the case of pure
states, has been demonstrated in (Torlai et al., 2018). In
these applications, the complex phase of the many-body
wave-function is retrieved upon reconstruction of several
probability densities associated to the measurement pro-
cess in diﬀerent basis. Overall, this approach has al-