14
In the 1990s and early 2000s simple feed-forward neu-
ral networks were commonly used for these tasks. Neu-
ral networks were largely displaced by Boosted Decision
Trees (BDTs) as the go-to for classiﬁcation and regres-
sion tasks for more than a decade (Breiman et al., 1984;
Freund and Schapire, 1997; Roe et al., 2005). Starting
around 2014, techniques based on deep learning emerged
and were demonstrated to be signiﬁcantly more powerful
in several applications (for a recent review of the history,
see Refs. (Guest et al., 2018; Radovic et al., 2018)).
Deep learning was ﬁrst used for an event-selection task
targetinghypothesizedparticlesfromtheoriesbeyondthe
standard model. It not only out-performed boosted deci-
sion trees, but also did not require engineered features to
achieve this impressive performance (Baldi et al., 2014).
In this proof-of-concept work, the network was a deep
multi-layer perceptron trained with a very large train-
ing set using a simpliﬁed detector setup. Shortly after,
the idea of a parametrized classiﬁer was introduced in
which the concept of a binary classiﬁer was extended to
a situation where the y= 1signal hypothesis is lifted
to a composite hypothesis that is parameterized continu-
ously, for instance, in terms of the mass of a hypothesized
particle (Baldi et al., 2016b).
1. Jet Physics
The most copious interactions at hadron colliders such
as the LHC produce high energy quarks and gluons in
the ﬁnal state. These quarks and gluons radiate more
quarks and gluons that eventually combine into color-
neutral composite particles due to the phenomena of con-
ﬁnement. The resulting collimated spray of mesons and
baryons that strike the detector is collectively referred to
asajet. Developingausefulcharacterizationofthestruc-
ture of a jet that are theoretically robust and that can be
used to test the predictions of quantum chromodynam-
ics (QCD) has been an active area of particle physics
research for decades. Furthermore, many scenarios for
physics Beyond the Standard Model predict the produc-
tion of particles that decay into two or more jets. If
those unstable particles are produced with a large mo-
mentum, then the resulting jets are boosted such that
the jets overlap into a single fat jet with nontrivial sub-
structure. Classifying these boosted or fat jets from the
much more copiously produced jets from standard model
processes involving quarks and gluons is an area that can
signiﬁcantly improve the physics reach of the LHC. More
generally, identifying the progenitor for a jet is a classiﬁ-
cation task that is often referred to as jet tagging.
Shortly after the ﬁrst applications of deep learning
for event selection, deep convolutional networks were
used for the purpose of jet tagging, where the low-level
detector data lends itself to an image-like representa-
tion (Baldi et al., 2016a; de Oliveira et al., 2016). While
machine learning techniques have been used within par-
ticle physics for decades, the practice has always been re-stricted to input features Xwith a ﬁxed dimensionality.
One challenge in jet physics is that the natural represen-
tation of the data is in terms of particles, and the number
of particles associated to a jet varies. The ﬁrst applica-
tion of a recurrent neural network in particle physics was
in thecontextof ﬂavor tagging(Guest et al., 2016). More
recently, there has been an explosion of research into the
use of diﬀerent network architectures including recurrent
networks operating on sequences, trees, and graphs (see
Ref. (Larkoski et al., 2017) for a recent review for jet
physics). This includes hybrid approaches that leverage
domain knowledge in the design of the architecture. For
example, motivated by techniques in natural language
processing, recursive networks were designed that oper-
ate over tree-structures created from a class of jet clus-
tering algorithms (Louppe et al., 2017a). Similarly, net-
works have been developed motivated by invariance to
permutations on the particles presented to the network
and stability to details of the radiation pattern of parti-
cles, (Komiske et al., 2018b, 2019). Recently, compar-
isons of the diﬀerent approaches for speciﬁc benchmark
problems have been organized (Kasieczka et al., 2019).
In addition to classiﬁcation and regression, machine
learning techniques have been used for density estima-
tion and modeling smooth spectra where an analytical
form is not well motivated and the simulation has sig-
niﬁcant uncertainties (Frate et al., 2017). The work also
allows one to model alternative signal hypotheses with a
diﬀuse prior instead of a speciﬁc concrete physical model.
More abstractly, the Gaussian process in this work is be-
ing used to model the intensity of inhomogeneous Pois-
son point process, which is a scenario that is found in
particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. One in-
teresting aspect of this line of work is that the Gaussian
process kernels can be constructed using compositional
rules that correspond clearly to the causal model physi-
cists intuitively use to describe the observation, which
aids in interpretability (Duvenaud et al., 2013).
2. Neutrino physics
Neutrinos interact very feebly with matter, thus the
experiments require large detector volumes to achieve
appreciable interaction rates. Diﬀerent types of inter-
actions, whether they come from diﬀerent species of neu-
trinos or background cosmic ray processes, leave diﬀerent
patterns of localized energy deposits in the detector vol-
ume. The detector volume is homogeneous, which moti-
vates the use of convolutional neural networks.
The ﬁrst application of a deep convolutional network
in the analysis of data from a particle physics experi-
ment was in the context of the NO A experiment, which
uses scintillating mineral oil. Interactions in NO A lead
to the production of light, which is imaged from two
diﬀerent vantage points. NO A developed a convolu-
tional network that simultaneously processed these two
images (Aurisano et al., 2016). Their network improves