19
Adversarial Networks (GANs) have even been used in the
context of inverse problems where they were used to de-
noise and recover images of galaxies beyond naive decon-
volution limits (Schawinski et al., 2017). Another exam-
ple involves estimating the image of a background object
prior to being gravitationally lensed by a foreground ob-
ject. In this case, describing a physically motivated prior
for the background object is diﬃcult. Recently, recurrent
inferencemachines(PutzkyandWelling,2017)havebeen
introduced as way to implicitly learn a prior for such in-
verse problems, and they have successfully been applied
to strong gravitational lensing (Morningstar et al., 2018,
2019).
A more ambitious approach to inverse problems in-
volves providing detailed probabilistic characterization of
ygivenX. In the frequentist paradigm one would aim to
characterize the likelihood function L(y) =p(X=xjy),
while in a Bayesian formalism one would wish to charac-
terize the posterior p(yjX=x)/p(X=xjy)p(y). The
analogous situation happens for inference of latent vari-
ablesZgivenX. Both particle physics and cosmology
have well-developed approaches to statistical inference
based on detailed modeling of the likelihood, Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Foreman-Mackey et al.,
2013), Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, and variational infer-
ence (Jain et al., 2018; Lang et al., 2016; Regier et al.,
2018). However, all of these approaches require that the
likelihood function is tractable.
1. Likelihood-free Inference
Somewhat surprisingly, the probability density, or like-
lihood,p(X=xjy)that is implicitly deﬁned by the sim-
ulator is often intractable. Symbolically, the probability
density can be written p(Xjy) =R
p(X;Zjy)dZ, whereZ
are the latent variables of the simulation. The latent
space of state-of-the-art simulations is enormous and
highly structured, so this integral cannot be performed
analytically. In simulations of a single collision at the
LHC,Zmayhavehundredsofmillionsofcomponents. In
practice, the simulations are often based on Monte Carlo
techniques and generate samples (X;Z)p(X;Zjy)
from which the density can be estimated. The challenge
is that ifXis high-dimensional it is diﬃcult to accurately
estimate those densities. For example, naive histogram-
based approaches do not scale to high dimensions and
kernel density estimation techniques are only trustwor-
thy to around 5-dimensions. Adding to the challenge is
that the distributions have a large dynamic range, and
the interesting physics often sits in the tails of the distri-
butions.
The intractability of the likelihood implicitly deﬁned
by the simulations is a foundational problem not only
for particle physics and cosmology, but many other areas
of science as well including epidemiology and phyloge-
netics. This has motivated the development of so-called
likelihood-free inference algorithms, which only requirethe ability to generate samples from the simulation in
the forward mode.
One prominent technique, is Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC). In ABC one performs Bayesian in-
ference using MCMC or a rejection sampling approach
in which the likelihood is approximated by the proba-
bilityp((X;x)< ), wherexis the observed data to
be conditioned on, (x0;x)is some distance metric be-
tweenxand the output of the simulator x0, andis
a tolerance parameter. As !0, one recovers exact
Bayesian inference; however, the eﬃciency of the proce-
dure vanishes. One of the challenges for ABC, particu-
larly for high-dimensional x, is the speciﬁcation of the
distance measure (x0;x)that maintains reasonable ac-
ceptance eﬃciency without degrading the quality of the
inference(Beaumont et al.,2002;Marin et al.,2012;Mar-
joramet al., 2003; Sisson and Fan, 2011; Sisson et al.,
2007). Thisapproachtoestimatingthelikelihoodisquite
similar to the traditional practice in particle physics of
using histograms or kernel density estimation to approx-
imate ^p(xjy)p(xjy). In both cases, domain knowledge
is required to identify useful summary in order to reduce
the dimensionality of the data. An interesting exten-
sion of the ABC technique utilizes universal probabilistic
programming. In particular, a technique known as infer-
ence compilation is a sophisticated form of importance
sampling in which a neural network controls the random
number generation in the probabilistic program to bias
the simulation to produce outputs x0closer to the ob-
servedx(Leet al., 2017).
The term ABC is often used synonymously with the
more general term likelihood-free inference; however,
there are a number of other approaches that involve
learning an approximate likelihood or likelihood ratio
that is used as a surrogate for the intractable likelihood
(ratio). For example, neural density estimation with
autoregressive models and normalizing ﬂows (Larochelle
and Murray, 2011; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Rezende
and Mohamed, 2015) have been used for this purpose
and scale to higher dimensional data (Cranmer and
Louppe, 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2018). Alternatively,
training a classiﬁer to discriminate between xp(xjy)
andxp(xjy0)can be used to estimate the likeli-
hood ratio ^r(xjy;y0)p(xjy)=p(xjy0), which can be
used for inference in either the frequentist or Bayesian
paradigm (Brehmer et al., 2018c; Cranmer et al., 2015;
Hermans et al., 2019).
2. Examples in particle physics
Thousands of published results within particle physics,
including the discovery of the Higgs boson, involve statis-
tical inference based on a surrogate likelihood ^p(xjy)con-
structed with density estimation techniques applied to
synthetic datasets generated from the simulation. These
typically are restricted to one- or two-dimensional sum-
mary statistics or no features at all other than the num-