30
Adecodermaps a syndrome to an error sequence, which,
once known, can be corrected by applying the same error
sequence again, and without aﬀecting the logical qubits
that store the actual quantum information. Roughly
stated, the art of quantum error correction is therefore
to predict errors from a syndrome - a task that naturally
ﬁts the framework of machine learning.
In the past few years, various models have been ap-
plied to quantum error correction, ranging from super-
vised to unsupervised and reinforcement learning. The
details of their application became increasingly complex.
One of the ﬁrst proposals deploys a Boltzmann machine
trained by a data set of pairs (error;syndrome ), which
speciﬁes the probability p(error;syndrome ), which can
be used to draw samples from the desired distribution
p(errorjsyndrome )(Torlai and Melko, 2017). This simple
recipe shows a performance for certain kinds of errors
comparable to common benchmarks. The relation be-
tween syndromes and errors can likewise be learned by a
feed-forward neural network (Krastanov and Jiang, 2017;
Maskara et al., 2019; Varsamopoulos et al., 2017). How-
ever, these strategies suﬀer from scalability issues, as the
space of possible decoders explodes and data acquisition
becomes an issue. More recently, neural networks have
beencombinedwiththeconceptofrenormalizationgroup
to address this problem (Varsamopoulos et al., 2018),
and the signiﬁcance of diﬀerent hyper-parameters of the
neural network has been studied (Varsamopoulos et al.,
2019).
Besides scalability, an important problem in quantum
error correction is that the syndrome measurement pro-
cedure could also introduce an error, since it involves ap-
plyingasmallquantumcircuit. Thissettingincreasesthe
problem complexity but is essential for real applications.
Noise in the identiﬁcation of errors can be mitigated by
doing repeated cycles of syndrome measurements. To
consider the additional time dimension, recurrent neu-
ralnetworkarchitectureshavebeenproposed(Baireuther
et al., 2018). Another avenue is to consider decoding as
a reinforcement learning problem (Sweke et al., 2018), in
which an agent can choose consecutive operations acting
on physical qubits (as opposed to logical qubits) to cor-
rect for a syndrome and gets rewarded if the sequence
corrected the error.
While much of machine learning for error correction
focuses on surface codes that represent a logical qubit by
physical qubits according to some set scheme, reinforce-
ment agents can also be set up agnostic of the code (one
could say they learn the code along with the decoding
strategy). This has been done for quantum memories,
a system in which quantum states are supposed to be
stored rather than manipulated (Nautrup et al., 2018),
as well as in a feedback control framework which protects
qubits against decoherence (Fösel et al., 2018). Finally,
beyond traditional reinforcement learning, novel strate-
gies such as projective simulation can be used to combat
noise (Tiersch et al., 2015).
As a summary, machine learning for quantum errorcorrection is a problem with several layers of complexity
that, for realistic applications, requires rather complex
learning frameworks. Nevertheless, it is a very natural
candidate for machine learning, and especially reinforce-
ment learning.
VI. CHEMISTRY AND MATERIALS
Machine learning approaches have been applied to pre-
dict the energies and properties of molecules and solids,
with the popularity of such applications increasing dra-
matically. The quantum nature of atomic interactions
makes energy evaluations computationally expensive, so
ML methods are particularly useful when many such
calculations are required. In recent years, the ever-
expanding applications of ML in chemistry and mate-
rials research include predicting the structures of related
molecules, calculatingenergysurfacesbasedonmolecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, identifying structures that
have desired material properties, and creating machine-
learned density functionals. For these types of problems,
input descriptors must account for diﬀerences in atomic
environments in a compact way. Much of the current
work using ML for atomistic modeling is based on early
work describing the local atomic environment with sym-
metry functions for input into a atom-wise neural net-
work (Behler and Parrinello, 2007), representing atomic
potentials using Gaussian process regression methods
(Bartók et al., 2010), or using sorted interatomic dis-
tances weighted by the nuclear charge (the "Coulomb
matrix") as a molecular descriptor (Rupp et al., 2012).
Continuing development of suitable structural represen-
tations is reviewed by Behler (2016). A discussion of
ML for chemical systems in general, including learning
structure-property relationships, is found in the review
by Butler et al.(2018), with additional focus on data-
enabled theoretical chemistry reviewed by Rupp et al.
(2018). In the sections below, we present recent exam-
ples of ML applications in chemical physics.
A. Energies and forces based on atomic environments
One of the primary uses of ML in chemistry and mate-
rialsresearchis topredict therelative energiesfor aseries
of related systems, most typically to compare diﬀerent
structures of the same atomic composition. These appli-
cations aim to determine the structure(s) most likely to
be observed experimentally or to identify molecules that
may be synthesizable as drug candidates. As examples
of supervised learning, these ML methods employ var-
ious quantum chemistry calculations to label molecular
representations ( X) with corresponding energies ( y)to
generate the training (and test) data sets fX;ygn
=1.
For quantum chemistry applications, NN methods have
had great success in predicting the relative energies of a
wide range of systems, including constitutional isomers