13
functiony(Z),thenlabeledtrainingdata fX;y(Z)gn
=1
can also be created from the simulation. The use of high-
ﬁdelity simulations to generate labeled training data has
not only been the key to early successes of supervised
learning in these areas, but also the focus of research
addressing the shortcomings of this approach.
Particle physicists have developed a suite of high-
ﬁdelity simulations that are hierarchically composed to
describe interactions across a huge range of length scales.
The components of these simulations include Feynman
diagrammatic perturbative expansion of quantum ﬁeld
theory, phenomenological models for complex patterns
of radiation, and detailed models for interaction of par-
ticles with matter in the detector. While the resulting
simulation has high ﬁdelity, the simulation itself has free
parameters to be tuned and number of residual uncer-
tainties in the simulation must be taken into account in
down-stream analysis tasks.
Similarly, cosmologists can simulate the evolution of
the universe at diﬀerent length scales using general rel-
ativity and relevant non-gravitational eﬀects of matter
and radiation that becomes increasingly important dur-
ing structure formation. There is a rich array of approxi-
mationsthatcanbemadeinspeciﬁcsettingsthatprovide
enormous speedups compared to the computationally ex-
pensiveN-body simulations of billions of massive objects
that interact gravitationally, which become prohibitively
expensive once non-gravitational feedback eﬀects are in-
cluded.
Cosmological simulations generally involve determin-
istic evolution of stochastic initial conditions due to pri-
mordial quantum ﬂuctuations. The N-body simulations
are very expensive, so there are relatively few simula-
tions, but they cover a large space-time volume that is
statistically isotropic and homogeneous at large scales.
In contrast, particle physics simulations are stochastic
throughout from the initial high-energy scattering to the
low-energy interactions in the detector. Simulations for
high-energy collider experiments can run on commodity
hardware in a parallel manner, but the physics goals re-
quires enormous numbers of simulated collisions.
Because of the critical role of the simulation in these
ﬁelds, much of the recent research in machine learning is
related to simulation in one way or another. These goals
of these recent works are to:
develop techniques that are more data eﬃcient by
incorporating domain knowledge directly into the
machine learning models;
incorporate the uncertainties in the simulation into
the training procedure;
develop weakly supervised procedures that can be
applied to real data and do not rely on the simula-
tion;
develop anomaly detection algorithms to ﬁnd
anomalous features in the data without simulation
of a speciﬁc signal hypothesis;improve the tuning of the simulation, reweight or
adjust the simulated data to better match the real
data, or use machine learning to model residuals
between the simulation and the real data;
learn fast neural network surrogates for the simula-
tion that can be used to quickly generate synthetic
data;
develop approximate inference techniques that
make eﬃciently use of the simulation; and
learn fast neural network surrogates that can be
used directly for statistical inference.
B. Classiﬁcation and regression in particle physics
Machine learning techniques have been used for
decades in experimental particle physics to aid particle
identiﬁcation and event selection, which can be seen as
classiﬁcation tasks. Machine learning has also been used
for reconstruction, which can be seen as a regression
task. Supervised learning is used to train a predictive
model based on large number of labeled training samples
fX;ygn
=1, whereXdenotes the input data and ythe
target label. In the case of particle identiﬁcation, the in-
put features Xcharacterize localized energy deposits in
the detector and the label yrefers to one of a few particle
species (e.g. electron, photon, pion, etc.). In the recon-
struction task, the same type of sensor data Xare used,
but the target label yrefers to the energy or momen-
tum of the particle responsible for those energy deposits.
These algorithms are applied to the bulk data processing
of the LHC data.
Event selection, refers to the task of selecting a small
subset of the collisions that are most relevant for a tar-
geted analysis task. For instance, in the search for the
Higgs boson, supersymmetry, and dark matter data an-
alysts must select a small subset of the LHC data that
is consistent with the features of these hypothetical "sig-
nal" processes. Typically these event selection require-
ments are also satisﬁed by so-called "background" pro-
cesses that mimic the features of the signal either due
to experimental limitations or fundamental quantum me-
chanical eﬀects. Searches in their simplest form reduce to
comparing the number of events in the data that satisfy
these requirements to the predictions of a background-
only null hypothesis and signal-plus-background alter-
nate hypothesis. Thus, the more eﬀective the event selec-
tion requirements are at rejecting background processes
and accept signal processes, the more powerful the re-
sulting statistical analysis will be. Within high-energy
physics, machine learning classiﬁcation techniques have
traditionally been referred to as multivariate analysis to
emphasize the contrast to traditional techniques based
on simple thresholding (or “cuts”) applied to carefully se-
lected or engineered features.