12
ﬂow defects, and (Schoenholz et al., 2017) argues to iden-
tify a parameter that captures the history dependence of
the disordered system.
In an ongoing eﬀort to go beyond the limitations of
supervised learning to classify phases and identify phase
transitions, several direction towards unsupervised learn-
ing are begin explored. For instance, in (Wetzel, 2017)
for the Ising and XY model, in (Wang and Zhai, 2017,
2018) for frustrated spin systems. The work of (Mar-
tinianiet al., 2019) explores the direction of identifying
phases from simple compression of the underlying conﬁg-
urations.
Machine learning also provides exciting set of tools to
study, predict and control non-linear dynamical systems.
For instance (Pathak et al., 2018, 2017) used recurrent
neural networks called an echo state networks or reser-
voir computers (Jaeger and Haas, 2004) to predict the
trajectories of a chaotic dynamical system and of mod-
els used for weather prediction. The authors of (Reddy
et al., 2016, 2018) used reinforcement learning to teach
an autonomous glider to literally soar like a bird, using
thermals in the atmosphere.
F. Outlook and Challenges
The described methods of statistical physics are quite
powerful in dealing with high-dimensional data sets and
models. The largest diﬀerence between traditional learn-
ing theories and the theories coming from statistical
physics is that the later are often based on toy genera-
tive models of data. This leads to solvable models in the
sense that quantities of interest such as achievable errors
can be computed in a closed form, including constant
terms. This is in contrast with aims in the mainstream
learning theory that aims to provide worst case bounds
on error under general assumptions on the setting (data
structure, or architecture). These two approaches are
complementary and ideally will meet in the future once
we understand what are the key conditions under which
practical cases are close to worse cases, and what are the
right models of realistic data and functions.
The next challenge for the statistical physics approach
is to formulate and solve models that are in some kind of
universality class of the real settings of interest. Mean-
ing that they reproduce all important aspects of the be-
haviour that is observed in practical application of neural
networks. For this we need to model the input data no
longer as iid vectors, but for instance as outputs from
a generative neural network as in (Gabrié et al., 2018),
or as perceptual manifolds as in (Chung et al., 2018).
The teacher network that is producing the labels (in an
supervised setting) needs to model suitably the correla-
tion between the structure in the data and the label. We
need to ﬁnd out how to analyze the (stochastic) gradient
descent algorithm and its relevant variants. Promising
works in this direction, that rely of the dynamic mean-
ﬁeld theory of glasses are (Mannelli et al., 2018, 2019).We need to generalize the existing methodology to multi-
layer networks with extensive width of hidden layers.
Going back to the direction of using machine learning
for physics, the full potential of ML in research of non-
linear dynamical systems and statistical physics is yet
to be uncovered. The above mentioned works certainly
provide an exciting appetizer.
III. PARTICLE PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY
A diverse portfolio of on-going and planned experi-
ments is well poised to explore the universe from the
unimaginably small world of fundamental particles to the
awe inspiring scale of the universe. Experiments like the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST) deliver enormous amounts of
data to be compared to the predictions of speciﬁc the-
oretical models. Both areas have well established phys-
ical models that serve as null hypotheses: the standard
model of particle physics and CDM cosmology, which
includes cold dark matter and a cosmological constant .
Interestingly, most alternate hypotheses considered are
formulated in the same theoretical frameworks, namely
quantum ﬁeld theory and general relativity. Despite such
sharp theoretical tools, the challenge is still daunting as
the expected deviations from the null are expected to be
incrediblytinyandrevealingsuchsubtleeﬀectsrequiresa
robust treatment of complex experimental apparatuses.
Complicating the statistical inference is that the most
high-ﬁdelity predictions for the data do not come in the
from simple closed-form equations, but instead in com-
plex computer simulations.
Machine learning is making waves in particle physics
and cosmology as it oﬀers a suit of techniques to confront
these challenges and a new perspective that motivates
bold new strategies. The excitement spans the theoreti-
cal and experimental aspects of these ﬁelds and includes
both applications with immediate impact as well as the
prospect of more transformational changes in the longer
term.
A. The role of the simulation
An important aspect of the use of machine learning
in particle physics and cosmology is the use of computer
simulations to generate samples of labeled training data
fX;ygn
=1. For example, when the target yrefers to
a particle type, particular scattering process, or parame-
ter appearing in the fundamental theory, it can often be
speciﬁed directly in the simulation code so that the sim-
ulation directly samples Xp(jy). In other cases, the
simulation is not directly conditioned on y, but provides
samples (X;Z)p(), whereZare latent variables that
describe what happened inside the simulation, but which
are not observable in an actual experiment. If the target
label can be computed from these latent variables via a