24
full state, in NQS form, using such measurements. In the
simplest setting, one is given a data set of Mmeasure-
ments r(1):::r(M)distributed according to Born’s rule
prescription P(r) =j(r)j2, whereP(r)is to be recon-
structed. In cases when the wave-function is positive def-
inite, or when only measurements in a certain basis are
provided, reconstructing P(r)with standard unsuper-
vised learning approaches is enough to reconstruct all the
availableinformationontheunderlyingquantumstate .
This approach for example has been demonstrated for
ground-states of stoquastic Hamiltonians (Torlai et al.,
2018) using RBM-based generative models. An approach
based on deep VAE generative models has also been
demonstrated in the case of a family of classically-hard
to sample from quantum states (Rocchetto et al., 2018),
for which the eﬀect of network depth has been shown to
be beneﬁcial for compression.
In the more general setting, the problem is to recon-
struct a general quantum state, either pure or mixed,
using measurements from more than a single basis of
quantum numbers. Those are especially necessary to re-
construct also the complex phases of the quantum state.
This problem corresponds to a well-known problem in
quantum information, known as quantum state tomog-
raphy, for which speciﬁc NQS approaches have been in-
troduced (Carrasquilla et al., 2019; Torlai et al., 2018;
Torlai and Melko, 2018). Those are discussed more in
detail, in the dedicated section V.A, also in connection
with other ML techniques used for this task.
3. Variational Learning
Finally, one of the main applications for the NQS
representations is in the context of variational approx-
imations for many-body quantum problems. The goal
of these approaches is, for example, to approximately
solve the Schrödinger equation using a NQS represen-
tation for the wave-function. In this case, the problem
of ﬁnding the ground state of a given quantum Hamilto-
nianHis formulated in variational terms as the prob-
lem of learning NQS weights Wminimizing E(W) =
h	(W)jHj	(W)i=h	(W)j	(W)i. This is achieved using
a learning scheme based on variational Monte Carlo opti-
mization(CarleoandTroyer,2017). Withinthisfamilyof
applications, no external data representative of the quan-
tum state is given, thus they typically demand a larger
computational burden than supervised and unsupervised
learning schemes for NQS.
Experiments on a variety of spin (Choo et al., 2018;
Denget al., 2017a; Glasser et al., 2018a; Liang et al.,
2018), bosonic(Choo et al.,2018;Saito,2017,2018;Saito
and Kato, 2017), and fermionic (Han et al., 2018a; Luo
and Clark,2018; Nomura et al., 2017)models have shown
that results competitive with existing state-of-the-art ap-
proaches can be obtained. In some cases, improvement
over existing variational results have been demonstrated,
most notably for two-dimensional lattice models (Carleoand Troyer, 2017; Luo and Clark, 2018; Nomura et al.,
2017) and for topological phases of matter (Glasser et al.,
2018a; Kaubruegger et al., 2018).
Other NQS applications concern the solution of
the time-dependent Schrödinger equation (Carleo and
Troyer, 2017; Czischek et al., 2018; Fabiani and Mentink,
2019; Schmitt and Heyl, 2018). In these applications, one
uses the time-dependent variational principle of Dirac
andFrenkel(Dirac,1930;Frenkel,1934)tolearntheopti-
mal time evolution of network weights. This can be suit-
ably generalized also to open dissipative quantum sys-
tems, for which a variational solution of the Lindblad
equation can be realized (Hartmann and Carleo, 2019;
Nagy and Savona, 2019; Vicentini et al., 2019; Yoshioka
and Hamazaki, 2019).
In the great majority of the variational applications
discussed here, the learning schemes used are typically
higher-order techniques than standard SGD approaches.
Thestochasticreconﬁguration(SR)approach(Beccaand
Sorella, 2017; Sorella, 1998) and its generalization to the
time-dependent case (Carleo et al., 2012), have proven
particularly suitable to variational learning of NQS. The
SR scheme can be seen as a quantum analogous of the
natural-gradient method for learning probability distri-
butions (Amari, 1998), and builds on the intrinsic geome-
tryassociatedwiththeneural-networkparameters. More
recently, in an eﬀort to use deeper and more expressive
networks than those initially adopted, learning schemes
building on ﬁrst-order techniques have been more con-
sistently used (Kochkov and Clark, 2018; Sharir et al.,
2019). These constitute two diﬀerent philosophy of ap-
proaching the same problem. On one hand, early appli-
cations focused on small networks learned with very ac-
curate but expensive training techniques. On the other
hand, later approaches have focused on deeper networks
and cheaper –but also less accurate– learning techniques.
Combining the two philosophy in a computationally eﬃ-
cient way is one of the open challenges in the ﬁeld.
B. Speed up many-body simulations
The use of ML methods in the realm of the quan-
tum many-body problems extends well beyond neural-
network representation of quantum states. A power-
ful technique to study interacting models are Quan-
tum Monte Carlo (QMC) approaches. These methods
stochastically compute properties of quantum systems
through mapping to an eﬀective classical model, for ex-
ample by means of the path-integral representation. A
practicalissueoftenresultingfromthesemappingsisthat
providing eﬃcient sampling schemes of high-dimensional
spaces (path integrals, perturbation series, etc..) re-
quires a careful tuning, often problem-dependent. Devis-
ing general-purpose samplers for these representations is
therefore a particularly challenging problem. Unsuper-
vised ML methods can, however, be adopted as a tool
to speed-up Monte Carlo sampling for both classical and