31
andnon-equilibriumconﬁgurationsofmolecules,byusing
many-body symmetry functions that describe the local
atomic neighborhood of each atom (Behler, 2016). Many
successes in this area have been derived from this type of
atom-wise decomposition of the molecular energy, with
each element represented using a separate NN (Behler
and Parrinello, 2007) (see Fig. 6(a)). For example, ANI-
1isadeepNNpotentialsuccessfullytrainedtoreturnthe
density functional theory (DFT) energies of any molecule
with up to 8 heavy atoms (H, C, N, O) (Smith et al.,
2017). In this work, atomic coordinates for the training
set were selected using normal mode sampling to include
some vibrational perturbations along with optimized ge-
ometries. Another example of a general NN for molec-
ular and atomic systems is the Deep Potential Molec-
ular Dynamics (DPMD) method speciﬁcally created to
run MD simulations after being trained on energies from
bulk simulations (Zhang et al., 2018a). Rather than sim-
ply include non-local interactions via the total energy of
a system, another approach was inspired by the many-
body expansion used in standard computational physics.
In this case adding layers to allow interactions between
atom-centered NNs improved the molecular energy pre-
dictions (Lubbers et al., 2018).
The examples above use translation- and rotation-
invariant representations of the atomic environments,
thanks to the incorporation of symmetry functions in
the NN input. For some applications, such as describ-
ing molecular reactions and materials phase transfor-
mations, atomic representations must also be continu-
ous and diﬀerentiable. The smooth overlap of atomic
positions (SOAP) kernels address all of these require-
ments by including a similarity metric between atomic
environments (Bartók et al., 2013). Recent work to pre-
serve symmetries in alternate molecular representations
addresses this problem in diﬀerent ways. To capitalize on
known molecular symmetries for "Coulomb matrix" in-
puts, both bonding (rigid) and dynamic symmetries have
been incorporated to improve the coverage of training
data in the conﬁgurational space (Chmiela et al., 2018).
This work also includes forces in the training, allowing
for MD simulations at the level of coupled cluster calcu-
lations for small molecules, which would traditionally be
intractable. Molecular symmetries can also be learned,
as shown in determining local environment descriptors
that make use of continuous-ﬁlter convolutions to de-
scribe atomic interactions (Schütt et al., 2018). Further
development of atom environment descriptors that are
compact, unique, and diﬀerentiable will certainly facili-
tate new uses for ML models in the study of molecules
and materials.
However, machine learning has also been applied in
ways that are more closely integrated with conventional
approaches, so as to be more easily incorporated in exist-
ing codes. For example, atomic charge assignments com-
patible with classical force ﬁelds can be learned, without
the need to run a new quantum mechanical calculation
for each new molecule of interest (Sifain et al., 2018).In addition, condensed phase simulations for molecular
species require accurate intra- and intermolecular poten-
tials, which can be diﬃcult to parameterize. To this end,
local NN potentials can be combined with physically-
motivated long-range Coulomb and van der Waals contri-
butions to describe larger molecular systems (Yao et al.,
2018). Local ML descriptions can also be successfully
combined with many-body expansion methods to allow
applicationofMLpotentialstolargersystems, asdemon-
strated for water clusters (Nguyen et al., 2018). Alterna-
tively, intermolecular interactions can be ﬁtted to a set of
ML models trained on monomers to create a transferable
model for dimers and clusters (Bereau et al., 2018).
B. Potential and free energy surfaces
Machine learning methods are also employed to de-
scribe free energy surfaces. Rather than learning the po-
tential energy of each molecular conformation directly as
described above, an alternate approach is to learn the
free energy surface of a system as a function of collective
variables, such as global Steinhardt order parameters or
a local dihedral angle for a set of atoms. A compact
ML representation of a free energy surface (FES) using
a NN allows improved sampling of the high dimensional
space when calculating observables that depend on an
ensemble of conformers. For example, a learned FES can
be sampled to predict the isothermal compressibility of
solid xenon under pressure, or the expected NMR spin-
spin J couplings of a peptide (Schneider et al., 2017).
Small NN’s representing a FES can also be trained itera-
tively using data points generated by on-the-ﬂy adaptive
sampling (Sidky and Whitmer, 2018). This promising
approach highlights the beneﬁt of using a smooth repre-
sentation of the full conﬁgurational space when using the
ML models themselves to generate new training data.
As the use of machine-learned FES representations in-
creases, it will be important to determine the limit of
accuracy for small NN’s and how to use these models as
a starting point for larger networks or other ML archi-
tectures.
Once the relevant minima have been identiﬁed on a
FES, the next challenge is to understand the processes
that take a system from one basin to another. For ex-
ample, developing a Markov state model to describe con-
formational changes requires dimensionality reduction to
translate molecular coordinates into the global reaction
coordinate space. To this end, the power of deep learn-
ing with time-lagged autoencoder methods has been har-
nessed to identify slowly changing collective variables in
peptide folding examples (Wehmeyer and Noé, 2018). A
variational NN-based approach has also been used to
identify important kinetic processes during protein fold-
ing simulations and provides a framework for unifying
coordinate transformations and FES surface exploration
(Mardtet al., 2018). A promising alternate approach
is to use ML to sample conformational distributions di-