6
in this case only between visible and hidden units and are
again adjusted in order for the likelihood of the observed
data to be large. Given the appealing interpretation in
terms of physical models, applications of BMs and RBMs
are widespread in several physics domains, as discussed
e.g. in section IV.A.
A very neat idea to perform unsupervised learning yet
being able to use all the methods and algorithms devel-
oped for supervised learning are auto-encoders . An au-
toencoder is a feed-forward neural network that has the
input data on the input, but also on the output. It aims
to reproduce the data while typically going trough a bot-
tleneck, in the sense that some of the intermediate layers
have very small width compared to the dimensionality
of the data. The idea is then that autoencoder is aim-
ing to ﬁnd a succinct representation of the data that still
keeps the salient features of each of the samples. Varia-
tional autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014) combine variational inference and
autoencoders to provide a deep generative model for the
data, which can be trained in an unsupervised fashion.
A further approach to unsupervised learning worth
mentioning here, are adversarial generative networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). GANs have attracted
substantial attentions in the past years, and constitute
another fruitful way to take advantage of the progresses
made for supervised learning to do unsupervised one.
GANs typical use two feed-forward neural networks, one
called the generator and another called the discrimina-
tor. The generator network is used to generate outputs
from random inputs, and is designed so that the out-
puts look like the observed samples. The discriminator
network is used to discriminate between true data sam-
ples and samples generated by the generator network.
The discriminator is aiming at best possible accuracy in
this classiﬁcation task, whereas the generator network is
adjusted to make the accuracy of the discriminator the
smallest possible. GANs currently are the state-of-the
art system for many applications in image processing.
Other interesting methods to model distributions in-
cludenormalizing ﬂows andautoregressive models with
the advantage of having tractable likelihood so that they
can be trained via maximum likelihood (Larochelle and
Murray, 2011; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Uria et al.,
2016).
Hybrids between supervised learning and unsupervised
learning that are important in application include semi-
supervised learning where only some labels are available,
oractive learning where labels can be acquired for a se-
lected set of data points at a certain cost.
3. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto, 2018) is an
area of machine learning where an (artiﬁcial) agent takes
actions in an environment with the goal of maximizing
a reward. The action changes the state of the environ-ment in some way and the agent typically observes some
information about the state of the environment and the
corresponding reward. Based on those observations the
agentdecidesonthenextaction, reﬁningthestrategiesof
which action to choose in order to maximize the result-
ing reward. This type of learning is designed for cases
where the only way to learn about the properties of the
environment is to interact with it. A key concept in rein-
forcement learning it the trade-oﬀ between exploitation
of good strategies found so far, and exploration in order
to ﬁnd yet better strategies. We should also note that
reinforcement learning is intimately related to the ﬁeld
of theory of control, especially optimal control theory .
One of the main types of reinforcement learning ap-
plied in many works is the so-called Q-learning . Q-
learning is based on a value matrix Qthat assigns quality
ofagivenactionwhentheenvironmentisinagivenstate.
This value function Qis then iteratively reﬁned. In re-
cent advanced applications of Q-learning the set of states
and action is so large that it is impossible to even store
the whole matrix Q. In those cases deep feed-forward
neural networks are used to represent the function in a
succinct manner. This gives rise to deep Q-learning .
Most well-known recent examples of the success of re-
inforcement learning is the computer program AlphaGo
and AlphaGo Zero that for a ﬁrst time in history reached
super-human performance in the traditional board game
of Go. Another well known use of reinforcement learning
is locomotion of robots.
II. STATISTICAL PHYSICS
A. Historical note
While machine learning as a wide-spread tool for
physics research is a relatively new phenomenon, cross-
fertilization between the two disciplines dates back much
further. Especially statistical physicists made important
contributions to our theoretical understanding of learn-
ing (as the term “statistical” unmistakably suggests).
The connection between statistical mechanics and
learning theory started when statistical learning from ex-
amples took over the logic and rule based AI, in the mid
1980s. Two seminal papers marked this transformation,
Valiant’s theory of the learnable (Valiant, 1984), which
opened the way for rigorous statistical learning in AI,
and Hopﬁeld’s neural network model of associative mem-
ory (Hopﬁeld, 1982), which sparked the rich application
of concepts from spin glass theory to neural networks
models. This was marked by the memory capacity cal-
culation of the Hopﬁeld model by Amit, Gutfreund, and
Sompolinsky (Amit et al., 1985) and following works. A
much tighter application to learning models was made
by the seminal work of Elizabeth Gardner who applied
the replica trick (Gardner, 1987, 1988) to calculate vol-
umes in the weights space for simple feed-forward neural
networks, for both supervised and unsupervised learning