15
the eﬃciency (true positive rate) of selecting electron
neutrinos by 40% for the same purity. This network has
been used in searches for the appearance of electron neu-
trinos and for the hypothetical sterile neutrino.
Similarly, the MicroBooNE experiment detects neutri-
noscreatedatFermilab. Ituses170tonliquid-argontime
projection chamber. Charged particles ionize the liquid
argon and the ionization electrons drift through the vol-
ume to three wire planes. The resulting data is processed
and represented by a 33-megapixel image, which is domi-
nantly populated with noise and only very sparsely popu-
lated with legitimate energy deposits. The MicroBooNE
collaboration used a FasterRCNN (Ren et al., 2015) to
identify and localize neutrino interactions with bounding
boxes (Acciarri et al., 2017). This success is important
for future neutrino experiments based on liquid-argon
timeprojectionchambers, suchastheDeepUnderground
Neutrino Experiment (DUNE).
In addition to the relatively low energy neutrinos pro-
duced at accelerator facilities, machine learning has also
been used to study high-energy neutrinos with the Ice-
Cube observatory located at the south pole. In partic-
ular, 3D convolutional and graph neural networks have
beenappliedtoasignalclassiﬁcationproblem. Inthelat-
ter approach, the detector array is modeled as a graph,
where vertices are sensors and edges are a learned func-
tion of the sensors’ spatial coordinates. The graph neu-
ral network was found to outperform both a traditional-
physics-based method as well as classical 3D convolu-
tional neural network (Choma et al., 2018).
3. Robustness to systematic uncertainties
Experimental particle physicists are keenly aware that
the simulation, while incredibly accurate, is not perfect.
As a result, the community has developed a number of
strategies falling roughly in two broad classes. The ﬁrst
involves incorporating the eﬀect of mis-modeling when
the simulation is used for training. This involves either
propagating the underlying sources of uncertainty (e. g.
calibrations, detectorresponse, thequarkandgluoncom-
position of the proton, and the impact of higher-order
corrections from perturbation theory, etc.) through the
simulation and analysis chain. For each of these sources
of uncertainty, a nuisance parameter is included, and
the resulting statistical model p(Xjy;)is parameterized
by these nuisance parameters. In addition, the likeli-
hood function for the data is augmented with a term p()
representing the uncertainty in these sources of uncer-
tainty, as in the case of a penalized maximum likelihood
analysis. In the context of machine learning, classiﬁers
and regressors are typically trained using data generated
from a nominal simulation =0, yielding a predictive
modelf(Xj0). Treating this predictive model as ﬁxed,
it is possible to propagate the uncertainty in through
f(Xj0)using the model p(Xjy;)p(). However, the
down-stream statistical analysis based on this approachis not optimal since the predictive model was not trained
taking into account the uncertainty on .
In machine learning literature, this situation is often
referred to as covariate shift between two domains rep-
resented by the training distribution 0and the target
distribution . Various techniques for domain adap-
tation exist to train classiﬁers that are robust to this
change, but they tend to be restricted to binary do-
mains2ftrain;targetg. To address this problem, an
adversarial training technique was developed that ex-
tends domain adaptation to domains parametrized by
2Rq(Louppe et al., 2016). The adversarial ap-
proach encourages the network to learn a pivotalquan-
tity, where p(f(X)jy;)is independent of , or equiv-
alentlyp(f(X);jy) =p(f(X)jy)p(). This adversarial
approach has also been used in the context of algorithmic
fairness, where one desires to train a classiﬁers or regres-
sor that is independent of (or decorrelated with) spe-
ciﬁc continuous attributes or observable quantities. For
instance, in jet physics one often would like a jet tag-
ger that is independent of the jet invariant mass (Shim-
minet al., 2017). Previously, a diﬀerent algorithm called
uboostwasdevelopedtoachievesimilargoalsforboosted
decision trees (Rogozhnikov et al., 2015; Stevens and
Williams, 2013).
The second general strategy used within particle
physics to cope with systematic mis-modeling in the sim-
ulation is to avoid using the simulation for modeling the
distribution p(Xjy). In what follows, let Rdenote an
index over various subsets of the data satisfying cor-
responding selection requirements. Various data-driven
strategies have been developed to relate distributions of
the data in control regions, p(Xjy;R = 0), to distribu-
tions in regions of interest, p(Xjy;R = 1). These rela-
tionships also involve the simulation, but the art of this
approach is to base those relationships on aspects of the
simulation that are considered robust. The simplest ex-
ample is estimating the distribution p(Xjy;R = 1)for
a speciﬁc process yby identifying a subset of the data
R= 0that is dominated by yandp(yjR= 0)1. This
is an extreme situation that is limited in applicability.
Recently, weakly supervised techniques have been
developed that only involve identifying regions where
only the class proportions are known or assuming that
the relative probabilities p(yjR)are not linearly depen-
dent (Komiske et al., 2018a; Metodiev et al., 2017) . The
techniques also assume that the distributions p(Xjy;R)
are independent of R, which is reasonable in some con-
texts and questionable in others. The approach has been
usedtotrainjettaggersthatdiscriminatebetweenquarks
and gluons, which is an area where the ﬁdelity of the
simulation is no longer adequate and the assumptions
for this method are reasonable. This weakly-supervised,
data-drivenapproachisamajordevelopmentformachine
learning for particle physics, though it is limited to a sub-
set of problems. For example, this approach is not ap-
plicable if one of the target categories ycorresponds to a
hypothetical particle that may not exist or be present in