1728 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
are uniformly sampled from replay memory, DQN
obviously fails to fully consider the importance of
each sample. An improvement on the experience re-play mechanism, DDQN (Schaul et al., 2016), tackles
the problem by calculating the priority of each sam-
ple in the experience pool and increasing the proba-
bility of valuable training samples.
Limited by conventional architectures (e.g.,
convolutional networks, long short time memories
(LSTMs), or auto-encoders), the DQN algorithm ex-
hibits some other shortcomings, such as the lack
of long-term memory capabilities. Hausknechtand Stone (2017) investigated the eﬀects of adding
recurrency to DQN by replacing the ﬁrst post-
convolutional fully conn ected layer with a recurrent
LSTM. Wang ZY et al. (2016) expanded DQN based
on a dueling architecture, which helps generalize
across actions by separately representing state val-
ues and action advantages.
The multi-step bootstrap targets (Sutton, 1988;
Sutton and Barto, 2018) used in asynchronous ad-
vantage actor-critic (A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) shift
the bias-variance tradeoﬀ and help propagate newlyobserved rewards faster to earlier visited states.
Noisy DQN (Fortunato et al., 2019) uses stochas-
tic network layers for exploration. Distributional Q-
learning (Bellemare et al., 2017) learns a categorical
distribution of discounted returns instead of estimat-ing the mean.
Since the aforementioned independent improve-
ments of DQN are based on a shared framework,
Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018) could combine themplausibly. Experimental results show that the combi-
nation provides state-of-the-art performance on the
Atari 2600 benchmark in terms of data eﬃciency and
ﬁnal performance.
From research on Rainbow, identifying priorities
is the most important for the agent’s performance.
However, Schaul et al. (2016) used only a single actor
to collect data, which is in eﬃcient. Ape-X (Horgan
et al., 2018) leverages a distributed architecture fordeep RL at scale, and uses hundreds of actors to col-
lect data and obtain a large number of replay buﬀers
with diﬀerent priority levels through various actors.
The experiment shows that the performance of Ape-
X is almost doubled in a shorter training time than
Rainbow. Besides, it reveals that distributed com-
puting is becoming one of the most important partsin deep RL.2.2 RL based on policy gradient
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) is the prototype
of policy gradient (PG) algorithms. Compared with
value-based RL, policy-based RL not only avoids
the policy degradation caused by the value func-
tion error, but also is easier to apply in the con-tinuous action space problem. Speciﬁcally, value-
based methods, such as Q-learning and SARSA, re-
quire a one-step operation to calculate the maxi-
mum value, which can hardly be found in the con-
tinuous space or high-dimensional space. In ad-dition, value-based methods learn implicit policies
but policy-based RL methods can learn stochastic
policies. That is, in the value-based method, the
policies obtained through policy improvement are
all deterministic policies, and will encounter someproblems that cannot be resolved in some tasks
like Rock-Paper-Scissors. Policy-based methods also
have some common shortcomings: (1) data eﬃciency
or sample utilization is low; (2) the variance is large,
which makes it diﬃcult to converge.
We introduce the typical improvements from
two aspects: (1) improved framework based on actor-
critic; (2) improved method based on the trust
region.
2.2.1 Improved frameworks based on actor-critic
A classical and eﬀective method to overcome
the common drawbacks of policy-based methods is
the actor-critic algorithm (Sutton and Barto, 2018),which learns a policy and a state-value function.
The state-value function is used for bootstrapping,
i.e., updating a state from subsequent estimates to
reduce variance and accelerate learning. However,
it has been a long-standing hurdle of RL to sta-bly apply the simple but eﬃcient design of actor
critic methods to both continuous and discrete ac-
tion spaces. By extending DQN and DPG (Silver
et al., 2014), a deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) algorithm (Lillicrap et al., 2016) can learncompetitive policies for tasks using low-dimensional
observations (e.g., Cartesian coordinates and joint
angles) that are based on the same hyper param-
eters and network structure. Moreover, the twin
delayed DDPG algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018) is
proposed as a deterministic algorithm which can con-
currently work and has substantial improvement overDDPG.