1738 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
5 Applications
In the early stages of RL development, DQN was
used mainly in various two-dimensional video games
such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2016; Schaul et al.,2016; Hessel et al., 2018; Horgan et al., 2018). With
AlphaGo successfully defeating the world champion
of chess using deep neural networks and MCTS, there
has been increasing interest in RL to improve the per-
formance in dealing with complex tasks in diﬀerent
ﬁelds in recent years.
In the ﬁeld of games, StarCraft II (Vinyals et al.,
2017) oﬀers a challenging multi-agent environment
with multiple players interacting to explore RL al-
gorithms and architectures. Deep meta-RL can also
be leveraged in games to do few-shot learning, such
as by imitating human Atari game play from a sin-
gle recorded action sequence (Pohlen et al., 2018) or
online videos (Aytar et al., 2018).
Deep RL has achieved signiﬁcant success in
various ﬁelds. We outline current representative
RL applications including robotics, natural language
processing (NLP), and computer systems in the
following.
5.1 Robotics
Robotics is a classic area for RL. RL can im-
plement behavioral control of complex robots in the
simulation environment, thus enabling realistic re-sponses to perturbations and environmental varia-
tion. Apart from Atari and simple agents in Mu-
joco (e.g., half-cheetah, ant, and spider), DeepMimic
(Peng et al., 2018a) further develops challenging mul-
tiskilled agents including multiple characters (e.g.,
human, Atlas robot, bipedal dinosaur, and dragon)
and a large variety of skills (e.g., locomotion, acro-batics, and martial arts).
In addition, RL has obtained numerous research
results in robot control tasks in real situations. A
range of real-world tasks are contact-rich and require
close coordination between vision and control, suchas stacking tight-ﬁtting Lego blocks and screwing
bottle caps onto a bottle. The improvements (Levine
et al., 2015) control manipulation to complete these
tasks by reducing the sample count and automating
parameter selection in GPS. An RNN with LSTM
(Rahmatizadeh et al., 2016) helps the controller learn
from virtual demonstrations and successfully per-forms the manipulation tasks on a physical robot.By closed-loop vision-based control (Kalashnikov
et al., 2018), re-grasping strategies are automatically
learned, probing an object and repositioning objectsto ﬁnd the most eﬀective grasps and perform other
non-prehensile pre-grasp manipulations.
However, training data of real robots is scarce
for real scenarios. The method which combines
knowledge from previous tasks with online adapta-
tion of the dynamics model (Fu et al., 2016) helpssolve a variety of complex robotic manipulation tasks
in a single attempt. Multiple robots (Gu SX et al.,
2017a; Yahya et al., 2017) learn collaboratively to
sample and train in parallel. Manipulating the
source domain (Peng et al., 2018b) narrows the gapbetween simulation and real physical systems. Al-
Nima et al. (2019) produced suitable road tracking
actions based on RL by collecting input states from
forward car facing views.
Based on transfer learning (Devin et al., 2017),
robots can share task-speciﬁc modules across robotsand robot-speciﬁc modules across all tasks. The im-
proved methods of meta-RL (Finn et al., 2017b; Yu
TH et al., 2018) enable the agents to learn rapidly
from little data in new environments. Learning to
adapt to dynamic real-world environments (Naga-bandi et al., 2019) further alleviates the problem of
missing training data and has better generalization
ability in dealing with robotic manipulation tasks.
5.2 Natural language processing
RL methods have broad application prospects
in the domain of NLP and have been successfully
applied in the ﬁelds of neural machine translation
(NMT), dialog systems, and speech generation.
NMT systems generally rely on aligned parallel
training corpora, but such parallel data is costly to
collect in practice. This co ntradiction may result
in heavy limitation in scale and constrain related
research and applications. Dual learning for machine
translation (He et al., 2016) tackles the data hunger
issue in NMT by training translation models from
unlabeled data through RL (e.g., PG). Using thismechanism, the monolingual data can play a similar
role to the parallel bilingual data, and signiﬁcantly
reduces the requirement on parallel bilingual data
during the training process.
Beneﬁtting from the development of transfer
learning and deep meta-RL, universal NMT (GuJT et al., 2018a) uses a transfer-learning approach