Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1727
a collection of RL resources. Vanschoren (2018)
reviewed meta-learning a lgorithms and categorized
them based on the type of meta-data. Vanschoren(2018) gave experimental evaluation and analysis of
the performance characteristics for several popular
techniques, including learning from task properties,
learning from model evaluations, and learning from
prior models. Botvinick et al. (2019) summarizedthe implementation of deep meta-RL and proposed
the future directions like combining episodic deep RL
with meta-RL.
Compared to these surveys, we systematically
and comprehensively revi ew diﬀerent deep RL algo-
rithms rather than focusing on one speciﬁc branch, to
show the relationship and development trend. Fur-ther, we systematically ca tegorize the advanced RL
methods and their applications, and propose promis-
ing directions to address the challenges of RL.
To summarize, this paper presents an extensive
survey of RL with the following contributions:
1. We provide a detailed review over state-
of-the-art RL methods and divide them into threecategories: model-free, model-based, and advanced
methods.
2. We systematically su mmarize the develop-
ment of advanced RL and divide the algorithms into
three categories including exploration, inverse RL,
and transfer RL.
3. We detailedly analyze and discuss the ap-
plication of RL, such as robotics, natural language
processing, and computer systems.
4. We propose several open problems (e.g., data
hunger issue and AGI issue) for future research as
well as the analysis of each problem and the direc-
tions for further study.
2 Model-free reinforcement learning
The development of deep RL is still in its in-
fancy. Academic research focuses on the determin-
istic and static environment where the states aremainly discrete and fully observed. Therefore, most
RL jobs are based on model-free approaches. Model-
free RL can estimate the state, value function, and
reward function of the agent through a large num-
ber of samples to optimize the action policy π
θ(a|s)
that aims to obtain more rewards by doing action
ain states. Because of its simple implementation
and rich open resources, model-free RL has attractedmore and more scholars to conduct further research.
In this section, we simply divide model-free RL
into two scenarios: (1) RL based on the value func-
tion; (2) RL based on policy gradient.
2.1 RL based on the value function
2.1.1 Deep Q-network
Deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013,
2015) is a typical representative of deep RL,
which uses the convolutional neural network (CNN)
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) as a model and is trained
with a variant of Q-learning (Kröse, 1995). DQN
uses the maximum Q value as the low-dimensional
action outputs to solve the confusing representation
of high-dimensional state inputs such as raw pixelslike the picture of the game.
Moreover, DQN reduces the bonus value and
error term to a limited interval, which mitigates the
instability of the value functions represented by anonlinear network. Diﬀerent from the Q-learning
algorithm, DQN synchroni zes the learning process
and the training process, and the main improve-
ments are summarized as follows: (1) experience re-
play buﬀer (Lin, 1992) is used to reduce the associa-tion between samples; (2) deep neural networks—
target network—is used for action-value function
approximation.
Experimental results show that DQN surpasses
previous algorithms on most of the Atari 2600 games
(Bellemare et al., 2013) and perform comparably toa human professional tester. When solving various
types of visual perception based deep RL tasks, DQN
uses the same set of network models, parameter set-
tings, and training algorithms, which demonstrates
that the method is highly adaptable and versatile(Gu SX et al., 2016).
2.1.2 Developments of DQN
A large number of improved algorithms have
been proposed since the success of DQN. In this sub-
section, we focus mainly on representative methodsrelated to the overall structure of the system, the
construction of training samples, and the structure
of neural networks.
Double deep Q-network (DDQN) (van Hasselt
et al., 2016) reduces the risk of overestimation bias
of Q-learning by decoupling selection and evaluationof the bootstrap action. Since experience transitions