Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1733
The optimistic initial value method (Sutton and
Barto, 2018) achieves exploration by increasing the
initial value of the value function instead of count-ing the frequency of the state. The gradient bandit
algorithm (Sutton and Barto, 2018) uses the entropy
value rather than the value function to represent un-
certainty. The algorithm adjusts the entropy of each
action through the rewards obtained, and tends toselect an action with a larger entropy value.
In some complex high-dimensional continuous
environments (e.g., StarCraft II), it is almost im-
possible for the exact same state to appear twice.
This will cause the above approaches to be mean-
ingless because almost every state counts one. De-
rived from a density model, the notion of pseudo-
count was introduced to generalize count-based ex-
ploration bonuses for non-tabular RL agents (Belle-mare et al., 2016). Since then, a large amount of
eﬀort has been put into improving the pseudo-count
algorithm. Ostrovski et al. (2017) improved the work
by the count-based exploration with neural density
models. Hash-based count (Tang et al., 2017) mapsstates to hash codes and count states’ occurrences
with a hash table. By exemplar model exploration
(Fu et al., 2017a), classiﬁers are trained to discrimi-
nate each visited state against all others and the new
state is implicitly compared to the old state.
4.1.2 Posterior sampling exploration
Exploring with random actions (e.g., epsilon-
greedy) suﬀers from oscillating back and forth. It
might not go to a coherent or interesting place,while exploring with random Q-functions can com-
mit to a randomized but internally consistent strat-
egy for an entire episode. Inspired by this, posterior
sampling algorithms are proposed for more targeted
exploration.
The Thompson sampling approach (Chapelle
and Li, 2011) samples the Q-value of each action from
the prior distribution. Then, the reward probability
of each action is consider ed as a Beta distribution,
which helps provide guidance on tweaking the pos-
terior and achieve a smaller regret. Bootstrapped
DQN (Osband et al., 2016) combines deep explo-
ration with deep neural networks to overcome the
shortcoming of incompatibility with nonlinearly pa-rameterized value functions. Fig. 3 shows the archi-
tecture of bootstrapped DQN.
Bootstrapped DQN trains bootstrap data onHead 1 Head 2 ... Head k
Shared network
Frame
Fig. 3 Architecture of bootstrapped DQN
Head represents Q-function. The shared network learns a
joint feature representation from all data. Frame is a replay
buﬀer storing samples
multiple shunt networks to randomize diﬀerent value
functions. This way of training contributes to a bal-ance between learning from noise and exploring com-
plex state/action spaces. Through this distributed
deep exploration, bootstrapped DQN can fully guar-
antee the exploration of various strategies, produce
diverse samples, and better generalize to the un-known state space.
4.1.3 Information gain exploration
In some complex environments, sampling one
action can help the agent assess other actions. Based
on this, for information gain exploration, the ad-
vantage of information structures is fully considered,
which helps the agent learn more eﬃciently in diﬃ-
cult tasks.
Information-directed sampling (Russo and Roy,
2014) measures the mutual information between
the true optimal action and the next observation,
and then selects an action to quantify the amount
learned. Each selected action is sampled in a manner
that the ratio between expected single-period regret
and the measure of information gain is minimized,
which will also balance exploration and exploitationto some extent.
However, it is impossible to construct a shaped
reward function for the reason that the rewards of
the environment are extremely sparse or missing al-
together in many real-world scenarios. Comparedto the aforementioned exploration approaches, vari-
ational information maximizing exploration (VIME)
(Houthooft et al., 2017) approximates the probabil-
ity of the dynamic model and greatly reduces the
reliance on rewards using variational inference in
Bayesian neural networks. The inner exploration
mechanism where the reward function is modiﬁed bythe information gain motivates the agent to explore