Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1739
to share lexical and sentence representations across
multiple source languages into one target language.
This enables the low-resource language to use thelexical and sentence representations of the higher re-
source languages. Further, Gu JT et al. (2018b) ﬁrst
extended a deep meta-RL algorithm (e.g., MAML)
into low-resource NMT. The model can learn to
adapt to low-resource languages based on multilin-gual high-resource language tasks. The results show
that the method signiﬁcantly outperforms the prior
multilingual approaches and enables the training of
a competitive NMT system with only a fraction of
training examples.
The task of chatbots in dialogue systems is
to mimic human-human interactions with extended
conversations (Shum et al., 2018). A modiﬁed ver-sion of the episodic REINFORCE algorithm (Dhin-
gra et al., 2017) explores and learns the policy and
the posterior probability over the knowledge base
entries for correct retrievals to select dialogue acts.
Moreover, although many t ext-to-speech (TTS) sys-
tems (Ping et al., 2018; Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018)
have produced high-quality samples for speakerspresent in the training set, generalizing to new speak-
ers given only a few seconds of audio remains a chal-
lenge. An adaptive TTS approach (Chen YT et al.,
2019) is presented based on MAML to highly re-
store the speaker’s voice in new scenes using veryfew speech samples. Similarly, the DeepVoice model
(Ping et al., 2018) is improved by predicting the em-
bedding with an encoding network and ﬁtting the
embedding based on a small amount of adaptation
data (Arik et al., 2018).
5.3 Computer systems
Computer systems present many challenging
problems for RL, including time-varying state or ac-
tion spaces (e.g., dynamically varying number of jobs
and machines in a computer cluster), structured data
sources (e.g., graphs to represent data ﬂow of jobsor a network’s topology), and highly stochastic en-
vironments (e.g., random time-varying workloads).
Here, we summarize some typical RL methods used
in computer systems and show that RL could provide
signiﬁcant real-world beneﬁts in this domain.
Tackling multi-resource cluster scheduling with
a PG algorithm (Mao et al., 2016) optimizes various
objectives like average job slowdown or completiontime in an online manner with dynamic job arrivals,and validates the approach via simulation. Chen L
et al. (2018) proposed a two-level system called “au-
tomatic traﬃc optimization (AuTO)” to solve thescalability problem in data center traﬃc. One level
is the peripheral system and the other is the cen-
tral system. They leverage the long-tail distribution,
which is a feature of data center traﬃc. The central
system uses a DDPG algorithm to help the periph-eral system choose the optimal parameters. This
allows AuTO to solve the scalability problem of traf-
ﬁc optimization in data centers and achieve superior
performance.
Motivated by prior applications, a scalable RL
model with the graph embedding technique (Maoet al., 2019a) is trained by the PG algorithm to
deal with the issue of continuous stochastic job ar-
rivals. The model could help learn workload-speciﬁc
scheduling algorithms without any human instruc-
tion beyond a high-level objective (e.g., minimiz-
ing average job completion time). Further, inspired
by much potential for RL to improve the perfor-mance, an open extensible platform Park (Mao et al.,
2019b) deﬁnes the MDP formulation (e.g., state, ac-
tion space, and reward function). Park connects to a
suite of real-world computer systems and lowers the
barrier of entry for machine learning researchers toinnovate based on deep RL in computer systems.
6 Challenges and the future
RL is one of the closest things that look anything
like AGI. However, there are still numerous problems
and many of them are fundamentally diﬃcult:
1. Ineﬃcient sampleAs listed in Table 1, an extremely large number
of training samples are required to allow the modelto reach a certain level. A lot of time is taken for
an Atari game that most humans pick up within a
few minutes. Rainbow DQN (Section 2.1.2) takes
long time to train the model and needs about 83 h of
play experience to exceed the human level. Model-based RL is computationally expensive and has its
own planning fallacy: learning a good policy usually
needs more samples and the practical level of sample
eﬃciency is usually much lower than the expected
result. Even though deep meta-RL algorithms (Sec-
tion 4.3.3) achieve few-shot learning on a new task,
they need to train with a lot of data to ﬁnd a goodgeneralization model.