1740 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
2. A demanding reward function
RL assumes the existence of a reward function,
which must be deﬁned exactly to ensure that the
agent can do the right thing all the time. However,
reward function design is often diﬃcult: (1) A suit-
able prior is needed; (2) Perfect knowledge of all
object states is required; (3) A good deﬁnition of
the problem is necessary. Moreover, sometimes too
much eﬀort on the reward function may introducenew biases. Even given a good reward, it is hard
to escape from local optima. The several mentioned
intuitively pleasing ways of exploration (Section 4.1)
mitigate the problem to some extent. However, as
far as we know, none of them could work consistentlyacross all environments. In addition, IRL and imita-
tion learning do not need a reward function, but their
performances are usually limited and unsatisfactory.
3. Overﬁtting and instabilityRarely can an RL agent ﬁt in multiple environ-
ments. Even for deep meta-RL, there is no guarantee
that the agent can perform well on new tasks. RL is
unstable and very sensitive to the initialization and
dynamics of the training process. Each category of
algorithms has its own chllenges in this regard. For
example, ﬁtted Q (or value) methods with deep net-
work function estimators are typically not contrac-tive, hence no guarantee of convergence. In addition,
there are many parameters for stability such as tar-
get network delay, replay buﬀer size, and clipping.
Policy gradient methods have a very high variance
gradient estimator. Although there have been manymethods that try to reduce the variance, most also
introduce hyper parameters, so they require many
samples and complex baseline. Model-based RL al-
gorithms have to choose their model class and a ﬁt-
ting method. The optimization policy is nontrivialdue to backpropagation through time. In contrast,
the diﬀerent hyper parameters in supervised learn-
ing will show more or fewer changes in training. Bad
luck in RL may mean that the curve of the model will
not change for a long time or that the RL methodsdo not work at all. What is worse, even if all the
hyper parameters and the random seeds are known,
the performance will be very diﬀerent as long as the
implementation is slightly diﬀerent.
We believe that there are great prospects for RL
and list some plausible directions for the future:
1. Algorithms with favorable improvement and
convergence are needed. Although TRPO gives akind of guaranteed improvement under assumptions,
it probably does not hold in the real world. Al-
though adjusting parameters adaptively (Gu SXet al., 2017b) requires a large number of samples
to provide statistical guarantees, it may be a good
starting point.
2. Artiﬁcially add some supervision signals. In
the case of sparse rewards, we can introduce an in-
trinsic reward or add some auxiliary tasks to increase
the exploration ability.
3. IRL can automatically learn the reward func-
tion, and imitation learning does not have high re-
quirements for reward functions. Besides, unsuper-
vised or weakly supervised learning of diverse be-haviors will avoid rigid supervision like the reward
function. These two directions could make up for
the disadvantages of RL.
4. Generalize from multi-task learning. Deep
meta-RL is increasingly recognized as one of the
most likely ways to implement AGI. Recent stud-
ies have shown that the performance of agents can
be improved by increasing the exploration ability of
meta-RL. Combining meta-RL with IRL is also anattractive direction.
7 Summary
Over the past few years, deep RL has become in-
creasingly powerful and important in handling com-
plex problems. In this survey, we conduct a com-prehensive review of deep RL algorithms. First, we
introduce the model-free and model-based deep RL
algorithms to determine th e characteristics of RL.
Then we summarize several recent advances and di-
vide them into three categories: exploration meth-
ods, inverse RL, and transfer RL. We give a detailed
review for each category. In terms of applications,we discuss deep RL in robotics, NLP, and computer
systems. Finally, we suggest some open challenges
that indicate future research directions for deep RL.
Contributors
Hao-nan WANG designed the research. Ning LIU and
Yi-yun ZHANG collected the literature. Hao-nan WANG
drafted the manuscript. Ning LIU, Da-wei FENG, and Feng
HUANG helped organize the manuscript. Hao-nan WANG
and Ning LIU revised the manuscript. Hao-nan WANG
ﬁnalized the paper under the guidance of Dong-sheng LI andYi-ming ZHANG.