Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1735
generative adversarial network (GAN). The strategy
model of GAIL acts as a production model in
GAN, generating actions with state as the input.The reward function model of GAIL can serve
as a discriminant model for discriminating the
extent to which actions appr oximate expert actions.
The experimental results show that GAIL could
achieve signiﬁcant performance in imitating complexbehaviors in large, high-dimensional environments.
Adversarial inverse reinfo rcement learning (AIRL)
(Fu et al., 2017b) provides simultaneous learning of
the value function and reward function. In contrast
to GAIL, AIRL makes adequate use of the eﬃcient
adversarial formulation and can also recover a
generalizable and portable reward function.
4.3 Transfer RL
A fundamental problem in artiﬁcial intelligence
is that it cannot learn as eﬃciently as a human.
Many RL algorithms demonstrate superhuman per-
formance but require millions of training samples.
Many transfer RL algorithms are presented moti-vated by an intuition that useful knowledge might
be acquired based on prior tasks to solve a new task.
This kind of algorithm aims to rapidly learn an opti-
mal policy in a new environment using only a small
amount of available data.
We divide transfer RL into three categories ac-
cording to the choice of the source domain: (1) for-
ward transfer that trains on one task and transfersto a new task; (2) multi-task transfer that trains on
many tasks and transfers to a new task; (3) meta-RL
that learns to learn from many tasks.
4.3.1 Forward transfer
The simplest method of forward transfer is just
to try with the best hope (Levine et al., 2016). Poli-cies trained for one set of circumstances might just
work and could deal with new tasks successfully with
good luck because sometim es there is enough vari-
ability during training to generalize.
Finetuning remains one of the most popular
choices for transfer learning with neural networks.
First, a model is pretrained on a source domain where
data is often abundant. Second, the output layers of
the model are adapted to the target domain. Finally,
the network is ﬁnetuned via backpropagation. Forexample, in an approach of pre-training for diversity(Haarnoja et al., 2017), it learns all the possible ways
of a given task to achieve a particular policy. This
policy can serve as a good initialization for ﬁnetuningto a more speciﬁc behavior (i.e., ﬁrst learn all the
ways that a robot could move forward, and then use
this as an initialization to learn separate running and
bounding skills).
Unfortunately, the ﬁnetuning approach often re-
sults in overﬁtting when ﬁnetuning with a little bit
of experience in large deep networks. Progressive
neural networks (Rusu et al., 2016b) mitigate overﬁt-
ting and solve expressivity problems by construction.
This framework retains a pool of pre-trained models
throughout the training process and learns lateral
connections from these to ext ract useful features for
the new task. Fig. 4 shows t he architecture of pro-
gressive neural networks. The gray box labeled “a”
indicates the adapters, which keep the hidden layer
activation values of the front row consistent with the
original input dimensions.
Output2
h2'
h1'Output3
h2''
h1''Output1
h2
h1
Inputaa
aa
Fig. 4 A simple progressive neural network
It is a fact that agents will transfer better if they
see more diversity during the training. To achieve
better performance, the methods make the networkunable to distinguish observations from the source
domain and target domain by modifying the source
domain and using a modest amount of target domain
data for transfer. The ensemble policy optimization
algorithm (Rajeswaran et al., 2017) can adapt theprobability over source domains in the ensemble us-
ing the data from the target domain and randomizing
physical parameters of simulated source domains.
The approach can help learn more robust policies
and generalize to a broad range of possible target
domains. For perception-b ased tasks, the methods
that prepare for the unknown (Yu WH et al., 2017;Peng et al., 2018b) use recurrent neural networks