1734 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
the unknown domain and enables integration with
other methods such as TRPO.
Similar to the idea of VIME, curiosity-driven
learning (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019)
generates an intrinsic reward signal based on how
hard it is for the agent to predict the consequencesof its own actions (i.e., predict the next state given
the current state and the executed action). The pre-
diction error of the forward dynamics model is used
as an intrinsic reward to encourage the agent’s cu-
riosity. The experiments reveal that curiosity-drivenlearning could achieve signiﬁcant performance across
a variety of continuous co ntrol tasks even in the en-
vironment with very sparse rewards.
4.2 Inverse RL
Usually we learn a transition model assuming
that the reward model is already known. However,
there will be a huge impact on performance once the
reward function is not designed properly. InverseRL (IRL) (Ng and Russell, 2000) is introduced to
learn a proper reward function from the observed
expert examples. However, there are some chal-
lenges in IRL: (1) The problem is under-deﬁned and
lacks prior knowledge; (2) It is diﬃcult to evaluatea learned reward; (3) Demonstrations may not be
precisely optimal. In the following, we discuss the
solutions based on maximum margin and maximum
entropy.
4.2.1 IRL based on maximum margin
Apprenticeship learning (Abbeel and Ng, 2004)
uses the maximum marginal method to ﬁnd the cur-
rent reward function from an expert example. There
is a guarantee that the optimal policy obtained un-
der the reward function is near the expert example
policy.
Maximum margin planning (MMP) (Ratliﬀ
et al., 2006) attempts to automate the mapping from
perception features to cost s by structured maximum-
margin classiﬁcation. In spite of some improvements
with tricks (e.g., support vector machines), MMP
still has troubles in calculation when iteratively solv-
ing MDP. To handle this issue, IRL through struc-
tured classiﬁcation (Klein et al., 2012) constrains
each action at each state instead of constraining the
solution of an MDP and uses the so-called featureexpectation of the expert as the parameterization ofthe score function of a multiclass classiﬁer.
Further, neural inverse RL (NIRL) (Xia and
El Kamel, 2016) focuses on IRL with large-scale
high-dimensional state spaces. With the help of a
neural network, NIRL can not only generalize the
expert’s behaviors into unvisited regions of the state
space but also express an explicit policy representa-
tion easily even for the stochastic expert policy.
In all, methods based on maximum margins
tend to be ambiguous. For instance, many diﬀer-
ent reward functions lead to the same expert policy.
In this case, the reward function learned often has
a random preference. The challenges are summa-rized as follows: (1) Maximizing the margin is a bit
arbitrary; (2) There is no clear model of expert sub-
optimality; (3) Deep planning is not applicable for
the messy constrained optimization problem.
4.2.2 IRL based on maximum entropy
The method of maximum entropy can avoid
ambiguity problems because its probability is dis-tributed without any assumption about the distri-
bution of any other location information except con-
straints. It may cause ambiguity when choosing
a distribution over decisions under the constraint
of matching the reward value of the demonstratedbehavior. Maximum entropy IRL (MaxEnt IRL)
(Ziebart et al., 2008) is proposed to solve the problem
by employing the principle of maximum entropy.
Although MaxEnt IRL solves the ambiguity
problem, it does not adapt to large and continu-
ous states and action spaces or meet the require-ments for eﬀective learning under unknown dynam-
ics. Methods based on maximum entropy are also
diﬃcult to apply in practical applications because:
(1) The learning of the reward function requires arti-
ﬁcially selected features (th e choice of features is very
diﬃcult for many practical problems); (2) Many sub-
cycles of IRL contain forward RL, which is a diﬃcult
problem. To address the former challenge, Ziebart
et al. (2008) exploited the representational capac-
ity of neural networks to approximate complex andnonlinear reward functions. To address the latter
challenge, guided cost learning (Finn et al., 2016a)
further formulates an eﬃcient sample-based approx-
imation instead of forward RL.
Generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL) (Ho and Ermon, 2016) maps the rewardfunction target in IRL in the context of the