1736 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
(RNN) to output unknown parameters in the true
environment (such as dict ionary/mass) to precom-
pute many possible situations that the robot mightencounter when acting in the real world to reduce
the interaction with the real world.
4.3.2 Multi-task transfer
Typical applications of RL focus more on mas-
tery than on one-shot learning and require a sub-
stantial number of training episodes. Multi-task
transfer provides a way to address these challenges
and is closer to what people do—build a lifetime of
experience.
One of the simplest solutions is to learn a model
that can simultaneously perform many tasks. Onlinedynamics adaptation (Fu et al., 2016) combines prior
knowledge from previous tasks with online adapta-
tion of the dynamics model. This model-based ap-
proach not only decreases the demand for training
data using the model, but also performs one-shot
learning of new tasks using the robot’s experience
on other tasks, without requiring explicit domainknowledge or demonstrations be provided by the
designer.
However, sometimes learning a model can be
very diﬃcult. Model-free approaches have been pro-
posed to combine the policies after training each
MDP separately (Parisotto et al., 2016; Rusu et al.,
2016a). This kind of algorithm exploits DQN andmodel compression techniques to train a single pol-
icy network and learns how to act in a set of distinct
tasks using the guidance of several expert teachers.
Architectures with reus able components can
be designed to make full use of the characteris-
tics of tasks if they have shared parts and distinct
parts. Since the above kinds of methods build a sin-gle network for all tasks, modular policies (Devin
et al., 2017) can achieve better performance by de-
composing neural network policies into task- and
robot-speciﬁc modules. The algorithm trains the
same task-speciﬁc compon ent across all robots and
the same robot-speciﬁc component across all tasks.
Then the robot- and task-speciﬁc modules will be
mixed and matched to execute new tasks. Fig. 5
shows the process of modular policies. This special
architecture allows the agent to share task informa-
tion (such as perception) between robots and share
robot information (such as dynamics and kinemat-ics) between tasks.
Robot1 Robot2
Task1
Task2
Fig. 5 Process of modular policies
After training robot1 with task1 and task2 and training
robot2 with task1, robot2 can execute new task2 when testing
by mixing the robot- and task-speciﬁc components
4.3.3 Meta-RL
Meta-RL oﬀers a feasible framework to address
few-shot learning in a very complicated environment
that demands strategic and tactical thinking. Let
Mi=(S,A,T i,Ri)represent an MDP with state
spaceS, action space A, transition probability dis-
tribution Ti, and reward function Ri.I n m e t a - R L ,
we consider a family of MDPs M={Mi}N
i=1,w h i c h
comprise a task distribution τi∼p(T)such that
each MDP shares the stat istical regularity of p(T).
Meta-RL aims to improve the learning eﬃciency for
novel subsequent tasks by learning a meta-item from
the family of MDPs such as policy πθ,m o d e l Tθ,
and the reward function. We introduce two kinds
of most representative meta-RL algorithms and then
list some main advanced improvements.
Almost at the same time, Duan et al. (2017) and
Wang JX et al. (2017) deﬁned a new concept, deep
meta-RL, and put forward recurrent models called
RL2, which are encoded in the weights of the RNN
and learned slowly through a general-purpose RLalgorithm. The main idea of RL
2is training neu-
ral networks with all historical trajectories (state,
action, and reward) and automatically determining
the information at the task level (meta level). This
design can signiﬁcantly speed up the training pro-cess of the new task and is thought as one of the
most basic changes from RL to meta-RL. Fig. 6 il-
lustrates the process of interaction between an agent
and the environment. Further, a simple neural at-
tentive learner (SNAIL) (Mishra et al., 2018) is pro-
posed to solve the problem of information loss in
the above original models. To aggregate informa-tion from experience and pinpoint speciﬁc pieces of