1732 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
its uncertainty dynamically and observes more data
using a continuous relaxation of a dropout’s dis-
crete masks. PETS (Chua et al., 2018) combinesuncertainty-aware deep network dynamics models
with sampling-based uncertainty propagation and ﬁ-
nally brings these components together in a deep RL
framework that reaches th e asymptotic performance
of the model-free RL methods on benchmark controltasks.
There is a growing interest in combining model-
free and model-based approaches in RL to achieve
algorithms with high performance but low sample
complexity. Model-based va lue expansion (Feinberg
et al., 2018) allows imagination to ﬁxed depth to
control the uncertainty of the model. Stochastic
ensemble value expansion (Buckman et al., 2018) en-
sures that the model is used only when doing so doesnot introduce signiﬁcant errors by dynamical inter-
polation between model rollouts of various horizon
lengths.
3.3 Model for complex observations
Model-based RL has proven to be a data-
eﬃcient approach for learning control tasks, but it
is diﬃcult to use in partially observable MDPs with
complex observations such as images. This is be-
cause agents have to make a decision based on theobservation rather than the accurate state of the
environment.
Spatial autoencoder architectures (Lange et al.,
2012; Finn et al., 2016b) are presented to learn
in the latent space and autonomously learn low-
dimensional embedding of the image. However, there
is an inevitable issue that the autoencoder might notrecover the right representation and is not suitable
for model-based RL. To tackle this diﬃcult prob-
lem, embed to control (E2C) (Watter et al., 2015)
applies variational autoencoders with iLQR in a la-
tent space and turns the problem of locally optimal
control in high-dimensional nonlinear systems into a
low-dimensional latent state space.
The method that combines deep action-
conditioned video prediction models with model-
predictive control (Finn and Levine, 2017) is the ﬁrst
instance of robotic manipulation to learn directly
in the observation space. It trains the agent with
entirely unlabeled data and plans for actions that
move user-speciﬁed objects in the environment touser-deﬁned locations, both of which could help gen-eralize to new, previously unseen objects. A video
prediction model (Ebert et al., 2017) can also keep
track of objects by incorporating temporal skip con-nections and achieve signiﬁcant advance in the range
and complexity of skills entirely with self-supervised
robot learning. Since accurate forward prediction
could be very expensive (Chua et al., 2018; Naga-
bandi et al., 2018), SOLAP (Zhang et al., 2019)uses simple models, typically linear models, to pro-
vide gradient directions for local policy improvement
rather than forward prediction and planning.
4 Advanced reinforcement learning
4.1 Exploration
In many complex RL tasks, agents face the chal-
lenge of balancing exploration and exploitation wheninteracting with unknown dynamics. With the rapid
development of RL, various eﬀective and scalable ap-
proaches have been proposed to overcome the draw-
back of lacking exploration. We will introduce the
typical algorithms of each category and analyze theiradvantages and disadvantages.
4.1.1 Optimistic exploration
Since unexplored actions could bring a better
reward, it would be valuable to optimize them to
eﬀectively increase exploration. Therefore, how to
quantify the state novelty of these never-accessed
states is key to solving such complex problems.
Frequency-based distribution reward mecha-
nisms have been widely applied. These count the
frequency of occurrences of an action (state-action)
as a bonus:
r
+(s,a)=r(s,a)+B(N(s)), (1)
whereN(s)represents the frequency of occurrences
of states.B(N(s))represents a bonus that decreases
withN(s). Optimistic exploration uses r+(s,a)in-
stead of r(s,a)as reward with any model-free al-
gorithm. Diﬀerent bonuses have the same essential
feature of tending to choose the optimal or the latest
action. Apart from the upper conﬁdence bound, used
by AlphaGo as a bonus in MCTS, there are some
other bonuses such as the model-based interval esti-
mation with exploration bonus (Strehl and Littman,
2008) and Bayesian exploration bonus (Kolter andNg, 2009).