1730 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
3 Model-based reinforcement learning
It is a fact that knowing the transition dynam-
icsp(st+1|st,at)makes things easier. The dynamics
are called models. Model-based methods are thealgorithms that learn the transition dynamics that
decide which next state s
t+1would be after doing
actionatin the current state st. Then methods
will ﬁgure out how to choose actions. In brief, this
kind of algorithm learns models of system dynamicsand uses optimal control to choose actions. Model-
based RL develops from the ﬁeld of optimal control.
Usually, speciﬁc problems are built by models such
as the Gaussian process and Bayesian network, and
then are solved through machine learning methods oroptimal control methods, e.g., model predictive con-
trol (MPC), linear quadratic regulator (LQR), and
linear-quadratic- Gaussian control.
Compared with model-free RL, model-based RL
learns a value function or policy in a data-eﬃcient
way and does not need continuous interaction with
the environment. However, it may suﬀer from theissue of model identiﬁcation and lead to an inac-
curate description of the real environment. In this
section, we divide the context of model-based RL
into three scenarios and systematically analyze their
advantages and disadvantages.
Table 1 shows diﬀerent algorithms that require
diﬀerent numbers of samples and diﬀerent computa-
tion time. It is a complicated question. This table
is a rough guide but we think it can be a starting
point. We list the data of these algorithms based
on the standard benchmark task “half-cheetah” in-
cluding the numbers of steps and episodes and totaltime for learning. Fig. 1 reveals the diﬀerent us-
age scenarios of model-bas ed and model-free meth-
ods. If we have a simulator and the simulation
cost is negligible compared to the training cost (it
is much cheaper to take one simulation step thanone gradient step on the model), it is a really good
choice to go with online-policy or policy-gradientNo
YesImpatient
Patient
No
YesLearn in a 
simulator?Model-free off-policy algorithms (e.g., DDPG, SAC, NAF, SQL, and TD3)Model-based algorithms (e.g., GPS and PETS)
How long 
would like 
to wait?
Is simulation 
cost negligible 
compared to 
training cost?Model-free online-policy orpolicy-gradient algorithms(e.g., TRPO, PPO, and A3C)
Fig. 1 Diﬀerent usage scenarios of model-based and
model-free methods
algorithms, such as TRPO, PPO, and A3C, be-
cause these algorithms are easier to tune and have
fewer hyper parameters and then converge more re-
liably. If we have a simulator but the simulation
is expensive, then we might opt for model-free oﬀ-policy algorithms like DDPG, NAF (Gu SX et al.,
2016), and SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017). There
are many diﬀerent choices for all policy-model-free
algorithms that can be Q-learning-based or extra-
critic-based. Finally, if we do not have a simulator,the main question is how long an acceptable wait-
ing period is. If the answer is not long (impatience),
the model-based algorithms like guided policy search
(GPS) (Levine and Koltun, 2013) and probabilistic
ensembles with trajectory sampling (PETS) (Chua
et al., 2018) are good choices. Otherwise, you can
choose the model-free oﬀ-policy algorithms that re-quire somewhat fewer assumptions and may be a
little bit less domain-speciﬁc.
3.1 Global and local models
For model-based algorithms, the ﬁrst question
is which one should be ﬁtted if the dynamics is un-known: global dynamics models or local dynamics
models? In this subsection, we introduce the related
algorithms and the comparison between these two
models.
In spite of some advantages such as cheap
computation at runtime, global model methods
often fail on numerical stability, especially in
Table 1 Comparison of diﬀerent reinforcement learning algorithms
Method ReferenceNumber of Number ofTimesteps episodes
Model-free Fully online (e.g., A3C) Wang ZY et al. (2016) 100 000 000 100 000 ∼15 d
Policy gradient (e.g., TROPO) Schulman et al. (2017) 10 000 000 10 000 ∼1.5 d
Value estimation (e.g., DDPG and SAG) Gu SX et al. (2016) 1 000 000 1000 ∼3h
Model-based E.g., PETS and GPS Chua et al. (2018) 30 000 30 ∼5m i n