Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1731
stochastic domains, because they iteratively collect
data using MPC and directly backpropagate them
into policy. There has been some eﬀort to overcomethis shortcoming. GPS (Levine and Koltun, 2013)
uses trajectory optimization to direct policy learn-
ing and avoid poor local optima. Levine et al. (2016)
developed GPS and a CNN architecture to reduce
real-world interaction a nd to decrease the number
of training samples. Nagabandi et al. (2018) initial-
ized a model-free learner with the help of special deep
neural network dynamics models, which can combine
sample eﬃciency of model-based approaches with the
high task-speciﬁc performance of model-free meth-
ods. The results on MuJoCo locomotion tasks show
that the algorithm has excellent sample eﬃciency,and can accelerate model-f ree learning on high-speed
benchmark tasks.
In most of the state space, the planner in global
models may seek out the region where the model
is erroneously optimistic, thus requiring a very accu-
rate model to converge on a good solution. Moreover,
it is often much more diﬃcult to obtain a proper
model than learning a policy especially when theenvironment is hard to des cribe. Therefore, more
and more attention is paid to local models with con-
straints. Local models need to ﬁgure out which con-
troller is executed to obtain the right data and how
to ensure the whole models not to diverge horribly.Here we list some typical algorithms.
A model-based iterative linear quadratic regula-
tor (iLQR) (Levine et al., 2015) is extended on GPS
and can learn a range of dynamic manipulation be-
haviors with highly general policy representations,without using known models or example demonstra-
tions. Combining the advantages of model-free RL,
Dyna-Q (Sutton and Barto, 2018) is a classical in-
tegrated architecture where a model is leveraged to
update Q-values. Probabilistic inference for particle-based policy search further allows for almost arbi-
trary models and policies by simultaneously match-
ing the performance of previous data-eﬃcient learn-
ing algorithms.
To adopt good points from both model-free
and model-based RL algorithms, Chebotar et al.
(2017) focused on time-varying linear-Gaussian poli-
cies, and integrated a model-based LQR algorithm
with a model-free path integral policy improvement
algorithm. Imagination-augmented agents (I2As)(Racanière et al., 2017) learns to interpret environ-ment models to augment model-free decisions. Com-
pared to Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Silver
et al., 2016), I2As shows improvements in data eﬃ-ciency and robustness by m itigating the problem of
model misspeciﬁcation.
3.2 Uncertainty-aware model
There is a performance gap between pure-
model-based and model-free methods. Comparedwith model-free methods that require 10 days,
model-based methods enable a complete training
process using only 10 min in real time. However,
model-free methods can achieve much better perfor-
mance, diﬀering by at most three orders of magni-
tude (Nagabandi et al., 2018). The main reason is
overﬁtting. The uncertainty-aware model is an eﬀec-tive approach for solving this problem. Based on the
representation of uncertainty, we divide it into two
distinct classes, aleatoric uncertainty (inherent sys-
tem stochasticity) and epistemic uncertainty (sub-
jective uncertainty due to limited data). There are
two main directions, estimating mode uncertainty
and using output entropy to build uncertainty-aware
models. We introduce the former in this section and
the latter in Section 4.1.1.
By learning a probabilistic dynamic model and
explicitly incorporating model uncertainty into long-
term planning, probabilistic inference for learning
control (PILCO) can cope with very little data and
facilitate learning from scratch in only a few tri-
als. Blundell et al. (2015) used variational Bayesian-learning to estimate the uncertainty in a nerual
network (Fig. 2). Compared to feedforward neu-
ral networks, this method not only mitigates the
issue of overﬁtting but also correctly assesses the
uncertainty in the training data. Similarly, relying
on developments in Bayesian deep learning, the ap-
proach in Gal et al. (2017) allows the agent to adapt
0.11.2
0.20.1
1.41.3 0.5
0.1 0.7S0(a) (b)
H1 H2 H3 I
XI??
??
?? ?
??S0
H1 H2 H3 I
XI
Fig. 2 Process to estimate the uncertainty in a neural
network: (a) each weight has a ﬁxed value provided by
classical backpropagation; (b) each weight is assigned
a distribution provided by Bayesian methods