Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1729
However, DDPG, whose policy is deterministic,
is particularly unsuitable in complex environments
with noise interference because the policy is requiredgenerally to perform with a certain randomness. An-
other problem is that many commonly used model-
free RL algorithms such as trust region policy opti-
mization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), proximal
policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017),or A3C, demand a number of new samples for each
gradient step. Suﬀering from this strict requirement,
it is extravagantly expensive to learn an eﬀective pol-
icy and will be much worse with the increase of com-
plexity of tasks. Soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) is an eﬀective approach for addressing
these problems. SAC combines oﬀ-policy updateswith a stable stochastic AC formulation and uses a
maximum entropy framework to augment the stan-
dard maximum reward RL objective. A substan-
tial improvement can be attained in performance
and sample eﬃciency over oﬀ-policy and on-policyprior methods, because there are several special ad-
vantages of the RL algorithm based on maximum
entropy:
1. An initialization for more complex speciﬁc
tasks. The policy learned by maximum entropy can
be used as an initialization for more complex speciﬁctasks and to learn a way to solve tasks.
2. Stronger exploration capabilities. It is obvi-
ous that maximum entropy makes it easier to ﬁnd
better patterns under a multimodal reward.
3. High robustness and stronger generaliza-
tion. Maximum entropy requires exploring vari-
ous optimal possibilities from diﬀerent ways and
makes it easier to do adjustments in the face of
interference.
2.2.2 Improved methods based on the trust region
The policy gradient method has the problem
that the policy is diﬃcult to update stably in the case
of unstable data because of using a neural network
as the nonlinear function approximator. In recent
years, the academic community has introduced thetrust region method into RL and enabled substantial
performance improvements in various experimental
scenarios.
Based on the conclusion of conservative pol-
icy iteration (Kakade and Langford, 2002), TRPO
computes the maximum value of total varia-tion divergence as the lea rning rate and consid-ers the relationship between total variation di-
vergence and Kullback-Leibler divergence, so as
to extend the mix policy into a general stochas-tic strategy. The genera lized advantage estimator
(Schulman et al., 2016) uses two factors as tun-
able parameters in the discounted Markov deci-
sion process (MDP) further to implement the trade-
oﬀ between bias and variance in the actor-criticalgorithm.
One trouble for TRPO is the large amount of
interaction with the environment. Wang ZY et al.
(2017) ﬁrst addressed the problem from sample inef-
ﬁciency at scale by introducing an actor-critic withexperience replay (ACER). Unlike TRPO, which re-
stricts policy updates by constraints, ACER main-
tains a sliding average that represents the past policy
and keeps policy updates from deviation from this
mean. Similarly, actor-critic using the Kronecker-factored trust region (Wu et al., 2017) optimizes both
the actor and the critic using Kronecker-factored ap-
proximate curvature with the trust region, while con-
strained policy optimization (Achiam et al., 2017)
uses a constrained MDP.
TRPO fails on complex calculations or com-
patibility with some architectures (e.g., noise or
parameter sharing). It is much simpler to imple-
ment PPO, since it uses an objective function with
a clipped probability ratio to form a pessimisticestimate based on ﬁrst-order optimization, which,
however, may result in sample ineﬃciency. Dis-
tributed PPO (Heess et al., 2017) is presented fur-
ther to explore how a rich environment can help
promote the learning of complex behaviors. Asin A3C, data collection and gradient calculation
are deployed to multiple distributed workers. This
not only improves performance and scalability but
also enables stable behaviors in a rich and varied
environment.
Combining the advantages of on-policy and oﬀ-
policy, path consistency learning (PCL) (Nachum
et al., 2017a) enhan ces exploration capabilities based
on a relationship between softmax temporal value
consistency and policy optimality under entropy reg-
ularization. Improved on PCL, Trust-PCL (Nachum
et al., 2017b) adds the discounted relative-entropy
trust region into constrained optimization. This not
only ensures the stability of optimization but also
makes full use of oﬀ-policy data to improve sampleeﬃciency.