Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1737
h0 h1 h2 h3 h4
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1a0
r0, d0a1
r1, d1a0
Episode2 Episode1
MDP1Agent
r0, d0
Fig. 6 Process of interaction between an agent and
the environment
For each episode in each MDP, a fresh S0 is drawn from the
initial state distribution speciﬁc to the corresponding MDP.Agent is trained with historical trajectories. At the end of
an episode, the hidden state of the policy is preserved to the
next episode, but not preserved between trials
information, SNAIL adjusts the architecture of RNN
with LSTM and uses a novel combination of inter-
leaved one-dimensional convolutions and soft atten-
tion. E-RL2(Stadie et al., 2018) adds an indicator
to the standard sum of discounted returns, returning
one if the episode helps account for the impact of thisinitial sampling distribution and 0 otherwise. Ex-
periments show that this encourages the RNN to ac-
count for the impact of casting a wider sampling dis-
tribution on the ﬁnal meta-reward. ReBAL (Naga-
bandi et al., 2019) uses a recurrent model to learn
the transition model instead of the action policy to
perform well on the simulated continuous controltasks.
Recurrent models have a variety of choices of
design in the architecture and are usually generaland expressive. However, they often fail in deal-
ing with complex tasks and demand complex mod-
els and impractical data. Another typical meta-RL
approach is model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML)
(Finn et al., 2017a). To overcome the drawbacks of
recurrent models, MAML uses a ﬁxed optimizer and
learns a set of base parameters that can be adaptedto minimize any task loss by a few steps of gradient
descent.
MAML can be directly applied to any learn-
ing problem and model that is trained with a gradi-
ent descent procedure because of the ﬁxed optimizer.
Since MAML is simple but powerful, it attracts great
interest among researchers. Improving exploration is
an attractive perspective. E-MAML (Stadie et al.,
2018) highlights the importance of correctly diﬀer-
entiating through sampling distributions in meta-RL. Model agnostic exploration with structurednoise (MAESN) (Gupta et al., 2018) injects struc-
tured stochasticity into MAML to acquire a latent
exploration space. Diﬀerent from MAESN that addsextra parameters as the em bedding space, fast con-
text adaptation via meta-learning (CAVIA) (Zint-
graf et al., 2019) uses the same network to learn the
embedding during a backward pass and make predic-
tions during a forward pass. Combined with inverseRL, SMILe (Ghasemipour et al., 2019) is the ﬁrst ef-
ﬁcient method for meta-IRL that scales to the func-
tion approximator setting. To tackle the problem
of eﬃcient oﬀ-policy meta-RL, there are also some
novel algorithms. GrBAl (Nagabandi et al., 2019)
combines MAML with model-based algorithms (e.g.,
MPC) to learn the transition model. Probabilisticembeddings for actor-critic RL (PEARL) (Rakelly
et al., 2019) integrates online inference of proba-
bilistic context variables with existing oﬀ-policy RL
algorithms.
Apart from the improvement based on the
framework of MAML, there are some other novel ap-
proaches. The meta-MDP approach to exploration
(Garcia and Thomas, 2019) models the problem of
searching for an optimal exploration policy as an
MDP, and separates the policies into an explorationpolicy and an exploitation policy to achieve lifelong
learning.
In all, deep meta-RL is a promising research di-
rection and is being researched using a variety of
meta-angles and numerous exploration methods toachieve better performan ce of both meta-training
and adaptation eﬃciency. Fig. 7 provides a rep-
resentation of relationships between improved deep
meta-RL algorithms.
Policy
gradientRecurrent
model
MAML
OthersRL22018: E-RL2 (NIPS),
          SNAIL (ICLR)2019: ReBAL (ICLR)
2018: Evolutionary
          strategies (NIPS),          Cognitive science          ( Nat Neurosci )
2019: meta-MDP (AAMAS)2018: E-MAML (NIPS),
          MAESN (NIPS)2019: GrBAL (ICLR),          SMILe (NIPS),          PEARL (ICLR)2020: CAVUA (ICML)
Meta-RL
Fig. 7 Relationship between deep meta-RL
algorithms