(b) Approximated distribution of unseen 
classes via CVAE(c) OCD: approximated distribution of unseen 
classes while generating hard samples via CVAE (a) Real distribution of unseen classesFigure 4. Illustrating synthetically generated distributions for unseen classes of the AWA2 database. (a) Real unseen distribution of the
AWA2 database. Different colours represent different classes of the AWA2 database with the PS protocol, (b) Approximated distribution
of unseen classes via CV AE, and (c) Approximated over-complete distribution of unseen classes via CV AE. From the distribution plot, it
can be observed that (c) is a closer representation of the real unseen class distribution shown in (a). (Best viewed in colour)
N(µHP,σHP)withµHP,σHPas the parameters of the
distribution and unseen class attributes a. In the second part
of Equation 1,µz|ˆXandσz|ˆXare estimated by using the
encoder module pE(.). The ﬁrst part of Equation 2rep-
resents the generation of over-complete distribution ˆXOC
in which latent variable z∼ N(µOC,σ′
HP)is randomly
sampled from the Gaussian distribution, where, mean of the
distribution µOCis estimated by the average of the current
and each competing class. For example, on a given batch of
µ,jis an index variable ranging from 1,...,batch size , and
it is randomly sampled without repetition.
In our approach, the decoder/generator PG(x|z,a)
is conditioned on attributes and used in Equations 1
and 2. In ZSL problems, it is assumed that attributes
are a good representation of a class and separated in the
attribute space. Within a class, if a sample is away from
the centre of the distribution, then it can be considered
as a hard sample. However, attributes of the sample
should be the same as the attributes of a class. Therefore,
while generating the OCD, attributes of a class are kept
unchanged. On the other hand, the latent variable zhas
been changed based on the mean parameter of other classes.
Visualization of the Distributions: Figure 4(b) shows
the unseen distribution predicted/generated via CV AE, and
the classes are well-separated. However, as shown in Fig-
ure4(a), the real distribution of unseen classes are closer
to other classes and some of them are overlapping. If the
generated distribution fails to mimic the behaviour of real
distribution, then the utility of such distributions is limited
in training. Usually, the discriminative classiﬁer trained on
such distribution performs poorly on unseen classes. On the
other hand, learning class separability by maximizing inter-class distance and minimizing intra-class distance might
provide a viable solution when the behaviour of the train-
ing set is close to the test set. In the case of ZSL, distribu-
tion is unknown and approximating unknown distribution
where latent variables are sampled from Gaussian distribu-
tion can lead to blind-spots in the feature space. As ob-
served in Figure 4(b), blind-spot is the place where samples
are not present and training a classiﬁer with such data would
not ensure the model to learn transformations which are ef-
fective for separating real unseen distributions. Figure 4(c)
illustrates the OCD, which is an approximated distribution
of unseen classes while generating hard samples via CV AE.
Experimentally we have shown that training using such dis-
tribution can improve the classiﬁcation performance.
3.2. Proposed OCD­CV AE Framework Training
As shown in Figure 2, we propose to train the OCD-
CV AE framework in three phases. In the ﬁrst phase, CV AE
loss (LCVAE ) is optimized. In the second phase, OBTL
loss along with center loss, i.e., LOBTL+LCL, is mini-
mized. The trained model is then utilized as a pre-trained
model for the third phase, where we propose training the re-
gressor on the generated OCD while minimizing the Online
Batch Triplet Loss (OBTL) and CL losses. In this section,
we ﬁrst discuss the loss functions, followed by the details
of the three training phases.
3.2.1 Loss Functions
Online Batch Triplet Loss to Maximize Inter Class Dis-
tance: The triplet loss has been widely used in the literature
to increase the inter-class distance ( Dinter ) and decrease the
intra-class distance ( Dintra ). Mathematically, triplet loss
can be represented as:
413303