Generalized Zero-Shot Learning Via Over-Complete Distribution
Rohit Keshari+, Richa Singh∗, and Mayank Vatsa∗
+IIIT-Delhi, India, ∗IIT Jodhpur, India
rohitk@iiitd.ac.in, {richa, mvatsa }@iitj.ac.in
Abstract
A well trained and generalized deep neural network
(DNN) should be robust to both seen and unseen classes.
However, the performance of most of the existing supervised
DNN algorithms degrade for classes which are unseen in
the training set. To learn a discriminative classiﬁer which
yields good performance in Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) set-
tings, we propose to generate an Over-Complete Distri-
bution (OCD) using Conditional Variational Autoencoder
(CVAE) of both seen and unseen classes. In order to enforce
the separability between classes and reduce the class scat-
ter, we propose the use of Online Batch Triplet Loss (OBTL)
and Center Loss (CL) on the generated OCD. The effec-
tiveness of the framework is evaluated using both Zero-Shot
Learning and Generalized Zero-Shot Learning protocols on
three publicly available benchmark databases, SUN, CUB
and AWA2. The results show that generating over-complete
distributions and enforcing the classiﬁer to learn a trans-
form function from overlapping to non-overlapping distri-
butions can improve the performance on both seen and un-
seen classes.
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Network (DNN) models have exhibited su-
perlative performance in a variety of real-world applications
when the models are trained on large datasets. However,
small sample size training sets pose a challenge to deep
learning models. It has been observed that in such cases,
the DNN models tend to overﬁt, thus leading to poor gen-
eralization. Based on the availability of labeled/unlabeled
data, multiple learning paradigms such as transfer learn-
ing [ 7], life-long learning [ 31], self-taught learning [ 26],
and one-shot learning [ 22] have been proposed for bet-
ter generalization. The problem becomes further challeng-
ing when the training dataset does not contain any sample
from the classes in the test dataset. Learning in this sce-
nario is known as zero-data learning or Zero-Shot Learning
(ZSL) [ 18].
To design algorithms for classifying in presence of lim-
f1f2
f1f2
f1f2f1f2Approximated Unseen 
Classes {X} From attributes
Seen ClassesOver-Complete 
Distribution (OCD)
(a)
(b)Unseen Classes OCD for Seen and 
Unseen ClassesFigure 1. Illustrating seen and unseen 2D distributions before and
after the generation of over-complete distribution. f1andf2are
two dimensions of the data. (a) Distributions of three approxi-
mated unseen classes and generated OCDs for the corresponding
classes. (b) Three approximated unseen and seen class distribu-
tions, and generated OCDs for the corresponding classes. (Best
viewed in colour)
ited or no training data, researchers have designed two dif-
ferent protocols: 1) conventional Zero-Shot Learning and
2) Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) [ 39]. In ZSL
problems, dataset is split into two sets with zero intersec-
tion in classes and the objective is to maximize the perfor-
mance on unseen classes. In GZSL, the test dataset contains
both unseen and seen classes, and it is required to maximize
the performance across both sets of classes. To address the
challenges of ZSL and GZSL, researchers have proposed to
1
13300