generate samples pertaining to unseen distribution synthet-
ically [ 10], [19], [32], [41]. The next section summarizes
the research efforts present in the literature. However, the
generated unseen classes fail to mimic the real unseen dis-
tribution, which is expected to have hard samples. Hence,
utilizing synthetically generated classes for training the dis-
criminative classiﬁer does not necessarily improve the per-
formance.
One of the primary reasons for performance degradation
in ZSL is that the testing set contains hard samples which
are closer to another class and the decision boundary is not
optimized for such instances present in the test set. There-
fore, it is our assertion that generating hard samples and
approximating unseen classes may lead the network to re-
duce the bias. In this research, we propose the concept of
Over-Complete Distribution (OCD). The objective of over-
complete distributions is to generate challenging samples
that are closer to other classes, which consequently helps in
increasing the generalizability of the network with respect
to the unseen classes. Secondly, as shown in Figure 1, we
propose to incorporate Online Batch Triplet Loss (OBTL) to
enforce separability between classes and Center Loss (CL)
to reduce the spread within the class. We experimentally
demonstrate that synthetically generated over-complete dis-
tribution allows the classiﬁer to learn a feature space where
the separability of seen/unseen classes can be efﬁciently im-
proved.
2. Related Work
The literature in this domain is segregated in two direc-
tions: ZSL and GZSL. In ZSL, Larochelle et al. [18] have
proposed to learn a mapping from input space view to the
model space view. Similarly, Akata et al. [2] have suggested
embedding each class into the attribute vector space, called
as Attribute Label Embedding (ALE). Liu et al. [19] have
proposed a Deep Calibration Network (DCN) for learning
the common embedding space between the visual features
of an image to the semantic representation of its respective
class. A widely used method to handle the ZSL problem is
to learn a mapping between seen observation to the attribute
vector space. Lampert et al. [17] proposed Direct Attribute
Prediction (DAP) where a weighted probabilistic classiﬁer
has been trained for each attribute. After learning sample-
to-attribute mapping, Bayes rule is used to map attributes to
the class label. Xian et al. [37] proposed a more challeng-
ing protocol and demonstrated that existing state-of-the-art
(SOTA) algorithms do not perform well.
In GZSL, researchers have utilized the generated un-
seen classes to have representative data in the training
set [20], [23]. Verma et al. [ 32] have proposed a generative
model based on conditional variational autoencoder. They
have shown that the synthetically generated unseen distribu-
tion is closely approximated to the real unseen data distri-bution. On synthetically generated data, they have trained
supervised linear SVM and shown state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on the GZSL protocol. Similarly, Gao et al . [10]
have proposed to synthesize the unseen data by utilizing a
joint generative model. They have used CV AE and GAN,
and observed that preserving the semantic similarities in the
reconstruction phase can improve the performance of the
model.
Zhang et al. [41] have proposed a hybrid model consist-
ing of conditional Generative Adversarial Network (cGAN)
and Random Attribute Selection (RAS) for the synthesized
data generation. They have trained the hybrid model while
optimizing the reconstruction loss. Zhang et al . [40] ob-
served that the performance of conventional zero-shot learn-
ing algorithms suffer due to Class-level Over-ﬁtting (CO)
when they are evaluated for the GZSL task. To overcome
the CO problem, they have utilized the triplet loss, which
signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-art methods. In an-
other research direction, Long et al . [20] have proposed
Unseen Visual Data Synthesis (UVDS) for generating syn-
thesized classes from semantic attributes information. The
authors have also proposed Diffusion Regularization (DR),
which helps to reduce redundant correlation in the attribute
space. Atzmon et al. [5] have proposed adaptive conﬁdence
smoothing for GZSL problem. They have utilized three
classiﬁers as seen, unseen and gating experts to improve
the model performance. Huang et al. [14] have proposed
generative dual adversarial network for learning a mapping
function semantic to visual space. Schonfeld et al. [29] have
proposed to align the distribution generated from V AE and
showed improvement on benchmark databases.
Signiﬁcant efforts have been made in the direction of
generating unseen synthetic distributions for training the
model. However, as discussed earlier, there are still chal-
lenges to be addressed to improve the performance on ZSL
and GZSL problems, such as generalization of the model
on the test set and reduce the bias for both seen and unseen
classes.
3. Proposed Framework
Figure 2demonstrate the steps involved in the proposed
framework. For a given input xwith associated attribute
aand latent variable z, there are three modules in the pro-
posed pipeline: (i) an encoder ( pE(z|x)) to compute the
latent variables zon given x, (ii) a decoder ( pG(ˆx|z,a))
to generate samples ˆxon given zand attribute a, and (iii)
a regressor ( pR(ˆa|ˆx)) to map ˆxto their predicted attribute
ˆa. The combined encoder and decoder modules is called
as CV AE, which has been conditioned on attribute a. The
regressor module is trained with the OBTL and CL losses
to optimize the interclass and intraclass distances. This sec-
tion presents the details of each of the modules followed by
the training process and the implementation details.
213301