One last thing that should be mentioned here is the per-
formance of the default Arm NN OpenCL drivers. Unfortu-
nately, they cannot unleash the full potential of Mali GPUs,
which results in atypically high inference times compared to
GPUs with a similar GFLOPS performance ( e.g., the Exynos
9820, 9810 or 8895 with Arm NN OpenCL). By switching
to their custom vendor implementation, one can achieve up
to 10 times speed-up for many deep learning architectures:
e.g., the overall performance of the Exynos 9820 with Mali-
G76 MP12 rose from 6% to 26% when using Samsung’s own
OpenCL drivers. The same also applies to Snapdragon SoCs
which NNAPI drivers are based on Qualcomm’s modiﬁed
OpenCL implementation.
5.2. Quantized performance
This year, the performance ranking for quantized inference
(table 3) is led by the Hexagon-powered Qualcomm Snap-
dragon 855 Plus chipset accompanied by the Unisoc Tiger
T710 with a stand-alone NPU. These two SoCs are show-
ing nearly identical results in all int-8 tests, and are slightly
(15-20%) faster than the Kirin 990, Helio P90 and the stan-
dard Snapdragon 855. As claimed by Qualcomm, the per-
formance of the Hexagon 690 DSP has approximately dou-
bled over the previous-generation Hexagon 685. The lat-
ter, together with its derivatives (Hexagon 686 and 688),
is currently present in Qualcomm’s mid-range chipsets.
One should note that there exist multiple revisions of the
Hexagon 685, as well as several versions of its drivers.
Hence, the performance of the end devices and SoCs with
this DSP might vary quite signiﬁcantly ( e.g., , Snapdragon
675 vs. Snapdragon 845).
As mobile GPUs are primarily designed for ﬂoating-point
computations, accelerating quantized AI models with them
is not very efﬁcient in many cases. The best results were
achieved by the Exynos 9825 with Mali-G76 MP12 graphics
and custom Samsung OpenCL drivers. It showed an overall
performance similar to that of the Hexagon 685 DSP (in the
Snapdragon 710), though the inference results of both chips
are heavily dependent on the running model. Exynos mid-
range SoCs with Mali-G72 MP3 GPU were not able to out-
perform the CPU of the Snapdragon 835 chipset, similar to
the Exynos 8890 with Mali-T880 MP12 graphics. An even
bigger difference will be observed for the CPUs from the
more recent mobile SoCs. As a result, using GPUs for quan-
tized inference on the mid-range and low-end devices might
be reasonable only to achieve a higher power efﬁciency.
6. Discussion
The tremendous progress in mobile AI hardware since last
year [31] is undeniable. When compared to the second gen-
eration of NPUs ( e.g., the ones in the Snapdragon 845 and
Kirin 970 SoCs), the speed of ﬂoating-point and quantizedinference has increased by more than 7.5 and 3.5 times, re-
spectively, bringing the AI capabilities of smartphones to a
substantially higher level. All ﬂagship SoCs presented dur-
ing the past 12 months show a performance equivalent to or
higher than that of entry-level CUDA-enabled desktop GPUs
and high-end CPUs. The 4th generation of mobile AI sili-
con yields even better results. This means that in the next
two-three years all mid-range and high-end chipsets will
get enough power to run the vast majority of standard deep
learning models developed by the research community and
industry. This, in turn, will result in even more AI projects
targeting mobile devices as the main platform for machine
learning model deployment.
When it comes to the software stack required for running
AI algorithms on smartphones, progress here is evolutionary
rather than revolutionary. There is still only one major mo-
bile deep learning library, TensorFlow Lite, providing a rea-
sonably high functionality and ease of deployment of deep
learning models on smartphones, while also having a large
community of developers. This said, the number of criti-
cal bugs and issues introduced in its new versions prevents
us from recommending it for any commercial projects or
projects dealing with non-standard AI models. The recently
presented TensorFlow Lite delegates can be potentially used
to overcome the existing issues, and besides that allow the
SoC vendors to bring AI acceleration support to devices with
outdated or absent NNAPI drivers. We also strongly recom-
mend researchers working on their own AI engines to design
them as TFLite delegates, as this is the easiest way to make
them available for all TensorFlow developers, as well as to
make a direct comparison against the current TFLite’s CPU
and GPU backends. We hope that more working solutions
and mobile libraries will be released in the next year, mak-
ing the deployment of deep learning models on smartphones
a trivial routine.
As before, we plan to publish regular benchmark re-
ports describing the actual state of AI acceleration on mo-
bile devices, as well as changes in the machine learn-
ing ﬁeld and the corresponding adjustments made in the
benchmark to reﬂect them. The latest results obtained
with the AI Benchmark and the description of the actual
tests is updated monthly on the project website: http:
//ai-benchmark.com . Additionally, in case of any
technical problems or some additional questions you can al-
ways contact the ﬁrst two authors of this paper.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we discussed the latest advances in the area
of machine and deep learning in the Android ecosystem.
First, we presented an overview of recently released mobile
chipsets that can be potentially used for accelerating the exe-
cution of neural networks on smartphones and other portable
15