Figure 1: Performance evolution of mobile AI accelerators: image throughput for the ﬂoat Inception-V3 model. Mobile devices were run-
ning the FP16 model using TensorFlow Lite and NNAPI. Acceleration on Intel CPUs was achieved using the Intel MKL-DNN library [45],
on Nvidia GPUs – with CUDA [10] and cuDNN [8]. The results on Intel and Nvidia hardware were obtained using the standard TensorFlow
library [2] running the FP32 model with a batch size of 20 (the FP16 format is currently not supported by these CPUs / GPUs). Note that
the Inception-V3 is a relatively small network, and for bigger models the advantage of Nvidia GPUs over other silicon might be larger.
While running many state-of-the-art deep learning models
on smartphones was initially a challenge as they are usually
not optimized for mobile inference, the last few years have
radically changed this situation. Presented back in 2015,
TensorFlow Mobile [79] was the ﬁrst ofﬁcial library allow-
ing to run standard AI models on mobile devices without any
special modiﬁcation or conversion, though also without any
hardware acceleration, i.e. on CPU only. In 2017, the latter
limitation was lifted by the TensorFlow Lite (TFLite) [46]
framework that dropped support for many vital deep learn-
ing operations, but offered a signiﬁcantly reduced binary
size and kernels optimized for on-device inference. This li-
brary also got support for the Android Neural Networks API
(NNAPI) [5], introduced the same year and allowing for the
access to the device’s AI hardware acceleration resources di-
rectly through the Android operating system. This was an
important milestone as a full-ﬂedged mobile ML pipeline
was ﬁnally established: training, exporting and running the
resulting models on mobile devices became possible within
one standard deep learning library, without using special-
ized vendors tools or SDKs. At ﬁrst, however, this approach
had also numerous ﬂaws related to NNAPI and TensorFlow
Lite themselves, thus making it impractical for many use
cases. The most notable issues were the lack of valid NNAPI
drivers in the majority of Android devices (only 4 commer-
cial models featured them as of September 2018 [19]), and
the lack of support for many popular ML models by TFLite.
These two issues were largely resolved during the past year.
Since the spring of 2019, nearly all new devices with Qual-
comm, HiSilicon, Samsung and MediaTek systems on a chip
(SoCs) and with dedicated AI hardware are shipped with
NNAPI drivers allowing to run ML workloads on embed-
ded AI accelerators. In Android 10, the Neural Networks
API was upgraded to version 1.2 that implements 60 new
ops [1] and extends the range of supported models. Many of
these ops were also added to TensorFlow Lite starting from
builds 1.14 and 1.15. Another important change was the in-troduction of TFLite delegates [12]. These delegates can be
written directly by hardware vendors and then used for ac-
celerating AI inference on devices with outdated or absent
NNAPI drivers. A universal delegate for accelerating deep
learning models on mobile GPUs (based on OpenGL ES,
OpenCL or Metal) was already released by Google earlier
this year [43]. All these changes build the foundation for
a new mobile AI infrastructure tightly connected with the
standard machine learning (ML) environment, thus making
the deployment of machine learning models on smartphones
easy and convenient. The above changes will be described
in detail in Section 3.
The latest generation of mid-range and high-end mobile
SoCs comes with AI hardware, the performance of which is
getting close to the results of desktop CUDA-enabled Nvidia
GPUs released in the past years. In this paper, we present
and analyze performance results of all generations of mo-
bile AI accelerators from Qualcomm, HiSilicon, Samsung,
MediaTek and Unisoc, starting from the ﬁrst mobile NPUs
released back in 2017. We compare against the results ob-
tained with desktop GPUs and CPUs, thus assessing perfor-
mance of mobile vs. conventional machine learning silicon.
To do this, we use a professional AI Benchmark applica-
tion [31] consisting of 21 deep learning tests and measuring
more than 50 different aspects of AI performance, including
the speed, accuracy, initialization time, stability, etc. The
benchmark was signiﬁcantly updated since previous year to
reﬂect the latest changes in the ML ecosystem. These up-
dates are described in Section 4. Finally, we provide an
overview of the performance, functionality and usage of An-
droid ML inference tools and libraries, and show the perfor-
mance of more than 200 Android devices and 100 mobile
SoCs collected in-the-wild with the AI Benchmark applica-
tion.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2
we describe the hardware acceleration resources available
on the main chipset platforms and programming interfaces
2