Figure 3: A general architecture of the Huawei’s DaVinci Core.
Below, we provide a detailed description of the mobile
platforms and related SDKs released in the past year. More
information about SoCs with AI acceleration support that
were introduced earlier, can be found in our previous pa-
per [31].
2.1. Samsung chipsets / EDEN SDK
The Exynos 9820 was the ﬁrst Samsung SoC to get an NPU
technically compatible with Android NNAPI, its drivers will
be released after Android Q upgrade. This chipset con-
tains two custom Mongoose M4 CPU cores, two Cortex-
A75, four Cortex-A55 cores and Mali-G76 MP12 graphics.
The NPU of the Exynos 9820 supports only quantized in-
ference and consists of the controller and two cores (Fig. 2)
having 1024 multiply-accumulate (MAC) units [78]. The
NPU controller has a CPU, a direct memory access (DMA)
unit, code SRAM and a network controller. The CPU is
communicating with the host system of the SoC and deﬁnes
the network scale for the network controller. The controller
automatically conﬁgures all modules in the two cores and
traverses the network. To use the external memory band-
width and the scratchpads efﬁciently, the weights of the net-
work are compressed, and the network compiler addition-
ally partitions the network into sub-networks and performs
the traversal over multiple network layers. The DMA unit
manages the compressed weights and feature maps in each
of the 512KB scratchpads of the cores. When running the
computations, the NPU can also skip weights that are zero
to improve convolution efﬁciency. A much more detailed
description of the Exynos NPU can be found in [78]. We
strongly recommend reading this article for everyone inter-
ested in the general functioning of NPUs as it provides an
excellent overview on all network / data processing stages
and possible bottlenecks.
The Exynos 9820’s NPU occupies 5.5mm2, is fabricated
in 8nm CMOS technology and operates at 67-933 MHz
clock frequency. The performance of the NPU heavily de-
pends on the kernel sizes and the fraction of zero weights.
For kernels of size 5 5, it achieves the performance of
2.1 TOPS and 6.9 TOPS for 0% and 75% zero-weights,
respectively; the energy efﬁciency in these two cases is
3.6 TOPS/W and 11.5 TOPS/W. For the Inception-V3
Figure 4: SoC components integrated into the Kirin 990 chips.
model, the energy efﬁciency lies between 2 TOPS/W and
3.4 TOPS/W depending on network sparsity [78].
The other two Samsung SoCs that support Android
NNAPI are the Exynos 9609 / 9610, though they are relying
on the Mali-G72 MP3 GPU and Arm NN drivers [6] to accel-
erate AI models. As to the Exynos 9825 presented together
with the latest Note10 smartphone series, this is a slightly
overclocked version of the Exynos 9820 produced in 7nm
technology, with the same NPU design.
This year, Samsung announced the Exynos Deep Neural
Network (EDEN) SDK that provides the NPU, GPU and
CPU acceleration for deep learning models and exploits the
data and model parallelism. It consists of the model con-
version tool, the NPU compiler and the customized TFLite
generator and is available as a desktop tool plus runtimes for
Android and Linux. The EDEN runtime provides APIs for
initialization, opening / closing the model and its execution
with various conﬁgurations. Unfortunately, it is not publicly
available yet.
2.2. HiSilicon chipsets / HiAI SDK
While the Kirin 970 / 980 SoCs were using NPUs originally
designed by Cambricon, this year Huawei switched to its in-
house developed Da Vinci architecture (Fig. 3), powering
the Ascend series of AI accelerators and using a 3D Cube
computing engine to accelerate matrix computations. The
ﬁrst SoC with Da Vinci NPU was a mid-range Kirin 810 in-
corporating two Cortex-A76 and six Cortex-A55 CPU cores
with Mali-G52 MP6 GPU. A signiﬁcantly enlarged AI ac-
celerator appeared later in the Kirin 990 5G chip having four
Cortex-A76, four Cortex-A55 CPUs and Mali-G76 MP16
graphics. This SoC features a triple-core Da Vinci NPU con-
taining two large (Da Vinci Lite) cores for heavy computing
scenarios and one little (Da Vinci Tiny) core for low-power
AI computations. According to Huawei, the little core is up
to 24 times more power efﬁcient than the large one when run-
ning face recognition models. Besides that, a simpliﬁed ver-
sion of the Kirin 990 (without “5G” preﬁx) with a dual-core
NPU (one large + one small core) was also presented and
should not be confused with the standard version (Fig. 4).
4