months [64, 13], there is still no ofﬁcial support for An-
droid (except for 2 two-year old camera demos [15, 14]),
thus making it not that interesting for regular developers.
Though some TensorFlow Lite issues mentioned last
year [31] were solved in its current releases, we still rec-
ommend using it with great precaution. For instance, in its
latest ofﬁcial build (1.14), the interaction with NNAPI was
completely broken, leading to enormous losses and random
outputs during the ﬁrst two inferences. This issue can be
solved by replacing the setUseNNAPI method with a stand-
alone NNAPI delegate present in the TFLite-GPU delegate
library [11]. Another problem present in the nightly builds is
a signiﬁcantly increased RAM consumption for some mod-
els (e.g., SRCNN, Inception-ResNet-V1, VGG-19), making
them crashing even on devices with 4GB+ of RAM. While
these issues should be solved in the next ofﬁcial TFLite re-
lease (1.15), we suggest developers to extensively test their
models on all available devices with each change of TFLite
build. Another recommended option is to move to custom
TensorFlow Lite delegates from SoC vendors that allow to
omit such problems and potentially achieve even better re-
sults on their hardware.
The other two major changes in the Android deep learn-
ing ecosystem were the introduction of TensorFlow Lite del-
egates and Neural Networks API 1.2. We describe them in
detail below.
3.1. Android NNAPI 1.2
The latest version of NN API provides access to 56 new op-
erators, signiﬁcantly expanding the range of models that can
be supported for hardware acceleration. In addition the range
of supported data types has increased, bringing support for
per-axis quantization for weights and IEEE Float 16. This
broader support for data types enables developers and hard-
ware makers to determine the most performant options for
their speciﬁc model needs.
A signiﬁcant addition to the API surface is the ability to
query the underlying hardware accelerators at runtime and
specify explicitly where to run the model. This enables
use cases where the developer wants to limit contention be-
tween resources, for example an Augmented Reality devel-
oper may choose to ensure the GPU is free for visual pro-
cessing requirements by directing their ML workloads to an
alternative accelerator if available.
Neural Networks API 1.2 introduces the concept of burst
executions. Burst executions are a sequence of executions of
the same prepared model that occur in rapid succession, such
as those operating on frames of a camera capture or succes-
sive audio samples. A burst object is used to control a set
of burst executions, and to preserve resources between exe-
cutions, enabling executions to have lower overhead. From
Android 10, NNAPI provides functions to support caching of
compilation artifacts, which reduces the time used for com-pilation when an application starts. Using this caching func-
tionality, the driver does not need to manage or clean up the
cached ﬁles. Neural Networks API (NNAPI) vendor exten-
sions, introduced in Android 10, are collections of vendor-
deﬁned operations and data types. On devices running NN
HAL 1.2 or higher, drivers can provide custom hardware-
accelerated operations by supporting corresponding vendor
extensions. Vendor extensions do not modify the behavior of
existing operations. Vendor extensions provide a more struc-
tured alternative to OEM operation and data types, which
were deprecated in Android 10.
3.2. TensorFlow Lite Delegates
In the latest releases, TensorFlow Lite provides APIs for del-
egating the execution of neural network sub-graphs to ex-
ternal libraries (called delegates) [12]. Given a neural net-
work model, TFLite ﬁrst checks what operators in the model
can be executed with the provided delegate. Then TFLite
partitions the graph into several sub-graphs, substituting the
supported by the delegate sub-graphs with virtual “delegate
nodes” [43]. From that point, the delegate is responsible for
executing all sub-graphs in the corresponding nodes. Un-
supported operators are by default computed by the CPU,
though this might signiﬁcantly increase the inference time
as there is an overhead for passing the results from the sub-
graph to the main graph. The above logic is already used
by the TensorFlow Lite GPU backend described in the next
section.
3.3. TensorFlow Lite GPU Delegate
While many different NPUs were already released by all ma-
jor players, they are still very fragmented due to a missing
common interface or API. While NNAPI was designed to
tackle this problem, it suffers from its own design ﬂaws that
slow down NNAPI adoption and usage growth:
Long update cycle: NNAPI update is still bundled with
the OS update. Thus, it may take up to a year to get new
drivers.
Custom operations support: When a model has an op
that is not yet supported by NNAPI, it is nearly impos-
sible to run it with NNAPI. In the worst case, two parts
of a graph are accelerated through NNAPI, while a sin-
gle op implemented out of the context is computed by
the CPU, which ruins the performance.
There is another attempt by the Vulkan ML group to in-
troduce common programming language to be implemented
by vendors. The language resembles a model graph repre-
sentation similar to one found in the TensorFlow or ONNX
libraries. The proposal is still in its early stage and, if ac-
cepted, will take a few years to reach consumer devices.
7