Besides the above issues, there also exists a huge fragmen-
tation of mobile hardware platforms. For instance, the most
popular 30 SoC designs are now representing only 51% of
the market share, while 225 SoCs are still covering just 95%
of the market with a long tail of a few thousand designs. The
majority of these SoCs will never get NNAPI drivers, though
one should mention that around 23% of them have GPUs at
least 2 times more performant than the corresponding CPUs,
and thus they can be used for accelerating ML inference.
This number is signiﬁcantly bigger than the current market
share of chipsets with NPUs or valid NNAPI drivers. To use
the GPU acceleration on such platforms, TensorFlow GPU
delegate was introduced.
The inference phase of the GPU delegate consists of the
following steps. The input tensors are ﬁrst reshaped to the
PHWC4 format if their tensor shape has channel size not
equal to 4. For each operator, shader programs are linked by
binding resources such the operators input / output tensors,
weights, etc. and dispatched, i.e. inserted into the command
queue. The GPU driver then takes care of scheduling and ex-
ecuting all shader programs in the queue, and makes the re-
sult available to the CPU by the CPU / GPU synchronization.
In the GPU inference engine, operators exist in the form of
shader programs. The shader programs eventually get com-
piled and inserted into the command queue and the GPU
executes programs from this queue without synchronization
with the CPU. After the source code for each program is
generated, each shader gets compiled. This compilation step
can take awhile, from several milliseconds to seconds. Typi-
cally, app developers can hide this latency while loading the
model or starting the app for the ﬁrst time. Once all shader
programs are compiled, the GPU backend is ready for infer-
ence. A much more detailed description of the TFlite GPU
delegate can be found in [43].
3.4. Floating-point vs. Quantized Inference
One of the most controversial topics related to the deploy-
ment of deep learning models on smartphones is the suit-
ability of ﬂoating-point and quantized models for mobile
devices. There has been a lot of confusion with these two
types in the mobile industry, including a number of incorrect
statements and invalid comparisons. We therefore decided
to devote a separate section to them and describe and com-
pare their beneﬁts and disadvantages. We divided the dis-
cussion into three sections: the ﬁrst two are describing each
inference type separately, while the last one compares them
directly and makes suggestions regarding their application.
3.4.1. Floating-point Inference
Advantages: The model is running on mobile devices in
the same format as it was originally trained on the server or
desktop with standard machine learning libraries. No spe-
cial conversion, changes or re-training is needed; thus onegets the same accuracy and performance as on the desktop
or server environment.
Disadvantages: Many recent state-of-the-art deep learn-
ing models, especially those that are working with high-
resolution image transformations, require more than 6-8 gi-
gabytes of RAM and enormous computational resources for
data processing that are not available even in the latest high-
end smartphones. Thus, running such models in their origi-
nal format is infeasible, and they should be ﬁrst modiﬁed to
meet the hardware resources available on mobile devices.
3.4.2. Quantized Inference
Advantages: The model is ﬁrst converted from a 16-bit
ﬂoating point type to int-8 format. This reduces its size and
RAM consumption by a factor of 4 and potentially speeds
up its execution by 2-3 times. Since integer computations
consume less energy on many platforms, this also makes the
inference more power efﬁcient, which is critical in the case
of smartphones and other portable electronics.
Disadvantages: Reducing the bit-width of the network
weights (from 16 to 8 bits) leads to accuracy loss: in some
cases, the converted model might show only a small perfor-
mance degradation, while for some other tasks the result-
ing accuracy will be close to zero. Although a number of
research papers dealing with network quantization were pre-
sented by Qualcomm [49, 54] and Google [34, 37], all show-
ing decent accuracy results for many image classiﬁcation
models, there is no general recipe for quantizing arbitrary
deep learning architectures. Thus, quantization is still more
of a research topic, without working solutions for many AI-
related tasks ( e.g., image-to-image mapping or various NLP
problems). Besides that, many quantization approaches re-
quire the model to be retrained from scratch, preventing the
developers from using available pre-trained models provided
together with all major research papers.
3.4.3. Comparison
As one can see, there is always a trade-off between using one
model type or another: ﬂoating-point models will always
show better accuracy (since they can be simply initialized
with the weights of the quantized model and further trained
for higher accuracy), while integer models yield faster in-
ference. The progress here comes from both sides: AI ac-
celerators for ﬂoating-point models are becoming faster and
are reducing the difference between the speed of INT-8 and
FP16 inference, while the accuracy of various network quan-
tization approaches is also rising rapidly. Thus, the applica-
bility of each approach will depend on the particular task
and the corresponding hardware / energy consumption lim-
itations: for complex models and high-performance devices
ﬂoat models are preferable (due to the convenience of de-
ployment and better accuracy), while quantized inference is
8