sion, NeuroPilot supports automatic network quantiza-
tion and pruning. The SDK’s APU drivers support
FP16/INT16/INT8 data types, while CPU and GPU drivers
can be used for some custom ops and FP32/FP16 models.
The NeuroPilot SDK was designed to take advantage of Me-
diaTek’s heterogeneous hardware, by assigning the work-
loads to the most suitable processor and concurrently uti-
lizing all available computing resources for the best perfor-
mance and energy efﬁciency. The SDK is supporting only
MediaTek NeuroPilot-compatible chipsets across products
such as smartphones and TVs. At its presentation of the He-
lio P90, MediaTek demonstrated that NeuroPilot v2.0 allows
for the real-time implementation of many AI applications
(e.g. multi-person pose tracking, 3D pose tracking, multi-
ple object identiﬁcation, AR / MR, semantic segmentation,
scene identiﬁcation and image enhancement).
2.5. Unisoc chipsets / UNIAI SDK
Unisoc is a Chinese fabless semiconductor company (for-
merly known as Spreadtrum) founded in 2001. The com-
pany originally produced chips for GSM handsets and was
mainly known in China, though starting from 2010-2011 it
began to expand its business to the global market. Unisoc’s
ﬁrst smartphone SoCs (SC8805G and SC6810) appeared in
entry-level Android devices in 2011 and were featuring an
ARM-9 600MHz processor and 2D graphics. With the intro-
duction of the quad-core Cortex-A7 based SC773x, SC883x
and SC983x SoC series, Unisoc chipsets became used in
many low-end, globally shipped Android devices. The per-
formance of Unisoc’s budget chips was notably improved
in the SC9863 SoC and in the Tiger T310 platform released
earlier this year. To target the mid-range segment, Unisoc in-
troduced the Tiger T710 SoC platform with four Cortex-A75
+ four Cortex-A55 CPU cores and IMG PowerVR GM 9446
graphics. This is the ﬁrst chipset from Unisoc to feature a
dedicated NPU module for the acceleration of AI computa-
tions. The NPU of the T710 consists of two different com-
puting accelerator cores: one for integer models supporting
the INT4, INT8 and INT16 formats and providing a peak
performance of 3.2 TOPS for INT8, and the other for FP16
models with 0.5 TFLOPS performance. The two cores can
either accelerate different AI tasks at the same time, or accel-
erate the task with one of them, while the second core can be
completely shut down to reduce the overall power consump-
tion of the SoC. The Tiger T710 supports Android NNAPI
and implements Android NN Unosic HIDL services support-
ing INT8 / FP16 models. The overall energy efﬁciency of the
T710’s NPU is greater than or equal to 2.5 TOPS/W depend-
ing on the scenario.
Unisoc has also developed the UNIAI SDK 7 that con-
sists of two parts: the off-line model conversion tool that can
compile the trained model into a ﬁle that can be executed
on NPU; and the off-line model API and runtime used to
Figure 7: Schematic representation of Unisoc UNIAI SDK.
load and execute the compiled model. The off-line model
conversion tool supports several neural network framework
formats, including Tensorﬂow, Tensorﬂow Lite, Caffe and
ONNX. To improve the ﬂexibility, the NPU Core also in-
cludes units that can be programmed to support user deﬁned
ops, making it possible to run the entire model with such ops
on NPU and thus signiﬁcantly decreasing runtime.
2.6. Google Pixel 3 / Pixel Visual Core
As for the Pixel 2 series, the third generation of Google
phones contains a separate tensor processing unit (Pixel Vi-
sual Core) capable of accelerating deep learning ops. This
TPU did not undergo signiﬁcant design changes compared to
the previous version. Despite Google’s initial statement [66],
neither SDK nor NNAPI drivers were or will be released
for this TPU series, making it inaccessible to anyone except
Google. Therefore, its importance for deep learning devel-
opers is limited. In the Pixel phones, it is used for a few
tasks related to HDR photography and real-time sensor data
processing.
3. Deep Learning on Smartphones
In a preceding paper ([31], Section 3), we described the
state of the deep learning mobile ecosystem as of Septem-
ber 2018. The changes in the past year were along the line
of expectations. The TensorFlow Mobile [79] framework
was completely deprecated by Google in favor of Tensor-
Flow Lite that got a signiﬁcantly improved CPU backend
and support for many new ops. Yet, TFLite is still lacking
some vital deep learning operators, especially those used in
many NLP models. Therefore, TensorFlow Mobile remains
relevant for complex architectures. Another recently added
option for unsupported models is to use the TensorFlow Lite
plugin containing standard TensorFlow operators [63] that
are not yet added to TFLite. That said, the size of this plu-
gin (40MB) is even larger than the size of the TensorFlow
Mobile library (20MB). As to the Caffe2 / PyTorch libraries,
while some unofﬁcial Android ports appeared in the past 12
6