Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Model BLEU
Multilingual 17.3
Multi-Model Ensemble 17.5
Pivoting with Multilingual 17.0
Multi-source Self-Ensemble 17.5
Table 12: Results on zero-shot language pairs for Multi-Source Self-Ensemble
compared to various baselines. We report the average test BLEU score on 100 randomly
sampled pairs.
A known, eﬀective strategy to improve accuracy is to ensemble multiple models at
inference time. However, this requires training multiple models which substantially increases
the training compute requirements. Instead, we explored self-ensembles as a possible direction,
created by applying the multilingual model to the same source sentence in diﬀerent languages.
For example, if we wish to translate Galician to English, then instead of directly translating
between the two, we ensemble the translation of Spanish to English with the translation of
Galician to English, using the same multilingual model for both directions, and by averaging
the predicted token log-probabilities, as for standard multi-model ensembles. The additional
source is obtained by translating the input to another intermediary language. After this,
we ensemble the translation of both sources to the target. This uses the same multilingual
model for all steps.
We evaluate both pivoting and self-ensembling on zero-shot directions as these can beneﬁt
from better accuracy. We report results on 100 randomly sampled zero-shot translation
directions which have at least 1000 examples in the validation and test set. Next, for each
translation direction, we choose the intermediary language that resulted in the highest BLEU
on the validation set; the same is done to choose the intermediary language for pivoting.
We also tune a weight to balance the two language directions (Garmash and Monz, 2016).
Table 12 shows that multi-source self-ensembling improves the single model result by 0.2
BLEU on average. It also performs as well as standard multi-model ensembling but requires
training only a single model. This is particularly relevant for large models trained on vast
quantities of data, which require a lot of compute to be able to perform standard ensembling.
Overall, we ﬁnd these directions of investigation very interesting—by exploiting multi-
linguality further at inference time, the large training cost could be reduced and replaced
with inference-time techniques that are much faster. We believe further research into these
inference-time techniques, focusing on similarity between languages or selecting speciﬁc
pivot languages, or architectural modiﬁcations that can be applied during decoding—such as
adding a language model or nearest neighbors search (Khandelwal et al., 2020), are fruitful
avenues of future work.
ImprovementsonVeryLow-ResourceLanguages. Strongperformanceforlow-resource
languages remains a critical area for future improvement (Gu et al., 2018; Sennrich and Zhang,
2019). For many languages, our system still requires substantial improvements. Examples
include African languages such as Xhosa and Zulu, European languages such as Catalan and
Basque, and Southeast Asian languages such as Iloko and Cebuano. For many of these, even
monolingual resources on the internet are limited, which strongly aﬀects the quantity and
32