Beyond English-Centric MMT
Figure 4: Improvements from Adding Backtranslated Data. For each of the 100
language directions we explored by adding backtranslation. The blue line indicates the
original model, where directions were selected if they had between 2 and 10 BLEU. The
orange scatter indicates the eﬀect of adding backtranslation. Languages are ordered by their
original BLEU scores before backtranslation.
3.3 Augmenting Bitext Data with Backtranslation
Backtranslation (BT) creates synthetic bitexts from unaligned monolingual data (Schwenk,
2008; Bojar and Tamchyna, 2011; Sennrich et al., 2016a; Edunov et al., 2018; Hoang et al.,
2018). The core idea is to translate monolingual sentences in the backward direction, and
add the obtained synthetic translations to the training set. More precisely, when training a
model to translate from a source language to a target language, backtranslation generates
additional data by translating monolingual target sentences into the source language. Using
backtranslation thus requires the ability to translate in both directions, which ﬁts well into
the setting of multilingual machine translation (Zhang et al., 2020; Siddhant et al., 2020).
However, generating these backtranslations is time consuming even for a single direction,
which is compounded in the Many-to-Many case. We thus focus on applying backtranslation
on speciﬁc pairs to supplement mined data where needed.
Selecting Backtranslation Pairs. Our goal is to translate between 100 languages and to
provide good translation quality for as many translation directions as possible. To this end,
we use BT to improve directions which have initially lower translation quality. We identify
these language directions by measuring the quality of our 1.2B parameter multilingual model
before applying BT. Since back-translation is computationally intensive, we focus on 100
directions with a BLEU score of between 2and10. For 50of these directions, we do not
have any bitext at all as we did not mine all 4,450 possible language pairs.
Training a Multilingual Model with Additional Backtranslations. For the selected
pairs, we ﬁrst generate synthetic translations that are added to the training set without
upsampling. Following Caswell et al. (2019), we add a special encoder-side BT token to
these translations to indicate to the model that they are synthetic. For each of the 100
target languages, we randomly sample 50million unique monolingual sentences from the
cleaned CommonCrawl corpus of Wenzek et al. (2019). The synthetic translations are then
generated with our 1:2B MMT model. We use a beam search with beam of size 5and ﬁx all
the hyper-parameters, including the length penalty, to the same values for all the directions.
13