Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Figure 2: Depiction of an English-Only data mining setting compared to the
Bridge Language Mining Strategy . We display a data matrix, where languages are
shown on the X and Y axes. Data is mined in one direction (such as Hindi to Marathi) and
used to train bidirectionally.
3.2.1 Bridge Language Group Mining Strategy
Mining data for each and every language pair is prohibitive — previous work circumvents
this issue by focusing only on the 99pairs that go through English (Zhang et al., 2020).
An alternative to the extensive computation required to mine all possible combinations of
pairs issparse mining , or mining only a select subset of pairs. A straightforward strategy is
torandomly select pairs to mine, but this does not use any linguistic information on how
languages are related and spoken around the world.
In this work, we propose an alternative based on language families and bridge languages
that avoids exhaustively mining every possible pair. Our goal is to reduce the number of
bitext pairs while preserving translation directions of practical interest. We ﬁrst group all
the100languages into 14language groupings . All languages within a grouping are mined
against each other. For instance, within the Indic language grouping, we mine all pairs
of Bengali, Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, and so on. The motivation for this strategy is
two-fold. First, people living in areas that speak multiple languages in the same grouping
tend to communicate a lot with each other and would beneﬁt from high quality direct
translation. Second, systematically mining languages of the same grouping is helpful for
training language-speciﬁc parameter models (see Section § 5.2).
For the most part, languages are grouped by linguistic similarity, for example Germanic,
Slavic, or Malayo-Polynesian languages. However, the size of the resulting groupings varies
greatly, resulting in less mined data for the languages in the smallest groupings. We further
group languages by geographic and cultural proximity to reduce this discrepancy. For
example, Uralic and Baltic languages are gathered into a single group to increase the quantity
of mined data. The resulting groupings are shown in Table 1.
To connect languages across groupings, we deﬁne 1—3 bridge languages in each grouping,
usually those with the most resources, such as Bengali, Hindi, and Tamil for the 12languages
in the Indo-Aryan family. All 26bridge languages are highlighted in Table 1. These bridge
languages are mined against all other bridge languages. Finally, all 100languages are mined
10