Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
All Supervised
Model Avg Low Mid High
Random 80% 11.93.6 16.1 31.5
Random 80% w/ En 16.38.9 22.4 36.6
Bridge Language, 80% 17.2 10.4 23.2 37.4
90% 80% 60% 20% 0%
Sparsity Level17.017.518.018.519.0Avg BLEU
Table 2:(left) Comparison of Sparse Mining Strategies , comparing BLEU scores. We
ﬁrst hold the sparsity level ﬁxed at 80% — compared to randomly selecting pairs to mine, the
Bridge Language mining strategy performs very well. (right) Bridge Language Strategy
at Diﬀerent Sparsity Levels , comparing BLEU scores. We analyze diﬀerent levels of
sparsity in the language matrix to understand how many pairs to mine. Based on these
results, we take 60% sparse as a tradeoﬀ point between strong performance and reasonable
quantity of mining. 0% indicates no sparsity, or a fully mined language matrix.
Bridge Language strategy versus Random and English-Centric Random. We
experimentally evaluate the impact of our bridge language mining strategy on the performance
of our baseline model in Table 2 (left). We consider two additional baselines, a fully random
mining strategy (Random 20%) and a English-Centric + Random strategy (Random 20% w/
En). In the Random strategy, mined pairs are randomly chosen, while in the English-Centric
+ Random strategy, we retain all pairs through English and only select the remaining
pairs randomly. We show that fully random mining has a substantial negative impact on
performance, as a lot of high quality data is aligned through English, so sampling fully
randomly eliminates a large portion of the potential training set. Random 20% w/ En is
worse as well. Through examination, we ﬁnd that randomly sampling pairs to mine often
selects pairs that do not produce as much data, as the pairs may not include high resource
languages. However, the bridge language strategy ensures that high resource languages are
mined, and then focuses on mining languages in related families. This produces a large
amount of bitext, and at the same time, covers many language directions.
Impact of Sparsity. We focus on a subset of 50 languages where we have a fully mined
matrix to investigate the impact of our sparse mining strategy. We control the sparsity of
our language matrix using the number of bridge languages. In Figure 2 (right), we show
the impact of sparsity on the performance of our baseline model compared to a fully mined
language matrix (0% sparse). We observe that increasing the amount of mined data to make
the matrix less sparse is helpful, but fully mining the matrix is not substantially better. The
main reason is that our mining strategy prioritizes frequently used pairs which are often
associated with the largest bitext, while the discarded pairs are often associated with small
bitext. For example, fully mining the matrix would mine a pair such as Icelandic to Chinese,
but the amount of data produced by mining this pair is quite low. This case is representative
of what occurs as the full matrix is mined—as increasingly more data is mined, the additional
pairs begin to add less data which in turn leads to diminishing quality improvements.
12