Beyond English-Centric MMT
Target language token. The Transformer architecture has been designed for the bilingual
case, where the target language is ﬁxed. In the case of multilingual machine translation, the
target language is not ﬁxed, and several strategies can be applied to condition the network to
produce a sentence in the desired target language. Similarly to Ha et al. (2016) and Johnson
et al. (2017), we add a special token in the encoder indicating the source language and a
special token in the decoder indicating the target language.
Training. Our starting point for improving massively multilingual translation models
is a large Transformer model, with 12 Encoder and 12 Decoder layers, with 8192 hidden
units in the FFN and 1024 embedding dimension. We share the weight matrices of the
input and output embeddings. The total parameter count is 1.2B. We train with the Adam
optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and warmup ﬁrst for 4000 updates (setting the batch
size to 4000 tokens), with label smoothing 0:1(Szegedy et al., 2015; Pereyra et al., 2017).
For regularization, we tune the dropout parameter between f0:1;0:2;0:3g. To stabilize
the training of deeper Transformers, we train with LayerDrop (Fan et al., 2019) 0.05 and
pre-normalization (Nguyen and Salazar, 2019).
To train with billions of sentences, we split the training data into 256 diﬀerent shards to
manage memory consumption. However, directly dividing mid and low resource languages
into shards would reduce the variability of each shard’s data for mid or low resource languages.
Imagine the extreme case where there are only 100sentences of a language direction per
shard—the model would easily overﬁt. Thus, each language is divided into a diﬀerent number
of shards based on resource level, such that high resource languages have more shards and
the lowest resource languages only have one shard. Subsequently, lower resource shards are
replicated until the full number of shards is reached—so sentences from lower resource shards
can appear multiple times.
Generation. Unless otherwise speciﬁed: for all results, we report single models with no
checkpoint averaging, use beam search with beam 5, and do not tune length penalty, keeping
it at 1 (meaning the model decides the length).
3. Building a Many-to-Many Parallel Data Set for 100 Languages
In this section, we provide an overview of our Many-to-Many setting: the selection of the
100languages, the evaluation benchmarks, and the construction of a large-scale training set
through data mining (Artetxe and Schwenk, 2019a) and backtranslation (Sennrich et al.,
2016a) that provides training data thousands of directions.
3.1 Creating a Multilingual Benchmark
The ﬁrst step of establishing a Many-to-Many data set is to select 100languages for which
there already exist high-quality, annotated data sets that can be used for model evaluation.
3.1.1 Language Selection
We consider several factors to select which languages to focus on. First, we include widely-
spoken languages from geographically diverse language families. We cover a diversity of
scripts and resource levels (as shown in Table 1) to have high coverage of languages worldwide.
5