Beyond English-Centric MMT
5.1.1 Background: Model Parallel Training
During the training of a neural network, we need to ﬁt its weights, activations, gradients,
and optimizer state in memory. This restricts the maximum capacity of a network that we
can train on a single accelerated device such as a GPU. In this section, we describe two
directions to circumvent this limitation. The ﬁrst direction focuses on ﬁtting a larger model
on single device by reducing the memory required by activations and optimizer states during
the training process. The second direction focuses on eﬃcient training of even larger models
through model parallelism, for example splitting a model across multiple devices. In this
work, we pursue both techniques to densely scale the capacity of Transformers.
Reducing Memory Consumption on a GPU. To reduce the amount of memory, we
consider optimizer state sharding and gradient checkpointing. Optimizer state sharding (Ra-
jbhandari et al., 2019) divides the optimizer state across distributed data parallel workers
so that each worker only needs to store a fraction of the optimizer state. We also apply
gradient checkpointing, which saves memory by discarding intermediate activations before
the forward pass ﬁnishes (Chen et al., 2016). During the backward pass, these activations
are recomputed again as required. This trades time for memory. In the case of a Transformer
based architecture, applying gradient checkpointing at pipeline parallel model partition
boundaries reduces the memory used by activations by almost 50%.
Models Sharded across Multiple GPUs. Reducing the memory consumption enables
ﬁtting greater model capacity on a single GPU, but the physical limitations of a single device
still apply. A solution is to split the model into separate components that are dispatched
across diﬀerent GPUs and trained in parallel. This type of solution scales model capacity
with the number of GPUs. There are two broad paradigms to split a model: along the width
or along the depth. Tensor parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019; Shazeer et al., 2018) splits by
width, while pipeline parallelism (Huang et al., 2019a; Kim et al., 2020) splits by depth,
placing diﬀerent layers on diﬀerent GPUs. We use pipeline parallelism, but both methods
work equally well with Transformers. We use the implementation from fairscale22.
5.1.2 Training Large Dense Models
We investigate several strategies to increase the capacity of a sequence-to-sequence Trans-
former model in the context of multilingual machine translation.
How to Scale: Wide or Deep? We consider increasing the capacity of a Transformer by
either increasing the number of layers (depth axis) or the dimensions of each layer, including
the feed-forward (width axis). The exact model conﬁgurations and dimensions are detailed in
the Appendix. On the left panel of Figure 7, we analyze which axis to prioritize by comparing
models with diﬀerent sizes, 1B,2B, and 10B, obtained by growing their depth or width
(see Appendix B for model conﬁgurations and dimensions). We report their performance
in BLEU and their inference speed measured in words per second (WPS). We train these
models on a data set that covers 80languages and evaluate them on 38diﬀerent benchmark
directions with more than 1k parallel sentences per direction. The main result of this study
22. Please see: https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairscale .
19