Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
bg-en cs-en ru-en uk-en hr-en mk-en pl-en sk-en sl-en sr-en152025303540BLEUBilingual
Many-to-English
Bilingual + BT
Figure 6: Performance of many-to-English multilingual translation compared to
bilingual baselines trained on mined data and bilingual + backtranslation. The
average performance of many-to-English is 25.1 BLEU compared to 25.2 BLEU for back-
translation while the bilingual system achieves 23.1.
explain this discrepancy between directions from and to English is that the decoder of an
English-Centric model learns a better English language model by leveraging the aggregated
English data across all through-English directions.
Result. We test this hypothesis with a controlled experiment where we compare a Many-
to-English model with bilingual models using backtranslated English data (Section § 3.3).
The experiment is based on 11 Slavic languages and we backtranslate the exact same English
data as was used to train the Many-to-English model so that both models are trained on
the same English data. Figure 6 shows that backtranslation performs comparably to the
Many-to-English approach. While this improves our understanding of Many-to-English
translation, a multilingual approach nevertheless retains the advantage of combining many
directions into a single model which greatly simpliﬁes modeling.
5. Components for Scaling Multilingual Translation Models
Our goal is to build a single model capable of translating 9;900language directions covering
100languages. This creates several challenges for models with insuﬃcient capacity to capture
that many languages and scripts adequately. To this end, previous MMT work has considered
diﬀerent types of large capacity models (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Lepikhin et al., 2020).
In this section, we investigate diﬀerent ways to add capacity to an MMT model. We ﬁrst
investigate dense scaling, where we increase the depth and width of standard Transformer
architectures. Then, we identify disadvantages of dense scaling, and propose an alternative
to eﬀectively add language-speciﬁc parameters and exploit the nature of language similarities
within the task of multilingual machine translation.
5.1 Dense Scaling
We describe how model parallel is used to scale model width and depth, then describe how
to train large model parallel models for multilingual machine translation.
18