Beyond English-Centric MMT
de-fr fr-de ja-zh zh-ja bn-hi hi-bn zh-fr fr-zh fr-ru ru-fr0246810Semantic Accuracy
Related Languages Unrelated Languages English-Centric
M2M-100
Figure 12: Human Evaluation of Translation Accuracy of m2m-100 compared to
English-Centric on 10 Non-English Directions. Evaluators are asked to score the
semantic accuracy of translations on a scale of 1 to 10.
most challenging direction based on human evaluation is French into Wolof (fr-wo), likely
because there is not suﬃcient target-side Wolof data.
Next, we compare our model with an English-Centric model on 10 directions in Figure 12.
Each evaluator is asked to rate 100 sentences, 50 from each model, in a blind test. Across
the board, we ﬁnd that our Many-to-Many system scores better in translation accuracy -
both for related and unrelated languages.
6.4 Related Work
Our work builds upon advances in translation quality, both from data and modeling stand-
points. In this section, we describe related work in these two areas.
DataWork in machine translation has leveraged natural sources of aligned data. For
example, European Parliamentary Proceedings (Koehn, 2005b) and religious text such as
the Bible and Quran are translated into numerous languages (Christodouloupoulos and
Steedman, 2015; Agić and Vulić, 2019). Many translation eﬀorts contribute data sets of
human translations, which can be used for training translation systems. However, beyond
human translations, a number of automatic alignment methods have created corpora as well.
For example, methods aligned documents on metadata (Resnik, 1999) or sentences based on
Jaccard distance or neural representations (Etchegoyhen and Azpeitia, 2016; Buck and Koehn,
2016). Other work expanded to use embeddings from translation systems (Abdul-Rauf and
Schwenk, 2009; Bouamor and Sajjad, 2018).
Several previous large-scale translation mining projects have produced data in many
directions. For example, eﬀorts have aligned data in Wikipedia (Smith et al., 2010; Tuﬁs
et al., 2013) including the Wikimatrix project, which mined 1620 directions (Schwenk et al.,
2019a). Wikipedia contains high quality data, but is limited in volume. Other work has
identiﬁed parallel data in sources such as subtitles, such as the OpenSubtitles project (Lison
and Tiedemann, 2016). Eﬀorts such as Paracrawl (Esplà-Gomis et al., 2019) have mined for
data on the web and are freely usable. Our work continues this line of scalable mining on
the web, but pushes to large-scale mining to produce billions of aligned sentences.
Complementary to the eﬀort of mining training data is to use available monolingual re-
sources. As parallel data is naturally more scarce, monolingual data provides the potential for
training high quality models, particularly for low resource languages. Backtranslation (Bojar
29