Beyond English-Centric MMT
每周六，在家附近的⼀个咖啡馆⾥，我坐在阳光最好的位置上Chaquesamedi, je m’assoisàma place préféréeau soleil dans le café voisin.language group ashared decoderlanguage group alanguage group blanguage group clanguage group dshared encoder<fr><zh>(c) Translating from Chinese to French with Dense + Language-Specific Sparse ModelxxxxxxxxxxxxEnglishEnglishxxxxxxxxxxxxTarget languageSource language(a) English-Centric Multilingual(b) M2M-100: Many-to-Many Multilingual ModelTarget languageSource language
Figure1:SummaryofourMany-to-Manydatasetandmultilingualmodel . English-
Centric data (top left) only contains training data to and from English, where as our Many-
to-Many multilingual setting (top right) contains data directly through various diﬀerent
directions. Our proposed model, m2m-100 , combines dense and sparse language-speciﬁc
parameters to translate directly between languages (bottom).
Sequence-to-sequence models are trained on pairs of sequences, conditioning on an input
sequence to produce an output sequence. Each sentence is split into tokens, that can be words
or characters, resulting in pairs of sequences (w1; : : : ; w S)and(v1; : : : ; v T). Most machine
translation systems are trained by maximizing the probability of the target sequence, given
the source sentence and the target language `t:
P(v1; : : : ; v Tjw1; : : : ; w S; `t)
Modernneuralmachinetranslationsystemsarebasedonseveralstandardcomponents, namely
a subword segmentation method and an encoder-decoder architecture called a Transformer.
We describe these components in the context of multilingual translation.
Segmentation with SentencePiece. The input and output of translation systems are
sequencesoftokens. Thesetokensareunitsfromadictionarybuiltwiththegoaltoreconstruct
any sentence in any language. Using words as base units is challenging, as it leads either
to vocabularies with poor coverage or to large vocabularies. This is especially true in the
multilingual setting. Another limitation of word-based systems are languages that are not
naturally split into words, like Thai. An alternative approach is to use subword units, which
are learned directly from data (Sennrich et al., 2015; Kudo and Richardson, 2018). We use
SentencePiece1as it was designed to work with languages with no segmentation, making it
1. This can be accessed here: https://github.com/google/sentencepiece .
3