Beyond English-Centric MMT
or training on English-Centric data and zero-shotting non-English directions (Arivazhagan
et al., 2019).
On the architectural side, multilingual translation has spurred much research in the
direction of improved model architectures. For example, Firat et al. (2016) examined how to
share attention mechanisms between languages. Other work has focused on architectures
that have specialized components that can be adapted for certain languages, such as adaptor
layers (Houlsby et al., 2019; Pfeiﬀer et al., 2020) or language-speciﬁc layer norms and linear
transformations (Zhang et al., 2020). Similar to our language-speciﬁc trunk-and-branch
architecture, these often have deterministic components based on the input language. Other
work has focused on learning which model components to use (Li et al., 2020) or how to
better train language-speciﬁc components (Escolano et al., 2020b,a). Another large body of
work focuses on model scaling for multilingual translation applications, such as gPipe(Huang
et al., 2019b) and gShard(Lepikhin et al., 2020).
Finally, translation systems cannot be developed in a vacuum. Multilingual transla-
tion systems have clear applications in various usecases. Their quality must be carefully
measured, in part with automatic metrics such as BLEU, COMET (Rei et al., 2020), and
BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020), but also with detailed human evaluations to really understand
the challenges that still must be overcome. Looking only at numerical scores is far from
adequate to understanding the quality of a translation. Further, work has analyzed the
presence of bias in automatic translation systems (Prates et al., 2019) as well as the use
of translation systems in various applications such as medicine (Vieira et al., 2020). These
biases in training, evaluation data, and even architectures (Costa-jussà et al., 2020) require
further dedicated eﬀorts and careful examination to understand as a pre-requisite to using
these systems broadly.
6.5 Discussion
Curating High-Quality Training Data. Creating high quality data sets to train trans-
lation models has been a long-standing area of research. For example, previous work has
explored how to best ﬁlter noisy data sets (Koehn et al., 2018b, 2019). Our use of large-scale
mined training data presents large quantities of data to train multilingual models on, but
brings challenges as well. For example, our mining methods mine both simpliﬁed and tradi-
tional Chinese text, tokenized and de-tokenized text, and many examples with code switching.
We apply several data ﬁltering methods, but the cleanliness and quality of alignment is
critical for training high-quality translation systems. Further, multilingual translation can
be aﬀected by domain mismatch, as people in diﬀerent parts of the world discuss diﬀerent
topics (Shen et al., 2019), which presents additional challenges for curating good training
sets. Thus, we see the continued improvement of data quality as an important direction for
multilingual translation systems, which require a lot of data to train well.
Multilinguality at Inference Time Throughout the paper, we explored how to improve
the performance of single models, scaling the amount of data as well as the model size, but
there remain numerous directions for future investigation of multilinguality. One direction is
understanding how to exploit the nature of multilingual translation at inference time as well.
A true Many-to-Many system provides several possible directions for exploring this potential.
31