Beyond English-Centric MMT
quality of mined data. Using curated data, possibly supplemented by mining, may provide a
starting point for future improvement. For example, several resources for African languages
exist, including JW300 (Agić and Vulić, 2019) used in the masakhane machine translation
eﬀort (8et al., 2020) and data sets for Nigerian Pidgin (Ahia and Ogueji, 2020), Wolof (Alla
et al., 2020), Fon (Emezue and Dossou, 2020), Igbo (Ezeani et al., 2020), Amharic, Tigrigna,
Afan-Oromo, Wolaytta, and Ge’ez (Abate et al., 2018). Other lines of work present resources
for low-resource Asian languages, such as the ALT project (Riza et al., 2016; Ding et al.,
2016), Mongolian, Uyghur, and Tibetian (Anonymous, 2020), or strategies for improvement
on speciﬁc directions (Chen et al., 2019). Further research is required to bring together small
data sets of higher quality translations, mined data, and monolingual resources to create
improved translation systems for very low resource languages.
7. Conclusion
We introduced m2m-100 , a new Many-to-Many multilingual translation model that can
translate between the 9,900 directions of 100 languages. The underlying data set was mined
from CommonCrawl using a novel strategy which exploits language groupings to avoid mining
every possible direction while maintaining good accuracy. Such a large data set requires
models with increased capacity and to this end we explored densely scaling the number of
parameters as well as sparsely, through introducing language-speciﬁc parameters trained
with a novel random re-routing scheme.
Results show that m2m-100 outperforms English-Centric multilingual models trained
on data where either the source or target language is English. The system improves over
10 BLEU on average compared to an English-Centric baseline when translating directly
between non-English directions. m2m-100 is competitive with bilingual models from WMT
and improves over existing publicly available multilingual translation systems. Human judges
indicate that our model translates ﬂuently with high semantic accuracy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Yuqing Tang and Peng-Jen Chen for their work on the multilingual translation
infrastructure in fairseq. We thank Xian Li, Chau Tran, Yuqing Tang, Peng-Jen Chen, and
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato for insightful conversations. We thank our volunteer human evaluators
for closely examining the translation quality of our models through various directions.
33