Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Supervised Zero-Shot All
Data sampling Low Mid High Avg Avg Avg
Uniform 6.1 20.4 38.4 19.0 11.8 15.7
Temperature Rescaling 10.2 23.7 38.0 21.8 13.0 18.1
Sinkhorn Temp. Rescaling 10.9 24.1 38.3 22.2 13.5 18.6
Table 3: Comparison of Various Sampling Strategies. We report BLEU on the
validation set of our 1:2B base multilingual model trained with diﬀerent data sampling
schemes. Performance is broken down into diﬀerent resource-setups (low, mid, high) where
bitext data exists (supervised) or in the zero-shot setting for pairs without data.
We apply the same ﬁltering to the backtranslations as the original mined training data, which
substantially reduces the size of the resulting synthetic bitexts.
Impact of Backtranslated Data. Results are shown in Figure 4, where we compare
the original Many-to-Many model used to create the backtranslations (blue line) with the
improvements after training a multilingual model with the backtranslation added (orange
scatter). Backtranslation almost always improves performance for any direction, regardless of
the original BLEU score. As the amount of data generated with BT correlates with the length
of training time, we decide to focus on applying BT on directions with low performance
(BLEU between 2 and 10) to improve our MMT system where it under-performs.
3.4 Balancing Languages in a Many-to-Many Setting
The data distribution produced by large-scale mining is not balanced between languages,
so training a model would favor over-represented languages. A standard solution is to
re-balance each language independently with Temperature Sampling (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019), for example replacing the probability p`of a language by p1
T
`. In the English-Centric
case, changing the probability of sampling a language changes the probability of the other
languages only through the normalization. However, in the Many-to-Many case, language
distributions are more interdependent. For example, some languages are only paired with
a subset of other languages or to an over-represented language. Thus, sampling them will
aﬀect the probability of these other languages they are paired with. This strategy thus has
no guarantee to produce the target balanced distribution between languages. We describe
Sinkhorn Temperature Sampling , which extends the temperature sampling strategy to the
Many-to-Many setting.
Our goal is to design a sampling technique such that the distribution of languages on the
sourceandtarget sides is equal to a given target distribution. Unfortunately, sequentially
sampling the source language and then the target would not work, as some languages are
only paired with a subset of languages—making it impossible to sample the target language
according to a given distribution. Moreover, the sizes and distributions of bitexts greatly vary
from a language to another. Instead, we propose directly sampling a pair of languages from
a matrix of pair probabilities such that the marginal distributions of languages corresponds
to our target distribution. In practice, this means that each row and column of the matrix
14