Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
to create. To ease this challenge, most prior work has focused on English-Centric data sets
and models which translate from and to English but not between non-English languages.
This English-Centric bias in the data and resulting models is not reﬂective of how people use
translation and empirically leads to lower performance for non-English translation directions.
In this work, we create more diverse multilingual machine translation models by building a
large-scale Many-to-Many data set for 100 languages. We considerably reduce the complexity
of this task through the automatic construction of parallel corpora (Artetxe and Schwenk,
2019a; Schwenk et al., 2019b) with a novel data mining strategy that exploits language
similarity to avoid mining all directions. We also leverage backtranslation to improve the
quality of our model on zero-shot and low resource language pairs. Overall, we build the ﬁrst
true Many-to-Many data set comprising 7.5B training sentences for 100languages, providing
direct training data for thousands of translation directions.
The quantity of data in a Many-to-Many data sets increases quadratically with the number
of languages, making neural networks with standard capacity underﬁt rapidly. To that eﬀect,
we leverage progress in scaling (Kaplan et al., 2020; Arora et al., 2018) to train models that
are over 50times larger than current bilingual models with model parallelism (Huang et al.,
2019a; Shoeybi et al., 2019). Even with these tools, scaling the number of parameters hardly
follows the quadratic increase in data induced by the Many-to-Many setting, and we propose
several scaling strategies tailored to the speciﬁcs of our problem. In particular, we consider a
deterministic mixture-of-experts strategy based only on the input language to split the model
parameters into non-overlapping groups of languages which we train with a novel re-routing
strategy. Language speciﬁc capacity also reduce the need to densely update parameters and
are more parallelizable in a multi-machine setting. Overall, combining these strategies allows
us to scale the capacity of the models to a size of 15:4B parameters and still train them
eﬃciently on hundreds of GPUs.
The resulting method allows us to scale Transformers and directly translate between
100 languages without pivoting through English at a performance that is competitive with
bilingual models on many competitive benchmarks, including WMT. Figure 1 illustrates
our data mining strategy as well as our model architecture. This paper is organized as
follows: ﬁrst, we introduce several standard components of modern machine translation and
explain how they apply in the multilingual setting (Section § 2), then describe our strategy
to scale the number of language pairs to create a Many-to-Many data set (Section § 3). We
then systematically compare this Many-to-Many data set to an English-Centric approach
(Section § 4). Next, we incorporate increased model scale through both dense scaling
and sparse mixture-of-experts (Section § 5). Finally, we end with a thorough analysis,
including human evaluation, of the quality of our 100x100 Many-to-Many translation system
(Section § 6). Our models and code are open-sourced: https://github.com/pytorch/
fairseq/tree/master/examples/m2m_100 .
2. Preliminaries
In this work, we investigate how we can best translate from 100 languages to 100 languages,
or 9900 directions, using a single model. We describe our starting point in this section, and
provide preliminary context on Transformer-based neural machine translation models.
2