Beyond English-Centric MMT
Mining parallel data with LASER. Mining parallel data consists of searching for
sentences that could be potential translations in large monolingual corpora. This search
requires a measure that captures the semantic similarity between sentences in diﬀerent
languages. Most recent methods build this similarity by comparing the embeddings from a
neural network trained on multilingual data (Artetxe and Schwenk, 2019a; Chen et al., 2020;
Kvapilíková et al., 2020). We focus on the embeddings generated by the LASER encoder,
which enables the comparison of sentences in 94diﬀerent languages (Artetxe and Schwenk,
2019b). We then retrieve parallel corpora eﬃciently using FAISS indexing (Johnson et al.,
2019). LASER embeddings generalize to unseen languages, like Asturian, allowing us to mine
bitexts for 100languages. The generic data mining pipeline consists of several steps: (1)a
large corpus of text is preprocessed and divided into diﬀerent languages, (2)candidate pairs
of aligned sentences are embedded and stored in a index, (3)indexed sentences are compared
to form potential pairs, (4)the resulting candidate pairs are ﬁltered in post-processing.
CCMatrix Mining Approach. CCMatrix takes a global approach: all unique sentences
in one language are compared with all unique sentences in another language. This global
miningapproach has the advantage of considering all possible documents when searching
for the translation of a sentence. CCMatrix works on the large monolingual corpora in
the91languages of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2019), but at this scale, the global search is
computationally demanding even with fast indexing from FAISS (Johnson et al., 2019). Thus,
we apply it to a selected subset of relevant pairs, as detailed in Section § 3.2.1.
CCAligned Mining Approach. CCAligned avoids the scaling challenges of global mining
by pre-selecting documents to compare. This local mining follows a hierarchical approach:
ﬁrst, document-level language identiﬁcation along with various rules is applied to ﬁnd whole
documents that are likely to contain mutual translations (El-Kishky et al., 2020). Parallel
sentences are then mined using LASER-based alignment within the paired documents only.
Filtering (Chaudhary et al., 2019) is performed to remove unaligned data that exists because
the original webpage did not have any parallel data, only partial parallel data, or other
processing failures. One advantage of this approach is that it is very fast, scalable, and
retrieves parallel sentences with high precision. Another advantage is that each English
document is aligned to many non-English documents—thus, mining non-English pairs can
be quickly performed by joining non-English documents paired to the same source.
Postprocessing. We apply a ﬁltering step to remove sentences of greater than 50%
punctuation. The data is then de-duplicated, and we remove any sentence that appears in
any validation or test data set—even if it is associated with another language pair. Finally,
we apply length and language-speciﬁc ﬁltering. The length ﬁltering removes sentences that
are too long—more than 250subwords after segmentation with SPM—or with a length
mismatch between the sentence and its translation—if the length ratio is greater than 3.
The language-speciﬁc ﬁltering removes sentences that contain more than 50%of characters
that have not been marked as core to the identiﬁed language—speciﬁcally, characters that
are commonly used in the identiﬁed language with the exception of white space, numbers,
punctuation, and Latin characters for non-Latin script languages.
9