Beyond English-Centric MMT
Parallel Transformer Layer. We follow the sequence-to-sequence Transformer architec-
ture and replace layers by a set of parallel Transformer layers, one for each pre-deﬁned group
of languages. More precisely, assuming we have split the languages into Kﬁxed groups,
this parallel layer is composed of Kparallel Transformer sub-layers, one per language group.
For each translation, we then select the corresponding sub-layer among the Kpossibilities
depending on the language direction. If the parallel layer is in the encoder, we select the
sub-layer according to the source language, while if it is in the decoder, we select according
to the target language. In practice, we only add these layers to either the encoder or decoder,
not both. This enables us to split translations along with their sub-layers per GPU, leading to
faster training and eﬃcient memory usage. We replace layers of the Transformer model—in
the encoder, we replace layers closer to the input, so that the specialized capacity can be
used to learn to read diﬀerent languages and varied scripts. In the decoder, we replace layers
closer to the output, so that the specialized capacity can be used to predict diﬀerent output
vocabulary distributions based on the language. Experimentally, we vary the number of
layers being replaced to evaluate the eﬀect of adding more specialized capacity to the model.
Concretely, if we wanted to add 1 language-speciﬁc decoder layer to a Transformer model
with 6 encoder layers and 6 decoder layers, the resulting model with have 6 shared encoder
layers, 5 shared decoder layers, and 1 language-speciﬁc decoder layer closest to the output.
Such a language-speciﬁc architecture is reminiscent of a deterministic mixture-of-experts,
where one expert is activated based only on the input language. This is a much simpliﬁed
form of standard mixtures, which often learn weights based on the input data to decide
which experts to activate. This architecture is also similar to adapters (Bapna and Firat,
2019; Houlsby et al., 2019). Generally, adapters function by adding small adapter layers
between the layers of a pre-trained network, and then performing ﬁne-tuning—the adapter
layers consist of two projections separated by an activation, followed by a residual connection.
The size of the adapters can be modiﬁed and tuned to improve performance. Our language-
speciﬁc layers generalize this adapter strategy to make entire Transformer layers adaptable,
allocating much larger quantities of capacity. Adapter layers further focus on adaptation of
a pre-trained model, often achieved by freezing the original network (Houlsby et al., 2019)
rather than training the entire shared-and-specialized architecture from scratch. Finally,
these are all speciﬁc instantiations of a larger desire for modular neural networks, where
various components can be ﬂexibly added or modiﬁed to adjust the level of computation
required for a task.
Figure 8 shows an example of the resulting trunk-and-branch architecture when the
parallel layer is in the decoder.
Grouping Languages by Frequency and Similarity. We group languages based on
two criteria: the amount of training data and their vocabulary. The motivation for these
criteria is that we can learn a speciﬁc layer for a language with enough data, and for the
rest, overlapping vocabulary is a good proxy for similar languages. First, each language with
more than 100M sentences forms its own group and hence has its own sub-layer. We have
28languages that ﬁt this criteria: hu, ru, hi, ro, fr, nl, ﬁ, pt, ar, el, vi, en, ms, tr, he, id,
pl, cs, sv, fa, zh, bg, de, es, ko, ja, it, da. Second, we group the remaining languages by
vocabulary overlap, leading to 18additional groups. To create these groupings, we calculate
the vocabulary overlap between the training data of diﬀerent languages and cluster those
21