Beyond English-Centric MMT
should sum to the probability of the corresponding language. More precisely, we estimate a
square matrix Psuch that:
max
Ptr(PQ)s.t.P1L=p1
T;P>1L=p1
T;
where pis the vector stacking the probabilities of the Llanguages and Qis the matrix of
pair probabilities. To identify a feasible solution to this problem, we use the Sinkhorn-Knopp
algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964; Sinkhorn and Knopp, 1967). The algorithm works by iteratively
operating on the rows and the columns such that it is possible to convergence to a solution
where all rows and all columns of the matrix sum to 121. The matrix Qhas entries equal to
0for pairs with no bitext and this algorithm preserves them in the solution P, hence adding
no probability mass to missing bitexts. We calculate this once before training and set the
temperature Tto5. We initialize the matrix Qwith the values from standard temperature
sampling methods, for example p1
T
`, then re-normalizing. In Table 3, we show the beneﬁts of
this strategy over temperature sampling with a constant improvement of 0:5in BLEU.
4. Many-to-Many Compared to English Centric
We have described the starting point of training Transformer-based multilingual translation
systems, and detailed how we construct a very large training and evaluation data set covering
thousands of directions and 100 languages. In this section, we investigate the importance of
our data eﬀort to create a true Many-to-Many data set that can support training direction
translation without relying on English-only data. We present a series of experiments to
better understand the performance improvements of English-Centric systems and to compare
them to our Many-to-Many setting.
Experimental Setting. We train our 1:2B model on the full 100language Many-to-Many
data set and compare it to the same model trained only on data through English. We use the
same vocabulary built with SentencePiece on the full data set in both cases. Each model has
a diﬀerent data set size and we train for 500K updates. This number of updates corresponds
to one pass over the entire Many-to-Many data set and 3:5passes on the English-Centric
data. We tune the dropout rate for each model over the values f0:1;0:2;0:3g.
4.1 Main Result
In Table 4, we compare the performance of both models on diﬀerent types of directions,
namely, any language to English (To English), English to any language (From English),
and all the directions not involving English (Non-English). Performance is aggregated over
150directions for To English and From English, and over 2500 directions for Non-English.
On the pairs including English, both models achieve similar performance, suggesting that
a1:2B model does not underﬁt even though the additional non-English data represents
98%of the directions and 74% of the data. For the non-English pairs, we consider two
translation strategies for the English-Centric model: directly translating as if the model was
trained on the pair – by using the corresponding language tokens – or by pivoting through
English. Our model outperforms direct translation with the English-Centric model by 10:2
21. There are several constraints to this, please see Sinkhorn and Knopp (1967) for full details.
15