Beyond English-Centric MMT
Second, we use languages for which public evaluation data exists, as we must be able to
quantify model performance. Lastly, we only use languages for which monolingual data is
available, as monolingual data is a critical resource for large-scale mining. Combining these
three criteria results creates our full list of 100 languages, summarized in Table 1.
3.1.2 Evaluation Benchmarks
We use publicly available evaluation data sets to evaluate the performance of all of our
models. To cover our set of 100languages, we bring together data from a variety of sources.
We describe each evaluation data set below.
WMT—The majority of language pairs from the Workshop on Machine Translatino
(WMT) data sets go through English and the data is from the news domain. We
consider data for 13languages (Ondrej et al., 2017; Bojar et al., 2018; Barrault et al.,
2019).
WAT—The Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT) covers Asian languages paired
with English. We consider data for Burmese-English (Riza et al., 2016), which contains
news articles. WAT contains many other evaluation directions, but many of those are
covered by WMT or in a speciﬁc domain, so we focus on Burmese-English for WAT
only.
IWSLT—The International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT)
contains data from TED talks paired with English translations. We use data for 4
languages (Cettolo et al., 2017).
FLORES —FLORES3(Guzmán et al., 2019) pairs two low resource languages, Sinhala
and Nepali, with English in the Wikipedia domain.
TED—The TED Talks data set4(Ye et al., 2018) contains translations between more
than 50languages; most of the pairs do not include English. The evaluation data is
n-way parallel and contains thousands of directions.
Autshumato —Autshumato5is an 11-way parallel data set comprising 10African
languages and English from the government domain. There is no standard valid/test
split, so we use the ﬁrst half of the data set for valid and second half for test.
Tatoeba —Tatoeba Challenge6covers 692test pairs from mixed domains where sen-
tences are contributed and translated by volunteers online. The evaluation pairs we
use from Tatoeba cover 85 diﬀerent languages.
3. This can be found here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/flores .
4. This can be found here: https://github.com/neulab/word-embeddings-for-nmt .
5.This can be found here: https://repo.sadilar.org/handle/20.500.12185/506 , created by CTexT
(Centre for Text Technology, North-West University), South Africa; Department of Arts and Culture,
South Africa.
6.This can be found here: https://tatoeba.org/eng/ . Note that the sentences in this dataset are often
very short, and the evaluation is less diﬃcult compared to other data sets.
7