Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Setting To English From English Non-English
Bilingual baselines 27.9 24.5 8.3
English-Centric 31.0 24.2 5.7
English-Centric with Pivot — — 10.4
Many-to-Many 31.2 24.1 15.9
Table 4:Comparison of Many-to-Many and English-Centric Systems , comparing
BLEU scores. Many-to-Many matches the performance of English-Centric on evaluation
directions involving English, but is signiﬁcantly better on non English directions.
Setting w/ bitext w/o bitext
En-Centric 5.4 7.6
En-Centric Piv. 9.8 12.4
M2M 12.3 18.5
Table 5: Many-to-Many versus
English-Centric on zero-shot di-
rections , comparing BLEU scores. We
report performance on language pairs with
and without bitext in the Many-to-Many
training data set.Setting !En En!Non-En
En-Centric 26.417.8 2.4
En-Centric Piv. — — 5.1
M2M 25.7 18.1 9.4
Table 6: Many-to-Many versus
English-Centric on one pass of
data, comparing BLEU scores. We report
performance for models after a number
of updates equivalent to the size of the
English-centric data set.
BLEU and when the English-Centric model uses pivoting by 5:5BLEU. While this result
is not surprising, it conﬁrms that a purely English-Centric model has limited potential on
non-English pairs, and there is a fundamental need for training on Many-to-Many data.
4.2 Understanding the Source of Improvement
The main impact of adding Many-to-Many data is on the directions that do not include
English. In this section, we provide a detailed study of where we observe the largest
improvements with the additional data.
Impact on Zero-shot. Many non-English pairs are not covered by our Many-to-Many
model, and we can thus study if the improvements we observe originate primarily from
directions associated with bitext data or if we observe the same improvement on directions
where the Many-to-Many model generates translations in a zero-shot fashion. In Table 5,
we show the performance if the evaluation is split between the Non-English pairs withand
withoutbitext. On directions with bitext, the Many-to-Many model outperforms the English-
Centric model by 7BLEU for direct translation, and by 3:5BLEU for English-Centric with
pivoting. This demonstrates the importance of diverse data. Not surprisingly, this gap is
even bigger on pairs without bitext. Many-to-Many performs nearly 11BLEU better than
the English-Centric model for direct translation, and with pivoting the gain remains over 6
BLEU.
16