Beyond English-Centric MMT
English
Spanish
French
German
Portuguese
Russian
Dutch
Swedish
Polish
Turkish
Indonesian
Chinese
Vietnamese
Arabic
Greek
Czech
Japanese
Hungarian
Finnish
Korean
Hebrew
Farsi
Lithuanian
Hindi
Bengali
Tamil
Swahili0.51.01.5Millions of Sentences1e9
Data through English
Data through family
Data through Bridge
Figure 3:Total Amount of Data through Bridge Languages on our 100x100 Train-
ing Corpus . We depict the amount of data through English (gray), amount of data through
a bridge language not counting English (orange), and amount of data through the language
grouping not counting bridge languages (blue).
against English. We illustrate this mining strategy in Figure 2. On the left, we depict what
many current approaches model: data only through English. On the right, we depict our
Many-to-Many language matrix for several example languages. Compared to English-Centric,
our data set has far greater coverage of non-English, direct translation directions.
Training Data Statistics. In total, our ﬁnal training data set contains 7.5B parallel
sentences, corresponding to 2200directions. We divide these directions by resource level
to label high, mid, and low resource language directions. While there is no clear standard,
we follow WMT’s example to roughly categorize the directions by the quantity of available
training data. Low resource languages are directions with less than 500K samples, mid
resource are directions with less than 50M samples, and high resource the remaining20. In
Figure 3, we show all bridge languages and demonstrate how their associated training data
is divided between translations with English, within a language grouping, or with bridge
languages across language groupings. Of particular interest is the comparison between
the additional Many-to-Many data and the data through English. We observe that 5—10
times more parallel data can be mined if using a Many-to-Many strategy, compared to an
English-Centric one. This is particularly beneﬁcial for mid- and low-resource languages.
3.2.2 Results
We validate the impact of several decisions made during data construction. First, we study
the impact of our bridge language strategy compared to English-Centric mining augmented
by other random pairs, as well as fully random mining. Second, we investigate the impact of
the level of sparsity chosen in our bridge strategy, focusing on a subset of 50 languages.
20.Note: In WMT20, for example, languages Tamil and Inuktitut were considered low resource directions
even though over a million sentences of monolingual data were available for backtransltion. We consider
mining and backtranslation similar approaches of augmenting training data with collections of monolingual
data online.
11