Beyond English-Centric MMT
Model Params BLEU
Language Speciﬁc Enc 540M 17.1
920M 17.5
Language Speciﬁc Dec 540M 17.3
920M 17.8
Table 7:Comparing Language-Speciﬁc
Encoders and Decoders by BLEU score.
We add parallel language-speciﬁc layers to
either the encoder or decoder, with diﬀerent
sizes.
0% 10% 20% 30% 50%
Amount of Random Rerouting0.00.20.40.60.81.0BLEU Improvement
High
Low/MidFigure 9: Impact of Re-routing Rate on
the performance of high resource and low/mid
resource languages. We display BLEU score.
We explore adding language-speciﬁc capacity in the encoder or decoder using a smaller
setting of 10 high-resource languages. Table 7 shows that language-speciﬁc parameters are
generally more eﬀective when applied to the decoder network. Recent studies show that
encoders are more important for bilingual machine translation (Wu et al., 2019; Kasai et al.,
2020), however, these studies are based on systems modeling only a single language direction
compared to our setting. In our case, increasing the encoder or the decoder does not impact
performance signiﬁcantly, and we focus on decoder for the rest of this paper.
RandomRe-routing. Figure9showstheimpactofthere-routingstrategyonperformance
as we increase the number of training samples routed to random parallel layers as opposed
to their assigned layers. With a re-routing rate of 20%, an improvement of about 0.8 BLEU
can be achieved over no re-routing for low and mid resource languages, without aﬀecting
the performance of high resource languages. Too much stochasticity leads to performance
similar to no random re-routing for high resource languages, but still improves mid to low
resource performance compared to no re-routing.
Comparison with Large Dense Models. We compare adding language speciﬁc capacity
with densely scaling model size in Table 8 on 100languages. As language-speciﬁc layers
add many parameters, we compare to baseline models at various sizes for multiple points
of comparison. Our conclusion is that language-speciﬁc layers improve results compared to
baselines of similar parameter size, particularly for mid and high resource languages where
there is suﬃcient data to train the language-speciﬁc sub-layers. Further, compared to dense
scaling, sparse scaling only uses a fraction of the parameters in each forward pass, which
maintains fast training speed despite large total model size.
Adding Language-Speciﬁc Layers to a Pre-Trained Model. We demonstrate the
impact of adding language-speciﬁc layers to the decoder of a pre-trained 12B parameter
Transformer in Figure 10. We show that adding language-speciﬁc layers for ﬁve languages
improves results on the WMT evaluation data sets. The language-speciﬁc layer adds 3:4B
parameters and we train it for 20K updates with the rest of the network frozen. The total
size of this model is 15:4B parameters. For several directions, we observe gains of more than
1 BLEU, which validates this strategy. On average, we observe gains of 0.9 BLEU.
23