Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
particularly suited to our setting. We train a model with 0.9995 character coverage to have
suﬃcient representation of character-based languages2.
Creating a Multilingual Dictionary. SentencePiece produces subword units depending
on their frequency in the training data set. Naively applying it to our corpora would result in
low resource languages and languages written in less frequent scripts being underrepresented
in the resulting dictionary. Randomly sampling data favors over-represented languages
because the probability of picking language `is proportional to its number of sentences,
D`, that is, p`=D`P
iDi. We circumvent this problem by adding monolingual data for low
resource languages and by using temperature sampling with T= 5. More precisely, the
probability p`is re-scaled to p1
T
`where the temperature Tcontrols the distribution. For
example, setting Tto1gives the original data distribution. Note the probability must be
re-normalized afterwards to be a valid probability. The resulting dictionary contains 128k
unique tokens that are well distributed across languages, as shown in Appendix A.
2.1 Transformers
Our multilingual machine translation model is based on the Transformer sequence-to-sequence
architecture, which is composed of two modules: the encoder and the decoder (Vaswani et al.,
2017). The encoder transforms the source token sequence into a sequence of embeddings
of the same length. Then, the decoder sequentially produces the target sentence, token
by token, or autoregressively. More precisely, the encoder takes the sequence of tokens
W= (w1; : : : ; w S)and the source language `s, and produces a sequence of embeddings
H= (h1; : : : ; h S), which are then fed to the decoder with the target language `tto produce
the sequence of target tokens V= (v1; : : : ; v T)sequentially, that is,
H=encoder (W; ` s); (1)
8i2[1; : : : ; T ]; vi+1=decoder (H; ` t; v1; : : : ; v i): (2)
Both the encoder and decoder are composed of the same type of layers, called Transformer
layers. Each Transformer layer takes a sequence of vectors as input and outputs a sequence of
vectors. In the encoder, Transformer layers are composed of two sub-layers, a self-attention
and a feed-forward layer. These are applied sequentially and are both followed by a residual
connection (He et al., 2015) and layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016):
Z=norm (X+self-attention (X)); (3)
Y=norm (Z+feed-forward (Z)): (4)
The self-attention layer is an attention layer that updates each element of the sequence by
looking at the other elements, while the feed-forward layer (FFN) passes each element of the
sequence independently through a 2-layer MLP. In the decoder, there is an additional third
sub-layer, between the self-attention and the feed-forward, which computes attention over
the output of the encoder. We refer the reader to Vaswani et al. (2017) for details of these
layers.
2.We use the recommended parameter from the SentencePiece repository: https://github.com/google/
sentencepiece .
4