Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Figure 8: Language-Speciﬁc Parameters provide specialized capacity to an otherwise
fully shared multilingual encoder and decoder.
that have high overlap together. Note that some low resource languages have their own
script—such as Kannada—and are not clustered with any similar languages as the script
is unique. However, to maintain balance between groups (Wang et al., 2020), we cluster
the remaining languages together and roughly balance the amount of training data for each
group. In total, we form 46groups, each with its own sub-layer in a language-speciﬁc layer.
Random Re-Routing between Sub-layers. During training and inference, a sub-layer
is deterministically selected according to its language direction. This guarantees that our
model always uses the same memory and time during inference, regardless of the translation
pair. However, during training, this deterministic routing does not share information
between similar languages if not associated with the same sub-layer. For example, the
sub-layer associated with Ukrainian does not beneﬁt from the large quantity of Russian
training data, since Russian has its own isolated sub-layer. We mitigate this shortcoming
byrandom re-routing of translations, that is, randomly picking another sub-layer instead
of the designated one. This shares information between languages associated with diﬀerent
sub-layers, beneﬁting low resource languages by training on similar high resource languages.
The re-routing is completely random, though could be restricted to re-route only to similar
languages.
Adding Language-Speciﬁc layers to Pre-Trained Transformers. We can integrate
a language-speciﬁc layer into an already pre-trained Transformer by adding it either at the
end of the decoder or at the beginning of the encoder. We can then freeze the parameters of
the pre-trained Transformer and learn the language-speciﬁc components. These additional
language-speciﬁc layers train rapidly as the rest of the model already has strong performance.
This strategy means it is straightforward to adapt pre-trained networks to a new domain
or language by training a small number of dedicated parallel layers, and could easily be
extended to various other applications.
5.2.1 Evaluation of the Language-Specific Layer
We experiment with diﬀerent scenarios by adding a language-speciﬁc layer to the encoder or
decoder, or to a pre-trained densely scaled model. We demonstrate the importance of random
re-routing. Finally, we validate this strategy by comparing it to scaling models densely.
ParallellayerinEncoderorDecoder? Thetrunk-and-brancharchitectureforlanguage-
speciﬁc layers is general and can be used to specialize capacity for any neural architecture.
22