Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
6.2 Comparison on Various Translation Benchmarks
Next, we compare our m2m-100 model to various existing work on diﬀerent benchmarks.
While the training data is not the same, we conduct this comparison to provide a reference
point for the overall strength of our model. An important note is that for each of these
benchmarks, there are various diﬀerent tokenizers used which aﬀect BLEU—we follow the
tokenization and BLEU calculation of each of these benchmarks, rather than the evaluation
methodology of our previous results. Thus, the numbers in this subsection are not comparable
to the rest of this paper, as they use the tokenization of each benchmark. Further, note this
comparison was prepared in advance, so all sentences appearing in these evaluation sets were
removed from the training data we used.
Comparison on WMT. First, we compare our Many-to-Many model to submissions to
WMT, the premier translation competition. We display results on a variety of diﬀerent
language directions, some of which are standard natural language processing machine trans-
lation benchmarks, such as English-French, English-German, and English-Russian. Results
are shown in Table 10.23Many submissions to the WMT shared task use ensembling,
in-domain ﬁne-tuning, or re-ranking methods, which are standard techniques to improve
quality. As these could be added to our system at inference time as well, we focus instead on
comparing single model results. To identify comparisons, we examine the WMT Shared Task
proceedings as well as the submissions at http://matrix.statmt.org/ .
As seen in Table 10, our m2m-100 system can achieve very competitive performance
compared to bilingual models tuned especially for individual WMT translation directions.
This shows that our model maintains strong translation quality on individual directions.
Next, we compare our models to other multilingual translation work. Table 11 displays
several previously published results on diﬀerent sets of benchmarks. Note that for each
comparison, we follow the published setting in tokenization, evaluation, and whether or not
the BLEU is tuned on the validation set to maximize comparability.
Bilingual Models. We ﬁrst compare to mBART (Liu et al., 2020), which creates bilingual
models based on ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained model on individual language directions. After
pre-training as a denoising autoencoder, publicly available bitext data is used to create
various diﬀerent bilingual models, one for each evaluation direction. Liu et al. (2020) tune
the test set BLEU on the validation set. Following their setting, we tune the generation
beam size between {5,10}, and length penalty between {0.5, 1.0, 1.5}, and the number of
checkpoints to average between {1, 5, 10}. Our model provides +0.7 BLEU improvement.
We then compare to the bilingual baselines provided in CCMatrix (Schwenk et al.,
2019b), which trained individual models for each direction. As these models generate with
no tuning, we generate on all pairs with beam size 5 and length penalty 1, using only the
23.En$De/En$Ru:we evaluated publicly available single model checkpoints prior to ﬁnetuning
from Ng et al. (2019) on WMT2019. En$Zh:we report results from Li et al. (2019) which contains
single model BLEU results on WMT2019. En$Lt:we report results from Pinnis et al. (2019) on
WMT2019; both directions are the best single model systems which use unconstrained training data.
En!Fr:we report results from Edunov et al. (2018). Fr!En:we report results from Johnson et al.
(2017) on WMT2014. En$Lv:we report results from Pinnis et al. (2017) on WMT2017. En$Tr:we
report results from Sennrich et al. (2017) on WMT17. En$Et:we report results from Pinnis et al.
(2018) on WMT18. En$Fi:we report results from Talman et al. (2019) on WMT17.
26