Beyond English-Centric MMT
Figure 5: Improvement of Many-to-Many over English-Centric in BLEU score
with respect to the amount of mined training data (left) and the amount of target side
language data (right). Improvement from a Many-to-Many model correlates with greater
amounts of bilingual training data with Pearson correlation 0.38 (left) and greater amounts
of target language data with Pearson correlation 0.32 (right).
Impact of the quantity of training data. A hypothesis to explain the gain between
English-Centric and Many-to-Many models is the eﬀect of additional source and target side
training data. Even if the Many-to-Many system has never seen a direction at training time, it
beneﬁts from additional source and target side data available through other training pairs. As
mining non-English language pairs creates more training data compared to English-Centric
data sets, the Many-to-Many model beneﬁts from a larger training set. In Table 6, we
compare both models after seeing the same quantity of data. We train both models for one
epoch. The English-Centric model performs better on To English directions, likely because it
only has one output language to learn, but the Many-to-Many model outperforms on From
English directions and Non-English directions.
Which Pairs Improve the Most? The main factor for improvement is the quantity of
data associated with either a pair or a language. Pairs that have a large quantity of mined
data, such as Spanish-Portuguese, greatly beneﬁt from our Many-to-Many data set. We show
this eﬀect in the left panel of Figure 5 (left). A second source of improvement is observed on
languages for which the Many-to-Many data set contains a large amount of data across many
pairs. This data beneﬁts the decoder-side language model in a way that is comparable with
BT. In the right panel of Figure 5, we show the impact of this cumulative monolingual data on
the average performance per language. Finally, we also observe a third type of improvements
from the similarity in vocabulary and syntax from related languages. A striking example is
the quality of translation between English and Belarusian, where the Many-to-Many model
achieves 12.7 BLEU on the TED evaluation set, compared to 3.2 BLEU for a bilingual model.
The number of bitexts for Belarusian is small, but Belarusian is related to Russian, and the
Many-to-Many model transfers its knowledge from Russian to Belarusian.
4.3 Understanding the Performance of English-Centric Systems
In Table 4, we conﬁrm an observation made in Arivazhagan et al. (2019) that an English-
Centric model improves the most over bilingual models on the directions into English, while
improvement in the other directions (From English) remain more modest. A hypothesis to
17