When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 17
(a) Re-identification Attack
 (b) Inference Attack
 (c) Linkage Attack
Fig. 6. Different privacy attack and threat models.
people who may or may not wanted to be in the picture, but it can also reveal sensitive information
about the family such as religious beliefs, traditions, and food habits. Therefore, sharing photos
online can severely violate privacy and disclose sensitive information [37].
Major traditional privacy attacks include identification attacks, inference attacks, and linkage
attacks, as shown in Fig. 6.
(1)Identification attack: Identification attack identifies a user’s name or identity-based on some
public dataset [ 76]. It is also called re-identification [ 53,58] when anonymisation is reversed.
Such kind of attack is illustrated in Fig. 6(a).
(2)Inference attack: This type of attack aims at “analyzing data in order to illegitimately gain
knowledge about a subject” [70]. Such an attack is illustrated in Fig. 6(b).
(3)Linkage attack: The adversary aims to achieve a target’s information by correlating multiple
data sources. For example, Narayanan et al. [ 104] showed that an adversary “can identify
a subscriber’s record in the Netflix Prize dataset”, linking it to an Internet Movie Database.
Such an attack is illustrated in Fig. 6(c).
4.2 Machine Learning Aided Privacy Protection Schemes
Many privacy protection schemes have been introduced. Obfuscation/perturbation [ 31,140],
anonymization [ 5,6], reducing information sharing [ 82,142], and cryptographic mechanisms [ 43,
127] are the major technologies.
However, the traditional privacy protection schemes focus on structured data, such as an entry
in the databases [ 162]. With the introduction of new applications such as Internet of Things (IoT)
and vehicular networks, both the volume and the complexity of the data is increasing. Traditional
protection schemes cannot handle all cases and it also becomes more difficult for both common
users and even data curators to understand the risk, select correct schemes and manage their
privacy.
Under these circumstances, ML has been introduced to enhance privacy protection during the
past few years. The efforts including research in several aspects.
•Privacy risk assessment and prediction: Assess and predict the privacy risk for the user during
the processes of “access” and “sharing”. As shown in Fig. 7(a), ML is used to evaluate both
the input and output data streams to find the risk and then privacy protection schemes can
be deployed accordingly.
•Personal privacy management assistant: This includes privacy policy evaluation, user prefer-
ence prediction and management, as shown in Fig. 7(b).
•Private data release: Publish datasets with privacy guarantee. The schemes are generally
adopted by data curators rather than an individual user, as shown in Fig. 7(c).
4.2.1 Privacy Risk Assessment and Prediction. The privacy risk exists either when the user is just
accessing the application (passively collected information by malicious attackers) or sharing on
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.