24 Bo Liu, et al.
of “imperceptible noise onto the original image” would mislead DNNs to the wrong classification.
Then, Goodfellow et al. [ 45] proposed the “fast gradient sign method (FGSM) that can be used to
generate this type of adversarial examples”. Other algorithms to generate such noise can be found
in [72, 103, 131].
According to [ 119], the primary reason for why neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial
examples is the linear nature of the neural networks. The authors formalize the space of adversaries
against DNNs, which are mostly originated from ML techniques itself. In simple words, ML is used
as a tool to breach the ML classifiers. Kurakin et al. [ 72] focused on adversarial training and how
they can be scaled to large datasets. Sharif et al. [ 138] proposed an algorithm for manufacturing
adversarial examples based on ML to disable DNN detection systems from finding objects in
shared photos. Additionally, a significant point about adversarial examples is its transferability
property [ 45]. It means that if they are able to fool one model, they are often likely to mislead
another model with a different set of parameters and architecture [ 152]. This is even true if the
other model is trained on a different training set or model [ 117]. This leads to the idea of universal
perturbation [ 102,128]. It is even possible to “generate adversarial examples that fool both human
and computer alike”. Elsayed et al. [ 35] exploited ML to construct adversarial examples that transfer
from models created based on computer vision to the human visual system. The authors generated
adversarial examples without utilizing the parameters of the model’s architecture, and then mimic
the visual processing of humans using ML.
Enlighted by the idea of adversarial examples, researchers started to focus on the generation of
adversarial examples based on ML to improve the privacy of users against attacks mostly based on
DNNs. Liu et al. [ 88] proposed an algorithm that is against automatic detection using adversarial
examples based on the “Faster RCNN framework”. Jia et al. [ 65] proposed a two-phase framework
called AttriGuard to defend against attribute inference attacks launched by a classifier. Liu et al. [ 80]
investigated schemes for using adversarial examples in ML systems so that they cannot identify
the sensitive information from images. Oh et al. [ 110] set up a game-theoretical framework and
studied the effectiveness of adversarial image perturbations for privacy protection. Li et al. [ 78]
proposed to use adversarial perturbation for face de-identification. Friedrich et al. [ 41] proposed a
privacy-preserving shareable representation of medical texts for a de-identification classifier.
5.3 Summary on Privacy Protection against ML
Previously, the common understanding of privacy protection is to prevent human adversaries
from knowing some sensitive information about people. For example, obfuscating faces in images
is a well-researched topic. However, the situation has dramatically changed recently. First, the
growth of data volume has reached a point where it is physically impossible for anyone to browse
everything with their eyes. Second, as a result, people increasingly rely on machines with advanced
algorithms to extract relevant information of interest. Third, the booming of ML open source
community makes ML tools easy to be obtained by anyone. This brings up a new problem, that is,
it is now possible to automatically process data to infer sensitive user information, such as personal
identity, social relationships, location, and context. Indeed, ML has recently been used by malicious
parties as an efficient tool to launch new types of privacy attacks, especially for social media data.
Therefore, we would expect that privacy protection against machines is as important as privacy
protection against humans.
ML-based privacy attacks are more challenging to defend against, due to three main reasons.
First, the average user is not aware of the capability of state-of-the-art ML methods in extracting
personal information. Second, privacy in some contexts such as multimedia data is not obvious.
Third, privacy threats also arise from organizations and government sectors that collect and analyze
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.