When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 5
and the parameters are truncated and/or obfuscated by DP mechanisms, the model exhibits
convergence through experiments [140].
–Federated learning: A popular framework for collaborative learning is Federated learn-
ing[69] introduced by Google. There are currently two different federated learning settings:
cross-device and cross-silo [ 68]. The cross-device setting normally involves a very large
number of mobile or IoT devices, while in the cross-silo settings it “might involve only a
small number of relatively reliable clients” [ 68], e.g., multiple organizations. In a broader
definition of federated learning that covers both settings, each device downloads the cur-
rent model from a centralized server, improves it by learning from data on a local device,
and then sums up the changes in a focused update. Here, “focused updates are updates”
containing “the minimum information necessary for the specific learning task” [68]. And
then the shared model is updated by averaging all users’ updates. Since all the training
data will not leave local devices, and no updates from individual users are stored in the
cloud, the privacy risk has been greatly reduced.
–Split learning: Another collaborative learning framework is Split learning , in which each
user trains the network up to a certain layer known as the cut layer and sends the weights
to server. Mathematically speaking, these weights represent and compress the input data to
some intermediate feature vectors. The server then trains the network for rest of the layers,
and generates the gradients for the final layer, followed by error back-propagation until the
cut layer. The gradient is then passed over to the users. The rest of the back-propagation
is completed by the users [ 159]. In split learning, “client-side communication costs are
significantly reduced as the data to be transmitted is restricted to first few layers of the
split neural network prior to the split”.
Although some collaborative learning models consider shared training data [ 145], which
presents a significant privacy risk. In this survey, however, we consider the case that the local
raw training data are not shared with the server or amongst users. In this learning process,
the users can collaboratively learn a shared ML model, thus decoupling ML tasks from the
storage of the data in a single device.
Overall, centralized learning is characterized by “globally stored data” and “globally trained model”,
as shown in Fig. 1(a), while the distributed learning is characterized by “locally stored data” and
“locally trained model”, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Although there will be a global model in distributed
learning, it is not trained globally, at least part of the model is trained by individual clients.
2.2 Relationship of privacy and machine learning
In contrast to traditional privacy-related research frameworks, ML techniques open new challenges
and opportunities to privacy protection. There has been some initial research embarking on this
journey. The existing works can be divided into three categories according to the roles of ML in
privacy.
First, making ML system private, i.e., ML system is the target of privacy protection. As shown
in Fig. 2(a), this category 1 includes making both the ML system (model parameter) and data
(training/test dataset and output data) private, since the privacy threat may happen in any stage of
a data cycle, e.g. the training, publishing, or prediction of data. Most of the research in this group
relies on the use of differential privacy in ML and deep learning models [ 44]. For example, Shokri
et al. [ 140] developed a differentially private SGD algorithm and a distributed deep learning model
training system. In such way, multiple entities can cooperatively learn a neural network.
Second, using ML to enhance privacy protection. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the privacy protection
target is the data in this category 2 and ML is a tool to help privacy protection. For example, Liu et
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.