22 Bo Liu, et al.
4.3 Summary on ML-aided Privacy Protection
The three different groups of ML aided privacy protection schemes introduced in Subsection 4.2
work in various stages of privacy protection. Privacy risk assessment and prediction is a pre-process
before privacy protection, that identifies what do we need to protect. Personal privacy management
assistants help to improve access control over sensitive information. Private data release can be
applied directly to the data. These protection schemes do not have a one-on-one relationship with
the attack models listed in Subsection 4.1. They can be effective against multiple attack models and
will work best if combined correctly in specific scenarios.
The two main types of ML models used for privacy protection are classification and object
detection. Classification is used for privacy risk prediction and assessment. Object detection is
used for identifying sensitive information. Additionally, schemes discussed in 4.2.1 do not directly
provide privacy protection. They are currently playing a supporting role, and other subsequent
privacy protection schemes are still needed.
GNN opens a new direction for privacy protection research, especially for unstructured data
such as image and video. But it is still challenging, as there are no unified metrics for privacy
measurements in those complicated cases.
5 MACHINE LEARNING-BASED PRIVACY ATTACKS AND CORRESPONDING
PROTECTION SCHEMES
Besides serving as a privacy protection tool, ML can also be used as an attack tool. It urges us to
revisit the definition and scope of privacy. In particular, the emerging deep learning technique
can “automatically collect and process millions of photos or videos to extract private/sensitive
information from social networks” [ 80]. Traditional privacy-preserving methods are over-powered
when combating deep learning tools. It is time to seriously discuss new threats and corresponding
solutions.
5.1 Attack and Threat Models
The riskiest personal information leakage source is the social network. While there are a variety
of social network platforms enriching people’s interactivity and relationship, the shared posts
including check-ins, activities, thoughts (tweets, status updates, etc.), pictures, videos often come
along with sensitive information. The information poses high privacy risks and they are likely to
hand over their privacy unintentionally. A growing number of companies and start-ups specialize
in analyzing shared pictures on social media to exploit them for commercial purposes or selling
them to other companies. Therefore, the most advanced DNNs have been used to launch privacy
attacks.
For example, the adversary can use geo-location information to initiate a localized attack that
focuses on finding the position and time information of the person. Gu et al. and Mahmud et
al. [50,91] showed a dangerous attack that is designed to “find important locations such as homes
and workplaces”. There have been some researches discussing the home location identification
problem, either based on the “content of the posts” [ 20], or the “geo-tags in the check-ins” [ 22].
And “the research shows that the identification accuracy might be over 90 %in many cases” [81].
Besides the simple location information, multimedia data poses more risk under the attack of ML
tools. Companies apply advanced DNNs to cluster photos or infer preference of users to facilitate
marketers to send targeted ads [ 99,130]. DNNs are considered one of the most practical tools in ML
as they take advantage of efficient training algorithms and large datasets which enables them to
outperform other existing ML techniques. The power of such ML tools has become a problem itself
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.