When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 23
(a) Identification attack
 (b) Inference attack
Fig. 9. Different privacy attack and threat models when ML is used as the attack tool.
that may compromise the privacy of photos once they are shared on social media and a challenging
problem that needs to be addressed.
The privacy of sensitive data, photos and videos become more crucial in IoT networks, as users
might not even be aware of their information such as pictures and videos being recorded. For
instance, areas controlled under surveillance cameras can severely compromise user privacy as
people lose control of how their photos and videos are being captured and managed. It is likely
that the surveillance system applies techniques such as face recognition and detection to identify
the users without their permission. Pew Internet survey in 2014 reported that over 91 percent of
participants “strongly agree” or “agree” that “they have lost their control over how their personal
information is being collected and used by companies” [17].
Major ML attack models include re-identification attacks and inference attacks, as shown in
Fig. 9. These attack models are different from those described in Section 4 in the sense that ML is
used as an attack tool here.
•The re-identification attack can be launched by face recognition techniques. The recent
advance in DNN makes it more harmful from two aspects. First, the process becomes automatic
with high accuracy [ 67,151,168]. Second, traditional protection schemes such as obfuscation
no longer work effectively [ 96,109]. An illustration of the re-identification attack can be
found in Fig. 9(a).
•Inference attack has also become more powerful when equipped with ML. ML classifiers can
be used to infer a target user’s private information (e.g., location, occupation, hobby, political
view) from its public data (e.g., twitters, movie rating scores) [ 20,22]. Moreover, a series of
research work have demonstrated how the advanced artificial neural networks can be used
as an adversarial tool to detect sensitive information in images, including people’s age [ 63],
relationship [ 150] and vehicle license plates [ 181] from ordinary or even obfuscated images.
An illustration of the inference attack can be found in Fig. 9(b). Therefore, it is quite urgent
to accelerate the research on privacy protection schemes against ML aided attacks.
5.2 Protection Schemes Against ML-based Attacks
There has been some preliminary research in this area. For privacy protection against traditional
ML attack, Liu et al. [ 81] designed community-based information sharing scheme that changes the
overall spatial and temporal features so that the clustering-based privacy attack [ 83] no longer
works.
The problem becomes more challenging when deep learning is involved. The solutions may come
from a better understanding of deep learning itself. Some researchers recently found that there are
limitations to deep learning. Specifically, “it is proved to be vulnerable to some well-designed inputs
termed adversarial examples ” [36,138]. Szegedy et al. [ 152] first discovered that the superposition
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.