12 Bo Liu, et al.
•Encrypting ML model. The encryption technique is also used to protect the model privacy.
Phong et al. [ 126] proposed to use “additively homomorphic encryption on the gradients”.
The scheme can prevent information leakage to the “honest-but-curious cloud server” in the
condition of collaborative deep learning.
Overall, training neural networks especially DNNs over encrypted data is still challenging.
Computational complexity is a major challenge. The network is slow even when trained on plaintext.
Adding homomorphic encryption to a process will make it at least an order of magnitude slower.
Since the level of the computed polynomial is proportional to the number of backpropagation steps
done, the deceleration is more likely to get worse. Another challenging aspect of encryption is
the lack of data scientists’ ability to examine data and train models, correct mislabelled items, add
functionality, and further tune the network [29].
Secure multi-party computation (SMC) is the extension of encryption under the multiparty
setting. In SMC, multiple non-colluding parties use a combination of encryption and oblivious
transfer to privately finish the computation without seeing the individual components. For ML, it
means to compute model updates without having access to both the data and the model.
SMC has been used for a variety of traditional ML models, including decision trees [ 7], linear
regression [ 30,66,107,135,136], logistic regression [ 143,170], Naive Bayes classifiers [ 157], and
𝑘-means clustering [16, 62].
In general, SMC techniques impose non-trivial computational overheads and their application
to privacy-preserving neural networks especially deep learning remains a challenging task. Se-
cureML [ 101] is a recent example of SMC. It uses “two-party computations to privately train logistic
regression models and neural networks”.
In summary, SMC based method can cover both data/model privacy concerns, at the cost of
communication overhead.
3.2.2 Obfuscation/Perturbation (Differential Private Learning). Obfuscation mechanisms in the
context of privacy protection in ML aim at reducing the precision of the data or model. It is can
be achieved by adding noises to the model parameters or the original dataset. It is very popular
because the DP scheme is usually implemented by obfuscation in practical applications.
The obfuscation can be applied to the model or data. When obfuscation mechanism is for the
model, it has another name in the community, i.e., differentially private machine learning. There are
some early works on traditional machine learning with differential privacy. For example, Rubinstein
et al. [ 132] proposed differentially-private support vector machine (SVM) learning mechanisms by
adding noise to the output classifier and they yield close approximations to the non-private SVM.
Chaudhuri et al. [ 18] provided the model objective perturbation to produce deferentially private
empirical risk minimization (ERM) classifier. Song et al. [ 146] derived differentially private SGD for
general convex objectives and validated the effectiveness of the approach using logistic regression
for classification. One of the well-known early methods of implementing differential privacy in
deep learning is [ 140]. They trained the ML model “in a distributed manner by updating the selected
local gradients and adding noise to them within the privacy budget of each parameter”. Based on
this work, Abadi et al. [ 2] introduced “a simpler differential private SGD (DPSGD) algorithm that
ensures DP by cutting the gradients to a maximum 𝑙2norm for each layer”. And then add the noise
bounded by the “ 𝑙2norm-clipping-bound”. It was shown that “high-quality models can be trained
through privacy under a moderate privacy budget” with the DPSGD algorithm. In DPSGD, the
DP noise is added to the gradients and the whole training process involves multiple iterations.
Therefore, it is important to compute the overall privacy loss of the training, i.e, privacy accounting.
Although the composition theorem [ 33] can be used to generate the overall privacy loss, it can be
quite loose. Abadi et al. [ 2] introduced a moments accountant method that can track privacy loss
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.