When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 21
such as text, image, and video. Triastcyn et al. [ 156] used GAN to generating artificial data that
retain statistical properties of the real data while reducing the risk of information disclosure. Sun
et al. [ 149] proposed GAN-based head inpainting obfuscation technique to preserve the identity of
users when sharing their photos online. Huai et al. [ 57] considered the differentially private release
of crowdsourcing data. They proposed the PrisCrowd approach “in which the data collector learns
about underlying patterns of the data and then samples a set of candidate synthetic data from the
learned density. The synthetic data are subjected to a privacy test and the ones that pass will be
released”.
Overall, the latest deep learning techniques show the ability to synthesize fake dataset that is
statistically similar to the original one. This technique can be used for private data release. Fig. 8
presents the generative model framework used for privacy preservation of rich semantic data. The
process can best be explained by an example. Consider a clinical data sharing scenario, in which the
data curator instead of directly releasing the data, trains a deep generative model using the original
data in a differentially private manner, and then publishes synthetic dataset generated by the model.
In a more general case, the data curator may publish the deep generative model from which “an
unlimited amount of synthetic data for arbitrary analysis tasks” can be produced [ 171]. The use
of generative models can significantly increase the privacy of users as the training process of the
models can be conducted based on synthetic data instead of the real data belonging to individuals.
Meanwhile, the utility of the dataset can be guaranteed as the statistical similarity of models trained
based on synthetic data and realist data has been shown repeatedly in the literature. For example,
Park et al. [ 120] proved the statistical similarity of the generated synthetic tabular data and original
data. Xu et al. [ 171] developed training deep neural networks for the generation of synthetic data
that closely resemble the actual medical records of patients.
Fig. 8. Privacy preserving framework based on generative model approach.
Although research in GNNs for privacy preservation is in its initial stages, the outlook of the
approach is promising. Generation of synthetic data is particularly crucial as traditional methods
such as anonymity and obfuscation are ineffective for privacy preservation of semantic-rich data.
Moreover, this approach is not associated with the drawbacks of other traditional anonymization
approaches such as having background knowledge or linking the data to other sources.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.