2 Bo Liu, et al.
paradigm-shifting impacts on privacy preservation. A critical question that needs to be well
investigated is: What are the privacy challenges and solutions associated with ML?
Some initial work has appeared in the literature with an emphasis on mitigating privacy risks
during the machine learning process by paying special attention to the privacy challenges and risks
associated with the ML models. In this regard, possible attack models [ 8,38,98,141,144,155] have
been discussed and protection schemes [ 2,12,118,126,140] have been proposed. These works
demonstrated both ML models and training datasets can be the target of privacy attacks, leading
to sensitive information leakage. Meanwhile, researchers have also tried to use ML for privacy
protection. As an example, the authors of [ 174] have developed a method for automatic recognition
of privacy-sensitive object classes and adjust users’ privacy preference settings. In addition, there
are also several works that develop new privacy protection schemes in the scenarios where ML is
used for attacks [ 80,81]. Overall, the current research has only scratched the surface, and there are
major issues that require further investigation:
•ML could play different roles in a privacy protection problem, e.g., protection target, attack
tool, and/or protection tool. It may even play multiple roles in the same problem.
•ML systems and models have different types, each facing different privacy risks and requires
different protection schemes.
•There does not exist a unified privacy metric or notion. Although differential privacy (DP) [ 32]
is widely accepted in traditional privacy studies, it still has limitations in the context of ML,
especially when considering unstructured data, such as text, image, and video.
In this context, a systematic study of privacy and ML is essential for future research efforts.
Although there are several surveys on this topic [ 1,64,85,177], The focus has been on a certain
type of ML model or specific methods.
This study attempts to provide the first comprehensive survey on privacy in ML by investigating
different scenarios/applications of privacy and ML. The main contributions of the paper are as
follows:
•We divide the works in this area by the different roles of ML, i.e., ML as protection target
(private ML), protection tool (ML enhanced privacy protection), attack tool (ML-based attack),
and analyze the problems and solutions in each category.
•For private ML, we categorize the attacks and protection schemes and then compare their
difference.
•For ML aided privacy protection and ML-based privacy attack, we not only discuss the
existing works, but also provide insights on new techniques to achieve privacy preservation.
•The study concludes with a discussion on the directions of future research in ML and privacy.
Through this comprehensive overview, we wish to prepare a solid ground for future research in
this field.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews basic concepts of machine
learning system and models, and discusses the relationship between privacy and ML. In Section 3,
we compare and classify existing privacy attacks and protection schemes in ML systems. Section 4
focuses on ML aided privacy protections, followed by the discussion of ML-based attack and
corresponding privacy preservation schemes in Section 5. We present our outlook and propose
some future directions for this promising research topic in Section 6. Finally, we conclude our work
with a summary in Section 7.
Moreover, the abbreviations used in this paper are listed in Table 1.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.