10 Bo Liu, et al.
in [38] they extended the attack to facial recognition models to achieve two different targets: the
reconstruction attack that produces “an image of the person associated with a given label” and
the deblurring attack that generates the deblurred image of a certain individual given “an image
containing a blurred-out face”. The idea behind these attacks is “to use gradient descent (GD) to
minimize a cost function involving 𝑓”.
Overall, the model inversion attack works with a simple philosophy: we can reverse-engineer
(find𝑓−1) by following the gradient in a trained network to adjust the weights and obtain the
features for all classes in the network. Even for classes that we do not have prior information, we
can still reproduce the prototype example. This type of attack suggests that any accurate deep
learning machine, regardless of training methods, may leak information on the distinguishable
classes. Extensive research has shown that generative adversarial network (GAN) generated sample
data are similar to the training data. And thus, the results given by the model inversion attack may
even “reveal more private information about the training data compared to the average samples” [ 8].
Second, Shadow Model Attack means the attacker trains other ML models to achieve the target.
It can happen in either black-box or white-box way. For example, Ateniese et al. [ 8] designed a
“meta-classifier that can be trained to hack into other ML classifiers to infer patterns or private
information from the training set”, e.g. they were able to extract accent information from trained
speech recognition systems.
Hitaj et al. [ 55] designed an attack in the context of collaborative learning. They consider
the adversary is an insider of the collaborative learning process who wants to infer sensitive
information from the peers. The adversary can see and use internal parameters of the model, so it
is a white-box attack. The adversary uses GANs [ 45] to extract and reconstruct information of the
victim. “This process is similar to facial composite imaging used by the police to identify suspects,
where the composite artist generates sketches based on eyewitness identification of the suspect’s
face. Although the composite artist (GAN) has never seen a real face, the final image is based on
eyewitness feedback” [55].
Finally, Wei et al. [ 164] proposed to use power side-channel attack on an FPGA-based convolu-
tional neural network accelerator, which can successfully recover the input image using the power
traces at the inference stage.
3.1.3 Membership Inference Attack. Membership inference attack refers to acquiring the knowledge
about whether a certain data record (®𝑥★,𝑦★)belongs to the model’s training dataset 𝐷or not [98,
141]. An illustration of such an attack can be found in Fig. 5(c).
Shokri et al. [141] introduced a “black-box membership inference” that used a shadow training
technique to imitate the behavior of the target model. The trained inference model is used “to
recognize differences in the target model’s predictions” on training and non-training inputs. They
also found that overfitting, the structure and type of the model are the main factors that cause
a model to be vulnerable to membership inference attack. Long et al. [ 89] and Yeom et al. [ 173]
investigated “the relationship between overfitting and privacy leakage”. Salem et al. [ 134] proposed
a membership inference attack method using an unsupervised binary classification, “which does
not need to train any shadow model and does not assume knowledge of model or data distribution”.
Membership inference attacks are also studied in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).
For example, Liu et al. [ 84] trained an attacker network to launch membership attacks against
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) and GANs. Hayes et al. [ 52] focused on “generative models in
ML-as-a-service applications and train GANs to recognize training inputs”.
Melis et al. [ 98] studied membership inference in collaborative learning. The attack is achieved
by “analyzing periodic updates to the shared model during training”. The reason that this attack
is effective is that the gradients in neural networks are based on features, “thus observations of
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.