When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 19
mobile and web applications are attempting to customize their services according to individual
preferences to grant personalized experience to customers. Such a customized service results in
potential risk for the users [ 122]. This evidence points to the fact that it is crucial to develop assistants
to help users with the management of their privacy configurations. ML can be an invaluable asset
in this regard. For example, it can help users to manage their privacy configurations and reduce
the burden of time and human resources required to ensure the preservation of privacy.
We have divided the applications of ML for privacy management in two broad categories: (i)
privacy policy evaluation, and (ii) user preference prediction and management.
Privacy policy evaluation :Users are usually prompted to agree with the provider’s privacy
policies when almost using any software and web applications. Privacy policies provide complete
information on the collection, storage, and sharing of personal data. Therefore, they are critical to
the privacy of users. Unfortunately, most of this information is written using technical jargon and
challenging to read terms. Hence, most of the readers prefer to accept the policy unconditionally
without thoroughly realizing the consequences [ 24]. To help users with the decision making,
Costante et al. [ 25] developed a system to evaluate the completeness of privacy policies based on
preferences of the users. The system uses natural language processing to analyze and verify the
existence of the privacy measures that users specify, and also, assess the level of completeness.
Nugent et al. [ 108] graded the privacy policies that the users encounter based on factors such as
security, cookies, and purpose which helps users to check the results and identify if their desired
privacy requirements are satisfied. Tesfay et al. [ 153] proposed an ML approach to “summarize
the long privacy policies” into a short paragraph so that it is readable and understandable for
users. Shayegh et al. [ 139] considered methods to improve the privacy notices given to users in IoT
networks. With the aid of ML, the authors extract notice and choice statements from the privacy
policies for IoT devices, so as to help users to better understand the implications of privacy notices.
Lebanoff et al. [ 73] investigated automatic detection of vague contents on privacy policies and used
GANs to characterize the vagueness of sentences.
User Privacy Preference Prediction and Management :Another difficulty in user privacy
protection is caused by the fact that each user has a different privacy sensitivity and preference.
Nowadays, applications often provide many functionalities with different levels of privacy guar-
antees. While installing the applications, users are usually prompted for permissions to access
resources that have an impact on their privacy. It is important that the users can well coordinate
their own privacy preference with the actual privacy risk.
ML techniques are implemented to predict user privacy preferences and help decision making. It
was initially proved feasible as some early studies found that user privacy preferences are related
to some statistical and environmental parameters. For example, the quantitative research in [ 166]
uncovered that a significant number of users would rather prevent at least one permission request
involved in the study. Also, several works have shown that the context of the applications is
highly related to user privacy preferences [ 112,165]. Lee et al. [ 75] surveyed 172 participants and
uncovered contextual factors that violate the privacy of users in IoT.
Based on the contextual factors and features, ML models can be developed to predict user
privacy preferences and take privacy management decision. Mehrpouyan et al. [ 97] used openness,
conscientiousness, neuroticism, extroversion, and agreeableness as inputs to ML models to predict
desired users’ preferences. Das et al. [ 26] generated ML models of people’s privacy preferences and
expectations.
Wijesekera et al. [ 165] proposed a run-time permission system to infer privacy requirements of
users automatically. The proposed system grants the resource allocation permission based on the
type of the application requesting the permissions, the request time, and in what circumstances
it is requested. Liu et al. [ 82] investigated ML to enhance privacy decision-making experience.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.