4 Bo Liu, et al.
Global Model 
Upload  
Local Data 
User 1 User 3 User 2 User 4 User 5Global Data 
(a) centralized learning (can be outsourced learning).
Global Model 
Exchange Model 
Parameters 
Local Models 
Local Data User 1 User 3 User 2 User 4 User 5
 (b) distributed learning
Fig. 1. Centralized and distributed ML systems: (a) centralized learning; (b) distributed learning.
Furthermore, according to the architecture of the ML systems, there are two different models, as
shown in Fig. 1:
•Centralized learning: The training data is centralized in a machine or in a data center, and
the centralized entity trains and hosts the models. For example, a researcher could use a
cloud platform, to host datasets and train an AI model based on them. It goes without saying
that the availability of all data in such a centralized method leads to high efficiency and
accuracy [ 55]. However, because the centralized operator has direct access to sensitive data,
user privacy might be violated.
As the learning tasks become more and more complicated, many companies start to outsource
the training process, i.e., outsourced learning , orML-as-a-service . In this case, each user owns
his/her training data while the service providers own the models and algorithms. The data
holder outsources model creation to a cloud service such as Microsoft Azure ML and Amazon
AWS ML, which automate the process of ML. “Users upload datasets, perform training, and
make the resulting models available for use” [ 144]. During this process, the users do not
have any understanding of the details of model creation. The “ML provider is the entity that
provides ML training codes to data holders” [144].
•Distributed learning: Centralized learning is sometimes not a good option for several reasons:
(i) data is inherently distributed in some scenarios; (ii) data is too large to be stored in a single
machine; (iii) users are not willing to share raw data; and (iv) users want to train the neural
network with different instances to achieve better predication accuracy. In this case, ML
can be conducted in a distributed manner, i.e., distributed learning. In general, distributed
learning is used in a scenario of distributed training data sources and a centralized server.
There are several variations of distributed learning:
–Collaborative learning: Distributed learning involving such collaborations is known as
collaborated learning . But the settings could be quite different in the literature. For example,
the authors of [ 145] proposed a collaborative learning framework that trains several
classifiers “simultaneously on the same training data” to achieve better performance. On
the other hand, in the collaborative learning model defined in [ 55], each participant uses
its device to train a local AI model. It then shares a fraction of the parameters/coefficients
of the model with the other users. Service operators can create a composite model by
collecting these parameters and achieve almost the same accuracy as a model built using a
centralized approach. The collaborative approach is “more privacy-friendly” because the
dataset is not directly exposed. Also, if only a small part of the model parameters is shared
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.