When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and
Outlook
BO LIU∗,University of Technology Sydney, Australia
MING DING, Data61, CSIRO, Australia
SINA SHAHAM, The University of Sydney, Australia
WENNY RAHAYU, La Trobe University, Australia
FARHAD FAROKHI, The University of Melbourne, Australia
ZIHUAI LIN, The University of Sydney, Australia
The newly emerged machine learning (e.g. deep learning) methods have become a strong driving force to
revolutionize a wide range of industries, such as smart healthcare, financial technology, and surveillance
systems. Meanwhile, privacy has emerged as a big concern in this machine learning-based artificial intelligence
era. It is important to note that the problem of privacy preservation in the context of machine learning is
quite different from that in traditional data privacy protection, as machine learning can act as both friend and
foe. Currently, the work on the preservation of privacy and machine learning (ML) is still in an infancy stage,
as most existing solutions only focus on privacy problems during the machine learning process. Therefore,
a comprehensive study on the privacy preservation problems and machine learning is required. This paper
surveys the state of the art in privacy issues and solutions for machine learning. The survey covers three
categories of interactions between privacy and machine learning: (i) private machine learning, (ii) machine
learning aided privacy protection, and (iii) machine learning-based privacy attack and corresponding protection
schemes. The current research progress in each category is reviewed and the key challenges are identified.
Finally, based on our in-depth analysis of the area of privacy and machine learning, we point out future
research directions in this field.
CCS Concepts: •Security and privacy →Privacy protections ;Social network security and privacy .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: machine learning, privacy, deep learning, differential privacy
ACM Reference Format:
Bo Liu, Ming Ding, Sina Shaham, Wenny Rahayu, Farhad Farokhi, and Zihuai Lin. 2020. When Machine
Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook. ACM Comput. Surv. 1, 1 (November 2020), 35 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Since Facebook data privacy scandal in 2018 [ 154], privacy has once again become a dominant
feature in people’s minds. This motivates revisiting privacy challenges, particularly with the
emergence of intelligent technologies thanks to the big data revolution. For example, newly emerged
machine learning (ML) techniques, especially the unprecedented powerful deep learning, will have
Authors’ addresses: Bo Liu, bo.liu@uts.edu.au, University of Technology Sydney, Australia, , Ultimo, NSW, 2007; Ming
Ding, Data61, CSIRO, Australia, ming.ding@data61.csiro.au; Sina Shaham, The University of Sydney, Australia, sina.
shaham@sydney.edu.au; Wenny Rahayu, La Trobe University, Australia, W.Rahayu@latrobe.edu.au; Farhad Farokhi, The
University of Melbourne, Australia, Farhad.Farokhi@unimelb.edu.au; Zihuai Lin, The University of Sydney, Australia,
zihuai.lin@sydney.edu.au.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2020/11-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.arXiv:2011.11819v1  [cs.LG]  24 Nov 2020