When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 3
Table 1. Summary of acronyms used in the paper.
CNN convolutional neural network
DNN deep neural network
DP∗differential privacy
ERM empirical risk minimization
FGSM fast gradient sign method
FHE fully homomorphic encryption
GAN generative adversarial network
GNN generative neural network
IoT Internet of things
ML machine learning
SGD stochastic gradient descent
SMC secure multi-party computation
SVM support vector machine
VAE variational autoencoder
∗DP in this survey is used as the abbreviation for Differential Privacy, not deep learning.
2 PRIVACY THREATS AND MACHINE LEARNING
In this section, we discuss the privacy threats in the context of machine learning, and further point
out various roles of machine learning in the studies of user privacy.
2.1 The Machine Learning System and Models
ML refers to algorithms and statistical models used by computer systems to efficiently perform
specific tasks without the use of explicit instructions. It relies on an automated learning process.
The ML algorithm constructs a mathematical model of sample data called a "training set" to make
predictions or decisions [10].
Depending on if the output is labelled in the training set, ML models can be divided into three
different groups: supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised. As supervised learning is used by
most practical machine learning algorithms, it will be explained here as an example.
A supervised ML model is a parameterized function 𝑓𝜃that maps input data ®𝑥∈X𝑑(generally a
vector of features) to output data 𝑦∈Y(label). For a classification problem, X𝑑is a𝑑-dimensional
vector space and Yis the set of classes. This function is trained to accurately predict the label of
new data that have not seen before.
Moreover, we can divide the ML process into two stages:
(1)Model training: The training process of a machine learning model is to find the optimal
parameters that can accurately capture the relationship between XandY. To achieve this, a
training dataset 𝐷={®𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1with𝑁samples is needed. Then a loss function 𝐿is adopted
to quantify the difference between two outputs, i.e. the ground-truth one 𝑦𝑖and the predicted
one𝑓𝜃(®𝑥𝑖). The goal of training a model is to minimize this loss function, i.e.,
𝜃★=arg min
𝜃(∑︁
𝑖𝐿(𝑦𝑖,𝑓𝜃(®𝑥𝑖))+Ω(𝜃)), (1)
where Ωis a regularization term to penalize model complexity and avoid overfitting.
(2)Model inference/prediction: After the model training is completed and the optimal parameters
𝜃★are obtained, given an input ®𝑥, the corresponding output can be calculated as 𝑦=𝑓★
𝜃(®𝑥𝑖).
This prediction process is called inference. We can calculate the prediction accuracy of the
model over a testing dataset 𝐷𝑡to measure the model’s performance.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.