6 Bo Liu, et al.
Fig. 2. Three different categories of research problems in privacy and ML: (a) Privacy of ML model and data;
(b) ML enhanced privacy protection; (c) ML-based privacy attack.
al. [82] utilized ML to enhance private decision-making experience through ML. Orekondy et al.
[114] proposed an approach to categorize personal information in images and predict information
leakage directly from images. Yuan et al. [ 175] presented an ML approach to decide whether to
share a picture with a specific requester for a particular context.
Third, ML-based privacy attack, i.e., ML is used as an attack tool of the adversary, as shown in
Fig. 2(c). For example, recent researches have shown that deep learning methods can be used to
detect object types, people’s identities, and landmarks, from images posted on Internet. When the
adversaries use this kind of powerful tools, conventional privacy protection methods would be
over-powered, especially being challenged by the mighty deep learning tools. There have been very
few works in this category. Liu et al. [ 80] proposed schemes of applying adversarial perturbations
images, so that ML systems cannot get private information from them.
Table 2 summaries three categories of privacy protection problems involving ML systems. It
is worth mentioning that one technique might belong to more than one category. For instance,
ML might be used as attack and protection tools at the same time, which makes the problem more
complicated. We will discuss this in more detail in the reminder of the paper.
Table 2. Three categories of privacy protection problems in the context of ML.
Category Role of ML in Privacy Protection
Private ML Protection target
ML enhanced Privacy Protection Protection tool
ML-based Privacy Attack Attack tool
Fig. 3 summarizes the general taxonomy of the research papers presented in this work. We divide
them according to the above mentioned three categories. In each category, we discuss the attack
and threat models first and then analyze the works on privacy protection schemes.
3 PRIVATE MACHINE LEARNING
In this section, we will discuss the challenges and existing solutions in privacy preservation in ML,
or simply stated, private ML.
We will first discuss attack and threat models, followed by detailed analysis of privacy preserva-
tion schemes, along with some comparisons at the end.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.