When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 25
data on a large scale. Therefore, we need to prevent ML algorithms from automatically mining
private information, either intentionally or unintentionally.
In summary, privacy protection against the fast-evolving ML techniques is the most challenging
task among all three categories we discussed in the paper. The methodology is to exploit the
weakness and limitations of ML methods. Although there have been some initial solutions to this
problem using adversarial machine learning, there are still many research problems that require
further investigations.
6 OUTLOOK AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Significant previous work focuses on making ML algorithms differentially private to preserve the
privacy of training sets. However, we should be aware that machine learning, as a whole, also
provide potent tools for privacy research (not just for the training datasets), both from attack and
defense perspectives.
6.1 Perturbation in Deep Learning
The goal of perturbation in deep learning is to train a model while ensuring DP concerning
information about individual training examples. Theoretically, the noise can be added to either the
input data, the model parameters (through gradient updates), or the model output. In practical, the
majority of work proposed to inject noise into gradients. The main disadvantage of this group of
methods is that amount of injected noise is dependent on the number of training epochs, and it
potentially can accumulate too much noise due to the significant number of parameters.
Directly adding noise to input data is an option, but it is similar to a typical big data privacy prob-
lem and does not closely related to deep learning. Output perturbation and objective perturbation
seem to be reasonable directions in the future.
Output perturbation adds noise to the output of the ML system, e.g., the logits at the prediction
stage. This method is fast and easy to implement. However, it can suffer from degradation from an
attack of repeated querying by an adversarial. Therefore, it is important to restrict the number of
queries [ 129]. One potential solution is to use output perturbation in certain intermediate outputs,
such as the teacher voting output in PATE frame work [116].
Objective perturbation is one of the most effective methods for differential privacy ML. This
technique adds a random linear term to the objective function. Objective perturbation has been
extensively studied in convex optimization. Recently, Iyengar et al. [ 61] has provided a practical
algorithm for differentially private convex optimization, which is a big step towards practical
deployment of this technique. Moreover, Neel et al. [ 106] has extended this approach to non-convex
optimization problems. Despite the success in traditional ML, applying objective perturbation to
deep neural network is still challenges due to several obstacles: 1) the sensitivity calculation is
difficult because the objective functions of deep learning models are mostly non-convex and do
not have closed-form expressions; 2) the privacy guarantee is implicitly based on the rank-one
assumption on the Hessian of the loss, which is difficult to verify; 3) the privacy guarantee holds
only at the exact minima (at least the approximate minima as proposed in [ 61]) of the optimization
problem, which is hard to be guaranteed in practical deep learning systems. One possible solution is
to use a convex approximation of the loss function [ 124]. However, the approximation error might
outweigh the reduced perturbation due to smaller sensitivity. It is expected to see more effective
methods following this path.
Moreover, instead of perturbing the final output, it is also possible to add noise to the middle
layers of the neural networks. Lecuyer et al. [ 74] proposed the PixelDP framework that includes a
DP noise layer in the DNN. Although the purpose of PixelDP is “to increase robustness to adversarial
examples”, the idea can be further investigated to serve for privacy preservation. For example,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.