8 Bo Liu, et al.
(a) Privacy of the ML model.
 (b) Privacy of the underlying data.
Fig. 4. Two different types of privacy attack targets in ML: (a) Model privacy; (b) Training data privacy.
model which can accurately predict stock prices or insurance rates. The model is an important
commercial and intellectual property. Another example is the commercial ML API services
currently provided by Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and other companies. They charge the
customers per API access. Revealing their models or algorithms will cause loss of revenue. In
summary, the attack target can either be the model structure or parameters.
Second, the adversaries have different levels of knowledge according to their access to the
information.
•White-box access: The adversary has access to the trained model, especially the model
parameters.
•Black-box access: The adversary is an end-user and is only allowed to query the prediction
model on his/her inputs through an appropriate interface.
Finally, the adversary can adopt different attack methods. Existing attack methods include model
inversion (reverse engineering), shadow training models, and encoding information into models.
Next, we will group existing popular attack models by attack targets and analyze them from the
above mentioned three aspects. An illustrative diagram of the attack models is presented in Fig. 5.
3.1.1 Model Extraction Attack. The model extraction attack targets at the duplication of (i.e., “steal”)
the AI model [ 155]. The outcome of the attack will be a function 𝑓′that is approximately the same
as the initial function 𝑓. An illustration of such an attack can be found in Fig. 5(a).
In this attack, the adversary only has black-box access with no prior knowledge of the ML model
parameters or training data. Tramèr et al. [ 155] used a shadow training scheme that can “extract
target ML models with near-perfect fidelity for popular ML models” including logistic regression,
decision trees, and neural networks, by equation-solving, path finding, or extending the Lowd-Meek
approach [90].
There are several other works following this path. Oh et al. [ 111] built meta-models to extract
more model details such as the neural network architecture. Wang et al. [ 161] designed an attack
to steal the hyperparameters of the machine learning model. A hyperparameter is “used to balance
the loss function and regularization term in the objective function”. The adversary can obtain this
value from the training set and model. Hua et al. [ 56] “investigated reverse-engineering attacks on
CNN models exploiting information leaks through memory and timing side-channels”.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.