14 Bo Liu, et al.
Bonawitz et al. [ 12] enhance the privacy of federated learning by leveraging SMC to compute
sums of model parameter updates, i.e., federated Learning with secure aggregation.
On the other hand, using aggregation schemes for privacy protection in ML after the training
process, i.e., using ensembles of models is also reasonable. If an ensemble contains enough of
models, and each model is trained with disjoint subsets of the training data in a distributed manner,
then “any predictions made by most of the models should not be based on any particular part of the
training data” [ 1]. The private aggregation of teacher ensembles (PATE) is based on this idea [ 116].
In more detail, the ensemble is seen as a set of “teachers” for a new “student” model. The student is
linked to the teachers only by their prediction capabilities. And the student is trained by “querying
the teachers about unlabelled examples”. The prediction result is disjoined from the training data
through this process. Therefore the data privacy can be protected. The privacy budget for PATE is
much lower than traditional DP ML approaches. But it may not work in many practical scenarios
as it relies on an unlabelled public dataset.
Until now, the above works consider aggregation from the perspective of the model. Dwork
et al. [ 34] proposed a scheme that aggregates the prediction output rather than the model. In
more details, they partition the dataset 𝐷into several subsamples 𝐷1, . . . ,𝐷𝑟and run a non-
private learning algorithm on each of those subsamples to obtain predictors 𝑓1, . . . ,𝑓𝑟, then use a
differentially private aggregation technique on values 𝑓1(𝑥), . . . ,𝑓𝑟(𝑥)and output the result. This
subsample-and-aggregate technique is easy to implement as it does not require a new learning
algorithm. It focuses on training data privacy via private prediction.
3.3 Summary on Private ML
In this subsection, we sum up the key points on private ML.
3.3.1 Discussions of attack models. We summarize the attack models and related papers in Table 3
and Table 4.
Table 3. Summary of Attack Models.
Adversary features Model Extraction Feature Estimation Membership Inference Model Memorization
KnowledgeBlack-box ✓ ✓ ✓
White-box ✓ ✓
TargetModel ✓
Data features ✓
Exact data values ✓
Membership ✓
SchemeModel inversion ✓
Shadow training ✓ ✓ ✓
Encoding ✓
The attack models listed in Section 3.1 are not interdependent. For example, many attacks might
be launched on top of the model extraction attack, because it converts the condition from black-box
to white-box. Once the black-box attack is finished, the adversary can continue to launch the
white-box attack, e.g., a model inversion attack followed by a model extraction attack.
3.3.2 Attack models and protection schemes. Table 5 summarizes the private ML schemes and their
effectiveness against different attacks in different situations. Generally speaking, encryption can
maintain the adversary’s knowledge to a black-box case, thus it is effective to white-box attacks
like model inversion attack. Obfuscation [ 179] influences most attacks as it blurs the information
to reduce the privacy risk at the cost of utility. Aggregation is mostly used in distributed systems
and often comes along with the other schemes.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.