26 Bo Liu, et al.
PixelDP scheme enforces that the output prediction function is DP provided the input changes on
a small number of pixels (when the input is an image). Potential extensions to PixelDP include:
1) enforcing DP for given different input samples so that it can provide privacy preservation for
the training set against membership inference attacks; 2) adding DP noise to the hidden layer of
an autoencoder. With the post-processing property of DP, the output of the autoencoder remains
to be DP as well. This idea is briefly mentioned in [ 74]. But we can further explore it in different
applications. For instance, we can protect a social network image by generating a perturbed version
using this autoencoder with a DP guarantee.
6.2 Defending ML-based Privacy Attack: Adversarial Examples
As we have discussed in Section 5, when ML is used as a privacy attack method, adversarial examples
become a powerful way of privacy protection. Despite the preliminaries work on this topic, there
are several issues that need to be solved:
•Adversarial example generation methods fall into two categories of attack scenarios: white-
box and black-box. The research of using an adversarial example for privacy protection
usually assumes that the deep learning model is known, using the white-box setting. In
practice, the black-box scenario seems to be a more realistic assumption, e.g., the latest
black-box adversarial generation methods such as ZOO [ 19],Nattack [ 79] and AdvFlow [ 28],
could be potentially used for privacy protection.
•It is still hard to evaluate the effectiveness of this mechanism with respect to privacy and
utility. The existing works use the change of ML outputs (labels) to evaluate the privacy
protection methods. We need to prompt more concise and better evaluation metrics.
•There have been some recent research works that connect the DP framework and adversarial
example [ 74]. The PixelDP algorithm [ 74] proposed to add a DP-noise to the input or any
middle layer to the network’s architecture to provide guaranteed robustness against adver-
sarial examples., In more details, if we consider “a DNN’s input (e.g., images) as databases
in DP parlance, and individual features (e.g., pixels) as rows in DP”, randomizing the out-
put prediction function to enforce DP can guarantee the robustness of predictions against
adversarial examples. PixelDP cannot effectively preserve privacy in the training set as the
input changes are restricted to “a small number of pixels” [ 74]. Phan et al. [ 125] proposed
a heterogeneous Gaussian Mechanism (HGM) that can preserve DP in training data and
provide provable robustness against adversarial examples at the same time. They further
proposed the stochastic batch mechanism in [ 123] that can retain higher model utility and
is more scalable to large DNNs and datasets, compared with HGM. Overall, the interplay
among DP, adversarial example and certified robustness would be a very interesting future
topic.
6.3 ML-aided Privacy Protection: GAN and VAE
Excessive amounts of unstructured data including images, videos, audios and texts are being gener-
ated constantly and are being used by the government and a wide range of industries. According to
the projections of the international data corporation, unstructured data will constitute approxi-
mately 80 percent of worldwide data by 2025. Unstructured data, especially image and videos, often
containing rich personal information, play a key role in the future privacy preservation ecosystem.
And the problem of private data release for unstructured data will be a hot topic in the future.
We expect GAN to play an important role in this area, as it has demonstrated the capability
to preserve high utility for ML algorithms while protecting sensitive information in the dataset.
Moreover, GAN, as part of VAE, might also be used for privacy protection for a signal data entry
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.