When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 11
the participants’ gradient updates can be used to infer the feature values, which are in turn based
on these participants’ private training data”. Wang et al. [ 163] considered membership inference
attack “against the user-level privacy on the federated learning framework by the attack from a
malicious server. The proposed attack framework exploits GAN with a multi-task discriminator,
which simultaneously discriminates category, reality and client identity of input samples, and doing
so recovers user-specific private data”.
3.1.4 Model Memorization Attack. Song et al. [ 144] first proposed the model memorization attack
that targets recovering the exact feature values on individual samples. They consider a “malicious
ML provider” specialized in model-training for the customers. In such a business model, the provider
does not observe the training, but has access to the resulting model. He can steal the sensitive
samples and encode the values into the model parameters or outputs. Another malicious party can
retrieve sensitive information from the model during model serving. An illustration of such an
attack can be found in Fig. 5(d).
Model memorization attack can happen both in white-box and black-box cases. In the white-box
case, Song et al. [ 144] proposed several techniques for the adversary to encode sensitive data into
the models. (1) LSB encoding: the adversary can encode the “training dataset in the least significant
(lower) bits of the model parameters”. (2) Correlated value encoding: the adversary can “gradually
encode information while training model parameters”. For instance, “the adversary can add a
malicious term to the loss function which maximizes the correlation between the parameters and
the data he wants to encode”. (3) Sign encoding: similar to correlated value encoding, the adversary
can use “the sign of model parameters to interpret as bit strings”, e.g., positive parameters represent
1 and negative parameters represent 0.
In the black-box case, the adversary is assumed to have no access to the model parameters. They
designed a scheme in which the adversary can “augment the training dataset with synthetic inputs
whose labels encode the critical information”. Then the information is leaked via the outputs of
these added inputs.
Model memorization attack studies how malicious training algorithms deliberately create models
that leak information about their training data sets. “This threat model is more generous to the
adversary, so it can extract more information about the training data than any other attack” [ 144].
3.2 Private Machine Learning Schemes
In this subsection, we present several private ML schemes, including encryption, obfuscation, and
aggregation.
3.2.1 Encryption. Encryption or cryptography-based methods can be divided into two groups:
•Encrypting training data. The mainstream technique is homomorphic encryption. As adding
homomorphic encryption to the process will make the process at least an order of magnitude
slower, initially it is applied on training data for relatively simple classifiers [ 13,15,47]. For
example, Graepel et al. [ 47] found that training over encrypted data is possible when the
training algorithm can be expressed as a low degree polynomial. Bost et al. [ 13] applied this
technique in three classifiers: hyperplane decision, Naive Bayes and decision trees. Then
researchers try to extend the work to deep neural networks (DNN). Dowlin et al. [ 29] proposed
CryptoNets which demonstrates how to efficiently convert learned neural networks to make
it applicable to encrypted input data. While Hesamifard et al. [ 54] proposed a framework to
train the neural network over encrypted data. Li et al. [ 77] investigate the case of collaborative
learning where datasets are encrypted with different keys, and propose a solution based on
multi-key fully homomorphic encryption (FHE).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.