20 Bo Liu, et al.
The results show that providing users with “recommendations based on clusters of like-minded
users and using predictive models of people’s privacy preferences work to the users’ satisfaction”.
Wijesekera et al. [ 166,167] built a classifier to work as a middle-man and make privacy decisions on
behalf of users. The classifier adjusts and preserves privacy by changes that happen in the context
predicated on the past behaviors of the users.
Orekondy et al. [ 114] proposed a method named “Visual Privacy Advisor” that “extends this
concept to image” contents. They classify “personal information in images into 68 attributes and
train models that directly predict such information from images”. A user study has been done to
understand the privacy preferences with respect to these attributes. They also proposed models
that “predict user specific privacy score from images”. Yuan et al. [ 175] presented an ML approach
to decide whether to share a picture with a specific requester at a particular context, and if yes, at
which granularity.
4.2.3 Private Data Release. Database release is currently an important process in data analytic
applications. Different entities generate different types of data, e.g., health data from medical centers.
Then, such data will be transmitted to data custodians such as government agencies. Then, the data
custodian maintains a platform that organizes, stores and provides data access to data consumers,
such as other government departments, individuals, analysts, etc. Privacy preservation processing
is highly required when the data custodians release the data. An illustration of such a defence
mechanism is shown in Fig. 7(c).
A frequently used traditional private data release mechanism is obfuscation by adding noise
to the original dataset. Whereas the ML techniques provide a new solution to this problem, i.e.,
using a generative neural network (GNN) or generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 45] to generate
synthetic dataset [4].
Although the technique of GNN itself has existed for a while, using it for private data release has
just been linked to privacy preservation very recently. Denton et al. [ 27] used the GAN framework in
the context of image processing to generate natural synthetic images. Gregor et al. [ 48] introduced
a model called “Deep Recurrent Attentive Writer (DRAW)” to create synthetic images. The principal
idea of the approach is to use two recurrent neural networks as encoder and decoder trained end-
to-end with SGD. Vinyals et al. [ 160] proposed a generative model predicated on recurrent neural
network architecture. The approach combines the natural processing ML tools with computer
vision for the generation of natural scenes. Using generative models has also been considered for
the generation of audios. Oord et al. [ 158] introduced a DNN model to produce raw audios and
applied the approach to “text-to-speech and validated by human listeners for natural sounding”. A
modified version of the proposed model is used for singing synthesis in [ 11]. Kulkarni et al. [ 71]
created spatiotemporal trajectories in large scale by training the models based on realistic data, and
then, creating synthetic data using the trained models. The authors investigate the utility-privacy
trade-off of the approach by experiments. Ouyang et al. [ 115] proposed a non-sequential non-
parametric generative model for spatiotemporal trajectories. The authors generate “synthetic data
by training a generative adversarial neural network, which can learn geographic patterns”. Liu et
al. [86] aim at the addition of geo-privacy protection layer for publication of spatiotemporal datasets
based on synthetic trajectory generation. Choi et al. [ 23] proposed an approach for the generation
of synthetic patient records based on GANs and autoencoders. In this work, the performance of
the proposed generative model is examined by comparing the generated synthetic patient records
with the real data. Cheung et al. [ 21] used GNNs for the transformation of sensitive images so that
they can preserve privacy of individuals. The authors focus on the generation of synthetic facial
images and how they can be used for classification of actual images. Zhang et al. [ 180] proposed
a novel approach based on GNNs to increase privacy of users while releasing semantic rich data
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.