18 Bo Liu, et al.
(a) Privacy risk assessment and prediction
 (b) Personal privacy management as-
sistant
(c) Private data release
Fig. 7. ML-aided privacy protection schemes.
social networks (actively sharing information). In both cases, ML can help to prevent the loss of
sensitive information. An illustration of such a defence mechanism is shown in Fig. 7(a).
Website and application privacy risk prediction :ML can make browsing the websites safer.
The proposed browser extension in [ 137] collects information about websites that users visit and
provides feedback to users based on ML to let them know the privacy quality of the site. Manek
et al. [ 92] proposed a method based on a Bayesian classifier to detect and identify websites that
can be malicious or threatening to the privacy of users. The proposed approach analyzes online
reviews written for websites to decide whether they are reliable or not.
The work in [ 42] uses an SVM classifier to rate the privacy risks of applications. The results
indicate that privacy risks can be identified with over 90%accuracy. Understanding the privacy
risks of mobile phone applications with the aid of ML have been considered in [9, 46].
Identifying sensitive information when sharing :Identifying sensitive information in multi-
media data has been difficult in the past. With the help of the state-of-the-art ML techniques, users
can prevent loss of their personal information while sharing their photos on social media.
Squicciarini et al. [ 147] considered visual-content features and images’ metadata to develop and
contrast several learning models. The ML models can classify the photos and evaluate the degree of
sensitivity so as to make the decision based on past decisions of the users. Yu et al. [ 174] proposed
a tool called “iPrivacy (image privacy)” to reduce the burden of specifying privacy setting by users
when they are sharing photos online. iPrivcy utilizes ML to automate the process. It finds privacy-
sensitive objects from images and classifies them according to their privacy sensitivity. Based on the
classification, iPrivacy notifies the users if there are objects, which should be suppressed/masked due
to privacy concerns before sharing. Moreover, iPrivacy provides privacy settings recommendation
based on user preferences and shared images. Orekondy et al. [ 113] proposed the first large-scale
private images dataset, with pixel and instance level annotations. And they proposed the first model
to automatically redaction various private information. Hasan et al. [ 51] proposed a method to
automatically identify bystanders “solely based on the visual information present in an image”.
4.2.2 Personal Privacy Management Assistant. As the user connectivity increases and web applica-
tions become ubiquitous, the responsibility of privacy management transfers more and more to
individuals. Unfortunately, given the complexity of the environments and the lack of awareness
about privacy attacks by adversaries, it is improbable that the users can manage and fine-tune their
privacy preferences correctly [ 93]. Therefore, there is an immediate need to develop automated
privacy management systems to help users in protecting their privacy. An illustration of such a
defence mechanism is shown in Fig. 7(b).
The authors of [ 3] indicate that users continuously modify their privacy requirements to reach
their expected level of privacy, and also, appropriately change their privacy preferences. Moreover,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.