When Machine Learning Meets Privacy: A Survey and Outlook 13
across multiple training iterations and generate a tighter bound. Another closely related notion is
Rényi differential privacy, which “offers quantitatively accurate way of tracking cumulative privacy
loss” throughout a multi-round DP mechanisms [100].
Prior to [ 95], all considered methods used “record-level differential privacy as a framework to
protect private information”. In many real-world work environments, users have multiple data
sources. They may be relevant and should be protected as a whole. Therefore, in some cases, the
DPSGD method results in a loss of privacy at a higher level (e.g., user level). McMahan et al. [ 95]
introduced a “user level differential private algorithm called the DP-FedAvg algorithm to protect
all the data of a user”. Instead of limiting the “contribution of a single record”, the DP-FedAvg
algorithm limits the contribution of the user data set to the learning model. The DPSGD algorithm
was “combined with the FederatedAveraging algorithm” from [ 14] which uses a server that performs
model averaging.
Obfuscation on training data has not been investigated extensively in the context of ML, because
it has been deemed as similar to traditional big data privacy. One notable research from Zhang et
al. [179] proposed an obfuscate function and applied it to the training data before feeding them
to the model training task. This function adds random noise to existing samples, or augments the
dataset with new samples. By doing so, sensitive information about the properties of individual
samples, or statistical properties of a group of samples, is hidden. Meanwhile, the model trained
from the obfuscated dataset can still achieve high accuracy.
Apart from the above-mentioned works, there are other research works in the closely relevant
area, such as tensor/matrix factorizations and functional optimization schemes. In more detail,
the authors of [ 59,60] discussed differentially private algorithms for tensor decomposition, in
both centralized and distributed settings [ 60]. The authors of [ 40] applied a DP framework in the
matrix factorization process with four different possible perturbation: input perturbation, private
stochastic gradient perturbation, alternating least squares (ALS) with output perturbation, and
output perturbation. The authors of [ 178] proposed a functional mechanism framework to achieve
an𝜖-DP in analyses, which involves solving an optimization problem with a perturbed objective
function.
3.2.3 Aggregation. Aggregation is a technique that generally comes along with distributed/collaborated
learning, in which multiple parties join a machine learning task while wishing to keep their respec-
tive dataset private.
Aggregation can be applied both in and after the training process. It often works together with the
encryption scheme (especially SMC) when used during the training process. For example, Pathak
et al. [ 121] proposed an aggregation scheme for independently trained classifiers. They average the
parameters using DP and SMC. But they do not consider the accuracy of their approach formally.
The first part of later research [ 140] also focuses on aggregation. They reduce the communication
costs and improve the model accuracy by selectively “sharing a subset of parameters in each round
of communication”.
Another popular framework using aggregation for collaborative learning is federated learning [ 69,
94] introduced by Google, which has been described before.
Compared with [ 140], federated learning considers different constraints on the training dataset,
i.e., Non-IID, unbalanced, and massively distributed, which is claimed to be more practical in some
scenarios such as using mobile devices for the local training.
Federated learning algorithm introduces techniques for quickly and safely aggregating gradients.
This scheme focuses on optimizing the communication efficiency of the aggregation process and
making the protocol robust against adversaries. However, it lacks guarantees on the amount of
user information leakage during training.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2020.