Admission/Discharge Demographics Measurements/Actions
Admission Type Language Laboratory Tests∗
Admission Location Race Procedures
ICU Care-unit Marital Status Medications
Discharge Destination Insurance Type Infusions∗
Age Diagnoses
Time-of-day Patient Weight
Gender
Table 1: The modalities of data we include in our MIMIC-IV working example. Our generative
model consists of continuous timeseries of partial observations of any of these events, and we task the
model with predicting which of the times of these events, which modalities will be observed in those
events, and what values they will take on. Included modalities are not observed uniformly across all
events, in a non-random manner.∗Includes continuous regression components.
3 Data Extraction and Pre-processing
3.1 The Problem
To build a dataset suitable for performing our task outlined in Section 2, we do the following:
1.Extract a filtered cohort of raw data from its source (here, the MIMIC-IV postgresql
database).
2.Pre-process the data: learn outlier detection and normalization parameters for numerical
variables, filter out infrequently measured variables or outliers, normalize data, etc.
3. Join independent input data sets together in a format optimized for deep learning.
4.Build a PyTorch dataset, dataloader, and embedding layer for this deep-learning-friendly
structure so that we can use these data efficiently in downstream pipelines.
3.2 Current State-of-the-art
If we wish to use current solutions for data extraction, we must find an existing tool that is either fully
specialized to our dataset, MIMIC-IV , and use case (of which no such example exists), or is a general
purpose data extraction, preprocessing, and/or modeling pipeline that will ease our workflow. For
such a general-purpose tool to be useful, it must meet several critical criteria:
1. It must solve at least a majority of the challenges identified in Section 3.1.
2.It must be flexible enough to handle not only the MIMIC-IV data, but also various other
input datasets, schemas, and covariate choices.
3.It must be designed with efficiency in mind – both in data pre-processing and in the output
deep-learning representations it produces, so that we can pre-train large models effectively.
4. It must be actively maintained, well documented, and tested.
Unfortunately, as shown in Table 2, existing pipelines for extracting EHR data for machine learning
do not meet these criteria fully. Only one pipeline meets even a meaningful subset of these critical
requirements, TemporAI [ 28], as it has strong development practices, exposes a flexible input format,
and meets our critical pre-processing feature goals. However, TemporAI does not support native
extraction from underlying source files, and suffers in its efficiency, both in the core data preprocessing
pipeline and in its output deep learning representation, raising concerns about its viability on larger
datasets.
3.3 Contributions of Event Stream GPT
ESGPT solves all these challenges in data extraction and pre-processing. Figure 1 shows the entire
pipeline in visual form. From a flexible, concise, and user-friendly configuration file, ESGPT can
extract raw data from a source, preprocess categorical and numerical data elements, and produce
efficient PyTorch datasets for downstream analysis. In the following, we detail three key advantages of
the ESGPT system. Full technical details of the pipeline are given in the Supplementary Information
(SI).
3