When fine-tuning a model from a pre-trained model, we support limited hyperparameter tuning over
just non-fixed parameters (e.g., learning rate, batch size, etc.). Doing this for the in-hospital mortality
and readmission risk prediction tasks achieves AUROCs of approximately 0.8 and 0.62, respectively,
in both cases yielding a lift over from-scratch training due to the generative pre-training at the 12k
patient dataset scale. We can also assess performance via zero-shot performance. While our proof
of concept models do not show better than chance AUROC on these measures, it is nonetheless a
significant strength of ESGPT that these analyses can now be performed in a systematic manner.
6 Further Discussion
Limitations While ESGPT provides significant benefits, it also has a number of limitations. Firstly,
it lacks some more advanced pre-processing capabilities that other systems support, such as unit
conversion, ontological aggregation, or support for a wide variety of optional pre-processing algo-
rithms. Secondly, defining downstream tasks is currently only possible through manual creation /
user-defined code, as opposed to via a configuration language. Next, while the utilities ESGPT offers
do significantly enhance evaluation, even more is needed on that front, including dedicated metrics
for fairness and privacy sensitivity, methods to assess embedding space structure, and methods to
detect emergence of foundation model capabilities more cost efficiently. As a mitigation for these
issues, we recommend that current users of these pipelines rigorously assess model performance
for any downstream tasks across relevant patient subgroups to ensure bias or fairness implications
are appropriately measured. Further research on this point, extending upon efforts such as those
explored in [ 5,37] is needed. Privacy mitigation strategies also need significantly more exploration
before models can be safely released. While prior work on NLP models have found some risks
due to memorization, the literature is far from clear on the risks or ways to address them for these
kinds of models [ 12,19]. Relatedly, any downstream users of ESGPT who wish to release datasets
pre-processed with ESGPT should also ensure they take all appropriate precautions to ensure ethical,
safe dataset release, and include sufficient documentation of the dataset’s provenance, composition,
and viable use-cases or pit-falls to ensure effective, impactful downstream use [ 9]. Thirdly, ESGPT
currently only supports categorical or continuous valued event stream data modalities; however, this
pipeline could also be extended to support additional modalities such as wearable and signals data,
with similar abilities as those described in [ 21,8]. Finally, ESGPT provides primary value as a
data pre-processing pipeline and set of modeling APIs, not as a static set of model architectures or
pre-trained weights. As such, we leave detailed comparisons of different model architectures that can
be built using the APIs provided by ESGPT across a variety of benchmark tasks to future work.
Related Work As listed in Tables 2 & 4, there are a number of existing processing pipelines and
models of relevance here. Beyond those already discussed, there are also a number of models that
leverage nongenerative losses that warrant highlighting, such as contrastive methods like [ 1,20,23].
These provide a valuable alternative to generative foundation models in various domains. Additionally,
other pipelines also exist in this and adjacent spaces, such as time series specific pipelines and tabular
data embedding methodologies [ 14,10,4]. GPTs have also been used very successfully in other
domains outside of event stream data. These include both examples of foundation models outside of
either NLP or event stream data, such as on protein sequences [ 27] or point clouds [ 36], but also other
examples of temporal point processes outside of the typical “foundation model” framework [ 29,38].
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced Event Stream GPT (ESGPT), a new, open source software library that fills
a critical gap in the foundation model literature: namely, technological support for building generative,
pre-trained transformers (GPTs) over “event stream data”—datasets consisting of continuous time
sequences of complex events with multiple modalities and internal dependencies. We showed that
Event Stream GPT can reliably address all aspects of the research pipeline for this end, from data
pre-processing at scale, model construction in a manner accounting for the unique properties of event
stream data, and evaluation across all aspects of the foundation model pipeline. We believe that
ESGPT will significantly accelerate, standardize, and improve the space of research into these models
and will help identify the best architectures and settings where the strengths of GPTs as seen in other
domains can be replicated in new domains.
10