particular, at present there are no existing strategies to reliably assess general, zero-shot performance
of GPTs over event stream datasets, a gap which we fill here.
5.3 Contributions of Event Stream GPT
ESGPT focuses on providing usable, powerful tools to enable rapid evaluation of GPTs over event
stream datasets, focused currently on the assessment of a model’s generative performance and in
its viability as a foundation model in few and zero-shot evaluation tasks. While further efforts on
the other evaluation criteria would be highly impactful, given the dearth of existing utilities just on
assessing these basic performance metrics, we leave the rest to future work. In addition to these
evaluation utilities, we also provide pre-built scripts for running distributed Bayesian hyperparameter
optimization sweeps over foundation models through Weights and Biases (WandB) [2].
Event Stream GPT assesses generative model performance & hyperparameter tuning To make
assessing generative performance easier, ESGPT comes pre-equipped with a PyTorch Lightning [ 7]
module for running pre-training models which tracks a variety of metrics to assess generative model
performance, including traditional classification and regression metrics over all component internal
event covariates. These are logged by default to WandB, permitting easy exploration of output
model performance. These metrics are further tracked and can be assessed visually in WandB reports
during hyperparameter tuning as well, which is run via a WandB sweep with a provided default
hyperparameter search space. A template report for assessing the output of these sweeps is also
provided alongside the code for our working example over MIMIC-IV (accessible in the SI), allowing
users to easily design their own dashboards to monitor their model tuning runs.
Event Stream GPT assesses foundation model viability via few and zero-shot performance
While many systems already explore few-shot performance (and ESGPT comes pre-equipped with
lightning modules and utilities for performing similar assessments), assessing zero-shot performance
across general models has not been previously studied. Enabling zero-shot evaluation for foundation
models trained on event stream data requires three things: First, a labeled dataset corresponding
to a well-defined task which can be used to evaluate zero-shot produced labels; second, a method
to perform unsupervised forecasting of a patient’s record given an input window, which ESGPT
provides; third, a function to translate generated samples into empirical predictions.
The ESGPT system then provides a PyTorch Lightning utility to take as input a dataset, task, pre-
trained model, and labeling function, and perform zero-shot evaluation over a specified data cohort.
This system reports performance metrics based on the output of this labeling function over the
empirical predictions generated for each patient’s input. This provides any model trained using the
ESGPT API the ability to assess zero-shot performance in a meaningful way, out of the box. For
examples of these evaluation utilities on MIMIC-IV , see the SI.
5.4 Example ESGPT Models over MIMIC-IV
To demonstrate the evaluation capabilities of ESGPT, in this section we provide examples of evaluating
pre-trained models or training supervised models from scratch on two canonical fine-tuning tasks
over MIMIC-IV: In hospital mortality prediction and 30-day readmission prediction (though all of
these capabilities are fully extensible to any binary classification task over an ESGPT dataset). Full
details of these experiments and results can be found in the online documentation for the MIMIC-IV
tutorial4, but here we highlight three capabilities of ESGPT: (1) producing baseline performance
numbers for fine-tuning tasks over ESGPT systems, (2) performing traditional fine-tuning, and (3)
performing zero-shot evaluation of a pre-trained model.
In particular, with regard to baselines, Event Stream GPT provides utilities to hyperparameter tune
baselines across both the same neural network architectures as are used during generative pre-training
and scikit-learn [ 26] classifiers. On our proof-of-concept MIMIC-IV cohort for the in-hospital
mortality prediction task, for example, hyperparameter tuned random forest classification pipelines
can obtain a held-out AUROC of approximately 0.67, and for the readmission risk prediction task, it
obtains a performance of approximately 0.65. On the other hand, training neural network architectures
from scratch yields AUROCs of 0.79 and 0.57 for the two tasks, respectively.
4eventstreamml.readthedocs.io/en/dev/MIMIC_IV_tutorial/index.html
9