Usable on General DatasetsFlexible Input FormatPerforms Extraction from SourceAccepts Arbitrary Input VariablesFits V ocabulariesOutlier DetectionPre-set censoring/outlier removalNormalizationFilters Infrequent MeasurementsEfficiently Pre-processes Data using Modern Libraries‡
Produces Efficient Deep-Learning Representation∗
Produces PyTorch DatasetsProvides Embedding LayerActively Maintained⋆
Tested†
Comprehensive Documentation
Input Pre-processing PyTorch Dev
MIMIC-Extract [34] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Fiddle [32] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
MT-MIMIC [11] ✓ ✓
Clairvoyance [13] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
OMOP-Learn [16] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
TemporAI [28] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
ESGPT (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 2: A collection of existing data pre-processing and/or modeling pipelines for temporal EHR
data, categorized on whether or not they enable various features. ⋆Active maintenance is defined by
the existence of a commit between May 2022 and May 2023. †Tested is defined by the presence of
a reasonably comprehensive and automated test suite. ‡Efficient data preprocessing is defined by
whether or not the library relies on Pandas [ 35,25] for its dataframe manipulation, as opposed to more
modern, faster systems such as Polars [ 33] or DuckDB [ 22].∗Efficient deep-learning representation
is defined by the extent to which sparsity is leveraged in their deep-learning representation files;
efficient outputs should only scale in size with the observations actually present in any given batch of
data, not with the number of total features in the space, total possible sequence elements, etc.
Event Stream GPT is easy to use and flexible To extract a machine learning ready data set from
anytemporal structured data set with ESGPT, a user only needs to specify a modest configuration
file detailing the input data sources, the desired modalities to extract, and preprocessing pipeline
parameters. This configuration file instructs the pipeline how to extract the initial data from its
raw source, preprocess the extracted measurements, aggregate the data temporally, and produce
deep-learning efficient representation outputs suitable for downstream modeling. A full configuration
file for our working example over MIMIC-IV can be found in the SI.
Event Stream GPT can efficiently pre-process large datasets Through the use of the Polars
library [ 33] and careful design choices, ESGPT is able to provide an extremely efficient and fast
pre-processing pipeline. For our working example, our entire extraction and preprocessing pipeline
over the MIMIC-IV dataset (resulting in a cohort of approximately 12 thousand patients) takes
only approximately 30 minutes. We further assess the performance of this pipeline on two other
datasets on different compute environments, with cohort sizes of 116 thousand and 145 thousand
patients, and find runtimes of 25 minutes and 62 minutes, respectively, further demonstrating the
strong performance of this pipeline. Output dataset sizes are also universally small, with no dataset
exceeding 4GB of final space on disk, with only standard compression. Unfortunately, there are no
direct competitors that replicate all the steps of ESGPT in a consistent manner against which we can
compare these results. However, to contextualize them, in order to run omop-learn on MIMIC-IV , one
would first need to convert MIMIC-IV to the OMOP format, a process that is supported by existing
ETLs. Running only these existing ETLs requires a runtime of over 37 minutes,2, meaning that
the entire ESGPT data preprocessing pipeline, which runs from scratch on MIMIC-IV and includes
2https://github.com/OHDSI/MIMIC/blob/df97a75cd974c491e595c8b007a79f7326066cb1/
z_more/run_times.txt#L4
5