ModelTTEContinuous OutputsCategorical OutputsIntra-event DependenciesGenerativeFine-tuningZero-shot
Models Evaluation
Doctor AI [3] ✓ ✓ ✓
CDT [18] ✓ ✓
MetaCare++ [31] ✓ ✓ ✓
CLMBR [30] ✓ ✓
MedTPP [6] ✓ ✓ ✓
MedGPT [17] ✓ ✓ ✓
ESGPT ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 4: A summary of existing foundation models over EHR data, broken down by what modalities
of data they model and how they report evaluation results.
Learn [ 16], they lack any suitable built-in model architectures for this task. Existing GPT architec-
tures, on the other hand, can be very helpful, especially for providing sources to adapt transformer
architectures for core multilayer network structures, but lack key features specific to this modality,
such as accounting for unknown output event times and complex interevent dependencies. Finally,
among existing, published generative models for EHR or other similar modalities, all existing
architectures have major limitations, as outlined in Table 4.
4.3 Contributions of Event Stream GPT
The ESGPT library includes a pre-built model architecture that models time-to-event components, con-
tinuous and categorical output measurements, handles intra-event dependencies in a user-configurable
way, and provides a HuggingFace-compatible API for generating new events with a pre-trained model.
We detail these capabilities below, and a full technical reference is in the SI.
Event Stream GPT provides a HuggingFace API compatible interface for building models
capable of outputting complex, temporal distributions To use one of the pre-defined model
architectures in ESGPT, users simply build a specialized configuration object, which is a sub-class
of the standard, Hugging Face PretrainedConfig3. Once the config is defined, a model can be
instantiated in the same way as any other Hugging Face pre-trained model, either from scratch or
from a pre-trained source. In addition to the standard Hugging Face attributes, the ESGPT config
also contains several custom attributes specific to our setting, including attributes describing the
breakdown of the various measurements and their respective vocabulary sizes, the implied dependency
relationships between intra-event covariates, and data embedding configuration parameters.
All pre-built ESGPT models for generative modeling output a unified model output object. This
object maps event generation covariate target names to PyTorch distributions, from which we can
easily compute losses or sample new events. The unified ESGPT dataset class and this output object
defines the API expected by ESGPT models in further utilities like generative capabilities.
Event Stream GPT provides a modeling interface for encoding complex, custom intra-
event dependencies ESGPT comes with two pre-defined model architectures. One (the
ConditionallyIndependent model) that matches much of the existing published literature and
only supports defining generative models where all intra-event covariates are conditionally inde-
pendent from one another given the patient’s history and one (the NestedAttention model) that
supports user-defined dependency relationships between various internal features of xi. Users specify
these relationships through the configuration file. For example, one of the models pre-trained in our
MIMIC-IV working example relies on the intra-event dependency chain shown in Figure 2. This
specification takes the form of a list of lists, and tells the model that it should make the assumption
3https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/configuration
7