Event Stream GPT: A Data Pre-processing and
Modeling Library for Generative, Pre-trained
Transformers over Continuous-time Sequences of
Complex Events
Matthew B. A. McDermott
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Harvard University
matthew_mcdermott@hms.harvard.edu
Bret Nestor
Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of WashingtonPeniel Argaw
John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Ye Jin
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Harvard UniversityIsaac Kohane
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Harvard University
Abstract
Generative, pre-trained transformers (GPTs, a type of "Foundation Model") have
reshaped natural language processing (NLP) through their versatility in diverse
downstream tasks. However, their potential extends far beyond NLP. This paper
provides a software utility to help realize this potential, extending the applicability
of GPTs to continuous-time sequences of complex events with internal depen-
dencies, such as medical record datasets. Despite their potential, the adoption of
foundation models in these domains has been hampered by the lack of suitable
tools for model construction and evaluation. To bridge this gap, we introduce Event
Stream GPT (ESGPT), an open source library designed to streamline the end-to-end
process for building GPTs for continuous-time event sequences. ESGPT allows
users to (1) build flexible, foundation-model scale input datasets by specifying only
a minimal configuration file, (2) leverage a Hugging Face compatible modeling
API for GPTs over this modality that incorporates intra-event causal dependency
structures and autoregressive generation capabilities, and (3) evaluate models via
standardized processes that can assess few and even zero-shot performance of
pre-trained models on user-specified fine-tuning tasks.
1 Introduction
The unprecedented performance of large language models (LLMs) in natural language processing
(NLP) has led to a new paradigm in machine learning. Instead of being dominated by single-
task, supervised learning models, this paradigm is characterized by general-purpose, pre-trained
“foundation models.” These models, exemplified by the “Generative, Pre-trained Transformer”
(GPT) architecture, deliver state-of-the-art performance on diverse downstream tasks in a highly
data-efficient manner [ 24]. The success of GPT models over natural language data is driven in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.