part by the fact that the generative, language modeling forecasting task is “universal” across NLP
downstream tasks—meaning any natural language task can be recast as a language modeling task
through prompting. However, this property is not unique to NLP, and GPT-equivalent architectures
may hold significant promise in other domains as well. In particular, this work explores the application
of these models to the domain of continuous-time sequences of complex, multimodal events (event
streams), specifically Electronic Health Record (EHR) datasets. In particular, this paper presents a
data preprocessing and modeling library that makes it significantly easier to build generative, auto-
regressive transformers over event stream data, then to fine-tune or use those models for zero-shot
prediction over diverse fine-tuning tasks on these data, such as in predicting the risk of a patient of
dying in the hospital or of needing an early readmission to the hospital from structured EHR data.
Two critical barriers inhibit the application of foundation model research to modalities like EHR
data. First, these data modalities do not come in a single, unified format, and compelling datasets are
often private and unshareable. This hampers foundation model research by requiring dataset-specific
preprocessing pipelines and hindering one’s ability to assess the model generalizability. Second,
modeling continuous-time sequences of complex events is more challenging than modeling ordinal
sequences of tokens, as GPTs over these modalities must account for non-ordinal inputs; complex,
multi-modal emission distributions; and intra-event causal relationships.
In this paper, we address these gaps with Event Stream GPT (ESGPT), an open source software
package1, API, and evaluation utility for foundation models over event stream data. ESGPT can
represent diverse datasets across various sources in a unified manner, preprocess very large datasets
extremely quickly through the use of the Polars library [ 33], and can tune hyperparameters, pre-
train, fine-tune, and perform zero-shot evaluation for foundation models through a Hugging Face
compatible API. In the rest of this work, we will demonstrate the unique value ESGPT offers through
the lens of a real-world working example: building foundation models over the MIMIC-IV electronic
health record dataset [ 15] (Section 2). We will walk through all aspects of the pipeline one would
follow to pursue this research, revealing in each how ESGPT fills a critical gap in existing tools
across data preprocessing (Section 3), model configuration and running (Section 4), and evaluation
(Section 5). Finally, we will close with related work and concluding thoughts.
2 Working Example Problem Setup
Source Data The MIMIC-IV dataset [ 15] is a publicly available dataset consisting of EHR data for
all adult patients who were admitted to the emergency department or an intensive care unit (ICU) at
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center between 2008 and 2019. This data set contains approximately
300,000 patients and consists of numerous health data modalities, including diagnoses, laboratory
test results, medications, hospital and outpatient mortality, and many other variables, all localized
continuously in time. For our running example, we will define the internal covariates of each event to
include the set of modeling targets in Table 1.
Modeling Task Our sample modeling challenge is to build a GPT model on the complex event
stream data contained in MIMIC-IV . This can also be seen as a multivariate marked temporal point
process. In particular, given a sequence of complex events x1, . . . ,xN(where each event xiis
a collection of occurrences of the selected covariates in Table 1) that occur at continuous times
t1, . . . , t N, we wish to model the following probability distribution:
p(ti,xi|(t1,x1), . . . , (ti−1,xi−1)| {z }
hi−1)
We will realize this through a transformer neural network architecture parametrized by θ, such that
fθ(ti,xi,hi−1) =p(ti,xi|hi−1). Note that, unlike other GPT modeling settings, it may be the case
that internal covariates of each event xihave internal causal dependencies. For example, if x(j)
iis
used to denote the jth internal covariate of event i, then p(xi|hi−1, ti)̸=Q
jp(x(j)
i|hi−1, ti). Any
full generative model will therefore need to account for these internal causal dependencies.
1https://eventstreamml.readthedocs.io/en/dev/index.html
2