Pipeline Disk (GB) RAM (GB) Load Time (sec) Time/Batch (sec) GPU Memory (MB)
TemporAI 3.0 413.5 229.5 0.6 ± 0.0 877.2 ± 95.5
omop-learn 4.2 17.2 133.9 0.4 ± 0.0 40.1 ± 19.7
ESGPT (ours) 0.6 7.6 42.5 0.4 ± 0.0 67.2 ± 35.0
Table 3: Performance comparisons of the output deep-learning datasets between TemporAI [ 28],
omop-learn [ 16], and ESGPT (our pipeline) over the MIMIC-IV example. We can see that ESGPT is
dramatically cheaper than both other pipeline in terms of full dataset storage cost, and is cheaper or
competitive with both other pipelines on batch iteration time, and is slightly more expensive than
omop-learn in terms of batch memory but dramatically cheaper than TemporAI.
extraction, preprocessing, and final representation, all happens faster than just the initial extraction
and data conversion stage required for omop-learn . Full details are provided in the SI.
Event Stream GPT provides a memory-efficient deep learning representation Beyond efficient
preprocessing of data, ESGPT also provides an efficient deep learning representation of the data
suitable for PyTorch modeling. In particular, ESGPT provides a data representation format that is
simultaneously easy to use, through provided PyTorch dataset, batch, and embedding layer objects;
efficient to load and work with from disk, in terms of both time and memory; and permits rapid
and memory efficient construction of PyTorch batches for use in deep learning models on the GPU.
To demonstrate the impact of these properties, we compare ESGPT to TemporAI and omop-learn
(two of the most comparable existing pipelines from Table 2) on metrics quantifying the time and
memory costs of working with deep-learning datasets through each of the three pipelines in Table 3
for our working MIMIC-IV example. We can see from these comparisons that ESGPT is dramatically
more efficient in terms of time, storage, and memory cost to work with these data than either other
pipeline, and is competitive with omop-learn and dramatically better than TemporAI in terms of
dataset iteration time and GPU memory cost. Notably, we must recognize that as neither TemporAI
nor omop-learn are directly comparable to ESGPT, these comparisons are approximate, may not
reflect the ideal use-cases of the respective pipelines, and required us to craft new code to approximate
the common way in which users would construct a PyTorch dataset when using TemporAI or omop-
learn; nevertheless, this demonstrates that for its intended use-case, ESGPT provides significant
advancements over existing options in terms of computational performance when working with large
scale datasets. We comment further on these comparisons in the Supplementary Information, in
particular providing more details on the assumptions and approximations required.
4 Building GPTs
4.1 The Problem
To produce the generative model outlined in Section 2, we must satisfy several desiderata: (1) We
need to be able to model historical dependencies ( p(ti,xi|hi−1)), temporal dependencies ( p(xi|ti)),
and intraevent dependencies ( p(x(j+1)
i|x(1)
i, . . . ,x(j−1)
i )). In contrast, traditional (sequential) GPTs
only need to model historical dependencies. (2) We need to enable deep, sequential processing of
event sequences that can take into account event timestamps to build high-capacity representations.
(3) We need to produce continuous, categorical, and temporal output emission distributions. In
contrast, traditional GPTs only need to output categorical emission distributions. (4) Our model must
be able to construct time-derived features ( e.g., age) on the fly during generation.
4.2 Current State-of-the-art
There are three categories of existing tools that could help us build models: General-purpose deep
learning modeling frameworks with built-in model architectures ( e.g., TemporAI [ 28]); other GPT
architectures for different problem settings, such as natural language or regularly sampled timeseries;
or existing models for autoregressive or generative modeling of EHR or related modalities.
Unfortunately, across all three options, there are no existing tools that satisfy the criteria outlined
in Section 4.1. Among existing general-purpose frameworks, such as TemporAI [ 28] or OMOP
6