bit-level augmentation. In the case of images the least signiﬁcant bits of each colour channel of each pixel in the given
image are used to hide the payload.
The perturbations introduced by the LSB algorithm do not preserve marginal or joint colour statistics, which despite
being imperceptible to a human observer, simplify detection of the hidden payload with machine learning or statistical
models. A modiﬁcation of this method, which addresses this issue to some extent, is the so-called 1-embedding: each
bit of the message is hidden by randomly adding or subtracting 1 from a pixel’s colour channel so that the last bit matches
it.
More sophisticated steganographic schemes modify the digital media adaptively. The key idea is to constrain the
embedding to regions of high local entropy, e.g. complex textures or noise. Each pixel is assigned an embedding cost and
the embedding locations are picked in such a way as to minimize the distortion function
D(I;ˆI) =å
i;jri j(I;ˆIi j);
where Iis the cover image, ˆIis the stego-embedding, and ri j(I;ˆIi j)is the bounded cost of altering a pixel (i;j)in the
cover-image I. The embedding itself is performed by coding methods such as Syndrome-Trellis Codes (STC) [3], which
are essentially binary linear convolutional codes represented by parity-check matrix. The state-of-the-art content-adaptive
stego-embedding algorithms include HUGO [24], which computes the embedding costs based on Subtractive Pixel Adja-
cency Matrix (SPAM) features [23]; WOW [9] and S-UNIWARD [10], which use directional wavelet ﬁlters to weigh and
pick regions with high entropy, but implement different embedding cost functional.
2.1 Steganalysis
The simplest approach to steganalysis is based on special feature extractors, e.g. SPAM [23], SRM [4], combined
with traditional machine learning models, such as support vector classiﬁers, decision trees, classiﬁer ensembles, et c. With
the recent overwhelming success of deep learning, speciﬁcally in the image classiﬁcation and generation domain, newer
approaches based on deep Convolutional Neural Networks (deep CNN) are gaining popularity. For example, in [27] it is
shown that deep CNN with Gaussian activation functions achieve competitive performance with hand-crafted features, and
in [25] it is demonstrated that even shallow CNN are able to outperform the usual ML based stego-analysis techniques in
terms of the detection accuracy.
In this paper we consider steganographic embedding of random bit messages into speciﬁcally crafted images using
the1-embedding algorithm. The security of the stego-containers is tested against a class of deep convolutional neural
network stego-analyzers, which try to distinguish images with hidden data from the empty ones.
2.2 Problem Statement
The total scheme of steganography and steganalysis is presented at Fig. 1:
• Usually all images are attacked by a stegoanalyser (Eve);
• Alice (Steganography algorithm) tries to deceive Eve;
Figure 1: Complete scheme of steganography and steganalysis
The disadvantage of the standard steganography approach is inadaptability of the containers and algorithms for Eve.
By this we mean that containers don’t adopt (and even know) for type of Eve. The goal for this work is to create adaptive
containers generator and steganography new method.