Steganographic Generative Adversarial Networks
Denis V olkhonskiy1, Ivan Nazarov1, Evgeny Burnaev1
1Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Nobel street, 3, Moscow, Moskovskaya oblast’, Russia
e-mail: e.burnaev@skoltech.ru
ABSTRACT
Steganography is collection of methods to hide secret information (“payload”) within non-secret information “con-
tainer”). Its counterpart, Steganalysis, is the practice of determining if a message contains a hidden payload, and recov-
ering it if possible. Presence of hidden payloads is typically detected by a binary classiﬁer. In the present study, we
propose a new model for generating image-like containers based on Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks
(DCGAN). This approach allows to generate more setganalysis-secure message embedding using standard steganography
algorithms. Experiment results demonstrate that the new model successfully deceives the steganography analyzer, and for
this reason, can be used in steganographic applications.
Keywords: generative adversarial networks, steganography, security
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen signiﬁcant advances in estimation methods and application of deep generative models. There
are two major general frameworks for learning deep generative models: Variational Autoencoders (V AEs), [17], and
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), [7]. The recent work of Hu et al. [11] develops a unifying framework, which
establishes strong connections of these approaches to Adversarial Domain Adaptation (ADA), [5].
GANs have achieved impressive results in semi-supervised learning, [16], and image-to-image translation, [13]. In [7]
the success of GANs framework was illustrated on the problem of image generation. A more recent paper [29] proposed
as set of constraints on the architecture of convolutional GANs and showed that thus restricted deep convolutional GANs
(DCGANs) are capable of learning a hierarchy of representations from object parts to scenes, which are sufﬁciently robust
to transfer across domains.
In this study we apply the DCGAN framework to the domain of steganography, i.e. practical approaches to concealing
information (payload) within another piece of information (stego-container). In particular, we train a generator, images pro-
duced by which are less susceptible to steganographic analysis compared to the original images used as stego-containers.
At the same time, we require that the induced distribution of the synthetic images approximate well the distribution of the
real images in the dataset.
Thus we train a generative model for image stego-containers by confronting it with two deep convolutional adversaries:
a discriminator network, which regularizes the output to look like samples from the real dataset, and a steganographic an-
alyzer, which aims at detecting if an image conceals a hidden message. The presence of two regularizers in the generator’s
objective resembles the recently proposed multi-target GAN framework [2].
2. STEGANOGRAPHY
Steganography is a set of algorithms for concealing information in inconspicuous-looking communication and a col-
lection of methods to detect and recover the hidden message from suspicious media (Steganalysis). In steganography the
information to be hidden, the payload , is embedded by an algorithm inside a cover medium, the stego-container . The
key drawback is that steganography offers security through obscurity: an embedded message is sent in the hope that a
third party won’t detect or discover it. This makes pure steganography impractical without cryptography, which deals with
secure communication over an insecure channel: the message is scrambled and authenticated with some keyed algorithm
before being concealed in a cover medium , [1, 21]. In this respect steganography serves as a layer of weak security by
adding a cyphertext detection and extraction step: encrypted data has much higher entropy than the regular data. Besides
information protection and covert communication, steganography is useful for watermarking in digital rights management
and user identiﬁcation.
The simplest and most popular algorithm of unkeyed stego-embedding is called the Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB) match-
ing. The main idea is to take the binary representation of a secret message, pad it, and store it in a stego-container by
overwriting the LSB of each byte within. The cover-media used for the LSB embedding must be resilient with respect toarXiv:1703.05502v2  [cs.MM]  7 Oct 2019