• We test the HUGO steganography analyzer on real images and on images, generated by the SGAN model.
Containers generated by the SGAN model decrease HUGO steganalysis accuracy from 0 :624 to 0 :499, which demon-
strates that the Steganographic Generative Adversarial Networks can potentially be used as a universal tool for generating
Steganography containers tuned to deceive any speciﬁc steganalysis algorithm.
6.2.4 Training/Testing on Generated Images
In this set of experiments we train the steganalyser Son images, generated using the DCGAN model from the prior
noise distribution pnoise(z)for some ﬁxed seed value. In all experiments the size of the train set is ﬁxed at 160000. After
training we test the analyser Son images generated with the DCGAN model according to the following experimental
setups:
C1. We use the same seed value;
C1. We use the same seed value, as in C1, and we additionally tune the DCGAN model for several epochs.
Table 4: Training/testing on generated images according to experimental conditions C1-C3
Experimental Conditions Accuracy
C1 0.982
C3 0.499
The experiment results in tab. 4 indicate that additional tuning of the image generator Gmake this effect even more
pronounced.
We also conduct an experiment with classiﬁcation of generated images without steganographic embeddings. For this
purposes we train a DCGAN conditional model on the MNIST dataset, and train a separate classiﬁer for the MNIST
classiﬁcation task. The trained classiﬁer achieved almost perfect accuracy both on the held-out real MNIST dataset, and
on synthetic images produced by the DCGAN. This provides evidence that it is possible to train an image classiﬁer that
shows acceptable accuracy both on real and synthetic images. However it is the artiﬁcial generation of image containers
that breaks the usual approaches to steganalysis.
7. INFORMATION ENCRYPTION WITH SEGAN
7.1 Data description
For the experiments in the current section we use MNIST [19] and CIFAR-10 [18] data sets. Both datasets can be
considered as a benchmark in Deep Learning and Compute Vision.
• The MNIST dataset is a set of gray handwritten digits from 0 to 9 of size 28 28;
• The CIFAR-10 dataset consists of 60000 32 32 RGB images of totally 10 classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat,
deer, dog, frog, horse, ship, truck.
7.2 Encryption experiments
We consider SEGAN model as a model for information encryption. It allows to generate images with hidden informa-
tion inside. In the experimental section we should
• check if the generated images are realistic;
• look at the quality of encryption.
The examples of generate images for MNIST dataset are presented in Fig. 9. We observe the full realism in the
generated images.
Figure 9: Sample synthetic images: MNIST