Sensors 2022 ,22, 4426 6 of 16
3. Materials and Methods
Lung cancer has become the main reason for cancer deaths all over the world, as
its symptoms appear late. Consequently, a signiﬁcant detection system is required to
detect lung cancer in patients at its early stages. In this study, the existing algorithms
LeNet, AlexNet, VGG16, ResNet-50, and Inception-V1, with the Adam, SGD, and RMSprop
optimizers were applied to classify lung cancer, and an example is shown in Figure 1.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 16 
 
 (c) It was observed that the AlexNet architect ure with the SGD optimizer achieved the 
best results on the LUNA16 dataset.  
(d) Finally, AlexNet wi th the SGD optimizer approach achieved the highest accuracy as 
compared with other existing techniques for lung cancer classification . 
3. Materials and Methods  
Lung cancer has become the main reason for cancer death s all over the world , as its 
symptoms app ear late. Consequently, a significant detection system is required to detect 
lung cancer in patients at its early stages. In this study , the existing algorithms  LeNet, 
AlexNet , VGG16 , ResNet -50, and Inception -V1, with the Adam, SGD, and RMSprop op-
timizers  were applied to classify lung cancer , and an example is  shown  in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. Convolutional neural network architecture.  
The overall procedure adopted to apply convolutional neural network architectures 
is demonstrate d in Figure 1. In the first step, t he LUng Nodule Analysis 2016 (LUNA -16) 
dataset obtains from the publicly available lung cancer nodules [44] . The  LIDC -IDRI da-
tabase is publicly available from The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). This database con-
tains a tot al number of 1018 CT scans. CT scan images are associated with XML files an-
notated by four experienced radiologists. Thin -slice CT scans play a significant role in the 
detection of pulmonary nodules ; therefore , the authors of  [45] discarded slices that wer e 
greater than 3  mm thick, missing slices, and  those with  inconsistent slice spacing. A total 
number of 888 scans provided as MetaImage (.mhd) images are accessible from the 
LUNA -16 website. Two methods are applied on LUNA16 for train ing and validat ion pur-
pose s. In the first method, a dataset is randomly split into 80% and 20% , and the second 
method is based on 5 -fold cross -validation. After splitting and 5 -fold cross -validation , the 
dataset is forward ed to the CNN architectures to extract the features.  
CNN s have various parameters and hyperparameters such as neurons, number of 
layers, weights, biases, stride, filter size, activation function , learning rate , etc. Convolu-
tion operation plays a significant role in image feature extraction [46]. Two types of fi lters , 
large size filters and small size filters , are used to extract various information. Large -sized 
filters are used to extract coarse -grained information , and small -sized filter s are used to 
extract fine -grained information.  
LeNet was developed by LeCun in 1998 for zip code recognition. In LeNet, a con-
volve filter size  of 5 × 5 with a stride of 1 was used , and in the subsampling (pooling) layer , 
a filter size  of 2 × 2 was applied with a stride of 2. AlexNet was the first CNN -based 
method that won th e ImageNet Scale Visual Recognition Challenge in 2012. AlexNet com-
prises 5 convolution s, 3 pooling , and 3 fully connected (FC) layer s. The input image size 
was 227 × 227 × 3, and t he rectified linear unit (ReLU) was applied for the first time in 
AlexNet. The visual geometric group (VGG) has two versions: VGG16 with 16 layers and 
VGG19 with 19 layers. In VGG16 and VGG 19, the number of layers increase s, but the size 
of the filters  decreases . In this study, we applied LeNet, AlexNet, VGG16 , ResNet -50, and 
Inception -V1 to classify lung cancer on the LUNA16 dataset.  
Figure 1. Convolutional neural network architecture.
The overall procedure adopted to apply convolutional neural network architectures
is demonstrated in Figure 1. In the ﬁrst step, the LUng Nodule Analysis 2016 (LUNA-
16) dataset obtains from the publicly available lung cancer nodules [ 44]. The LIDC-IDRI
database is publicly available from The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). This database
contains a total number of 1018 CT scans. CT scan images are associated with XML ﬁles
annotated by four experienced radiologists. Thin-slice CT scans play a signiﬁcant role in
the detection of pulmonary nodules; therefore, the authors of [ 45] discarded slices that
were greater than 3 mm thick, missing slices, and those with inconsistent slice spacing.
A total number of 888 scans provided as MetaImage (.mhd) images are accessible from
the LUNA-16 website. Two methods are applied on LUNA16 for training and validation
purposes. In the ﬁrst method, a dataset is randomly split into 80% and 20%, and the second
method is based on 5-fold cross-validation. After splitting and 5-fold cross-validation, the
dataset is forwarded to the CNN architectures to extract the features.
CNNs have various parameters and hyperparameters such as neurons, number of layers,
weights, biases, stride, filter size, activation function, learning rate, etc. Convolution operation
plays a signiﬁcant role in image feature extraction [ 46]. Two types of ﬁlters, large size
ﬁlters and small size ﬁlters, are used to extract various information. Large-sized ﬁlters
are used to extract coarse-grained information, and small-sized ﬁlters are used to extract
ﬁne-grained information.
LeNet was developed by LeCun in 1998 for zip code recognition. In LeNet, a convolve
ﬁlter size of 55 with a stride of 1 was used, and in the subsampling (pooling) layer, a
ﬁlter size of 22 was applied with a stride of 2. AlexNet was the ﬁrst CNN-based method
that won the ImageNet Scale Visual Recognition Challenge in 2012. AlexNet comprises
5 convolutions , 3 pooling, and 3 fully connected (FC) layers. The input image size was
2272273, and the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) was applied for the ﬁrst time in AlexNet.
The visual geometric group (VGG) has two versions: VGG16 with 16 layers and VGG19
with 19 layers. In VGG16 and VGG19, the number of layers increases, but the size of
the ﬁlters decreases. In this study, we applied LeNet, AlexNet, VGG16, ResNet-50, and
Inception-V1 to classify lung cancer on the LUNA16 dataset.
Optimizers are methods or algorithms applied to minimize a loss function and to
maximize the efﬁciency of the model. Optimizers are mathematical functions that are based
on the model’s learnable parameters, and they assist to reduce the losses with updated
learning rates and weights of the neural network. The learning rate (LR) is known as a
tuning parameter that works in an optimization algorithm. LR determines the step size in