Sensors 2022 ,22, 4426 4 of 16
size of 33 was used in both networks, providing signiﬁcant improvements in the image
recognition process. The experimental results exploited that the depth representation is ben-
eﬁcial to classifying problems and increased state-of-the-art accuracy. Both networks were
also tested on other datasets and achieved high accuracy as compared to other techniques .
Another study [ 31] introduced a technique to detect early lung cancer by using a
deep learning genetic algorithm. In the preprocessing method, three techniques were
applied: the histogram stretching technique was used to enhance the contrast of the raw
image; the Wiener ﬁlter was used to remove noise; the image was cropped into 224 224
for VGG16 and 227 227 for VGG19 for the AlexNet architecture. Low-dose computed
tomography (LDCT) images were used, and three CNN architectures, VGG16, VGG19,
and AlexNet, were applied to extract features. A genetic algorithm was applied to select
the most relevant features. Finally, K-nearest neighbor (KNN), decision tree, and SVM
classiﬁers were investigated to classify pulmonary lung nodules. The experimental results
indicated that VGG19 with a support vector machine classiﬁer obtained a remarkable 96.3%
accuracy, sensitivity of 97.5%, and speciﬁcity of 95% as compared to other CNN models
and classiﬁers.
The authors of [ 32] presented an accurate lung segmentation technique based on VGG-
16 and dilated convolution network. Dilated convolution used a dilation rate parameter
and indicated an expansion of the size of the respective ﬁeld. The hypercolumn features
technique was used to fuse multi-scale convolution features to enhance the robustness
of the lung segmentation technique. The modiﬁed VGG16 was used, followed by the
multilayer perceptron (MLP) and ReLU activation function. The method achieved a dice
similarity coefﬁcient of 0.9867.
Another study based on VGG16 [ 33] introduced VGG16 with a boosting technique
for the identiﬁcation of the pathological types of lung cancer. The dataset consisted of
125 patients with early-stage lung cancer and was enhanced by using reproducing, shifting,
and revolving operations. VGG16-T comprised ﬁve convolution layers with a kernel
size of 33. It was found that the boosting strategy enhanced the accuracy, and three
weak classiﬁers can be adequate enough to make a strong classiﬁer. Finally, the softmax
function was applied to identify the pathological type of lung cancer by using CT images.
The experimental results of VGG16-T with boosting achieved 85% accuracy, which was
better than the other techniques, ResNet-34, DenseNet, and AlexNet.
Similarly, the authors of [ 34] presented a lung cancer detection system by using a trans-
fer learning technique. The suggested method reduced the processing time by using a maxi-
mum dropout ratio, and it decreased overﬁtting in the learning phase. GoogleNet, AlexNet ,
and ResNet50 transfer learning convolutional neural network architectures were applied
to detect lung cancer. LIDC, a publicly available dataset, was used to train and test the
pre-trained model as well as the suggested model and achieved high accuracy as compared
to pre-trained methods.
Another study [ 35] based on ResNet architecture presented a method for pulmonary
nodule classiﬁcation. The proposed model was based on 18 layers of ResNet and achieved
89.90% accuracy using LIDC-IDRI. In [ 36], an inception module CNN classiﬁer achieved
88.67% validation accuracy for the detection of pulmonary nodules on the AIA-INF publicly
available dataset. Similarly, in [ 37], the Darknet-53 CNN-based architecture was applied
for pulmonary nodule detection and achieved 70.5% to 73.9% accuracy on the LUNA16
dataset. Many other studies covered other cancer types such as thyroid, breast, skin, colon,
and blood cancers. In [ 38], the Xception neural network was applied to thyroid cancer
for the early detection of malignant nodules. The framework adopted three-level multi-
channel and real-world datasets, which were used to evaluate the proposed approach.
Another cancer type, colon carcinoma [ 39], was adopted to be used in a convolutional
neural network for classiﬁcation task. A study [ 40] conducted on the early detection
of breast cancer was based on fused and deep learning approaches; similarly, another
study [ 41], empowered with a deep learning technique, exploited breast cancer and its
stages, such as mucinous carcinoma, papillary carcinoma, ductal carcinoma, and lobular