Sensors 2022 ,22, 4426 2 of 16
Medical images are kept in Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM)
format, which can be quickly accessed for quantitative and qualitative analysis [8].
Medical imaging modalities comprise multidisciplinary techniques to attain an ac-
curate diagnosis of various diseases. There are various medical image modalities such
as computed tomography, X-ray angiography, mammography, digital radiography, radio
ﬂuoroscopy, and computed radiography that are used to analyze image processing [ 9].
Computed tomography (CT) images are an easier and more accurate method for the correct
detection of various diseases [ 10]. However, it is tedious for medical experts to manually
analyze CT scans without any error [ 11]. In the last few years, a low-dose CT scan has been
used to screen for lung cancer diseases that has led to a decrease in the mortality rate of
lung cancer [12].
The authors of [ 13] presented a framework based on deep learning to detect lung can-
cer and pneumonia abnormalities. The deep learning technique, named Modiﬁed AlexNet
(MAN), was presented to detect two classes, normal and pneumonia class, by using X-ray
images. The MAN technique was applied to classify lung cancer by using a support vector
machine (SVM) model. The MAN method performance was evaluated with other deep
learning approaches such as ResNet50, VGG19, VGG16, and AlexNet and achieved 97.27%
accuracy by using the LIDC-IDRI dataset. Another study [ 14] presented a network based on
a deep convolutional neural network, named AlexNet. The network consisted of an eight-
layer two-architecture deep CNN to classify malignant and benign nodules. The network
extracted the features automatically from CT scan images. Binary cross-entropy was ap-
plied to improve precision in the training phase as well as validation accuracy. The lung
nodule classiﬁcation model achieved 99% training precision and 97% validation accuracy.
Similarly, the authors of [ 15] introduced a lung cancer detection method based on a deep
learning algorithm using the segmentation method. Five-fold cross-validation was applied
to train and validate the deep learning-based model. In another study, the authors of [ 16]
presented a CAD system for pulmonary pure ground-glass nodules based on the convolu-
tional neural network. In line with the above, various research works have been presented
where diverse optimization algorithms have been applied to achieve an improvement in
performance for the detection of lung cancer diseases. In this research work, we have
investigated and explored an optimization algorithm based on a convolutional neural
network to detect lung cancer. Furthermore, this work exploited the optimizers RMSprop,
Adam, and SGD as well as their implementation with CNN architectures.
The remaining part of the paper has been organized as follows: Section 2 discusses
prior works published in recent years. Section 3 introduces the materials and methods
based on CNN, and Section 4 demonstrates the experimental results. Section 5 discusses
the present, and ﬁnally, limitations and future works are discussed in Section 6.
2. Related Work
Convolutional neural networks have been implemented to solve various visual prob-
lems since the late 1980s. LeCun et al. used a ﬁrst-time backpropagation algorithm in
multilayered CNN, namely ConvNet, to recognize handwritten zip codes in 1989 [ 14].
Khehrah et al. presented a pulmonary nodule detection system using shape-based and
statistical features in CT images [ 17]. Another study [ 18] introduced lung nodule detection
based on an artiﬁcial neural network using texture and shape features. The model achieved
an accuracy of 89.62%. Similarly, the authors of [ 19] proposed a lung cancer detection
model based on ANN that achieved 96.67% accuracy. Miah et al. [ 20] presented a lung
cancer detection system using a neural network from CT images that obtained 96.67%
accuracy. LeCun et al. [ 21] suggested another advanced version of ConvNet called LeNet-5
to classify characters in a document in 1998.
In [22], the researchers applied the LeNet-5 model to classify benign and malignant
pulmonary nodules in thoracic CT images. Lung Image Database Consortium and Image
Database Resource Initiative (LIDC-IDRI) datasets were obtained for the experimental
results. The 10-folder cross-validation was implemented to evaluate the model classi-