Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
REVISITING DESIGN CHOICES IN OFFLINE
MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Cong Lu, Philip J. Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael A. Osborne, Stephen J. Roberts
Department of Engineering
University of Oxford
ABSTRACT
Ofﬂine reinforcement learning enables agents to leverage large pre-collected
datasets of environment transitions to learn control policies, circumventing the
need for potentially expensive or unsafe online data collection. Signiﬁcant progress
has been made recently in ofﬂine model-based reinforcement learning, approaches
which leverage a learned dynamics model. This typically involves constructing a
probabilistic model, and using the model uncertainty to penalize rewards where
there is insufﬁcient data, solving for a pessimistic MDP that lower bounds the
true MDP. Existing methods, however, exhibit a breakdown between theory and
practice, whereby pessimistic return ought to be bounded by the total variation
distance of the model from the true dynamics, but is instead implemented through a
penalty based on estimated model uncertainty . This has spawned a variety of uncer-
tainty heuristics, with little to no comparison between differing approaches. In this
paper, we compare these heuristics, and design novel protocols to investigate their
interaction with other hyperparameters, such as the number of models, or imaginary
rollout horizon. Using these insights, we show that selecting these key hyperparam-
eters using Bayesian Optimization produces superior conﬁgurations that are vastly
different to those currently used in existing hand-tuned state-of-the-art methods,
and result in drastically stronger performance.
1 I NTRODUCTION
In ofﬂine (or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) (Ernst et al., 2005; Levine et al., 2020), the goal is
to leverage ofﬂine datasets of transitions in an environment to train a policy that transfers to an online
task. This could have vast implications for using RL in real-world settings, as agents can make use
of ever-increasing amounts of data without the need for an accurate simulator, while also avoiding
expensive and potentially even unsafe exploration in the environment.
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) has recently shown promise in this paradigm, obtaining
state-of-the-art performance on ofﬂine RL benchmarks (Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021),
improving upon powerful model-free approaches (e.g. Kumar et al. (2020)). MBRL works by
training a dynamics model from the ofﬂine data, then optimizing a policy using imaginary rollouts
from the model. This allows the agent to learn from on-policy experience, as the model is agnostic
to the policy used to generate data, making it possible to achieve high returns using data collected
from even a random policy. Furthermore, recent work has demonstrated the utility of world models
beyond maximizing return, such as generalizing to unseen variations in an environment (Ball et al.,
2021), transferring to new tasks (Yu et al., 2020), and learning with safety constraints (Argenson &
Dulac-Arnold, 2021). Therefore, the case for MBRL in ofﬂine RL is clear: not only does it represent
state-of-the-art in terms of performance, but it also provides the opportunity to maximize the signal
in the ofﬂine data to generalize onto tasks beyond those encoded by the behavior policy. This is
crucial for ofﬂine RL to be useful for real-world tasks (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021), where there will
inevitably be differences between the data and desired task.
However, a common failure mode of MBRL is when policies exploit the model in parts of the
state-action space where the model is inaccurate. Thus, naïve application of MBRL to ofﬂine data
Joint ﬁrst authors. Correspondence: cong:lu@stats:ox:ac:uk,ball@robots:ox:ac:uk
1arXiv:2110.04135v2  [cs.LG]  16 Mar 2022