Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
F I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
This paper extensively discusses key hyperparameters speciﬁc to current ofﬂine MBRL algorithms.
However, there are signiﬁcant code-level implementation details which are often critical for strong
performance and make it hard to disambiguate between algorithmic and implementation improve-
ments. Worryingly, many of these details are not mentioned in their respective papers, or are different
between the authors’ code and paper. We detail clear examples of this below. We believe further
investigation of these code-level implementation details represents important future work, as has
already been done for policy gradients (Engstrom et al., 2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2021). Indeed – it
is unclear if the improvement of MOReL over MOPO is due to its different P-MDP formulation, or if
it is successful in spite of this formulation, due to a superior policy optimization strategy or dynamics
model design. We believe that this paper takes a signiﬁcant ﬁrst step in tackling this issue by directly
comparing a number of key design choices, and understanding their individual impact. Now we
summarize key differences between the paper and code for the MOPO and MOReL algorithms which
we compare against that are crucial to achieve the same reported performance.
In MOPO,
• Each layer in the model neural network has a different level of weight-decay
• The authors’ code uses different objectives for training (log-likelihood) and validation (MSE).
• The authors use elites, but only for next state prediction (as discussed previously).
In MOReL,
•There is a difference in the authors’ code about how the penalty threshold is calculated and tuned,
and isn’t provided as a hyperparameter in the appendix.
• The absorbing HALT state does not appear in the authors’ code.
• The negative halt penalty appears signiﬁcantly different between code and paper.
• There is a minimum trajectory steps parameter (hard-coded to 4) not mentioned in the paper.
•The reward function appears to be hard-coded in the authors’ implementation, not learned as stated
in the paper.
•The policy architecture is different in the authors’ code (64,64 hidden layers) and the paper (32,32
hidden layers)
• It is not clear when the optional behavior cloning initialization step is applied.
G H YPERPARAMETERS AND EXPERIMENT DETAILS
The D4RL (Fu et al., 2021a) codebase and datasets used for the empirical evaluation is available
under the CC BY 4.0 Licence. As stated in the main text, we choose to use ‘v0’ experiments as these
are more challenging for Hopper due to having low return trajectories (Kostrikov et al., 2021), and
we clearly state when other benchmarks use the ‘v2’ experiments, which have ofﬂine trajectories with
higher returns on Hopper.
The remaining hyperparameters for the MOPO algorithm that we do not vary by Bayesian Opti-
mization were taken from the original MOPO paper (Yu et al., 2020), apart from we ﬁx the number
of policy epochs/iterations to 1,000 for all experiments. This means our implementation uses
the same probabilistic dynamics models (with unchanged hyperparameters) and policy optimizer
(SAC, Haarnoja et al. (2018)) as MOPO, differing from MOReL, which uses Natural Policy Gradient
(Kakade, 2002).
The hyperparameters used for the BO algorithm, CASMOPOLITAN , are listed in Table 7. We use the
batch-mode of CASMOPOLITAN , where multiple hyperparameters settings are proposed and evaluated
concurrently.
Each BO iteration is run for 300 epochs on a single seed, and the full optimization over an ofﬂine
dataset took ~200 hours on a NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU taken up predominantly by
MOPO training.
35