Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
observe Fig. 27, where we plot a random subset of 5individual rollouts from the Hopper Medium-
Expert data we generated.
0 50 1000.02.55.07.510.0
0 50 100 0 50 100 0 50 100 0 50 100Normalized MediansTime Steps in Model
Dynamics Distribution
Figure 27: Several Individual Ground Truth Rollouts in Hopper Medium-Expert
We observe that errors along any single trajectory tend to manifest as ‘spikes’, and that it is entirely
possible to recover from these, returning to either admissible dynamics, or parts of the state-action
space that have been seen in the data. This speaks to the nature of how we ought to penalize policies
for accessing regions of inaccuracy/uncertainty, and may justify a hybrid MOPO/MOReL approach,
whereby we penalize individual transitions along a trajectory, but do not stop rollouts early. Indeed,
this is similar to the approach taken in M2AC (non-stop), albeit they choose to ‘mask’ uncertain
transitions, not penalize them. We leave the design of such an algorithm to future work.
Finally, we address the issue of comparing OOD dynamics and inputs. As already observed in Fig. 27,
these two errors are not necessarily always the same, and oftentimes it is possible that one quantity is
large, whilst the other is small. We revisit Fig. 1a to explore this, now also plotting the Distribution
Error in Fig. 28.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time Steps in Model02468Normalized Measure1 2 Dynamics Error
Distribution Error
Max Aleatoric
Max Pairwise Diff.
Ensemble Std.
Ensemble Var.
Figure 28: Comparing OOD dynamics and inputs on a Hopper Medium-Expert trajectory
We ﬁrst speak to the inset annotated ‘ 1’. Here we observe that the transitions generated in fact closely
resemble the data that our model was trained on, however the predicted dynamics are incorrect, and
cause an aforementioned ‘spike’. This is the opposite of what is observed in the inset annotated
‘2’; where we actually predict accurate dynamics, however the resultant state-action tuples do not
closely resemble the data that our model was trained on. We generally observe that regions of high
Distribution Error tend to be preceded by ‘spikes’ pertaining to high Dynamics Error, and this present
an exciting avenue for future work understanding how these quantities are related.
D.3 O N THE DIVERSITY OF EXPLOITATIVE POLICIES
It is possible that training policies purely to exploit the world models may result in generating state-
action tuples that are low in diversity, as the policy could discover "pockets" in the model that provide
consistently high return. To prevent this, we train multiple policies inside the model from different
seeds, with the aim of inducing different modes of exploitation. To validate this induces diverse
trajectories in the world models, we visualize the state-action manifold using a t-SNE projection
(van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of: 1) the D4RL Hopper Mixed-Replay (which contains diverse
samples); 2) the imagined rollouts inside the model from the exploitative policies in Fig. 29. The
policies were trained to exploit a model that itself was trained on the Hopper Mixed-Replay data.
32