Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
0 25 50 75 100
Time Steps in Model0100101Log Norm. ScaleDynamics Error
Max Aleatoric
Max Pairwise Diff.
Ensemble Std.
Ensemble Var.
(a)Uncertainty vs. True Errors
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
P[Optimized > MOPO]MuJoCoAdroit (b)Probability of Improvement
Figure 1: a)The variation of different uncertainty penalties against truedynamics error during a model rollout
of Hopper Medium-Expert. The canonical ensemble variance penalty most closely ﬁts the true dynamics error.
b)Tuning key hyperparameters (an approach we call Optimized) can lead to large gains over state-of-the-art
methods (MOPO) on the D4RL benchmark, as we show in this summary using rliable (Agarwal et al., 2021).
can result in suboptimal performance. To prevent this, concurrent works (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi
et al., 2020) have approached the problem by training a policy in a pessimistic MDP (P-MDP). The
P-MDP lower bounds the true MDP, and discourages the policy from regions where there is large
discrepancy between the true and learned dynamics; this often provides a theoretical guarantee of
improvement over cloning the behavior policy that generated the ofﬂine data. This is made practically
possible by adding a penalty correlated with the uncertainty in the dynamics model. However, while
these recent successes are similar in principle, in practice they differ in a series of design choices.
First and foremost, they make use of different heuristics to measure model uncertainty, in some cases
deviating from simpler metrics which are more consistent with the theory.
In this paper, we conduct a rigorous investigation into a series of these design choices. We begin by
focusing on the choice of uncertainty metric, comparing both recent state-of-the-art ofﬂine approaches
(Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Rafailov et al., 2020) with additional metrics used in the online
setting (Ball et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020; Cowen-Rivers et al., 2022). We also explore the interaction
with a series of other hyperparameters, such as the number of models and imaginary rollout length.
Interestingly, the relationship between these variables and model uncertainty varies signiﬁcantly
depending on the choice of uncertainty penalty. Furthermore, we compare these uncertainty heuristics
under new evaluation protocols that, for the ﬁrst time, capture the speciﬁc covariate shift induced by
model-based RL. This allows us to assess calibration to model exploitation in MBRL, observing that
some existing penalties are surprisingly successful at capturing the errors in predicted dynamics, as
seen in Fig. 1a (see App. D for details). Then, using the insights gained from sections 4 and 5, we
then achieve a 43% gain over a previously grid-searched method by using a single hyperparameter
value across all environments. We then jointly ﬁne-tune our identiﬁed key variables using a powerful
Bayesian Optimization algorithm (Wan et al., 2021) and ﬁnd the simpler uncertainty measures can
provide state-of-the-art results in continuous control ofﬂine benchmarks, and that the chosen optimal
hyperparameters continue to align with our analysis. Finally, we rigorously conﬁrm the aggregate
improvement of our results using the rliable framework (Agarwal et al., 2021) in Fig. 1b, and
show that the improvements over existing methods are signiﬁcant (see App. H for details). This work
is intended to beneﬁt both researchers and practitioners in ofﬂine RL. Our main ﬁndings include:
•Longer horizon rollouts with larger penalties can improve existing methods. Contrary to
common wisdom, conducting signiﬁcantly longer rollouts inside the model, coupled with larger
uncertainty penalties, typically improves performance.
•Penalties that use canonical forms of uncertainty estimation achieve better correlation with
OOD measures. The uncertainty estimation approach of Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017) often
outperforms the penalty from state-of-the-art methods (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020).
We observe that the ensemble standard deviation is statistically strikingly similar to that used in
Kidambi et al. (2020), but has improved correlation and scaling behavior.
•Uncertainty is more correlated with dynamics error than distribution shift .We ﬁnd that suc-
cessful penalties measure the discrepancy in dynamics, and can in fact assign high certainty to data
far away from the ofﬂine data.
2 R ELATED WORK
Two recent works concurrently demonstrated the effectiveness of model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) in the ofﬂine setting. MOPO (Yu et al., 2020) follows the successful online RL algorithm
MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) but trains inside a conservative MDP , penalizing the reward based on the
maximum aleatoric uncertainty over the ensemble members. MOReL (Kidambi et al., 2020) achieves
2