Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 16 of 29
explains a large part of the variation, after which adding environmental covariates has little added
value. This was also conﬁrmed by the relatively high accuracy of IDW interpolation. Note, however,
that these results depend on sampling density and may turn out differently in other cases.
Scatter density plots of predictions against observations from nested LLOCV are presented
in Figure 11. Point clouds for RF and RFsp are more dispersed, which agrees with the higher MAE
and RMSE, and lower R2
1:1and CCC, in comparison with STRK and RFSI. Another reason why IDW
performed as well as STRK and RFSI might be that IDW managed to model zeros well. Table 5 shows
the number of hits and misses for predicting zero and non-zero precipitation of all models. Note that
1 mm is taken as a threshold for zero precipitation, because a “dry day” is deﬁned as a day with less
precipitation than 1 mm [ 49]. IDW and RFSI had the best overall accuracy. STRK, IDW, and RFSI
modelled zeros best, while RFSI and RFSI 0were better in modelling precipitation above 1 mm.
Predictions made at 1 km spatial resolution for four example days (Figure 12) show that RF and
RFsp over-predicted precipitation extremes (34.2 mm and 30.0 mm on 4 January). RFSI predicted a
maximum precipitation of 13.8 mm, STRK 13.6 mm and IDW 14.2 mm on 4 January. An advantage of
RFSI and other RF models in comparison with RK and STRK is that these do not extrapolate and do
not give negative precipitation predictions. STRK predicted negative precipitation in 35.8% of all cases,
with a minimum of –29.9 mm. As mentioned in Section 3.2.1, all negative predictions were replaced
with zeros. IMERG has a low spatial resolution (Figure S1), which leads to a blocky structure in all
prediction maps in Figure 12, except for RFSI and IDW. IMERG patterns are most noticeable in RF and
RFsp predictions, especially on 4 January, because IMERG is their most important feature (Figure 10).
Figure 11. Scatter density plots of predictions vs. observations with 1:1 line for the precipitation
case study.