Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 22 of 29
IDW, RFsp, and RFSI performed differently for different semivariogram nugget-to-sill ratios,
ranges, and sample sizes (Figure 4). IDW outperformed RFsp and RFSI in the case of low nugget.
This might be because in the synthetic case, where realities are simulations from normally distributed
stationary random ﬁelds, the best interpolator (i.e., OK) is linear. This indicates that non-linear
interpolators, such as RFsp and RFSI, have no clear advantage over linear interpolators, such as IDW.
IDW weights are large for near observations, which is the best strategy in case of strong spatial
autocorrelation. This explains why IDW performs well in case of a zero nugget. IDW performance
deteriorates if the nugget-to-sill ratio is large, because in such case IDW assigns too much weight to
near observations. This effect is strongest in case of a large semivariogram range, because in such case
distant observations carry more information than when the semivariogram range is small. RFsp and
RFSI are better able to incorporate the effect of a large nugget-to-sill ratio, but only when the sample
size is sufﬁciently large, so that there are enough calibration data to train the model.
Figure 4 also shows that NN has the worst performance if the nugget-to-sill ratio and
semivariogram range are large, because in this case the nearest observation captures only a small part of
the available information. It was already noted in Section 3.1 that TS has poor performance compared
to other methods in case of large sample sizes, because it has only a few global parameters and hardly
beneﬁts from the extra information in large sample datasets. However, in case of a large nugget-to-sill
ratio, it still outperforms NN because in such case short-distance spatial variation (i.e., “noise”) affects
NN much more than TS.
When comparing IDW, RFsp and RFSI, the advantage of RFSI over RFsp is its computational
speed, especially in case of large datasets (Table 1), while its advantage over IDW is that environmental
covariates can be added to the model.
We also evaluated the inﬂuence of the nparameter, that is the number of nearest locations, on the
performance of RFSI in the synthetic case study. The optimal value of ndepended on the degree of
spatial correlation and the sample size. Optimal values of nwere large when the sample size and
semivariogram range were large (Figure 8). Figure 8 also shows that the effect of nwas not that
large, provided it is not too small, because after an initial decrease the RMSE was fairly constant.
We therefore recommend that initial values for tuning the nparameter are between 5 and 35. If nis
not tuned, a value of 25 seems sufﬁcient. Clearly, this speciﬁc needs to be further researched, but our
results suggest that extending the number of nearest locations to more than 25 will not improve
the results signiﬁcantly, because the added value of extra neighbours becomes smaller and smaller
as new neighbours are added. Similar results are found in kriging, where limiting the local search
neighbourhood to the nearest 25 or 50 observations is often done to save computing time. This hardly
deteriorates the kriging prediction accuracy because kriging weights quickly converge to zero when
there are many other observations closer to the prediction location ([ 7], Chapter 8). In fact, we observed
a similar effect in the RFSI importance plots (Figures 6, 10 and 14).
In the real-world case studies, the reality was not simulated from a geostatistical model as in
the synthetic case, which means that STRK does not have to be the best interpolation method [ 53].
Observations and distances to the nearest locations showed to be valuable spatial covariates for RFSI.
RFSI combined with other environmental covariates (e.g., IMERG, MODIS LST) signiﬁcantly improved
prediction performance, mainly because standard RF did not capture all spatial and spatio-temporal
correlation. Furthermore, RFSI outperformed STRK and RFsp.
In the precipitation case study, IDW had similar performance as RFSI, and outperformed all other
methods, including STRK and RFsp. Malamos and Koutsoyiannis [ 54], Liao et al [ 55], Qiao et al. [ 56]
and Long et al. [ 57] compared OK and IDW (among other methods) and also reported that IDW had
similar performance and sometimes outperformed kriging in real-world case studies. Note also that the
number of environmental covariates was fairly small in this study and did not add much information
in cases in which neighbourhood observations were available. Thus, interpolation methods that make
use of environmental covariates did not beneﬁt much in this case study.