Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 24 of 29
4. RFSI has several orders of magnitude better scaling properties than RFsp. In RFsp the number of
spatial covariates equals the number of observations, whereas in RFSI it is optimized and fairly
independent of the number of observations.
5. Hengl et al. [ 8] recommended using RFsp for fewer than 1000 locations. For more than
1000 locations RFsp becomes slow because buffer distances cannot be computed quickly (Table 1).
The calculation of spatial covariates needed to apply RFSI, (Euclidean) distances and observations
to the nearest locations, is not computationally extensive.
6. RFsp cannot be spatially cross-validated properly, i.e., with nested LLOCV . Considering that
in nested LLOCV entire stations are held out, the buffer distance covariates in the test dataset
(consisting of one main fold) and nested folds of the calibration dataset (consisting of the other
folds) are not the same. Therefore, RFsp hyperparameters tuned on the nested folds with one set
of buffer distance covariates can be a poor choice to make predictions on the test dataset.
4.2. Extensions and Improvements
RFSI predicts in the sample dataset value domain. This can be a disadvantage in the case of new
observations that are out of the sample dataset value domain. This is a well-known extrapolation
problem of RF ([ 8], Figure 14), [ 18,24]. Another similar potential problem relates to distances.
When predicting at a location where distances to the nearest observations are smaller or larger than
the distances used to develop the RFSI model, the prediction will be made in the same way as for the
lowest or largest distance to the nearest observation. A solution for these problems would be to ﬁt
the RFSI model again or to ﬁt extra trees to the RFSI model with the new observations and distances.
Furthermore, the spatial sampling design may be optimised for RFSI [59].
The distances to the nearest observations had low importance in RFSI. It seems that distances to
the nearest locations are still not used optimally in RFSI. They were always signiﬁcantly less important
than observations at nearest locations, possibly because distance information is indirectly incorporated
in the order of the observations. Possible improvements could be to not only consider Euclidean
distance, but also take direction into account (anisotropy) and local observation density.
Currently, RFSI is a methodology for spatial interpolation, even though it can be applied to
spatio-temporal data, as was done in the real-world case studies. Future work may be oriented
to the extension of RFSI to the space–time domain by including the nearest temporal observations
and temporal distances as covariates. Some temporal covariates, such as day of year—DOY [ 21],
cumulative day from a date—CDATE [ 8], and month of the year [ 20] were already used in RF models
and gave good results. Another possible improvement of RFSI could be the use of ensemble ML
techniques, e.g., SVM and RF could be combined for classiﬁcation and regression problems. Ensemble
ML tends to perform at least as well as the best ML algorithm in the ensemble [60].
Finally, the main goal of this research was not to mimic kriging, but to develop a different method
that might outperform kriging in cases where the kriging assumptions are violated. More case studies
are needed to evaluate the general performance of RFSI, but we think that the three case studies
in this paper provide sufﬁcient evidence that RFSI has merit. No one-size-ﬁts-all algorithm exists.
The choice of the optimal method for spatial interpolation depends on the case study, spatial structure,
and the behaviour of the data and covariates. Thus, there is much to say for having a large variety of
interpolation methods to choose from, and we have conﬁdence that RFSI is a valuable extension of the
spatial interpolation toolbox.
5. Conclusions
In this study, a novel spatial interpolation method, RFSI, was introduced. It was shown that it
can produce accurate spatial interpolation results. RFSI prediction maps had higher accuracy than
simple deterministic interpolation methods such as nearest neighbour and trend surfaces interpolation,
and were generally comparable to or performed better than kriging, IDW, RF, and RFsp. Nearest
observations and distances to nearest observations are of great value for RFSI. An initial hypothesis