Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 23 of 29
In the temperature case study, RFSI outperformed IDW because in this case the environmental
covariates were more important than in the precipitation case study. But IDW was better than STRK,
possibly because STRK was limited to a separable covariance model. RFSI was also better than RFsp,
which conﬁrmed that there are cases where using the nearest observations as covariates in RF has truly
added value.
Comparison of RFSI and RFSI 0showed that adding environmental covariates did not increase
performance much in the precipitation case study, while it did improve prediction accuracy
considerably in the temperature case study. The difference lies in whether the environmental covariates
have added value to the information already provided by the nearest observations. In the precipitation
case, neighbouring observations and their distances alone already explained a large part of the
variation, after which adding environmental covariates had little added value. Note, however, that this
does not mean that the environmental covariates carry no information about precipitation. The results
of the standard RF model show that they do have value, because the R2
1:1of RF was 49.4% (Table 4).
But the small difference of less than 1% in the R2
1:1of RFSI with and without environmental covariates
shows that environmental covariates were no longer important once neighbouring observations were
available, as conﬁrmed by the covariate importance plot (Figure 10). For the temperature case study,
neighbouring observations were also more important than environmental covariates, but less so than
in the precipitation case study. Including environmental covariates could still improve performance
considerably (Table 7). This shows that it is useful to include environmental covariates as well as
nearest observations and their distances in RFSI. Depending on the case, RFSI will determine from
the training data which of the two information sources is most important and make predictions based
on that.
Spatial interpolation methods tend to smooth the reality because both linear and non-linear
averaging of observations produce predictions that on average are closer to the mean of the
observations and miss the extremes. A typical example of this is OK, which produces smooth maps,
particularly in a case where the nugget-to-sill ratio is high, while the reality is quite noisy in that case.
Predictions of RF models also have smaller variance than the observations, as conﬁrmed by the scatter
density plots shown in Figure 11. The more accurate the spatial interpolation method, the closer the
predictions are to the observations and the less smoothing will occur. Thus, in the precipitation case
study IDW and RFSI had the lowest smoothing effect, and in the temperature case study RFSI had
less smoothing than the other interpolation methods. While there are ways to decrease the degree of
smoothing by combining interpolation and stochastic simulation (e.g., Goovaerts [ 58]), this comes at
the expense of an increased MAE.
In summary, RFSI has a number of important advantages over STRK and RFsp:
1. RFSI is much closer to the philosophy of spatial interpolation than standard RF and RFsp. RFSI
uses observations nearby in a direct way to predict at a location. RFsp uses a much more indirect
way to include the spatial context in RF prediction. In fact, RFSI mimics kriging much more than
RFsp, with the additional advantage that it is not restricted to a weighted linear combination of
neighbouring observations.
2. Compared to kriging, RFSI is easier to ﬁt, because there is no need for semivariogram modelling
and stringent stationarity assumptions.
3. RFSI provides a model with more interpretative power than RFsp, i.e., the importance of the
ﬁrst, second, third, etc., nearest observations can be assessed and compared with each other
(Figure 6) and with the importance of environmental covariates (Figures 10 and 14). RFsp variable
importance shows how important buffer distances from observation points are, but this is difﬁcult
to interpret, because it is unclear why certain buffer distance layers have high importance and
others do not. However, it should be noted that feature importance is difﬁcult to measure
objectively in cases where covariates are cross-correlated and their inﬂuence may be masked by
other covariates.