Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 2 of 29
standard deviation. Kriging is the Best Linear Unbiased Predictor (BLUP) for spatial data under certain
stationarity assumptions [ 5]. It is also very ﬂexible because there are many variants that can deal with
speciﬁc cases, such as anisotropy, non-normality, and information contained in covariates [6,7].
However, kriging also has disadvantages. It can be computationally demanding, makes many
assumptions, and it may not be easy to come up with a sound geostatistical model that ﬁts all types of
data well [ 8]. It is also not well suited for incorporating the abundance of covariate information that is
available nowadays. An important issue is that it is difﬁcult to deﬁne a geostatistical model for data that
cannot easily be transformed to normality. To solve this challenge, indicator kriging was developed [ 9];
however, it is cumbersome and not model-based (i.e., it does not use formal statistical methods derived
for an explicit and complete statistical model, see Diggle and Ribeiro [ 6]). The Generalized Linear
Geostatistical Model [ 6] is statistically sound but still limited in the type of distributions it can handle,
and in addition it is technically very complex. For example, it is far from obvious how variables with
many zeroes and extreme values, such as in the case of precipitation, can be modelled geostatistically.
Even though annual and monthly precipitation can still have zero values in arid regions and exhibit
strong positive skewness, spatial interpolation using kriging is less problematic in these cases than for
daily or hourly precipitation, because temporally aggregated precipitation tends more to the normal
distribution. However, when mapping hourly or daily precipitation, spatial variability is higher,
the stationarity assumption becomes questionable, and the distribution of precipitation becomes
skewed, and has a lot of zeroes [ 10,11]. Similar problems may occur with kriging air quality indices or
concentrations of pollutants in ground- and surface water [ 12]. In these situations, kriging may not be
a good choice.
In recent years, more and more use is being made of machine learning (ML) techniques for spatial
interpolation [ 13]. ML heavily relies on the strength of the relation between the dependent variable
and covariates and can produce remarkably accurate results if this correlation is strong. Nowadays
remote sensing (RS) based covariates are abundant and this has given a boost to ML for spatial and
spatio-temporal mapping. One of the strengths of ML is that it is very ﬂexible and not restricted
to linear relations, as in linear regression, regression kriging (RK), and kriging with external drift
(KED) [ 14–18]. ML for spatial interpolation is used in many ﬁelds, including soil science, climatology,
geology, econometrics, spatial planning, and land use mapping. For example, Kirkwood et al. [ 17]
used quantile regression forests to map soil geochemical variables in southwest England and obtained
more accurate results compared with ordinary kriging (OK). The authors concluded that eventually
the spatial autocorrelation of the target variable was entirely captured by the auxiliary variables.
Kirkwood et al. [ 17] and Veronesi and Schillaci [ 19] gave an extensive overview of the application
of ML in soil mapping. Mohsenzadeh Karimi et al. [ 20] compared ML methods and reported that
random forest (RF) was superior to support vector machines (SVM) and artiﬁcial neural networks
(ANN) in estimating long-term monthly air temperature. Hashimoto et al. [ 18] proposed a NASA
Earth Exchange Gridded Daily Meteorology (NEX-GDM) RF model for mapping daily precipitation
(among other meteorological variables) at 1 km spatial resolution using satellite, re-analysis, radar,
and topography data for the conterminous United States, from 1979 to 2017.
Despite the increased use and mapping successes, most of the RF frameworks for spatial
interpolation do not take into account that the observations are geo-referenced and may be spatially
correlated. In other words, they do not fully exploit the available spatial information. Some
approaches to include a geographic context into ML were to introduce longitude and latitude as
covariates [ 14,20–23], as well as to use distance-to-coast [ 14] and distance-to-closest dry grid cell as
covariates [ 21]. He et al. [ 21] also used precipitation at adjacent grid cells as covariates for downscaling
precipitation using random forest. Behrens et al. [ 24] used x- and y-coordinates and distances to the
corners and center of a bounding box around the sampling locations as covariates. Hengl et al. [ 8]
introduced Random Forest for spatial prediction (RFsp), which uses buffer distance maps from
observation points as covariates. The authors showed that adding these covariates improved prediction
and produced results that mimic kriging. Zhu et al. [ 25] proposed an ML model which considers