Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1687 3 of 29
autocorrelation to reconstruct surface air temperature data at high spatial resolution across China.
They added weights based on altitude and distance differences between the target station and
surrounding stations as covariates. Georganos et al. [ 23] proposed Geographical Random Forest (GRF)
as a function of RS covariates for modelling population density in Dakar, Senegal. This methodology
imitates geographically weighted regression by ﬁtting local RF models for each observation location
using the covariates from nnearest observations as training data, while for prediction the closest RF
model is used. Hashimoto et al. [ 18] proposed the AINA methodology, which is similar to the method
of Georganos et al. [ 23], with the difference being that Hashimoto et al. [ 18] ﬁtted models to grid cells
and made predictions by weighing 16 surrounding RF models.
However, to the best of our knowledge, none of the current approaches that aim to include
geographical context in ML explicitly included the actual observations at the nearest locations of the
prediction location as covariates. This is quite surprising because it seems to be a natural choice to
include them; it is the very basis of kriging and most deterministic interpolation methods.
With this in mind, the objectives of this paper were: (1) to introduce Random Forest Spatial
Interpolation (RFSI), i.e., RF which includes the neighbouring observations and their distances to
the prediction location as covariates, and (2) to evaluate the performance of RFSI against simple
deterministic interpolation techniques (NN, TS, and IDW), kriging, standard RF, and RFsp. For this
purpose, we ﬁrst deﬁne the RFSI approach and give a brief overview of existing, alternative
interpolation methods. Next, we analyse its performance using a synthetic case study where realities
were simulated from normally distributed stationary random ﬁelds, with a known semivariogram.
In such a case it is known that kriging is optimal. The performance of RFSI in this case was evaluated
and compared with the performance of ordinary kriging (OK), RFsp, IDW, NN, and TS. Finally, we
applied RFSI to two real-world case studies, a daily precipitation dataset for Catalonia for the years
2016–2018 and a mean daily temperature dataset for Croatia for the year 2008 (i.e., the same dataset as
used in Hengl et al. [ 26]) and compared its performance to space–time RK (STRK), IDW, standard RF
and RFsp by using nested k-fold cross-validation.
A complete script in R [ 27] and datasets for prediction and benchmarking of the
prediction efﬁciency are available and can be obtained via the GitHub repository at
https://github.com/AleksandarSekulic/RFSI.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Methodology
Here, we ﬁrst summarize existing interpolation methods that we used in our experiments and then,
in Section 2.1.4, we describe the main contribution of our paper - Random Forest Spatial Interpolation.
2.1.1. Deterministic Interpolation Methods
The idea behind deterministic interpolation methods is to create a surface from measured points
using a mathematical function. We give a brief explanation of each method and refer to Burrough and
McDonnell [28] for details.
Nearest neighbour interpolation simply assigns the value of the nearest measured point to
a prediction location. The interpolated surface takes the form of Thiessen polygons (or Voronoi
diagrams) [1].
Inverse distance weighting [2] makes a prediction at a location as a weighted average:
ˆz(s0) =n
å
i=1wiz(si) (1)