Figure 3. System overview of Mesh R-CNN. We augment Mask R-CNN with 3D shape inference. The voxel branch predicts a coarse
shape for each detected object which is further deformed with a sequence of reﬁnement stages in the mesh reﬁnement branch .
ogy in order to accommodate a wide variety of complex
real-world objects. We accomplish these goals by marrying
state-of-the-art 2D perception with 3D shape prediction.
Speciﬁcally, we build on Mask R-CNN [ 18], a state-of-
the-art 2D perception system. Mask R-CNN is an end-to-
end region-based object detector. It inputs a single RGB
image and outputs a bounding box, category label, and seg-
mentation mask for each detected object. The image is
ﬁrst passed through a backbone network (e.g. ResNet-50-
FPN [ 34]); next a region proposal network (RPN) [ 46]
gives object proposals which are processed with object clas-
siﬁcation and mask prediction branches.
Part of Mask R-CNN’s success is due to RoIAlign
which extracts region features from image features while
maintaining alignment between the input image and fea-
tures used in the ﬁnal prediction branches. We aim to main-
tain similar feature alignment when predicting 3D shapes.
We infer 3D shapes with a novel mesh predictor, com-
prising a voxel branch and a mesh reﬁnement branch . The
voxel branch ﬁrst estimates a coarse 3D voxelization of an
object, which is converted to an initial triangle mesh. The
mesh reﬁnement branch then adjusts the vertex positions of
this initial mesh using a sequence of graph convolution lay-
ers operating over the edges of the mesh.
The voxel branch and mesh reﬁnement branch are ho-
mologous to the existing box and mask branches of Mask R-
CNN. All take as input image-aligned features correspond-
ing to RPN proposals. The voxel and mesh losses, described
in detail below, are added to the box and mask losses and the
whole system is trained end-to-end. The output is a set of
boxes along with their predicted object scores, masks and
3D shapes. We call our system Mesh R-CNN , which is il-
lustrated in Figure 3.
We now describe our mesh predictor, consisting of the
voxel branch and mesh reﬁnement branch, along with its
associated losses in detail.3.1. Mesh Predictor
At the core of our system is a mesh predictor which re-
ceives convolutional features aligned to an object’s bound-
ing box and predicts a triangle mesh giving the object’s full
3D shape. Like Mask R-CNN, we maintain correspondence
between the input image and features used at all stages of
processing via region- and vertex-speciﬁc alignment opera-
tors (RoIAlign andVertAlign ). Our goal is to capture
instance-speciﬁc 3D shapes of all objects in an image. Thus,
each predicted mesh must have instance-speciﬁc topology
(genus, number of vertices, faces, connected components)
andgeometry (vertex positions).
We predict varying mesh topologies by deploying a se-
quence of shape inference operations. First, the voxel
branch makes bottom-up voxelized predictions of each ob-
ject’s shape, similar to Mask R-CNN’s mask branch. These
predictions are converted into meshes and adjusted by the
mesh reﬁnement head , giving our ﬁnal predicted meshes.
The output of the mesh predictor is a triangle mesh T=
(V,F)for each object. V={vi∈R3}is the set of vertex
positions and F⊆V×V×Vis a set of triangular faces.
3.1.1 Voxel Branch
Thevoxel branch predicts a grid of voxel occupancy proba-
bilities giving the course 3D shape of each detected object.
It can be seen as a 3D analogue of Mask R-CNN’s mask pre-
diction branch: rather than predicting a M×Mgrid giving
the object’s shape in the image plane, we instead predict a
G×G×Ggrid giving the object’s full 3D shape.
Like Mask R-CNN, we maintain correspondence be-
tween input features and predicted voxels by applying a
small fully-convolutional network [ 38] to the input feature
map resulting from RoIAlign . This network produces a
feature map with Gchannels giving a column of voxel oc-
cupancy scores for each position in the input.
9787