Mesh R-CNN
Georgia Gkioxari Jitendra Malik Justin Johnson
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Abstract
Rapid advances in 2D perception have led to systems
that accurately detect objects in real-world images. How-
ever, these systems make predictions in 2D, ignoring the 3D
structure of the world. Concurrently, advances in 3D shape
prediction have mostly focused on synthetic benchmarks
and isolated objects. We unify advances in these two areas.
We propose a system that detects objects in real-world im-
ages and produces a triangle mesh giving the full 3D shape
of each detected object. Our system, called Mesh R-CNN,
augments Mask R-CNN with a mesh prediction branch that
outputs meshes with varying topological structure by ﬁrst
predicting coarse voxel representations which are converted
to meshes and reﬁned with a graph convolution network op-
erating over the mesh’s vertices and edges. We validate
our mesh prediction branch on ShapeNet, where we outper-
form prior work on single-image shape prediction. We then
deploy our full Mesh R-CNN system on Pix3D, where we
jointly detect objects and predict their 3D shapes. Project
page:https://gkioxari.github.io/meshrcnn/ .
1. Introduction
The last few years have seen rapid advances in 2D ob-
ject recognition. We can now build systems that accurately
recognize objects [ 19,29,54,60], localize them with 2D
bounding boxes [ 13,46] or masks [ 18], and predict 2D key-
point positions [ 3,18,64] in cluttered, real-world images.
Despite their impressive performance, these systems ignore
one critical fact: that the world and the objects within it are
3D and extend beyond the XY image plane.
At the same time, there have been signiﬁcant advances in
3D shape understanding with deep networks. A menagerie
of network architectures have been developed for differ-
ent 3D shape representations, such as voxels [ 5], point-
clouds [ 8], and meshes [ 68]; each representation carries
its own beneﬁts and drawbacks. However, this diverse and
creative set of techniques has primarily been developed on
synthetic benchmarks such as ShapeNet [ 4] consisting of
rendered objects in isolation, which are dramatically less
complex than natural-image benchmarks used for 2D object
recognition like ImageNet [ 51] and COCO [ 36].Input Image 2D Recognition
3D Meshes 3D V oxels
Figure 1. Mesh R-CNN takes an input image, predicts object
instances in that image and infers their 3D shape. To capture di-
versity in geometries and topologies, it ﬁrst predicts coarse voxels
which are reﬁned for accurate mesh predictions.
We believe that the time is ripe for these hitherto dis-
tinct research directions to be combined. We should strive
to build systems that (like current methods for 2D percep-
tion) can operate on unconstrained real-world images with
many objects, occlusion, and diverse lighting conditions but
that (like current methods for 3D shape prediction) do not
ignore the rich 3D structure of the world.
In this paper we take an initial step toward this goal. We
draw on state-of-the-art methods for 2D perception and 3D
shape prediction to build a system which inputs a real-world
RGB image, detects the objects in the image, and outputs a
category label, segmentation mask, and a 3D triangle mesh
giving the full 3D shape of each detected object.
Our method, called Mesh R-CNN , builds on the state-of-
the-art Mask R-CNN [ 18] system for 2D recognition, aug-
menting it with a mesh prediction branch that outputs high-
resolution triangle meshes.
Our predicted meshes must be able to capture the 3D
structure of diverse, real-world objects. Predicted meshes
should therefore dynamically vary their complexity, topol-
ogy, and geometry in response to varying visual stimuli.
However, prior work on mesh prediction with deep net-
works [ 23,56,68] has been constrained to deform from
1
9785