Figure 8. Barnes-Hut t-SNE visualization [ 33] of the proposed HDML (N-pair) method on the test split of CUB-200-2011, where we
magnify several areas for a better view. The color of the boundary of each image represent the category. (Best viewed when zoomed in.)
eration method DAML [ 5]. We employed the proposed
framework to the triplet loss and N-pair loss as illustrated
before. We evaluated all the methods mentioned above us-
ing the same pre-trained CNN model for fair comparison.
Tables 1,2, and 3show the quantitative results on the
CUB-200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products
datasets respectively. Red numbers indicate the best results
and bold numbers mean our method achieves better results
than the associated method without HDML. We observe our
proposed framework can achieve very competitive perfor-
mance on all the three datasets in both tasks. Compared
with the original triplet loss and N-pair loss, our framework
can further boost their performance for a fairly large mar-
gin. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
hardness-aware synthesis strategy. The performance im-
provement on the Stanford Online Products dataset is rela-
tively small compared with the other two datasets. We think
this difference comes from the size of the training set. Our
proposed framework generates synthetic samples with suit-
able and adaptive hardness, which can exploit more infor-
mation from a limited training set than conventional sam-
pling strategies. This advantage becomes more signiﬁcant
on small-sized datasets like CUB-200-2011 and Cars196.
Qualitative Results: Figure 8shows the Barnes-Hut t-
SNE visualization [ 33] of the learned embedding using the
proposed HDML (N-pair) method. We magnify several ar-
eas for a better view, where the color on the boundary of
each image represents the category. The test split of theCUB-200-2011 dataset contains 5,924 images of birds from
100 different species. The visual differences between two
species tend to be very subtle, making it difﬁcult for humans
to distinguish. We observe that despite the subtle inter-class
differences and large intra-class variations, such as illumi-
nation, backgrounds, viewpoints, and poses, our method
can still be able to group similar species, which intuitively
verify the effectiveness of the proposed HDML framework.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a hardness-aware syn-
thesis framework for deep metric learning. Our proposed
HDML framework boosts the performance of original met-
ric learning losses by adaptively generating hardness-aware
and label-preserving synthetics as complements to the train-
ing data. We have demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed framework on three widely-used datasets in both
clustering and retrieval task. In the future, it is interesting to
apply our framework to the more general data augmentation
problem, which can be utilized to improve a wide variety of
machine learning approaches other than metric learning.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61672306, Grant
U1813218, Grant 61822603, Grant U1713214, and Grant
61572271.
79