nent. A primary issue concerning the sampling strategy is
the lack of informative samples for training. A large frac-
tion of samples may satisfy the constraints imposed by the
loss function and provide no supervision information for the
training model. This motivates many deep metric learning
methods to develop efﬁcient hard negative mining strate-
gies [ 25,13,46,10] for sampling. These strategies typically
under-sample the training set for hard informative samples
which produce gradients with large magnitude. However,
the hard negative mining strategy only selects among a sub-
set of samples, which may not be enough to characterize
the global geometry of the embedding space accurately. In
other words, some data points are sampled repeatedly while
others may never have the possibility to be sampled, re-
sulting in an embedding space over-ﬁtting near the over-
sampled data points and at the same time under-ﬁtting near
the under-sampled data points.
In this paper, we propose a hardness-aware deep metric
learning (HDML) framework as a solution. We sample all
data points in the training set uniformly while making the
best of the information contained in each point. Instead of
only using the original samples for training, we propose to
synthesize hardness-aware samples as complements to the
original ones. In addition, we control the hard levels of
the synthetic samples according to the training status of the
model, so that the better-trained model is challenged with
harder synthetics. We employ an adaptive linear interpo-
lation method to effectively manipulate the hard levels of
the embeddings. Having obtained the augmented embed-
dings, we utilize a simultaneously trained generator to map
them back to the feature space while preserving the label
and augmented hardness. These synthetics contain more
information than original ones and can be used as com-
plements for recycled training, as shown in Figure 1. We
provide an ablation study to demonstrate the effectiveness
of each module of HDML. Extensive experiments on the
widely-used CUB-200-2011 [ 36], Cars196 [ 16], and Stan-
ford Online Products [ 30] datasets illustrate that our pro-
posed HDML framework can improve the performance of
existing deep metric learning models in both image cluster-
ing and retrieval tasks.
2. Related Work
Metric Learning: Conventional metric learning meth-
ods usually employ the Mahalanobis distance [ 8,4,41] or
kernel-based metric [ 6] to characterize the linear and non-
linear intrinsic correlations among data points. Contrastive
loss [ 9,12] and triplet loss [ 38,25,3] are two conventional
measures which are widely used in most existing metric
learning methods. The contrastive loss is designed to sepa-
rate samples of different classes with a ﬁxed margin and pull
closer samples of the same category as near as possible. The
triplet loss is more ﬂexible since it only requires a certainranking within triplets. Furthermore, there are also some
works to explore the structure of quadruplets [ 18,13,2].
The losses used in recently proposed deep metric learn-
ing methods [ 30,28,32,29,39,44] take into considera-
tion of higher order relationships or global information and
therefore achieve better performance. For example, Song et
al.[30] proposed a lifted structured loss function to consider
all the positive and negative pairs within a batch. Wang et
al.[39] improved the conventional triplet loss by exploit-
ing a third-order geometry relationship. These meticulously
designed losses showed great power in various tasks, yet
a more advanced sampling framework [ 42,22,7,20] can
still boost their performance. For example, Wu et al. [42]
presented a distance-weighted sampling method to select
samples based on their relative distances. Another trend
is to incorporate ensemble technique in deep metric learn-
ing [ 23,15,43], which integrates several diverse embed-
dings to constitute a more informative representation.
Hard Negative Mining: Hard negative mining has been
employed in many machine learning tasks to enhance the
training efﬁciency and boost performance, like supervised
learning [ 25,13,46,10,45], exemplar based learning [ 21]
and unsupervised learning [ 40,1]. This strategy aims at pro-
gressively selecting false positive samples that will beneﬁt
training the most. It is widely used in deep metric learning
methods because of the vast number of tuples that can be
formed for training. For example, Schroff et al. [25] pro-
posed to sample semi-hard triplets within a batch, which
avoids using too confusing triplets that may result from
noisy data. Harwood et al. [10] presented a smart min-
ing procedure utilizing approximate nearest neighbor search
methods to adaptively select more challenging samples for
training. The advantage of [ 46] and [ 10] lies in the selection
of samples with suitably hard level with the model. How-
ever, they can not control the hard level accurately and do
not exploit the information contained in the easy samples.
Recently proposed methods [ 5,47] begin to consider
generating potential hard samples to fully train the model.
However, there are several drawbacks of the current meth-
ods. Firstly, the hard levels of the generated samples cannot
be controlled. Secondly, they all require an adversarial man-
ner to train the generator, rendering the model hard to be
learned end-to-end and the training process very unstable.
Differently, the proposed HDML framework can generate
synthetic hardness-aware label-preserving samples with ad-
equate information and adaptive hard levels, further boost-
ing the performance of current deep metric learning models.
3. Proposed Approach
In this section, we ﬁrst formulate the problem of deep
metric learning and then present the basic idea of the pro-
posed HDML framework. At last, we elaborate on the ap-
proach of deep metric learning under this framework.
73