agent-map and agent-goal point. For each motion query
Qi,k(defined later, and we omit subscripts i,kin the follow-
ing context for simplicity), its interactions between other
agents QAor map elements QMcould be formulated as:
Qa/m=MHCA (MHSA (Q), QA/QM), (1)
where MHCA ,MHSA denote multi-head cross-attention and
multi-head self-attention [50] respectively. As it is also im-
portant to focus on the intended position, i.e., goal point,
to refine the predicted trajectory, we devise an agent-goal
point attention via deformable attention [62] as follows:
Qg=DeformAttn (Q,ˆxl−1
T, B), (2)
where ˆxl−1
Tis the endpoint of the predicted trajectory of
previous layer. DeformAttn (q,r,x), a deformable atten-
tion module [62], takes in the query q, reference point rand
spatial feature x. It performs sparse attention on the spatial
feature around the reference point. Through this, the pre-
dicted trajectory is further refined as aware of the endpoint
surroundings. All three interactions are modeled in parallel,
where the generated Qa,QmandQgare concatenated and
passed to a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), resulting query
context Qctx. Then, Qctxis sent to the successive layer for
refinement or decoded as prediction results at the last layer.
Motion queries. The input queries for each layer of Mo-
tionFormer, termed motion queries, comprise two compo-
nents: the query context Qctxproduced by the preceding
layer as described before, and the query position Qpos.
Specifically, Qposintegrates the positional knowledge in
four-folds as in Eq. (3): (1) the position of scene-level an-
chors Is; (2) the position of agent-level anchors Ia; (3) cur-
rent location of the agent iand (4) the predicted goal point.
Qpos=MLP(PE(Is)) + MLP(PE(Ia))
+MLP(PE(ˆx0)) + MLP(PE(ˆxl−1
T)).(3)
Here the sinusoidal position encoding PE (·)followed by an
MLP is utilized to encode the positional points and ˆx0
Tis
set as Isat the first layer (subscripts i, kare also omitted).
The scene-level anchor represents prior movement statistics
in a global view, while the agent-level anchor captures the
possible intention in the local coordinate. They are both
clustered by k-means algorithm on the endpoints of ground-
truth trajectories, to narrow down the uncertainty of pre-
diction. Contrary to the prior knowledge, the start point
provides customized positional embedding for each agent,
and the predicted endpoint serves as a dynamic anchor op-
timized layer-by-layer in a coarse-to-fine fashion.
Non-linear Optimization. Different from conventional
motion forecasting works which have direct access toground truth perceptual results, i.e., agents’ location and
corresponding tracks, we consider the prediction uncer-
tainty from the prior module in our end-to-end paradigm.
Brutally regressing the ground-truth waypoints from an
imperfect detection position or heading angle may lead
to unrealistic trajectory predictions with large curvature
and acceleration. To tackle this, we adopt a non-linear
smoother [4] to adjust the target trajectories and make them
physically feasible given an imprecise starting point pre-
dicted by the upstream module. The process is:
˜x∗= arg min
xc(x,˜x), (4)
where ˜xand˜x∗denote the ground-truth and smoothed tra-
jectory, xis generated by multiple-shooting [2], and the cost
function is as follows:
c(x,˜x) =λxy∥x,˜x∥2+λgoal∥xT,˜xT∥2+X
ϕ∈Φϕ(x),(5)
where λxyandλgoalare hyperparameters, the kinematic
function set Φhas five terms including jerk, curvature, cur-
vature rate, acceleration and lateral acceleration. The cost
function regularizes the target trajectory to obey kinematic
constraints. This target trajectory optimization is only con-
ducted in training and does not affect inference.
2.3. Prediction: Occupancy Prediction
Occupancy grid map is a discretized BEV representa-
tion where each cell holds a belief indicating whether it
is occupied, and the occupancy prediction task is to dis-
cover how the grid map changes in the future. Previous
approaches utilize RNN structure for temporally expanding
future predictions from observed BEV features [20, 23, 59].
However, they rely on highly hand-crafted clustering post-
processing to generate per-agent occupancy maps, as they
are mostly agent-agnostic by compressing BEV features as
a whole into RNN hidden states. Due to the deficient us-
age of agent-wise knowledge, it is challenging for them to
predict the behaviors of all agents globally, which is es-
sential to understand how the scene evolves. To address
this, we present OccFormer to incorporate both scene-level
and agent-level semantics in two aspects: (1) a dense scene
feature acquires agent-level features via an exquisitely de-
signed attention module when unrolling to future horizons;
(2) we produce instance-wise occupancy easily by a matrix
multiplication between agent-level features and dense scene
features without heavy post-processing.
OccFormer is composed of Tosequential blocks where
Toindicates the prediction horizon. Note that Tois typically
smaller than Tin the motion task, due to the high compu-
tation cost of densely represented occupancy. Each block
takes as input the rich agent features Gtand the state (dense
feature) Ft−1from the previous layer, and generates Ftfor
17856