Figure 2. Pipeline of Unified Autonomous Driving (UniAD). It is exquisitely devised following planning-oriented philosophy. Instead of
a simple stack of tasks, we investigate the effect of each module in perception and prediction, leveraging the benefits of joint optimization
from preceding nodes to final planning in the driving scene. All perception and prediction modules are designed in a transformer decoder
structure, with task queries as interfaces connecting each node. A simple attention-based planner is in the end to predict future waypoints
of the ego-vehicle considering the knowledge extracted from preceding nodes. The map over occupancy is for visual purpose only.
mentation of the map. With the above queries represent-
ing agents and maps, MotionFormer captures interactions
among agents and maps and forecasts per-agent future tra-
jectories. Since the action of each agent can significantly
impact others in the scene, this module makes joint pre-
dictions for all agents considered. Meanwhile, we devise
an ego-vehicle query to explicitly model the ego-vehicle
and enable it to interact with other agents in such a scene-
centric paradigm. OccFormer employs the BEV feature
Bas queries, equipped with agent-wise knowledge as keys
and values, and predicts multi-step future occupancy with
agent identity preserved. Finally, Planner utilizes the ex-
pressive ego-vehicle query from MotionFormer to predict
the planning result, and keep itself away from occupied re-
gions predicted by OccFormer to avoid collisions.
2.1. Perception: Tracking and Mapping
TrackFormer. It jointly performs detection and multi-
object tracking (MOT) without non-differentiable post-
processing. Inspired by [56, 58], we take a similar query
design. Besides the conventional detection queries utilized
in object detection [5, 62], additional track queries are in-
troduced to track agents across frames. Specifically, at each
time step, initialized detection queries are responsible for
detecting newborn agents that are perceived for the first
time, while track queries keep modeling those agents de-
tected in previous frames. Both detection queries and track
queries capture the agent abstractions by attending to BEV
feature B. As the scene continuously evolves, track queries
at the current frame interact with previously recorded ones
in a self-attention module to aggregate temporal informa-
tion, until the corresponding agents disappear completely
(untracked in a certain time period). Similar to [5], Track-
Former contains Nlayers and the final output state QApro-
vides knowledge of Navalid agents for downstream predic-
tion tasks. Besides queries encoding other agents surround-ing the ego-vehicle, we introduce one particular ego-vehicle
query in the query set to explicitly model the self-driving
vehicle itself, which is further used in planning.
MapFormer. We design it based on a 2D panoptic seg-
mentation method Panoptic SegFormer [31]. We sparsely
represent road elements as map queries to help downstream
motion forecasting, with location and structure knowledge
encoded. For driving scenarios, we set lanes, dividers and
crossings as things, and the drivable area as stuff [28]. Map-
Former also has Nstacked layers whose output results of
each layer are all supervised, while only the updated queries
QMin the last layer are forwarded to MotionFormer for
agent-map interaction.
2.2. Prediction: Motion Forecasting
Recent studies have proven the effectiveness of trans-
former structure on the motion task [24,25,35,39,40,48,55],
inspired by which we propose MotionFormer in the end-to-
end setting. With highly abstract queries for dynamic agents
QAand static map QMfrom TrackFormer and MapFormer
respectively, MotionFormer predicts all agents’ multimodal
future movements, i.e., top-k possible trajectories, in a
scene-centric manner. This paradigm produces multi-agent
trajectories in the frame with a single forward pass, which
greatly saves the computational cost of aligning the whole
scene to each agent’s coordinate [27]. Meanwhile, we pass
theego-vehicle query from TrackFormer through Motion-
Former to engage ego-vehicle to interact with other agents,
considering the future dynamics. Formally, the output mo-
tion is formulated as {ˆxi,k∈RT×2|i= 1, . . . , N a;k=
1, . . . ,K}, where iindexes the agent, kindexes the modal-
ity of trajectories and Tis the length of prediction horizon.
MotionFormer. It is composed of Nlayers, and each
layer captures three types of interactions: agent-agent,
17855