Planning-oriented Autonomous Driving
Yihan Hu1,2∗, Jiazhi Yang1∗, Li Chen1∗†, Keyu Li1∗, Chonghao Sima1, Xizhou Zhu3,1
Siqi Chai2, Senyao Du2, Tianwei Lin2, Wenhai Wang1, Lewei Lu3, Xiaosong Jia1
Qiang Liu2, Jifeng Dai1, Yu Qiao1, Hongyang Li1†
1OpenDriveLab and OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
2Wuhan University3SenseTime Research
∗Equal contribution†Project lead
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/UniAD
Abstract
Modern autonomous driving system is characterized as
modular tasks in sequential order, i.e., perception, predic-
tion, and planning. In order to perform a wide diversity of
tasks and achieve advanced-level intelligence, contempo-
rary approaches either deploy standalone models for indi-
vidual tasks, or design a multi-task paradigm with separate
heads. However, they might suffer from accumulative er-
rors or deficient task coordination. Instead, we argue that
a favorable framework should be devised and optimized in
pursuit of the ultimate goal, i.e., planning of the self-driving
car. Oriented at this, we revisit the key components within
perception and prediction, and prioritize the tasks such that
all these tasks contribute to planning. We introduce Unified
Autonomous Driving (UniAD), a comprehensive framework
up-to-date that incorporates full-stack driving tasks in one
network. It is exquisitely devised to leverage advantages of
each module, and provide complementary feature abstrac-
tions for agent interaction from a global perspective. Tasks
are communicated with unified query interfaces to facili-
tate each other toward planning. We instantiate UniAD on
the challenging nuScenes benchmark. With extensive abla-
tions, the effectiveness of using such a philosophy is proven
by substantially outperforming previous state-of-the-arts in
all aspects. Code and models are public.
1. Introduction
With the successful development of deep learning, au-
tonomous driving algorithms are assembled with a series
of tasks1, including detection, tracking, mapping in percep-
tion; and motion and occupancy forecast in prediction. As
depicted in Fig. 1(a), most industry solutions deploy stan-
1In the following context, we interchangeably use task, module, com-
ponent, unit and node to indicate a certain task ( e.g., detection).
Figure 1. Comparison on the various designs of autonomous
driving framework. (a)Most industrial solutions deploy separate
models for different tasks. (b)The multi-task learning scheme
shares a backbone with divided task heads. (c)The end-to-end
paradigm unites modules in perception and prediction. Previous
attempts either adopt a direct optimization on planning in (c.1) or
devise the system with partial components in (c.2). Instead, we
argue in (c.3) that a desirable system should be planning-oriented
as well as properly organize preceding tasks to facilitate planning.
dalone models for each task independently [38, 41], as long
as the resource bandwidth of the onboard chip allows. Al-
though such a design simplifies the R&D difficulty across
teams, it bares the risk of information loss across modules,
error accumulation and feature misalignment due to the iso-
lation of optimization targets [32, 37, 47].
A more elegant design is to incorporate a wide span of
tasks into a multi-task learning (MTL) paradigm, by plug-
ging several task-specific heads into a shared feature extrac-
tor as shown in Fig. 1(b). This is a popular practice in many
domains, including general vision [46, 51, 61], autonomous
driving2[8, 34, 57, 59], such as Transfuser [13], BEV-
2In this paper, we refer to MTL in autonomous driving as tasks be-
yond perception. There is plenty of work on MTL within perception, e.g.,
detection, depth, flow, etc. This kind of literature is out of scope.
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
17853