Design ApproachPerception PredictionPlanDet. Track Map Motion Occ.
(b)NMP [57] ✓ ✓ ✓
NEAT [12] ✓ ✓
BEVerse [59] ✓ ✓ ✓
(c.1) [7, 9, 45, 54] ✓
(c.2)PnPNet†[32] ✓ ✓ ✓
ViP3D†[18] ✓ ✓ ✓
P3 [47] ✓ ✓
MP3 [6] ✓ ✓ ✓
ST-P3 [23] ✓ ✓ ✓
LA V [8] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
(c.3) UniAD (ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 1. Tasks comparison and taxonomy. “Design” column is
classified as in Fig. 1. “Det.” denotes 3D object detection, “Map”
stands for online mapping, and “Occ.” is occupancy map predic-
tion. †: these works are not proposed directly for planning, yet
they still share the spirit of joint perception and prediction. UniAD
conducts five essential driving tasks to facilitate planning.
erse [59], and industrialized products, e.g., Mobileye [38],
Tesla [49], Nvidia [41], etc. In MTL, the co-training strat-
egy across tasks could leverage feature abstraction; it could
effortlessly extend to additional tasks, and save computa-
tion cost for onboard chips. However, such a scheme may
cause undesirable “negative transfer” [16, 36].
By contrast, the emergence of end-to-end autonomous
driving [6, 8, 12, 23, 54] unites all nodes from perception,
prediction and planning as a whole . The choice and priority
of preceding tasks should be determined in favor of plan-
ning. The system should be planning-oriented, exquisitely
designed with certain components involved, such that there
are few accumulative error as in the standalone option or
negative transfer as in the MTL scheme. Table 1 describes
the task taxonomy of different framework designs.
Following the end-to-end paradigm, one “tabula-rasa”
practice is to directly predict the planned trajectory, with-
out any explicit supervision of perception and prediction as
shown in Fig. 1(c.1). Pioneering works [7, 9, 14, 15, 45, 53,
54, 60] verified this vanilla design in the closed-loop simu-
lation [17]. While such a direction deserves further explo-
ration, it is inadequate in safety guarantee and interpretabil-
ity, especially for highly dynamic urban scenarios. In this
paper, we lean toward another perspective and ask the fol-
lowing question: Toward a reliable and planning-oriented
autonomous driving system, how to design the pipeline in
favor of planning? which preceding tasks are requisite?
An intuitive resolution would be to perceive surrounding
objects, predict future behaviors and plan a safe maneuver
explicitly, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c.2). Contemporary ap-
proaches [6,18,23,32,47] provide good insights and achieve
impressive performance. However, we argue that the devil
lies in the details; previous works more or less fail to con-
sider certain components (see block (c.2) in Table 1), being
reminiscent of the planning-oriented spirit. We elaborateon the detailed definition and terminology, the necessity of
these modules in the Supplementary.
To this end, we introduce UniAD , a Unified Autonomous
Driving algorithm framework to leverage five essential tasks
toward a safe and robust system as depicted in Fig. 1(c.3)
and Table 1(c.3). UniAD is designed in a planning-oriented
spirit. We argue that this is nota simple stack of tasks with
mere engineering effort. A key component is the query-
based design to connect all nodes. Compared to the classic
bounding box representation, queries benefit from a larger
receptive field to soften the compounding error from up-
stream predictions. Moreover, queries are flexible to model
and encode a variety of interactions, e.g., relations among
multiple agents. To the best of our knowledge, UniAD is
the first work to comprehensively investigate the joint co-
operation of such a variety of tasks including perception,
prediction and planning in the field of autonomous driving.
The contributions are summarized as follows. (a)we
embrace a new outlook of autonomous driving framework
following a planning-oriented philosophy, and demonstrate
the necessity of effective task coordination, rather than stan-
dalone design or simple multi-task learning. (b)we present
UniAD, a comprehensive end-to-end system that leverages
a wide span of tasks. The key component to hit the ground
running is the query design as interfaces connecting all
nodes. As such, UniAD enjoys flexible intermediate rep-
resentations and exchanging multi-task knowledge toward
planning. (c)we instantiate UniAD on the challenging
benchmark for realistic scenarios. Through extensive abla-
tions, we verify the superiority of our method over previous
state-of-the-arts in all aspects.
We hope this work could shed some light on the target-
driven design for the autonomous driving system, providing
a starting point for coordinating various driving tasks.
2. Methodology
Overview. As illustrated in Fig. 2, UniAD comprises four
transformer decoder-based perception and prediction mod-
ules and one planner in the end. Queries Qplay the role
of connecting the pipeline to model different interactions of
entities in the driving scenario. Specifically, a sequence of
multi-camera images is fed into the feature extractor, and
the resulting perspective-view features are transformed into
a unified bird’s-eye-view (BEV) feature Bby an off-the-
shelf BEV encoder in BEVFormer [30]. Note that UniAD
is not confined to a specific BEV encoder, and one can uti-
lize other alternatives to extract richer BEV representations
with long-term temporal fusion [19, 43] or multi-modality
fusion [33,36]. In TrackFormer , the learnable embeddings
that we refer to as track queries inquire about the agents’ in-
formation from Bto detect and track agents. MapFormer
takes map queries as semantic abstractions of road ele-
ments ( e.g., lanes and dividers) and performs panoptic seg-
17854