timestep tconsidering both instance- and scene-level infor-
mation. To get agent feature Gtwith dynamics and spatial
priors, we max-pool motion queries from MotionFormer in
the modality dimension denoted as QX∈RNa×D, with D
as the feature dimension. Then we fuse it with the upstream
track query QAand current position embedding PAvia a
temporal-specific MLP:
Gt=MLP t([QA, PA, QX]), t= 1, . . . , T o, (6)
where [·]indicates concatenation. For the scene-level
knowledge, the BEV feature Bis downscaled to 1/4reso-
lution for training efficiency to serve as the first block in-
putF0. To further conserve training memory, each block
follows a downsample-upsample manner with an attention
module in between to conduct pixel-agent interaction at 1/8
downscaled feature, denoted as Ft
ds.
Pixel-agent interaction is designed to unify the scene-
and agent-level understanding when predicting future occu-
pancy. We take the dense feature Ft
dsas queries, instance-
level features as keys and values to update the dense feature
over time. Detailedly, Ft
dsis passed through a self-attention
layer to model responses between distant grids, then a cross-
attention layer models interactions between agent features
Gtand per-grid features. Moreover, to align the pixel-agent
correspondence, we constrain the cross-attention by an at-
tention mask, which restricts each pixel to only look at the
agent occupying it at timestep t, inspired by [10]. The up-
date process of the dense feature is formulated as:
Dt
ds=MHCA (MHSA (Ft
ds), Gt,attnmask =Ot
m).(7)
The attention mask Ot
mis semantically similar to occu-
pancy, and is generated by multiplying an additional agent-
level feature and the dense feature Ft
ds, where we name the
agent-level feature here as mask feature Mt=MLP(Gt).
After the interaction process in Eq. (7), Dt
dsis upsampled to
1/4size of B. We further add Dt
dswith block input Ft−1as
a residual connection, and the resulting feature Ftis passed
to the next block.
Instance-level occupancy. It represents the occupancy
with each agent’s identity preserved. It could be simply
drawn via matrix multiplication, as in recent query-based
segmentation works [11, 29]. Formally, in order to get
an occupancy prediction of original size H×Wof BEV
feature B, the scene-level features Ftare upsampled to
Ft
dec∈RC×H×Wby a convolutional decoder, where Cis
the channel dimension. For the agent-level feature, we fur-
ther update the coarse mask feature Mtto the occupancy
feature Ut∈RNa×Cby another MLP. We empirically find
that generating Utfrom mask feature Mtinstead of orig-
inal agent feature Gtleads to superior performance. The
final instance-level occupancy of timestep tis:
ˆOt
A=Ut·Ft
dec. (8)2.4. Planning
Planning without high-definition (HD) maps or prede-
fined routes usually requires a high-level command to in-
dicate the direction to go [6, 23]. Following this, we con-
vert the raw navigation signals ( i.e., turn left, turn right
and keep forward) into three learnable embeddings, named
command embeddings. As the ego-vehicle query from Mo-
tionFormer already expresses its multimodal intentions, we
equip it with command embeddings to form a “plan query”.
We attend plan query to BEV features Bto make it aware
of surroundings, and then decode it to future waypoints ˆτ.
To further avoid collisions, we optimize ˆτbased on New-
ton’s method in inference only by the following:
τ∗= arg min
τf(τ,ˆτ,ˆO), (9)
where ˆτis the original planning prediction, τ∗denotes
the optimized planning, which is selected from multiple-
shooting [2] trajectories τas to minimize cost function f(·).
ˆOis a classical binary occupancy map merged from the
instance-wise occupancy prediction from OccFormer. The
cost function f(·)is calculated by:
f(τ,ˆτ,ˆO) =λcoord∥τ,ˆτ∥2+λobsX
tD(τt,ˆOt),(10)
D(τt,ˆOt) =X
(x,y)∈S1
σ√
2πexp(−∥τt−(x, y)∥2
2
2σ2).(11)
Hereλcoord,λobs, and σare hyperparameters, and tindexes
a timestep of future horizons. The l2cost pulls the trajectory
toward the original predicted one, while the collision term
Dpushes it away from occupied grids, considering sur-
rounding positions confined to S={(x, y)|∥(x, y)−τt∥2<
d,ˆOt
x,y= 1}.
2.5. Learning
UniAD is trained in two stages. We first jointly train
perception parts, i.e., the tracking and mapping modules,
for a few epochs (6 in our experiments), and then train the
model end-to-end for 20 epochs with all perception, predic-
tion and planning modules. The two-stage training is found
more stable empirically. We refer the audience to the Sup-
plementary for details of each loss.
Shared matching. Since UniAD involves instance-wise
modeling, pairing predictions to the ground truth set is
required in perception and prediction tasks. Similar to
DETR [5, 31], the bipartite matching algorithm is adopted
in the tracking and online mapping stage. As for tracking,
candidates from detection queries are paired with newborn
ground truth objects, and predictions from track queries in-
herit the assignment from previous frames. The matching
results in the tracking module are reused in motion and oc-
cupancy nodes to consistently model agents from historical
tracks to future motions in the end-to-end framework.
17857