dence in cognitive science [60, 91]): data samples are classi-
ﬁed based on their proximity to representative prototypes of
classes. With this perspective, in §2, we ﬁrst answer ques-
tion¶by pointing out most modern segmentation methods,
from softmax based to pixel-query based, from FCN based
to attention based, fall into one grand category: parametric
models based on learnable prototypes . Consider a segmenta-
tion task with Csemantic classes. Most existing efforts seek
to directly learnCclass-wise prototypes – softmax weights
or query vectors – for parametric, pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
Hence question ·becomes more fundamental: ¸What are
the limitations of this learnable prototype based parametric
paradigm? and¹How to address these limitations?
Driven by question ¸, we ﬁnd there are three critical limi-
tations: First , usually only one single prototype is learned per
class, insufﬁcient to describe rich intra-class variance. The
prototypes are simply learned in a fully parametric manner,
without considering their representative ability. Second , to
map aHWDimage feature tensor into a HWCseman-
tic mask, at least DCparameters are needed for prototype
learning. This hurts generalizability [115], especially in the
large-vocabulary case; for instance, if there are 800classes
andD=512 , we need 0.4M learnable prototype parameters
alone .Third , with the cross-entropy loss, only the relative
relations between intra-class and inter-class distances are op-
timized [89, 111, 134]; the actual distances between pixels
and prototypes, i.e., intra-class compactness, are ignored.
As a response to question ¹, in §3, we develop a nonpa-
rametric segmentation framework, based on non-learnable
prototypes .Speciﬁcally, building upon the ideas of prototype
learning [116, 133] and metric learning [40, 64], it is fully
aware of the limitations of its parametric counterpart. Inde-
pendent of speciﬁc backbone architectures (FCN based or
attention based), our method is general and brings insights
into segmentation model design and training. For model
design, our method explicitly sets sub-class centers , in the
pixel embedding space, as the prototypes. Each pixel data
is predicted to be in the same class as the nearest prototype,
without relying on extra learnable parameters. For training,
as the prototypes are representative of the dataset, we can
directly pose known inductive biases ( e.g., intra-class com-
pactness, inter-class separation) as extra optimization crite-
ria and efﬁciently shape the whole embedding space, instead
of optimizing the prediction accuracy only. Our model has
three appealing advantages: First , each class is abstracted by
a set of prototypes, well capturing class-wise characteristics
and intra-class variance. With the clear meaning of the pro-
totypes, the interpretability is also enhanced – the prediction
of each pixel can be intuitively understood as the reference
of its closest class center in the embedding space [3, 7].
Second , due to the nonparametric nature, the generalizabil-
ity is improved. Large-vocabulary semantic segmentation
can also be handled efﬁciently, as the amount of learnableprototype parameters is no longer constrained to the number
of classes ( i.e., 0vsDC).Third , via prototype-anchored
metric learning, the pixel embedding space is shaped as well-
structured, beneﬁting segmentation prediction eventually.
By answering questions ¶-¹, we formalize prior methods
within a learnable prototype based, parametric framework,
and link this ﬁeld to prototype learning and metric learning.
We provide literature review and related discussions in §4.
In §5.2, we show our method achieves impressive results
over famous datasets ( i.e., ADE20K [140], Cityscapes [22],
COCO-Stuff [10]) with top-leading FCN based and attention
based segmentation models ( i.e., HRNet [108], Swin [78],
SegFormer [118]) and backbones ( i.e., ResNet [45], HRNet
[108], Swin [78], MiT [118]). Compared with the paramet-
ric counterparts, our method does not cause any extra com-
putational overhead during testing while reduces the amount
of learnable parameters. In §5.3, we demonstrate our method
consistently performs well when increasing the number of
semantic classes from 150 to 847. Accompanied with a set
of ablative studies in §5.4, our extensive experiments verify
the power of our idea and the efﬁcacy of our algorithm.
Finally, we draw conclusions in §6. This work is expec-
ted to open a new venue for future research in this ﬁeld.
2. Existing Semantic Segmentation Models as
Parametric Prototype Learning
Next we ﬁrst formalize the existing two mask decod-
ing strategies mentioned in §1, and then answer question ¶
from a uniﬁed view of parametric prototype learning.
Parametric Softmax Projection . Almost all FCN-like and
many attention-based segmentation models adopt this strat-
egy. Their models comprise two learnable parts: i) an en-
coderfor dense visual feature extraction, and ii) a classi-
ﬁer(i.e., projection head) that projects pixel features into
the semantic label space. For each pixel example i, its em-
bedding i2RD, extracted from , is fed into forC-way
classiﬁcation:
p(cji) =exp(w>
ci)PC
c0=1exp(w>
c0i); (1)
wherep(cji)2[0;1]is the probability that ibeing assigned
to classc.is a pixel-wise linear layer, parameterized by
W= [w1;;wC]2RCD;wc2RDis a learnable projec-
tion vector for c-th class; the bias term is omitted for brevity.
Parametric Pixel-Query . A few attention-based segmen-
tation networks [118, 139] work in a more ‘Transformer-
like’ manner: given the pixel embedding i2RD, a set ofC
query vectors, i.e.,E= [e1;;eC]2RCD, are learned to
generate a probability distribution over the Cclasses:
p(cji) =exp(eci)PC
c0=1exp(ec0i); (2)
where ‘’ is inner product between `2-normalized inputs.
2583