Rethinking Semantic Segmentation: A Prototype View
Tianfei Zhou1, Wenguan Wang2;1*, Ender Konukoglu1, Luc Van Gool1
1Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich2ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
https://github.com/tfzhou/ProtoSeg
Abstract
Prevalent semantic segmentation solutions, despite their
different network designs (FCN based or attention based)
and mask decoding strategies (parametric softmax based or
pixel-query based), can be placed in one category, by con-
sidering the softmax weights or query vectors as learnable
class prototypes. In light of this prototype view, this study un-
covers several limitations of such parametric segmentation
regime, and proposes a nonparametric alternative based on
non-learnable prototypes. Instead of prior methods learning
a single weight/query vector for each class in a fully para-
metric manner, our model represents each class as a set of
non-learnable prototypes, relying solely on the mean fea-
tures of several training pixels within that class. The dense
prediction is thus achieved by nonparametric nearest proto-
type retrieving. This allows our model to directly shape the
pixel embedding space, by optimizing the arrangement be-
tween embedded pixels and anchored prototypes. It is able to
handle arbitrary number of classes with a constant amount
of learnable parameters.We empirically show that, with FCN
based and attention based segmentation models ( i.e., HR-
Net, Swin, SegFormer) and backbones ( i.e., ResNet, HRNet,
Swin, MiT), our nonparametric framework yields compel-
ling results over several datasets ( i.e., ADE20K, Cityscapes,
COCO-Stuff), and performs well in the large-vocabulary
situation. We expect this work will provoke a rethink of the
current de facto semantic segmentation model design.
1. Introduction
With the renaissance of connectionism, rapid progress
has been made in semantic segmentation. Till now, most of
state-of-the-art segmentation models [15, 34, 49, 135] were
built upon Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [79]. De-
spite their diversiﬁed model designs and impressive results,
existing FCN based methods commonly apply parametric
softmax (
 ) over pixel-wise features for dense pre-
diction (Fig. 1(a)). Very recently, the vast success of Trans-
former [105] stimulates the emergence of attention based
*Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang .
Figure 1. Different sematic segmentation paradigms: (a-b) para-
metric vs(c)nonparametric . Modern segmentation solutions, no
matter using (a) parametric softmax or (b) query vectors for mask
decoding, can be viewed as learnable prototype based methods that
learn class-wise prototypes in a fully parametric manner. We in-
stead propose a nonparametric scheme (c) that directly selects sub-
cluster centers of embedded pixels as prototypes, and achieves per-
pixel prediction via nonparametric nearest prototype retrieving.
segmentation solutions. Many of these ‘non-FCN’ models,
like [118, 139], directly follow the standard mask decoding
regime, i.e., estimate softmax distributions over dense visual
embeddings (extracted from patch token sequences). Inter-
estingly, the others [20, 100] follow the good practice of
Transformer in other ﬁelds [11, 82, 113] and adopt a pixel-
query strategy (Fig. 1(b)): utilize a set of learnable vectors
(
 ) to query the dense embeddings for mask prediction.
They speculate the learned query vectors can capture class-
wise properties, however, lacking in-depth analysis.
Noticing there exist two different mask decoding strate-
gies, the following questions naturally arise: ¶What are the
relation and difference between them? and·If the learn-
able query vectors indeed implicitly capture some intrinsic
properties of data, is there any better way to achieve this?
Tackling these two issues can provide insights into mod-
ern segmentation model design, and motivate us to rethink
the task from a prototype view . The idea of prototype based
classiﬁcation [31] is classical and intuitive (which can date
back to the nearest neighbors algorithm [23] and ﬁnd evi-
2582